# Full-Time Missionaries

### Full-Time Missionaries
Carlos E. Asay, Seven M's of Missionary Service: Proclaiming the Gospel as a Member or Full-time Missionary ( 1996)
 
 

4 

Full-Time Missionaries

"Missionaries to Match the Message"

And ye shall go forth in the power of my Spirit, preaching my gospel, two by two, in my name, lifting up your voices as with the sound of a trump, declaring my word like unto angels of God (D&C 42:6). 

The fourth M of missionary service is the full-time missionaries-those who have received an unction from a living prophet to preach the gospel in all the world (see 1 Jn. 2:20, 27). 

Angelic Commission

Full-time missionaries, whether young or older, are given an angelic commission which requires them to-

Go Forth in the Power of the Spirit

The power of a missionary is not determined by his or her height, weight, or physical prowess. Nor is it determined by his or her smoothness of tongue or cleverness of mind. It is, however, determined by his or her receptivity to the Spirit and willingness to heed its promptings.

To go forth in the power of the Spirit means that a missionary must be taught and led by the Spirit and must teach by the Spirit. Therefore, the conscientious missionary courts the Holy Spirit every day of his mission. Such courting involves the exercise of faith,

prayer, study, work, and righteous living. All of this is done with these promises in mind: (1) "The Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith (D&C 42:14) and (2) "If ye will . . . receive the Holy Ghost, it will show unto you all things what ye should do (2 Ne. 32:5). There is also the instruction that "if ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach (D&C 42:14). 

Missionaries must bear in mind that the Spirit or Holy Ghost enables a missionary to speak persuasively with "the tongue of angels (2 Ne. 32:2). It serves as a conduit, if you will, through which the message passes from a missionary's heart to the heart of the listener. It is the power that converts.

The characteristic that most distinguishes true ministers of the gospel from people engaged in the works of the world is the presence and influence of the Holy Spirit. Said Brigham Young: "If those who are going to preach do not go with that faith that pertains to eternal life, and that spirit that is like a well of water, springing up into everlasting life, their labours will be vain. They may be the best theoretical theologians in the world-may be able to preach a Bible and a half in a sermon, to read history without a book, and understand all the dealings with men from the days of Adam till now; and, without the Spirit of the living God to guide them, they will not be able to accomplish anything to their credit towards building up his kingdom. They must realize that success in preaching the Gospel springs not from the wisdom of this world. They must so live as to enjoy the power of God. (In Journal of Discourses 8:70-71.)

Preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ

What is the gospel of Jesus Christ? It is the good news, the glad tidings, and all else that causes men and women to repent and "come unto the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and be saved (1 Ne. 6:4). 

The gospel of Jesus Christ embodies truths, covenants, ordinances, and practices that place believers on the path that leads to eternal life. This path begins with steps of repentance, continues with an invitation to be baptized and receive the Holy Ghost, and proceeds with the plea to keep all of the commandments of God and endure to the end. Therefore, it is understandable why the doctrine of the Savior is referred to as the "right way of living (see 2 Ne. 25:28-29). 

Paul the Apostle declared: "I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth (Rom. 1:16). He also said to the Galatians: "There be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ. But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel . . . , let him be accursed. (Gal. 1:7-8.) 

There is only one true gospel, just as there is only one true and living God. Those who dispute this fact would make God a God of confusion instead of a God of order who can be trusted and relied upon.

How very privileged are the men and women who accept mission calls and go forth preaching, "baptizing with water, saying: Repent ye, repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand (D&C 42:7). No greater honor or privilege can be extended to a person than to represent the Lord and serve as a savior of men.

Go About Their Labors "Two by Two"

Anyone who knows the concept of synergism appreciates the wisdom of sending missionaries into the world two by two.

In another place I have written:

Synergism, it is said, is an old Christian doctrine. It purports that the grace of God combined with the good works of mortals results in full salvation.

In our time, synergism is defined as "the simultaneous action of separate agencies which, together, have greater total effect than the sum of their individual effects (Webster's New World Dictionary, p. 1444).

This principle may be illustrated as follows:

A 2 x 4 eight feet long, standing on end, can bear a weight of 615 pounds. If a second 2 x 4 eight feet long is nailed to the first, together they can bear not 1,230 pounds (double 615 pounds) but rather 2,400 pounds.

. . . Two are not simply twice as strong as one. Two are four times as strong as one [when they are united in the Lord's work]! This is synergism. (Carlos E. Asay, In the Lord's Service [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990], pp. 90-91.)

Reasons for serving with others are many and quite apparent. They include the following:

Â•The need for two or more witnesses. The Lord has declared more than once, "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established (2 Cor. 13:1; see also Deut. 17:6; Matt. 18:16; Ether 5:4; D&C 6:28, 128:3). People serving together teach and bear witness of the work they share. Each testifies of what the other says. Moreover, each witnesses in behalf of the other, refuting the words of false accusers or others who would defile the truth.

Â•Support in teaching. Alma and Amulek constituted a powerful companionship. According to the account in the Book of Mormon, Alma "began to speak . . . and to establish the words of Amulek, and to explain things beyond, or to unfold the scriptures beyond that which Amulek had done (Alma 12:1). Two minds are, generally speaking, better than one. When both are concentrated upon the same task or purpose, mutual support may be enjoyed.

Â•Protection. The preacher said: "Two are better than one; because they have a good reward for their labour. For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: but woe to him that is alone when he falleth; for he hath not another to help him up. . . . And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him. (Eccl. 4:9-10, 12.) 

Â•Strengthen one another. There are many scriptures that explain the need to strengthen those with whom we serve. I shall cite four:

"The Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat: but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren (Luke 22:31-32). 

"If any man among you be strong in the Spirit, let him take with him him that is weak, that he may be edified in all meekness, that he may become strong also (D&C 84:106). 

"We then that are strong [experienced] ought to bear the infirmities of the weak [inexperienced], and not to

please ourselves. Let every one of us please his [missionary companion] for his good to edification. (Rom. 15:1-2.) 

"Strengthen your brethren in all your conversation, in all your prayers, in all your exhortations, and in all your doings (D&C 108:7). 

Â•Counsel. One of the greatest benefits of serving with others relates to counsel. Those older or more experienced share what they have learned; those younger or less experienced provide fresh insights and new enthusiasm. All have something valuable to contribute.

 Alma counseled one of his sons: "I command you to take it upon you to counsel with your elder brothers in your undertakings; for behold, thou art in thy youth, and ye stand in need to be nourished by your brothers. And give heed to their counsel. (Alma 39:10; see also 1 Pet. 5:5.) 

These are only a few of the benefits of serving with others. More reasons could be listed. Please understand that synergistic powers are unleashed as servants of the Lord witness, support, protect, strengthen, and counsel one another (see Asay, In the Lord's Service, pp. 92-93).

Teach and Testify in the Name of the Lord

Missionaries are representatives of the true and living God, and all that they do and say must be done in his holy name. Many prophets have reminded us that there is "no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent (Mosiah 3:17). Hence, missionaries are expected to labor diligently in persuading others "to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do (2 Ne. 25:23). 

When we pray, we address God the Father, he whom we lovingly refer to as our Heavenly Father. Each prayer is closed in the name of Jesus Christ, he who is the Only Begotten Son of God and whom we adore as the Savior of mankind. We belong to the Church or household of God that bears the name of him who is the "chief corner stone of the organization (Eph. 2:20). Moreover, legal

administrators in the Church, including missionaries, officiate and perform all ordinances in the name of Christ.

It would be an inconsistency of serious proportions if missionaries did not teach and testify in the name of the Lord. Missionaries have taken upon themselves his holy name, and they have agreed to stand as his witnesses"at all times and in all things, and in all places (Mosiah 18:9). 

Lift Up Their Voices "as with the Voice of a Trump (D&C 29:4) 

A rebellious young man by the name of Alma was rebuked by an angel who spoke with "a voice of thunder, which caused the earth to shake (Mosiah 27:11). Later on, after Alma had repented and cleaned up his life, he wished that he were an angel and that he could speak "with the trump of God, with a voice to shake the earth, and cry repentance unto every people! (Alma 29:1.) That same wish or desire should be in the heart of every missionary.

There was an occasion when elders of the Church were reluctant to open their mouths and lift up their voices. The Lord chastised them by saying, "But with some I am not well pleased, for they will not open their mouths, but they hide the talent which I have given unto them, because of the fear of man (D&C 60:2). 

Sometimes missionaries are ridiculed, rejected, and scoffed at by those who are hard of heart and blind of mind. Perhaps part of such rejection is related to unpreparedness or a weakness of testimony. However, those who study, prepare, live righteously, and open their mouths are promised that they shall be filled and blessed with success. (See D&C 33:2, 8-10.) 

Only the faithless hide their talents and go about their proselyting work apologetically. But those with faith and an understanding of what the gospel can do to liberate people from the abyss of sin and elevate them into a condition of exquisite joy willfully lift up their voices as with the sound of a trump.

Declare God's Word "like unto Angels (D&C 42:6) 

Speaking of angels, Mormon taught: "The office of their ministry is to call men unto repentance, and to fulfil and to do the work of the covenants of the Father, which he hath made unto the children of men, to prepare the way among the children of men, by declaring the

word of Christ unto the chosen vessels of the Lord, that they may bear testimony of him (Moro. 7:31). 

Almost the same could be said about the office and calling of full-time missionaries. They too are commissioned to call men to repentance, to do the will of the Father, and to declare the word of Christ to the people of the world. They too receive an unction or anointing from the Holy One to teach, testify, and search out the chosen vessels of the Lord (see 1 Jn. 2:20, 27). 

In the course of their ministries, many missionaries are treated by people "as though they were angels sent from God to save them from everlasting destruction (Alma 27:4). Some missionaries become so sanctified through their service that their faces "shine exceedingly, even as the faces of angels (Hel. 5:36). More than a few become imbued with the Spirit and wish that they were angels so that they could speak with "a voice to shake the earth, and cry repentance unto every people! (Alma 29:1.) Little wonder that God extends missionaries the promise: "I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up. (D&C 84:88.) 

Much more could be said about the six-fold angelic commission given to full-time missionaries. The call is clear, and the expectations are explicit. I would add only these words of the Prophet Joseph Smith given at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple: "And we ask thee, Holy Father, that thy servants may go forth from this house armed with thy power, and that thy name may be upon them, and thy glory be round about them, and thine angels have charge over them (D&C 109:22). 

Instruments of Righteousness

As a small boy in grammar school, I had a teacher who made King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table come alive for me. She caused me to become so obsessed with stories of knights that I played and dreamed that I was one.

One evening I dreamed that I was a white knight on a white horse riding over the greens of England. Suddenly, without warning, a knight dressed in black armor and mounted on a black horse appeared

at the edge of the forest. We measured each other carefully, lowered our lances, and charged at full gallop. The lances struck target, and both of us were knocked off our steeds.

I scrambled to my feet, knowing that we would draw our swords and that hand-to-hand combat was imminent. Fear gripped my heart as I saw my opponent rushing toward me flashing a long, gleaming sword. Instinctively I reached to my side and drew forth from the scabbard my weapon. That is when the dream turned into a nightmare! In my hand was a tiny dagger-not a long, gleaming sword. I woke up in a cold sweat, screaming for help.

Many times since that nightmarish experience, I have wondered about the serviceability of the Saints. When God calls us to serve, are we positioned in the scabbard and ready to be drawn? When the Lord draws us forth as his instrument in combating evil forces, what does he have in his hand-a long, gleaming sword or a dinky dagger?

Shared Opportunities

At one time I wondered why God did not take matters into his own hands and guarantee the salvation of all people. I knew that God was omnipotent and could, if he so willed, thunder his word over the earth and blaze his message across the skies with such convincing power that everyone would join the Church. I also knew he could build all the temples needed, perform all the family history research required, and do all else-single-handedly, letter-perfect, and without any wasted motion. Yes, I knew that God could do it all by simple command, without the help or intrusion of weak mortals.

As my understanding of the gospel of Jesus Christ expanded, I saw the folly of a one-man show. I realized that if Heavenly Father took matters into his own hands and performed all the missionary, temple, and other Church services, he would: (1) offend our agency in a manner similar to what Lucifer proposed before the world was formed (see Moses 4:1-3), and (2) deprive us of sanctifying experiences, just as impatient, perfectionist parents deprive their children of growth when they push the children aside and do all the work themselves. These and other gospel insights led me to the conclusion that an all-wise and loving Father involves his children in his work so they may grow, learn, and become like him.

Opposite Forces

From the very beginning, our Heavenly Father has worked through his children in fulfilling his holy purposes. It was through his Only Begotten Son that the Atonement was wrought. Another son, Adam, became the father of the whole human family. Moses led the children of Israel out of bondage. A modern Joseph became the prophet of the Restoration. All of these leaders served as agents or instruments in the hands of God in helping to fulfill his avowed purpose of bringing "to pass the immortality and eternal life of man (Moses 1:39). Each was sanctified and assumed attributes of the Father in the process.

Other children of God listened to another voice, a dissident voice, and made themselves instruments of the outcast Satan. This was done in fulfillment of Lucifer's pledge "to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will (Moses 4:4), for he had warned that he would fight his battles and extend his rule through those who loved darkness more than light.

Satan used the hands of Cain in committing murder (see Moses 5:16-35) he used Korihor as his voice in preaching anti-Christian doctrine (see Alma 30:6-21) and he abused Sherem's learned nature and perfect knowledge of language by having him sow seeds of doubt among the Nephites (see Jacob 7:1-20). In each of these instances, Cain, Korihor, or Sherem yielded himself to Satan and became an instrument of unrighteousness. Each was abandoned in the end by his tempter and allowed to go down in bitter defeat (see Alma 30:60). 

Yield Yourselves to God

The Apostle Paul understood clearly the life-and-death struggle for the souls of men. He was aware of the enlistment programs of both sides-the Savior and his Saints, and Lucifer and his legions. Therefore he issued this warning to the Romans: "Neither yield ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin: but yield yourselves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God (Rom. 6:13). He added, "Know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness? (Rom. 6:16.) 

To yield is to give or submit oneself. So the first issue is, are you

positioned in the scabbard of righteousness and ready to be drawn by the hand of God? Alma and the sons of Mosiah, through disobedience, allowed themselves to slip into the wrong sheath. An evil hand drew them forth and caused them to become an impediment to the church of God. This period of subjection to Satan was later referred to by Alma as the "gall of bitterness, "bonds of iniquity, and "darkest abyss (Mosiah 27:29). 

After a miraculous conversion, Alma and his friends changed scabbards. They confessed their sins, tried to repair the injuries they had made, and published peace. According to the record, "They were instruments in the hands of God in bringing many to the knowledge of the truth, yea, to the knowledge of their Redeemer (Mosiah 27:36). 

The slide into Satan's scabbard begins with little and seemingly harmless transgressions. It may start with a cigarette, a suggestive thought, an off-color story, one alcoholic drink, a so-called white lie, or even one X-rated movie. Gradually, however, the sins mount in number and seriousness until one finds himself Satan's ward. Each wrongdoing molds the transgressor's hilt to fit the hand of Lucifer.

In contrast, properly directed faith, repentance, and good works guide one into the scabbard strapped to the side of Deity. The person who cultivates a love for the scriptures, attends church, becomes involved in service projects, prays daily and honestly, and honors loving parents is positioning himself or herself for righteous service. A state of useful readiness is achieved virtue by virtue as the hilt of the instrument and the hand of God become molded as one.

Gleaming Swords or Dinky Daggers?

Now, the second issue: When the Lord draws you forth to wage his battles, does he have in his hand a long, gleaming sword? If I were a knight and I was preparing for combat, I would select carefully the tools of my trade. At the top of my list of tools would be a strong, sharp, and gleaming sword. I would want a sword that was perfectly balanced and honed to a fine cutting edge. It would be of the finest steel and fitted so perfectly to my hand that it felt like an extension of my arm. I would not want to be hindered by a small, useless weapon that I could have little confidence in. A long, gleaming sword, however, would reflect light and power; it would stir confidence in the heart of its user and strike fear into the heart of its intended target.

Strong, Sharp, and Clean

To observers in Jerusalem of a former day, Peter may have appeared to be a small, useless weapon as he denied Christ thrice near the high priest's palace (see Matt. 26:69-75). But when the converted Peter stood before the Jews on the day of Pentecost, he testified with the conviction and power of a gleaming sword, placing himself in the hands of God and winning the souls of three thousand people (see Acts 2). 

The mettle of the man Peter did not come automatically and without effort. Peter was subjected to trials and temptations and all else commonly referred to as the refiner's fire. The heat of opposition did not consume him; it served only to burn out the impurities and weaknesses and leave refined and pure metal. Peter emerged from the furnace of affliction as a polished, strong sword of righteousness. His iron strength of character carried him through to the end of his mission.

After the day of Pentecost, Peter was a man with a cutting edge. He exhibited a sharpness of mind that enabled him to bear witness of the risen Christ. It is recorded that on one occasion his words "cut to the heart (Acts 5:33) those who sought to slay him. Undoubtedly such sharpness of mind was the result of much study, fasting, and prayer.

We are taught that miracles are performed and revelation received through clean vessels of the Lord (see 3 Ne. 8:1). Peter's cleanliness of soul gained him deliverance from prison at the hands of angels. It provided him power to heal the sick and raise Dorcas from death (see Acts 9:36-42). And his purity made it possible for him to see a vision that led to the extension of the gospel to the Gentiles.

The saving virtue of a sword is related to its strength, sharpness, and cleanliness and to the hand that guides it. Is it not the same with people? (See Asay, In the Lord's Service, pp. 58-64.)

Schoolboys or Missionaries?

A number of years ago, two missionaries walked along a street in a large city in Europe. It was a lovely morning, and their enthusiasm for life was reflected in their brisk walk and jovial moods. When one missionary was least expecting it, the other kicked his companion's heel

and sent him stumbling forward. Both laughed boisterously over the little trick and merrily went on their way. Later, when the kicking elder had relaxed his guard, the companion returned the favor with added vigor that almost caused a serious fall on the pavement. Once again, however, they laughed and continued down the sidewalk.

The next day they tracted along that same street. At one door, a lady appeared and extended a warm greeting. Quickly the senior companion announced, "We are representatives of the Lord Jesus Christ. We have a- At that point, the woman interrupted the elder by saying: "No, you can't be representatives of the Lord. Representatives of the Lord would not walk down the street laughing and joking like two little schoolboys, as you did yesterday."

In this instance, the missionaries did not match the message they were bearing. Their actions betrayed their purpose and mocked the one they represented.

Christlike Preparation and Growth

If a missionary truly desires to become an instrument of righteousness-even a sharp, gleaming sword-in the hands of God, there are certain honing actions that must be taken. To begin with, he must increase "in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man (Luke 2:52). Don't forget, the Savior "received not of the fulness at the first, but received grace for grace (D&C 93:12), and so must all who seek to become his worthy servants.

An increase in wisdom occurs as one["seek[s] learning, even by study and also by faith (D&C 88:118). I know of a young man who entered the mission field with little or no grounding in the gospel. Consequently he embarrassed himself and the Lord during his first teaching appointment. He was so mortified by the experience that he pledged to God that he would search the scriptures, seek the Spirit, and thirst after the proper knowledge, if only the Lord would forgive him and bless him. In just a few short months he became a gospel scholar and one of the most effective teachers in his mission.

An increase in wisdom refers to an enlightenment of understanding and an expansion of the mind as pertaining to the teachings of the Lord (see Alma 32:28, 34). Such enlightenment and expansion

occurs as one searches the scriptures, ponders the written and spoken words of prophets, and receives personal insights and revelation. It occurs with those who thirst after righteousness and drink freely of living waters (see John 4:1-14). 

An increase in stature suggests physical growth and well-being. Many young people mature and put on inches and pounds while serving as full-time missionaries. They begin their ministries as young and raw individuals, but they arise from their inexperience and become men and women of Christ. Sooner or later they learn that fitness to serve is not a gift, freely endowed to all persons. Real and complete fitness is attained through proper diet, regular exercise, adequate rest, clean living, and good medical care.

Life, even missionary life, can become a burden to those who neglect their physical machines. It is virtually impossible for a missionary to be effective and happy when plagued with fatigue or illness. Worse still, when one is idled by sickness, the companion is also restricted in his or her activities. As William Osler observed, "The clean tongue, the clear head, and the bright eye are birthrights of each [missionary] day (A Way of Life [New York: Harper and Brothers, 1937], p. 25).

Elder John A. Widtsoe is reported to have said: "There should be no pride in ill health. The person who keeps his body in good condition lengthens out his life in years, and, because he can do his work more effectively, increases the sum total of his service and enjoyments on earth. Of course, there are missionaries who become ill through no fault of their own. The Lord tells us that no one is to run faster than his or her strength (see Mosiah 4:27). 

An increase in favor with God implies spiritual growth by yielding to "the enticings of the Holy Spirit and putting off "the natural man (Mosiah 3:19). A missionary begins the process by controlling his thoughts and garnishing them with virtue. He continues by measuring his words carefully and speaking only the truth. He distances himself from fleshly desires and influences by studying, praying, and working diligently. Gradually, day by day, he becomes more and more like the sons of Mosiah. Of them it was said: "They had waxed strong in the knowledge of the truth; for they were men of a sound understanding and they had searched the scriptures diligently, that they might know the word of God. But this is not all; they had given themselves

to much prayer, and fasting; therefore they had the spirit of prophecy, and the spirit of revelation, and when they taught, they taught with power and authority of God. (Alma 17:2-3.) 

A missionary's transformation does not take place automatically without some pain and persistent effort. I like the words of a country sheepherder who, despite the rocky beginning of his mission, eventually gained favor with God. In answer to the question, How did you do it? he replied, "I just realized one day how raw I was, how poorly equipped to do the Lord's work. So I buckled down and changed my ways and my outlook, and studied hard, and began to do not what I wanted to do, but what the Lord asked me to do. I still have far to go. But I've started. (Quoted in Robert O'Brien, Marriott: The J. Willard Marriott Story [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977], p. 74.)

An increase in favor with man affirms the need for missionaries to develop all of the social graces consistent with their divine callings. President Joseph F. Smith taught, "The characteristics of a good missionary are: A man who has sociability-whose friendship is permanent and sparkling-who can ingratiate himself into the confidence and favor of men who are in darkness (Gospel Doctrine [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1919], p. 356).

Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl add: "A successful missionary has the faculty of making friends. He takes an interest in all that interests his fellowmen, and brings to the society in which he moves the sweet influence of the gospel, even when he does not say a word on the subject of religion. Hermits are useless as missionaries. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, rev. ed. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1951], p. 728 n. 3.)

I would add only the caution given by Brigham Young: "If you go on a mission to preach the Gospel with lightness and frivolity in your hearts, looking for this and that, and to learn what is in the world, and not having your minds riveted . . . on the cross of Christ, you will go and return in vain (Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widtsoe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978], p. 325).

Christlike preparation and growth may be capsulized in the simple but meaningful entreaty, "Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole armour of God. (Eph. 6:10-11.) All soldiers of the Spirit or good soldiers of Jesus Christ will-

Have their "loins girt about with truth."

Put on "the breastplate of righteousness."

Shod their feet "with the preparation of the gospel of peace."

Take in hand "the shield of faith."

Don "the helmet of salvation."

Wield "the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God."

And pray always for needed support.

(See Eph. 6:14-18; see also D&C 27:15-18.) 

Serve with the Whole Soul

I don't suppose that any missionary ever feels fully and adequately prepared to represent Deity. If one does, one may be dangerously close to losing one's humility and feeling of dependency upon the Lord. If one runs a little scared in one's calling, recognizing the continuing need to improve one's performance and rely upon the Lord, one will never forget that it is really God who works the miracles and gives the increase.

No amount of preparation and success ever supersedes the following command given to those who serve in God's kingdom, especially full-time missionaries: "Therefore, O ye that embark in the service of God, see that ye serve him with all your heart, might, mind and strength, that ye may stand blameless before God at the last day (D&C 4:2). 

I emphasize those four powerful words: heart, might, mind, and strength. Authors Smith and Sjodahl explain: "'Heart' stands for 'emotions', 'sentiment'. 'Might' . . . stands for 'soul' . . . and means the spiritual faculties. 'Mind' refers to the intellect, and 'strength' to the physical attributes. This commandment enjoins on us to love our heavenly Father so that our entire beings-our emotions, our spiritual faculties, and mental and physical activities are all devoted to Him and His service. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 350.)

Missionary service is really a matter of love and faith. Those who love the Lord and have faith in him and his stated purposes will "come unto him, and offer [their] whole souls as an offering unto him (Omni 1:26). Those whose love and faith is weak are prone to withhold their services and lose the blessings.

A Proselyting Model

A number of scriptural references provide proper directions for missionaries. For instance, Ammon won the hearts of a people through service (see Alma 17:23-30) Peter and John spoke "the word of God with boldness (Acts 4:31; emphasis added); Aaron opened the scriptures to his listeners and discussed the plan of salvation and the coming of Christ (see Alma 21:9) the sons of Mosiah gained power through fasting and prayer (see Alma 17:3) Apollos was "an eloquent man, and mighty in the scriptures (Acts 18:24; emphasis added); and Paul tailored his remarks to catch the attention of people worshipping an "unknown God (see Acts 17:22-31). These and many more references give us valuable insights concerning the behavior of effective missionaries.

However, I know of only one concise listing of missionary virtues in holy writ that constitutes a comprehensive model worthy of close inspection by all full-time proselyters. This listing is found in the first epistle of Paul to the Thessalonians, chapter 2, verses 1-13. I will lead you through Paul's record verse by verse and make brief comments. In the end, a proselyting model emerges for true ministers who desire to preach in a godly manner-a manner that never becomes timeworn, out-of-date, or inappropriate.

Verse 1: "For yourselves, brethren, know our entrance in unto you, that it was not in vain."

I have no idea how many converts Paul won among the Thessalonians. It is presumed that his harvest of souls was significant because the group is referred to collectively as "the church (1 Thes. 1:1). Moreover, the very fact that Paul addressed at least two letters to these people suggests a community of Saints worthy of receiving bolstering correspondence from their concerned leader. So, whatever the number of converts, Paul's work was not in vain-it was a success!

All missionaries should be success-oriented, as was Paul. They should serve with resolve and determination, believing that their honest efforts will not be in vain. Feelings of doubt, defeat, and despair are satanic and must be dispelled. True ministers mirror the optimism

and courage of these lines: "Go forward and not backward. Courage, brethren; and on, on to the victory! (D&C 128:22.) 

Even if Paul's work in Thessalonica had resulted only in strengthening his personal conversion and in the writing of two inspired epistles, it would not have been wasted. Missionary success cannot and must not be measured only by the number of converts gained. There are other standards involved, such as testimony and goodness, that cannot be counted or reduced to simple numbers and figures.

Poor performance, however, must not be rationalized by referring to the unmeasurable aspects of missionary service. Each missionary is accountable for his or her efforts, and each should be open to an inspection of his or her records.

Verse 2: "But even after that we had suffered before, and were shamefully entreated, as ye know, at Philippi, we were bold in our God to speak unto you the gospel of God with much contention [confidence]."

Men and women of weak faith or conviction wilt under the heat of opposition. Shameful entreatment can cause quick retreat. Rejection can cause submissiveness and subjection.

But Paul was not to be denied. He was a fearless witness of Christ in many life-threatening circumstances. He was bold in his God because he was strong in his faith and confident in his message.

Modern missionaries must also possess this virtue. It can be said that faith causes a man to stand, authority prompts him to stand tall, and testimony enables him to stand tall and firm. Mormon wrote: "Behold, I speak with boldness, having authority from God; and I fear not what man can do; for perfect love casteth out all fear (Moro. 8:16). 

Said Alma to his son Shiblon, "Use boldness, but not overbearance (Alma 38:12). I believe that Alma was advocating a type of confidence relating to a commission received of God and a confidence relating to a righteous life. If a missionary or member really believes that he or she is an agent of the Lord and engaged in the Lord's business, that person's confidence and boldness will wax strong, providing he or she is doing things according to the will of the Lord (see D&C 64:29; Prov. 28:1). 

Verse 3: "For our exhortation was not of deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor in guile."

The Apostle Paul might well have said: "We taught you the pure unadulterated truth from the scriptures, and we did it in an honest, forthright manner. There was no high-powered salesmanship in Paul's approach; there was no gimmickry involved or attempts to delude his listeners. Paul knew the sacredness of his message and the holiness of his calling, and he kept himself free of tactics and strategies that would mock or demean his important mission.

The same must be said of today's missionaries and members. It is wrong to trifle with the souls of men and women by engaging in cursing conversations or speaking half-truths. Is it possible that the Lord had this in mind when he taught: "Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man; but that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man (Matt. 15:11). 

Verse 4: "But as we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the gospel, even so we speak; not as pleasing men, but God, which trieth our hearts (emphasis added).

One marvels, like Paul, at the trust that God places in his children. He makes them custodians of his saving truths; he places in their hands the salvation of precious souls; and he relies upon them to build his church and kingdom upon the earth. What greater things could he possibly put in their trust?

If a missionary's or member's trust came from men, that would be one thing. But since the trust is of the Lord, it should be regarded soberly and seriously. It should try one's heart to the extent that it provokes a godly manner of living and preaching. It should also cause one to heed this counsel: "Wherefore, be not weary in well-doing, for ye are laying the foundation of a great work. And out of small things proceedeth that which is great. Before, the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind; and the willing and obedient shall eat the good of the land of Zion in these last days. (D&C 64:33-34.) 

Verse 5: "For neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know, nor a cloke of covetousness; God is witness."

Flattery is defined as insincere and excessive praise. It is a device used by the evil one to lull people into a false sense of security and a procrastination of repentance. Sherem, an anti-Christ, was learned and had a perfect knowledge of the language of the people; "wherefore, it is written, "he could use much flattery, and much power of speech, according to the power of the devil (Jacob 7:4). 

Paul and other true ministers do not hide behind a "cloke of covetousness or resort to flattery to accomplish their purposes. They know that sin must be identified and forsaken, else there would be no progress upward. They know that friendships based upon ear-tickling exchanges are shallow and short-lived. They also know that calls to repentance and commitments to live the commandments, voiced in a spirit of sincere love and concern, will weld friendships between missionaries and contacts rather than destroy them.

Verse 6: "Nor of men sought we glory, neither of you, nor yet of others, when we might have been burdensome, as the apostles of Christ."

The power of a person seems to be directly related to his motive. If he serves with an eye over his shoulder expecting the praise and adulation of others, his powers are limited to his own resources. If, however, his heart is right and he ascribes the honor and glory to the Lord with a singleness of mind, he draws powers from above.

Verse 7: "But we were gentle among you, even as a nurse cherisheth her children."

Years ago I was stricken with a serious illness and not expected to live. Family members were summoned, and they paraded by my bedside to say good-bye. I was unconscious most of the time and racked with fever and pain. I can recall seeing only one or two persons. However, there was a nurse whom I shall never forget and in whose debt I shall always be. During the crisis hours, she sat at my side gently rubbing my arms to aid the circulation and whispering softly in my ear over and over again: "You must not die! You will live!"

In many respects, missionaries are like nurses. They assist the Great Physician in the healing arts of the gospel. They seek to reduce the number of spiritual deaths. Such is done by helping people recognize spiritual illnesses and by applying the cures of faith, repentance, baptism, and other gospel principles.

True ministers work their miracles "by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile (D&C 121:41-42). Like my nurse, they minister selflessly and encourage people to overcome sin and the other enemies of the soul.

Verse 8: "So being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto you, not the gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us."

This is a tender statement. In it, Paul expresses a love for the Saints in Thessalonica that is deep and abiding. His love apparently reached the point that he loved the people as much or more than himself. Little wonder they responded so well to his instructions!

Paul's words bring to mind something the Savior taught: "He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it (Matt. 10:39). Moreover, "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends (John 15:13). 

It is a good and noble thing to share one's testimony with another. Yet that gift, as precious as it is, has limited value unless it is given with charity-"the pure love of Christ (Moro. 7:47). One cannot preach or minister in a godly manner until this type of love for people is cultivated. And such love is cultivated by serving others, looking for the best in others, withholding judgment of others, and viewing others in terms of what they may become rather than who they are.

I would ask, who loves children most? The answer is mother. Why? Because she serves her children and gives them her all. Similarly, through service missionaries learn to love people regardless of race, color, creed, and standard of living.

Verse 9: "For ye remember, brethren, our labour and travail: for labouring night and day, because we would not be

chargeable unto any of you, we preached unto you the gospel of God (emphasis added).

I emphasize the words labor and travail. Both are synonymous for work; however, travail suggests very hard work. Apparently Paul made such a full investment of himself in preaching to the Thessalonians that he concluded his efforts with a clear conscience.

If he does his best and serves in the Lord's appointed way, a missionary can "stand blameless before God at the last day (D&C 4:2), or declare that he is not chargeable to the people he serves. Otherwise, he completes his work with a troublesome conscience and wishes that he had been more faithful. (See Ezek. 3:17-21; Jacob 1:19, 2:2; Mosiah 2:27.) 

Verse 10: "Ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily and justly and unblameably we behaved ourselves among you that believe."

Righteous or model behavior is the godly attribute highlighted by Paul in this verse. Obviously, he had lived as he taught Timothy: "Be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity (1 Tim. 4:12). 

Paul did not allow his actions to mock his words, nor should any other representative of the Lord.

Much of our communication is nonverbal. Who we are and what we do count for more than what we say. Therefore, missionaries must act well their parts and avoid all forms of hypocrisy.

While presiding over a mission, I received an anonymous telephone call from a nonmember. The woman said: "I have watched your missionaries come and go in my neighborhood for years, and I have grown to appreciate them for their cleanliness and circumspect behavior. But, she added, "the two who are currently laboring in this part of the city are not living as they should. I promptly investigated the matter and, to my chagrin, verified the woman's report. In this isolated case, two negligent missionaries had forgotten their holy callings and were chargeable to both God and the people who had been offended by their actions. As happened with Corianton of old, the wayward behavior or conduct of the missionaries had caused investigators to reject the truth (see Alma 39:10-12). 

Men and women of Christ are what is needed in missionary service-men and women who are "a light unto the world (D&C 103:9). 

Verse 11: "As ye know how we exhorted and comforted and charged every one of you, as a father doth his children."

This verse refers to the teaching approach used by Paul and his coworkers and the manner in which the approach was used. In modern language we would say: They taught (exhorted), resolved concerns (comforted), and committed (charged) their listeners. And, we would add, their actions were an outgrowth of their profound love for the people.

We can surmise from the scripture that the missionaries in the meridian of time understood what we have learned in the fulness of times, namely: "Faith, if it hath not works, is dead (James 2:17) both gospel principles and saving ordinances are necessary; spiritual rebirth requires understanding and commitment; and the grace of God and the good works of man work synergistically toward salvation. Otherwise Paul and his associates would not have attempted to resolve the concerns of the people or challenge them to accept a higher form of living.

It is imperative that modern missionaries teach and testify and invite contacts to make needed changes in their lives. At the same time, they must remember that there is no place for force or coercion in missionary work. It must always be a labor of love, wherein those who exhort and charge exercise a parental type of loving concern and those who accept do so much like a trusting child.

Verse 12: "That ye would walk worthy of God, who hath called you unto his kingdom and glory."

In my mind, this verse has an implicit and an implied meaning. The implicit meaning is that Paul wanted his converts to remain true to the faith. He did not want them to fall away or out of the Church. He wanted the fruits of his labors to remain. He knew that their retention depended upon their continuing resolve to walk worthy of the Spirit (see John 15:16). 

Missionaries or members must be interested in more than baptisms. They

must be intent upon obtaining convert baptisms. They must understand that "conversion is not a point but a line, not the beginning of a Christian life but the whole of it. Their duty is to place themselves on that line, walk progressively forward, and invite others to do the same. Full-time missionaries and member-missionaries understand that they enjoy their present blessings through the grace of God and full obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel; therefore, they reach out with love to help others walk the path marked by the Savior. (See Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, ed. James Hastings, 12 vols. [New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1922], 12:161.)

The implied meaning of Paul's words in verse 12 is that missionaries must walk worthy of God-worthy of the Holy Spirit-in order to be effective in their callings. I say this because conversion is really a spiritual transfusion involving the missionary, the investigator, and the Holy Spirit. The missionary teaches under the influence of the Spirit; the Spirit bears witness of the spoken truth; and the investigator responds to the influence of the Spirit by submitting to baptism. It can be said that the missionary sparks a courtship between his or her listener and the Spirit, a courtship that will hopefully become a lifetime companionship.

The Lord promised Enoch: "Behold my Spirit is upon you, wherefore all thy words will I justify; and the mountains shall flee before you, and the rivers shall turn from their course; and thou shalt abide in me, and I in you; therefore walk with me (Moses 6:34). 

Verse 13: "For this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because, when ye received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men, but as it is in truth, the word of God, which effectually worketh also in you that believe (emphasis added).

I emphasize the words "ye received . . . as the . . . word of God, which effectually worketh also in you that believe, for they suggest that conversion occurred and a retention of converts took place.

In too many instances, potential converts receive the missionaries and become attached to them rather than to the message. Consequently, when the missionary is transferred or released, the prospective member falls away because he or she is not rooted in the truth. Missionaries must therefore do all that is essential to make the

word of God work effectually in the lives of those with whom they labor; otherwise new members will not have "root in themselves and will "endure but for a time (Mark 4:17; see also John 15:16). 

The missionaries' message of truth will be effective in the lives of others as the hands of converts are placed upon the iron rod (1 Ne. 11:25) and as their hands are clasped by fellow citizens in "the household of God (see Eph. 2:19-22, 4:11). 

Elder Bruce R. McConkie provides this summary of Paul's proselyting model: "The manner in which the Lord's ministers carry their message to the world is one of the great identifying characteristics of the truth. Paul here recites the valiance and devotion, the uprightness and gentleness, the fairness and holiness that attended his missionary efforts and those of his companions. He and they manifest the same spirit and course which the Lord set for his latter-day ministers in these words: 'No one can assist in this work except he shall be humble and full of love, having faith, hope, and charity, being temperate in all things, whatsoever shall be entrusted to his care.' (D&C 12:8). (Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1973], 3:45.)

Summary

All who strive to share the gospel should review periodically the model or standard of service outlined by the Apostle Paul. From time to time you should use Paul's listing of attributes as a mirror. Look into it, and allow it to reflect your personal performance. If you feel that you have not measured up completely in one respect or another, have the courage to make the necessary adjustments.

Don't become discouraged or impatient. Habits are changed slowly. Virtues, like principles, are acquired line upon line, little by little, and day by day. Just maintain your resolve and earnest desire for improvement-the rest will take care of itself.

The kind of men we want as bearers of this Gospel message are men who have faith in God; men who have faith in their religion; men who honor their Priesthood; men in whom the people who know them have faith

and in whom God has confidence, and not some poor unfortunate beings who are wanted to leave a place because they cannot live in it; but we want men full of the Holy Ghost and the power of God that they may go forth . . . sowing the seeds of eternal life, and then returning with gladness, bringing their sheaves with them. . . . Men who bear the words of life among the nations, ought to be men of honor, integrity, virtue and purity; and this being the command of God to us, we shall try and carry it out. (John Taylor, in Journal of Discourses 21:375.)

 
 
© 1996 Deseret Book Company 

Printed from Gospelink.com
