Elder David A. Bednar and Elder Quentin L. Cook of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, along with other Church leaders, visited the Philippines Area from August 24 to September 2, 2012.

At priesthood leadership conferences, young single adult devotionals, stake conferences, and mission meetings, the Brethren taught doctrine and encouraged the Saints to strengthen their faith in Jesus Christ.

In Laguna, Elder Bednar answered young single adults’ questions during a special meeting. He explained, “The Savior used questions as one of His primary teaching tools. If we strive to ask inspired and effective questions as we ponder and pray, you and I can engage in a learning process that enables us to receive inspiration and find our own answers from the Holy Ghost.”

On Sunday the chapel, cultural halls, and overflow rooms of the Legazpi Stake Center were packed with members as Elder Cook taught, “Do not let your doubts disturb your faith.”

He emphasized the importance of husbands and wives being equal partners in marriage as taught by “The Family: A Proclamation to the World” (Liahona and Ensign, Nov. 2010, 129).

Elder Cook greeted the members at the conclusion of the meeting.

Members and missionaries in Iloilo, on Panay Island, traveled as much as five hours by boat and bus to attend meetings where Elder Bednar gave instruction on strengthening their faith in Jesus Christ and assisting others to come unto Christ.

“We are here to teach the gospel of Jesus Christ, but we should always remember that the true teacher is the Holy Ghost,” summarized Sister Manguil, a full-time missionary serving in the Philippines Iloilo Mission.

In Cagayan de Oro Elder Cook told local young adults, “Your righteousness is needed, and this nation needs to be stronger. There will be an impact as a result of the Church’s strength in the Philippines that will bless people all over Asia.”

He encouraged members to focus on what is most important, conquer doubts, exercise faith, and marry in the temple.

“The timing of the teachings of the principles and scripture thoughts they shared was of [great] importance,” Iligan Philippines Stake president Carlo V. Crisanto said. “Surely those principles are what we need today. … Of all the callings we have, the most important is in the family.”

The Apostles ended their visit to the Philippines by meeting with two Philippine senators and attending a cultural event highlighting the local youth.
