Islam and Mormonism—A Comparison

Hugh Nibley

Professor of History and Religion

Brigham Young University

Ensign, March 1972, pp. 55-64

The late great Classical scholar Werner Jaeger once electrifying announcement that God had again said that the only time the lectures of the immortal spoken from the heavens and that after 600 years of Eduard Meyer were really interesting and the only silence the voice of a prophet was again heard in the time he was ever able to fill his lecture hall at the land. It was this announcement that aroused the scorn University of Berlin was when he talked about the and derision of the world and brought down storms of Mormons.

denunciation and persecution on the head of that

prophet. Here indeed is a closer parallel to the case of

Eduard Meyer was the last mortal to attempt single- Joseph Smith; in fact, early Mormon leaders saw no handed a history of the Ancient World; others before reason why Mohammed should not be considered a him had written monumental histories of antiquity, true prophet, for there have been many prophets, “but never before had such work been undertaken by great and small, in the past whose words are not in anyone with a comparable preparation.” 1 “He had a the Bible.

special preference for the history of religion which

never left him, from his dissertation (at the age of But the striking resemblance turns almost at once into twenty) to the great work of his old age,” 2 and that is an equally striking contrast when the Moslems why in 1904 he spent a year [page 56] in Utah; he announce that Mohammed is the last of the prophets was convinced that “Mormonism … is not just and that there can be no prophet after him. “When a another of countless sects, but a new revealed doctrine is sealed,” writes an eminent Moslem religion. … What in the study of other revealed scholar, “it is complete, and there can be no further religions can only be surmised after painful research addition. The holy Prophet Mohammed closed the is here directly accessible in reliable witnesses. long line of Apostles. … there has been and will be Hence the origin and history of Mormonism no prophet after Mohammed.” 5 Thus Islam ignored possesses great and unusual value for the student of its one unique advantage over conventional Judaism religious history.” 3

and Christianity, the joyful tidings that God still

speaks from the heavens through his prophets.

In particular, “Mormonism,” he writes, “exc ited my

interest at an early age before all else because of the Upon learning about the Mormons, Moslems usually surprising analogy, extending even to the smallest comment favorably on the resemblance between the details, between it and the fundamental drives, Word of Wisdom and Moslem rules of abstinence; external forms, and historical development of Islam: but again the parallel is weakened by the fact that here one might hope to discover significant clues for only a small minority of Moslems, such as the strict a proper understanding of Mohammed and his and rigorous Wahabis, observe such rules. The religion. … there is hardly another historical parallel toleration of more than one wife in both religions is as instructive as this one. … It is impossible to based on quite different principles and at any rate has undertake the scholarly investigation of the one been of limited application in both societies. Both without a closer acquaintance with the other.” 4 religions advocate high moral principles, but then so

do most other religions.

It would be foolish not to take advantage of the

spade-work already done by so competent a Most fundamental are certain doctrinal traditions that, researcher as Meyer. Let us consider then the points while found in the Koran, have been rejected by on which he believes the Moslems and Mormons to conventional Christianity and Judaism but have be most alike and on which they differ. At the outset, always been a part of Mormonism. Great emphasis is the resemblances pointed out by Meyer are quite placed, for example, on the concept of dispensations, superficial, while the differences are profound and i.e., the restoration of prophetic gifts and divine fundamental.

authority after long periods of apostasy and darkness

through the sending of a great prophet. This doctrine

First as to the likenesses: Islam owed its impact on was necessary to justify Mohammed’s appearance as the world and its great appeal to its followers to the

a new prophet but became a dead letter in Islam after

his death.

The intractable Joseph Smith “thinks of spiritual

things in a far cruder and more materialistic way than

The Koran tells how at a great council held in the Mohammed … all of his manifestations, visions, heavens at the creation of the earth God set forth the healings, ecstasies, etc., are quite everyday things to plan of salvation, and how Satan rejected the plan, him and his followers. … For Mohammed on the refused to bow to Adam, and was cast [page 57] out other hand, the only miracle [the ‘sign’] is the of heaven by main force, falling to this earth, where revelation of the words of the divine book. … he he now undertakes to tempt the children of men forcefully denied possessing any of the other during their time of probation here below. 6 Such miraculous powers possessed by the ancient prophets teachings enjoy great prominence in the newly …” 10 The italics emphasize that Joseph Smith is discovered documents of the early Christian and again classified with the prophets of Israel and not Jewish saints and sectaries of the desert, documents with the prophet of Islam. “Both think of God as of which Eduard Meyer knew nothing but which now having corporeal form,” writes Meyer, “but Smith in go a long way toward explaining how the teachings his first vision sees God Himself, the Father and the got into the Koran.

Son, just as Moses and others saw him; while to

Mohammed only the angel appears.” 11 More italics

Actually, these things belong to the mysteries of the reinforce the point. Koran and have never meant much to Moslems.

Meyer himself limits the resemblances between While Joseph Smith taught “the continuation of direct Mormonism and Islam to “fundamental drives, prophetic inspiration, along with charismatic gifts of external forms, and historical development,” all of tongues, healings, etc.,” to be generally enjoyed which are secondary to the real genius of a religion— whenever the true church is u pon the earth, “the idea what its followers really believe. As mentioned of any miraculous powers in the possession of his before, in Meyer’s work it is the differences between followers is utterly out of the question” for Islam and Mormonism that are most significant. Mohammed. 12 Again Joseph Smith is among the

prophets: “He that believeth on me, the works that I

In the first place, Meyer, who feels quite at ho me do shall he do also; and greater works … shall he do. with the great Moslem leaders, is puzzled and …” (John 14:12.)

annoyed by the Mormons; he finds it “easier to reach

a confident conclusion about Mohammed, Abu Bekr, “Mohammed was able to win the loyalty of men of Omar, than about Joseph Smith or Brigham Young, such superior intelligence and high social standing as in spite of the relatively much greater amount of Abu Bekr and Omar … while Joseph Smith’s materia l surviving concerning the latter.” 7 He can followers belonged almost without exception to the explain Mohammed as a human being, plagued with dregs of the people. …” Here one is reminded that in doubts and misgivings about the nature of his calling the early Jewish and [page 58] Christian writings the and the authenticity of his visions.

followers of the prophets are regularly designated as

“the poor,” because they really were the poor and

“For Joseph Smith, on the other hand,” he reports, “it outcast. But Mohammed was able “to command is a most distinctive characteristic that any such sort unswerving submission” of these followers, whereas of doubt or misgiving is utterly out of the question.” “the first to follow [Joseph Smith] later fell away and 8 The biblical prophets annoy Meyer in the same were expelled from the Church.” 13 way; since for him there is no such thing as

revelation, he insists that “Jesus never claimed direct Among those who maintained family and party revelation … never had a vision … never once loyalty to Mohammed were many who did not take predicted future events.” The passages in the Bible him seriously as a prophet, and many soon found it to that describe the Lord as doing such things Meyer their temporal advantage to support him regardless of simply attributes to later invention.

their beliefs. But Joseph Smith never had anything to

offer his followers but the sure word of prophecy,

“It goes without saying,” Meyer decides, “that the and Meyer notes with wonder that there were those Gospel of John is utterly worthless as a source,” 9 whom he “threw out of the Church” who never and as for literal-minded prophets like Ezekiel, he denied his prophetic calling. simply loathes them. But the thing to notice is that

Meyer puts the Mormon prophets in the same It was, of course, the Book of Mormon that first category with the deluded prophets of the Bible and suggested the parallel between its author and in a very different category from Mohammed. Mohammed, each of whom claimed to have given the world a divine book brought to him personally by an

angel. But there all resemblance ends; the differences Mohammed, with his purely spiritual book, never between the two books are as great as those between takes the terrible risks that Joseph Smith does, though their authors. The Book of Mormon, though the Koran constantly flings out meaningless transmitted and translated by divine ministration, was challenges. Meyer fails to appreciate that the Book of an earthly book, written by the hands of men, as is all Mormon is a highly testable document, since for him scripture, and hence apt to contain the mistakes of there is nothing to test: there is no revelation, so there men. The Koran, on the other hand, is held by most is no point to challenging any document, [page 60] Moslems to be “identical with the uncreated eternal including the Bible, that claims it. While both the Word of God that is written on the heavenly tablets; Koran and the Book of Mormon claim to be strictly literally, not in any figurative sense. …” Even the in the biblical tradition, Mohammed, as Meyer ink, paper, and binding are accepted in the most observes, “has but a dim conception” of the Bible, literal sense as the Uncreated Word of God. 14 and even the greatest Moslem scholars are

astonishingly ignorant of the scriptures; in no way

The Book of Mormon is a history of the doings of has the Book of Mormon supplanted the Bible as has very fallible humans, while devotees of the Koran the Koran.

disdain to attribute to it anything as banal as human

history. While Joseph Smith “copies out the peculiar The key to understanding both the likenesses and written characters of the holy book,” Meyer notes, differences between Mormonism and Islam is to be “such a thing would never have occurred to found in the double nature of the latter, which draws Mohammed.” 24 And whereas Joseph Smith “claims from both “vertical” and “horizontal” traditions. that he actually dug it up and kept it in his house … Vertical Judaism and Christianity is that brand of for Mohammed it always remains in the hands of the religion that believed in the necessity of direct angel.” 15

revelation, inspired leaders, charismatic gifts, the

coming of a real Messiah and a real millennium; the

There is nothing like the testimony of the Three predominance of such beliefs at an early time has Witnesses to support Mohammed’s story, the Koran become apparent from the oldest Jewish and repeatedly and solemnly affirming that it is its own Christian manuscripts, whose recent discovery has witness, and though Meyer naturally rejects the completely changed the picture of Christian testimony of the witnesses o ut of hand, still it jars beginnings.

him. “The essential thing is, that this vision was for

the Three Witnesses an absolutely real occurrence, on Both Judaism and Christianity, it would now appear, the complete and literal actuality of which none of began as charismatic vertical religions that were in them ever betrayed the slightest trace of a doubt. The time completely suppressed and supplanted by the opponents of t he Mormons made every conceivable horizontal or academic way of thinking, which holds effort to get these men to retract their testimonies and that one should reverence only the tradition handed to admit that there was a deception; but they down horizontally fro m one generation of teachers remained unshaken, and continued to the end of their and scholars to the next and that the complete lives to affirm the truth of the revelation and the religious life is comprised in the proper observance authenticity of the Book of Mormon. Far harder to of established customs and the acceptance of explain is the testimony of the eight witnesses.” 16 officially approved doctrines. However, Islam arose

in a time and place in which much of the old vertical

Since he will accept neither book as inspired, Meyer attitudes of the desert sectaries still survived, but in prefers the Koran to the Book of Mormon, because it which also the influence of the schoolmen was well took years of painful study to produce and it shows established and on the increase. Hence the two “a conviction won through genuinely strenuous elements mingle and impart a spirit of ambiguity and mental effort, and even at times a poetic exaltation.” controversy to every Mos lem discussion. 17

Since Islam’s debt to the early desert sectaries (such

Naturally one prefers the work of a thinker and a poet as those represented by the Dead Sea scrolls) has not to a big history turned out all at once by a very young yet been seriously studied, a few illustrations may be man who is both ignorant and strangely devoid of helpful. One evening in March of the year A.D. 620 misgivings: “… the vocabulary is exceedingly Mohammed took a walk to the valley of Mina on the limited, except for the numerous peculiar words and western outskirts of his hometown of Mecca, where proper names invented by the author, in which he some pilgrims were camping. Some of the campers gives his imagination free rein.” 18

were Jews—Chasraj from Yathrib in the north—who had separated themselves from the rest of their renounced the doing of miracles.” 21 He was not in people, after the immemorial custom of the desert the line of the great prophets, the restorers, all of sectaries. They were looking for a prophet, and they whom spoke with the Lord face to face and whose accepted Mohammed as their inspired leader; the ministries were marked by signs and wonders; he next year they returned and secretly entered a was, as Waraka said, “The prophet for this people covenant to support him. Thus the Prophet’s first (an-nabi li-hadhihi-l-’ummah).” He was a reformer solid support came from the vertically minded and a great one, but he was not a restorer; of the sectaries of the desert.

things the Bible talks about he had, as Meyer

observes, little or no understanding.

At the same time he had his famous dream of

journeying to heaven from the temple at Jerusalem But if Islam came early enough to catch the last and there meeting Moses, Christ, Abraham, John the echoes of early Christianity and vertical Judaism, it Baptist, Enoch, and Aaron, and seeing Adam also came late enough to find the schoolmen in presiding as judge over the great assemb ly of all his complete control of the situation. The official children. These are the figures that dominate in the theology of the church and the synagogue was that early apocryphal writings of the Jews and which the churchmen and the rabbis had learned from Christians—no wonder Mohammed’s [page 61] the University of Alexandria, and the Moslems lost Arabic relatives shook their heads in perplexity and no time falling in line, quickly producing a host of doubt. And when Mohammed himself had serious learned theologians whose mental and verbal doubts about the divinity of his calling, it was one of gymnastics could put [page 62] the Christian and the the sectaries who had read both the Old Testament Jewish doctors to shame. and the New, his wife’s uncle Maraka, who told him

that his visions were genuine and that he would be Their interpretations, imposed upon the more the special prophet to his people.

“primitive” teaching of the Koran, make every point

of doctrine in Islam a disputed one. The mollahs

But the early Chris tian and Jewish traditions that (Muslims trained in law and doctrine) insist that survive in the Koran and in works by its early Islam is the ultimate world religion and criticize other commentators came to the Arabs secondhand and religions as being geographically limited and were never really assimilated or understood by them. culturally conditioned; yet the ordinary Moslem “No knowledge have I of the chiefs on high, boasts that no one can understand the Koran except a discussing among themselves,” says Mohammed; born Arab.

“only this has been revealed to me: to give warning

plainly and publicly.” 19 That is, Mohammed has While the official theology constantly reiterates that heard about the council in heaven, but he really Mohammed is the last of the prophets (a point not knows nothing about it. So we are told of God’s plan, pressed in the Koran itself), a large part of the laid down at the foundation of the earth; and yet the Moslem world looks forward to the coming of other plan is no plan at all, for punishment and reward have prophets, notably the Mahdi, and has ever been eager nothing whatever to do with individual behavior and to follow leaders claiming divine inspiration. Trying all things happen—”don’t ask why or how” (bila to reconcile the two views, A. Y. Ali writes, “God’s kaif)—according to the imponderable will and teaching is and will always be continuous, but there pleasure of God.

has been and will be no prophet after Mohammed.”

22

Like the early Christians and Jews, the Koran is

aware of the great importance of the rites and If God can teach continuously without a prophet, why ordinances of the temple, yet the cult of Jerusalem Mohammed? If God’s entire message could be put in was supplanted almost immediately by the more a small book 1200 years ago, why not 2400 or 3600 familiar and very ancient cult of Mecca. “Though years ago? If men have needed prophets in the past, Mohammed was in fact a charismatic leader,” after as the Koran itself pointedly asks, why not today? the manner of the early sectaries, according to a Though it was its vivid eschatology that gave Islam recent study, “… the concept of the charismatic its great initial appeal (as it did Christianity and leader had little part in the Qur’anic system of ideas.” Judaism), Islam, like its sister religions, has become 20

particularly weak in the field of eschatology:

Mohammed now turns out to be a prophet who does

Though the Koran recalls the marvelous works of not prophesy.

God for and among the Chosen People, “Mohammed

did not claim to be a saint, and deliberately Constantly repeating the old formula of the sectaries, Thus the Moslem doctors have often noted that a God that God is gentle and forbearing, the Moslems early who is totally incomprehensible leads straight to adopted a policy of conquest by force and have ever atheism and idolatry (as among the Sabaeans); yet been imbued with the polemical and party spirit that incomprehensible he must be if he is to be absolutely has kept the doctors of all religions divided and unique, unapproachable, indescribable, totally unlike squabbling through the centuries.

any other thing—and he must be all those things if he

is to be the Only One: there can be nothing like him.

The same ambivalence is apparent in the attitude to

the Koran. Hailed as “the book that makes things Even to imagine God as having any “partners” of any clear,” in a world in which the rabbis and the doctors kind sharing his nature and his activities is the great of the church could never agree among themselves crime of shirk; he does all things himself without the about their own scriptures, the Koran soon turned out need or wish for any helpers—yet the Moslem creed to be an object of even greater disagreement than the requires belief in God, his angels, his prophets, his Bible, while many Moslems point to its supreme apostles, his books, i.e., with a whole host of agents obscurity as a sign of its divinity. There are as many through whom the all-sufficient God somehow conflicting commentaries on the Koran as there are operates in his dealings with men. And while it is on the Bible, and as many conflicting sects claiming wicked to think of man as having anything whatever its true interpretation: one of the most famous hadiths in common with God, still man is supposed to love or sayings attributed to Mohammed is that “there are him, yearn to be with him, seek the reward of gazing seventy-seven sects in Islam (already in his day) and upon his face, and in the end become completely all but one are for the burning!”

identified with him, one with whom he can have

nothing in common!

It is claimed that the Koran eschews the arts of

rhetoric for the plain, simple language that can be It is outrageous blasphemy to think of a Son as grasped by one and all, yet in the teaching of the participating in his glory and power; how much Koran the principal emphasis has always been on worse, then, to conceive of other and lesser beings i’rab, correct pronunciation, with the insistence that it existing beside him—man’s very existence is a is more important to pronounce the words with the crime: yet the Moslem theologians admit that man correct enunciation and the proper tone of voice than exists, along with a lot of other not so glorious things. it is to understand what they mean.

For though God alone created all things, and though

he is perfectly good and does only what he wants to

The Koran claims to be the complete and final word do, the doctors insist that evil is a reality and that the of God, yet the doctors of Islam have handed down world is full of it. The problem of evil goes thus tens of thousands of hadiths, that is, things that unanswered.

Mohammed is reported to have said or would have

said (according to them) to clarify and extend the The idea that God might [page 64] have children is teaching. The Koran declares that no amount of utterly abhorrent to the Moslems: we are not his intellectual effort will avail in understanding the children but things that he has created out of nothing; word of God, yet it was the Moslem teachers who but he created us with tragic weaknesses in our first turned wholeheartedly to Aristotle to find an nature: this anomaly leads to the fatalism and answer to theological questions, and it [page 63] was cynicism of an Omar Khayyam. from them that the scholastic philosophers of the

medieval church later took over.

The Koran hails Jesus as a true prophet and a great

one, yet Moslem theology rejects all his teachings

The central theme of Moslem as of Christian about the Son of God as false; it teaches that Mary theology is the nature of God, and while the Moslem was “the woman of truth” who conceived Jesus by doctors boast of being free of the contradictions and the Holy Ghost and bore him when she was still a obscurities that have ever marked the course of virgin, yet it deplores the idea that God should have a trinitarian theology, their wholehearted acceptance Son.

(along with the Christians and the Jews) of the God

of the Alexandrian school-men—absolutely, A well-known teaching in Islam is that “we come out exclusively, totally, inconceivably one—soon got from God and to him we shall return.” This has led to them into even worse predicaments than the Christian much controversy among Moslem theologians. How theologians.

can we go from and return to him if he is

everywhere? In nothing is the dual tradition of Islam

more apparent than in the division of its great teachers into two main schools, one of which insists Note: Additional footnote explanations and on a completely formless and incomprehensible God supportive material are available upon request from while the other teaches of a God who has a body just the Ensign, 79 South State Street, Salt Lake City, like a man’s. The former asks: “Can God have any Utah 84111

attributes whatever without completely destroying

belief in his invisible, unchanging Oneness?” 23 Yet

a famous teacher of the other school, Abu Amir,

“would slap on his own thigh and say [commenting

on Sura 68: 42], ‘God has a real thigh, just like this

one here!’ ” 23

The Koran can define God in terms of the schools

and then go right on talking about him as a rea l

person. It can tell us that men are lost or saved by his

good pleasure alone and through no act of theirs and

then insist that all men are individually responsible in

all things. It swears by the Bible, which it never

reads, and knows nothing of the Mess iah. The

Moslems insist that nothing whatever can be known

about God and then fill libraries with treatises on his

true nature. It is outrageous presumption for anything

to exist beside him, they say—yet here we are. He

created absolutely everything that is out of his own

perfect nature, and yet the world is full of evil.

Ability to live with such basic contradictions would

seem to be a highly developed trait among the Arabs.

“The Oriental is not a realist,” writes a famous

Moslem scholar; “he is above all an idealist. He

certainly hears and contemplates nature … but what

he grasps is very soon altered, or rather stylized”;

then he quotes P. Ricard: “Muslim art … turns away

from the reality of existing things. It appears to reject

all that binds it closely or remotely to the living

world. It only permits the representation of inner,

imaginary vues. …” 24

The Arab sees what he wants to or as he wants it to

be. The same type of licensed thinking is the

hallmark of conventional Christian theology, and it

was because Mormonism turned away from this

theology of freewheeling symbol and fantasy that it

was anathema to all the churches. For all its

superficial resemblances to Islam, Mormonism is

even farther removed from it than from sectarian

Christianity.

.
