Let me begin by saying that “A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step”. Unofficially, the church work began in 1850 by British sailors who visited Calcutta, India.

Other missionary efforts were initiated in subsequent years with some success. In 1981, government regulations allowed a missionary couple to establish a branch.

In 1993, a mission was created in Bangalore with Gucharan Singh Gill, a native of India, presiding over it and I remember being a part of a small group of members gathering at a local meeting house. Home groups were organized where members met every Sunday. Activities and spiritual growth were fostered, and love bloomed within this little flock and as a result more were added to this group. Each meeting brought about a change in the hearts of many. Seminaries and Institute were organized, and Gospel doctrine was taught with much emphasis. Missionary efforts were in full force and the good news was being accepted and baptisms were held. The youth were particularly strong and valiant in their learning about the Gospel. Sunday worship was extremely important. Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin and President Gordon Hinckley graced this land with their presence and words which stood as a standing instruction to govern the saints here in New Delhi, India. Visits to the nearest Temples were encouraged and families were sealed. With little that these pioneers had they made much in their spiritual journey and quest to please their Maker. Nothing good comes without challenges and yes, we did have our part of trials, but the Saints did overcome the part they were confronted with. Gospel was introduced to the Bhatti’s in the late 1980’s and they accepted it indeed like a pearl of great price and have handed it over to their children who now carry it forward as a treasure to be cherished on to the third generation. Noble Patrick Bhatti accepted the Gospel with his wife Nirmala in the year 1987.He worked for the Indian Air force and his wife was a Speech therapist for the specially abled. They diligently followed the commandments and especially were firm believers in the Principle of Tithing and encouraged the pursuance of the said commandment in every testimony they bore. They did witness the windows of heaven opening for them and their family in various ways leading to their spiritual enlightenment. Oh, how time flies! The experience of being a member of the Savior’s true church has been marvelous and has blessed their lives abundantly. Both of them have moved on to the other side of the veil survived by their daughters who now live in New Delhi and Utah.

Being a pioneer has never been easy but the lessons we learn being one of them is priceless. The establishment of a stake in the year November 2017 was an emotional and auspicious event and a heartfelt tribute to the many saints who came as missionaries, couples and singles to serve the people in this beautiful land. The journey from home branch to a stake involved silent prayers and tears and the efforts of many whom the Lord Has an account of. We touch generations and build a reservoir of memories and legacies which become a part of history.
