324 JOURNAL OF THE EVANGELICAL THEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Charts covering so many courses over so many years obviously cannot be in-cluded here.43 However, one important aspect of their testimony deserves mention. Because the twenty-four-year cycle of ministration is determined by the juncture of Jehoiarib and first week of Tishri on the one hand, and the week of Ab 8–14 on the other, the cyclical parameters of all other courses is governed by this result. As al-ready noted, the week of Ab 8–14 represents the twenty-first station of the second ministration, and therefore indicates the cycle began in AD 50. If the juncture of these two points turned out instead to be the sixteenth station, this would place the beginning of the cycle at AD 55. The beginning of all preceding cycles would there-fore also be five years earlier, with the result that the course of Abijah in the year 3 BC would serve five weeks earlier, moving the conception of John the Baptist an equal number of weeks from the autumnal equinox, and Jesus’ birth fifteen months later the same distance from the winter solstice.

If, on the other hand, the juncture of the two points occurred three stations later, at the twenty-fourth station, Zachariah would then have served after the au-tumnal equinox. This would place the births of John and Jesus beyond the summer and winter solstices, arguing against the verity of their received birth-dates. Thus, the fact that the convergence of Jehoiarib with the weeks of Tishri 1 and Ab 8–14 occurs twenty-one steps apart—and only twenty-one steps apart—and so doing causes the course of Abijah in the year 3 BC to fall two weeks before the autumnal equinox argues persuasively not only that the charts are correct (they concur with historical tradition on both ends), but that John was in fact conceived and born about the time traditionally received, but more importantly, so also was Jesus. Of course, since the courses served twice annually, when Zachariah actually served, and John and Jesus were born, cannot be proved absolutely by the charts. However, while the charts may not prove the certainty, they do establish the possibility, if not probability, that the traditional date of Christ’s birth is correct.

VI. CONCLUSION

Neither the History of Religions Theory nor the Calculation Theory can ade-quately account for the origin of the Christmas date. Therefore, transmission of the date of Christ’s birth by tradition from the apostles and holy family cannot logically be ruled out. Moreover, since the traditional date of the nativity is fully consistent with various chronological indicators left for us in history and the Gospels, we have every reason to accept it as the true source and origin of the Christmas date.

43 The charts may be viewed at http://www.dec25th.info/pdf%20books/Priestly%20Courses

%2023%20BC%20-%20AD%2070%20Revised.pdf.
