I gazed upon the many rows of black marble stones standing in haunting stillness among the beautiful gardens of the Okinawa Peace Memorial Park in Itoman, Okinawa, Japan. Engraved with over 200,000 names, these stones commemorate those who lost their lives during the Battle of Okinawa during World War II.

Walking toward the parking lot at the conclusion of our visit, my wife and I noticed that our toddler no longer held his favorite yellow truck. When we asked him where it was, he led us back to the main monument. He had neatly placed his truck by a bouquet of flowers donated by other visitors. With shining eyes and a huge smile, our son showed us his own contribution to the memorial.

Driving home, we pondered his selfless choice. Did he recognize the special spirit of that place and feel compelled to give his most prized possession? What worth could a plastic truck add to the honor and memorial of those who had lost their lives here?

My thoughts turned to the Savior’s atoning sacrifice. In a similarly beautiful garden, He sacrificed His life so we could be freed from sin and death and return home to our Heavenly Father. What could I possibly give to the Savior or to my brothers and sisters that would be enough to show my appreciation? What value would my contributions be compared to His sacrifice?

That night, I read in the Gospel of Mark about the woman who offered two mites while the rich around her gave much more. The Savior’s words touched my heart:

“This poor widow hath cast more in, than all they which have cast into the treasury:

“… She of her want did cast in all that she had” (Mark 12:43–44).

I believe that the Lord is less concerned about what we contribute and more concerned about our desires and sincerity. Much of what I can give may seem insignificant compared to the beautiful monument-like contributions of others. But “the Lord looketh on the heart” (1 Samuel 16:7), so a simple, heartfelt expression of love, gratitude, or service can mean much as it glorifies Jesus Christ and His redeeming sacrifice.

Just like yellow trucks and widows’ mites.
