The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints hosted the Interfaith Forum at their meetinghouse at Ledsham Avenue, St. Leonards. The mayor of Hastings, James Bacon and local councillor and previous mayor Nigel Sinden both took time to commemorate Queen Elizabeth’s passing and shared fond memories with the delegates from different faith groups.

The focus of the evening was an introduction by Bishop Cornelis Taekema, of the Hastings Ward, explaining tenets of the faith and stressing the importance of working together as local faith leaders seeking the common good. Bishop Taekema said that, in his opinion, many people suffered from what he called ‘church deficit disorder’, expressing concern that society had pulled away from church, adding that—as a result—many were feeling disconnected and isolated, a condition much exacerbated by the recent pandemic and overuse of mobile phones and other devices. Experiencing a renewed sense of awe and reverence for beauty as expressed in music and found in nature as well as in places of worship such as churches, chapels and temples would work as a healing balm, a cure for our society.

This was followed by a tour of the building with various brief presentations in a number of teaching rooms, including the Church’s family history centre. The members of the Church gave concise and informative presentations to the 25-plus delegates present.

The delegates were treated to a marvellous tea afterwards and went away most impressed with the various facilities the building offers, all free of charge to members and nonmembers alike. Some said they loved how the Church and its hosts were such warm, welcoming people and how they had felt the energy of the place.

The Anglican bishop enthusiastically shared how he had been shown round Temple Square in Salt Lake City, Utah, many years ago and had fond memories of his time in the U.S.

The chaplain for the National Health Service, responsible for a staff of 7,000 in the Hastings area hospitals, was most intrigued by one of the paintings in the chapel which depicted the Saviour’s visit to the ancient Americas and promptly requested a Book of Mormon.

The organiser and chairman, Tim Miller was also full of praise and felt the evening had been a great success.

Interestingly, local composer Polo Piatti, was in the audience and was given some time to introduce his latest interfaith oratorio ‘Libera Nos’ which was performed at the Delaware Theatre in November. He was commissioned to write it specifically to bring old and young people, of all cultural and faith backgrounds, together to help build bridges between the diverse communities of Hastings and Bexhill.

The Hastings meetinghouse is also used as a facility for local school concerts and music rehearsals, the NHS blood donation service, the Young Carers charity and as a polling station.
