Tis this and 'tis that, They cannot tell what,

Why so many great Men of the Nation,

Should Aprons put on, To make themselves one

With a Free or an Accepted Mason.

—Entered Apprentice Song, 1723

Scholars have largely disregarded the tremendous influence exerted by Freemasonry on nineteenth-century American political, social, and religious institutions. As Steven Bullock noted, Masonry seems “too obscure, too unusual to hold much [scholarly or historical]

interest.” However, he further argued that this “very obscurity” of

American “interest and emotional investment in Masonry” can provide

“a point of entry that offers a new perspective” for the careful historian.

Bullock’s study “seeks to understand the appeal of Masonry for

eighteenth- and early-nineteenth-century Americans” and “to illuminate

the society and culture that first nurtured and then rejected it.”1

The appeal of Masonry in Joseph Smith’s Restoration movement

deserves the same careful consideration. Smith was a teenager in a

family with strong Masonic ties during the time and the place of the

fraternity’s greatest upheaval and transformation. His involvement in

Freemasonry was arguably earlier and broader than many modern

historians have admitted. While no one thing can entirely explain the rise

of Mormonism, the historical influence of Freemasonry on this religious

tradition cannot be refuted.

This work approaches the subject of Mormonism and Masonry with

Bullock’s view in mind. It offers a fresh perspective on the relationship

between Freemasonry and the Mormon restoration. It asserts that the

Mormon prophet’s firsthand knowledge of and experience with both

Masonry and anti-Masonic currents contributed to the theology,

structure, culture, tradition, history, literature, and ritual of the church he

founded. There is a Masonic thread in Mormonism from its earliest days.

The topic of Mormonism and Freemasonry has been rife with

misunderstanding and misrepresentation, often because scholars have

invariably been lacking in one or both relevant perspectives. Few Latter-

day Saints who were also Masons have authored book-length treatments

of the relationship between the two traditions. The fact that the most

obvious vestiges of Freemasonry are evident only in the more esoteric

7

aspects of the Mormon faith has made it difficult for Masonic authors to

recognize, let alone fully grasp, the relevant issues. Even those with both

Mormon and Masonic experience may not be versed in the nineteenth-

century versions of the rituals, legends, and practices. Without this

specialized background, many researchers and writers have missed the

Masonic significance of numerous early Mormon statements, doctrines,

and practices.

The authors have spent many years researching and wrestling with the

subject of Freemasonry’s influence upon Mormonism. Nick Literski was

the first Mormon Freemason in Hancock County since the Mormon

exodus. Nick began the preliminary research and writing of this book in

2002, spending years traveling around the country to examine original

records. The resulting expertise became noteworthy in many conferences

and online venues. A change in life circumstances led Nick to pass years

of research, analysis, and drafts of early chapters on to Joe Swick, a

Mormon Freemason and Past Master of Verity Lodge No. 59 in Kent,

Washington. Both Joe and Nick approached this project with the benefit

of their experiences as Master Masons, Royal Arch Masons, Cryptic

Masons, Knights Templar, and Scottish Rite Masons. A student of early

Masonic history, Joe amassed a large library of eighteenth- and

nineteenth-century Masonic works. His collection, as well as his ideas

and insights, have been invaluable to the production of this book. Cheryl

Bruno came into the project in 2012. Her interest in esoterica in early

Mormonism made Freemasonry a primary research topic, and her writing

skills pushed the work to completion. As we researched, we found not

just facts, but a fascinating story. The three of us, along with Clinton

Bartholemew, Patrick McCleary, Roy Schmidt, Arturo de Hoyos, and

Joseph Johnstun (who designed our fabulous book cover) spent hours

discussing the evidence and implications of what we had discovered. We

thank them, Holly Welker, who provided valuable editing assistance, and

many others who have listened to our ideas and offered encouragement.

Loyd Isao Ericson, instrumental in the production of Method Infinite

during the long haul before and through the Covid crisis, has never

ceased to believe in us and this project. Throughout our investigation, we

have been inspired by the statement Edward Tullidge attributes to Eliza

R. Snow: “There is method in Mormonism—method infinite.

Mormonism is Masonic.”2 We hope this book will provide the reader a

measure of the adventure and insight we found during the many years of

its creation.

8
