JACHIN AND BOAZ ON THE WOODPILE

In strength I will establish this mine house to stand firm forever.

—Richard Carlile, Manual of Freemasonry in Three Parts

Early spring in Salt Lake City is often chilly, though budding vegetation and early flowers saluted the members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as they made their way to the Salt Lake Temple on the

morning of April 4, 1899. In this inspiring setting, they held their

quarterly meetings in preparation for the Church’s upcoming semi-

annual general conference. Seated at the front of the room was the

quorum’s aged president, Elder Franklin Dewey Richards. Throughout

the day, each of the apostles spoke to the quorum on various topics

pertaining to their ministry, but Richards’s words were extraordinary.

Elder Rudger Clawson, then the junior member of the quorum, recorded

his impressions in his personal diary:

Pres. Richards . . . said he desired to say a few words about Freemasonry. A Masonic Lodge, he said, was established in Nauvoo and Joseph Smith, Brigham Young, Willard Richards, John Taylor, Lorenzo Snow, Orson Hyde, F. D. Richards, and about 1000 others in all became Masons. Joseph, the Prophet, was aware that there were some things about Masonry which had come down from the beginning and he desired to know what they were, hence the lodge. The Masons admitted some keys of knowledge appertaining to Masonry were lost. Joseph enquired of the Lord concerning the matter and He revealed to the Prophet true Masonry, as we have it in our temples. Owing to the superior knowledge Joseph had received, the Masons

became jealous and cut off the Mormon Lodge.1

Fellow apostle Elder John Henry Smith, who had served since 1880,

was more circumspect in his comments: “All of the Apostles met in their

room in the Temple and the day was spent in happy talk and in giving

instruction. At our afternoon meeting President F. D. Richards gave some

pleasing explanations of Doctrine.”2 Elder Anthon H. Lund, also in

attendance, simply wrote, “Meetings were very interesting today. Prest.

Richards explained Nauvoo Masonry e.t.c.”3 Other apostles, such as

Elder Brigham Young Jr., recorded the meeting without comment on

Richards’s words.

Franklin Richards’s diary provides context for his address to the

Twelve. Twelve days earlier, he had spent an afternoon consulting the

original records of the Nauvoo Lodge.4 His account of the April 4

meeting states:

10

I spoke of the Masonic Organization in Nauvoo & some of the circumstances which led up to the Prophet Joseph asking of the Lord & obtaining promise to restore that which was lost indeed to Restore all things which enraged the high officials of the Mystic Order so that the National Grand conclave expelled or cut off all the Mormon Masonic Order from their fellowship.

The brethren appreciated my explanation highly and I felt reli[e]ved in my Spirit for having

accomplished it as it had pressed upon my mind for some time past.5

Of the twelve men serving as Apostles in 1899, only Richards had

become a Master Mason in Nauvoo. The next senior apostle, Brigham

Young Jr., was a child of nine years old when the Latter-day Saints left

Illinois under his father’s direction. The urgency obvious in Richards’s

diary reflects his sense that history was already being lost with the

passing of the first Mormon generation. With his comments limited by

obligations he held sacred, Richards had attempted to convey the nature

of “Nauvoo Masonry” to the uninitiated.

Fourteen years earlier, Richards had returned to visit the remnants of

Nauvoo, Illinois. The former Masonic Hall received considerable

attention in his private diary, where he noted that the building had been

repurposed into a private home. In a published account of the 1885 visit,

Richards stated:

Every thing which signified the character of the building has been removed. This spoliation must have been recent, for I saw [Jachin] and Boaz lying upon the woodpile, accompanied by

other emblems and insignia which had been stripped from the building.6

The mention by Richards to seeing “Jachin and Boaz lying upon the

woodpile” as a sign of “recent spoliation” would have been a disturbing

one for any Mason, and a profoundly distressing symbol for Richards

and other Nauvoo Freemasons. In the Bible, Jachin and Boaz are the

names of the pillars standing on the porch at the entrance to Solomon’s

Temple, and they are of great symbolic significance to Masons.7 Jachin,

meaning “to establish,” was the pillar situated on the south side of the

entrance. Boaz, meaning “in strength,” was located on the north side of

the entrance of the Temple. In Masonic tradition, these pillars are said to

allude together to the promise of God to King David: “In strength will I

establish this mine house and kingdom forever.”8

Pillars representing Jachin and Boaz are placed inside of the entrance

to every Masonic lodge, forming a portal through which candidates must

pass each time they are admitted for initiation. Because pillars are often

the symbol of a covenant, they are intended as a powerful reminder to

the Freemason of certain covenants mentioned in the Bible and of his

own Masonic obligations:

11

And [King Josiah] went up into the house of the LORD, and all the men of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with him . . . and he read in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant. . . . And [he] stood by a pillar, and made a covenant before the Lord . . . to perform

the words of this covenant . . . written in this book. (2 Kgs. 23:1–3)9

12

Mystical alchemical diagram of Boaz and Jachin, pillars of the Temple of Jerusalem, 1782.

13

What was it that would “press upon” Richards’s mind so heavily,

leading him to give clarification to the rising group of Church leaders

before his death? Perhaps he foresaw just how deeply this part of

Mormon history would be buried and forgotten. At the conclusion of the

nineteenth century, Richards was speaking to a new generation of

Mormons who were not Freemasons. His audience was so widely

separated by time and by distance that they had become oblivious to an

America that had been entrenched in Freemasonry. Present in the original

colonies, Masonry grew and developed along with the new nation.

Masonic orations and sermons were published as early as the 1740s and

50s. By the 1800s, it had become a vital part of popular social, political,

and religious culture and discourse.

Richards, born in 1821, understood something in Freemasonry that

explained and enriched the story of the Church’s origins and deepened

the significance of Mormonism’s own Masonic-inspired rituals—and he

wished to pass it on. But those who had turned the corner into a modern

era had become far removed from the esoteric system that influenced

how Joseph Smith and his colleagues both viewed and understood their

work.

While the transformation of the elaborate Nauvoo Lodge into the

common dwelling-place that Richards observed in 1885 was literal, he

also became witness to a spiritual and historical transformation within

Mormonism itself. By the time of his April 1899 meeting with the

apostles, Richards had lived to see the transformation of Mormonism’s

theocratic kingdom into a more conventional American church.

Believing it was established by the hand of God through a prophet-heir

to David’s throne, the Saints of the Great Basin Kingdom had assumed

their “religious and civil” order would exist forever.10 Yet, like the

gloriously beautiful Masonic lodge in Nauvoo, the Mormons’ own

“grand design” lay stripped of the emblems and insignia of its holy and

Masonically inspired purpose. Eight months later, the senior apostle

would pass on, leaving President Lorenzo Snow as the last surviving

Nauvoo Mason.11 By the time the Nauvoo Masonic Hall was restored in

the latter part of the twentieth century, even its original purpose would be

masked with a new name, the “Cultural Hall.”12

14

Former Nauvoo Masonic Hall, 1885.

Overshadowed by such significant events as the First Vision and the

martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, one of the most pivotal events

in Mormon history has gone largely unappreciated. On March 15 and 16,

1842, in the upper room of his store in Nauvoo, Illinois, Joseph Smith

followed the footsteps of his older brother, receiving the three degrees of

Ancient York Freemasonry.13 Smith’s formal induction into the Craft

was a ratification and extension of Masonic activity in which he had

been immersed since his youth. As an adult, Smith relied on Masonry as

one of the primary lenses and means by which he sought to approach

God and restore true religion. Yet this aspect of his work has been

abandoned by his modern-day followers. Masonry in Mormonism has

been placed upon the woodpile.

Just as Joseph Smith’s name “should be both good and evil spoken of

among all people” (JS—H 1:33), later writers would treat the prophet’s

participation in Freemasonry with varying degrees of excuses,

speculation, and outright denial. From the very beginning, some would

suggest that Smith plagiarized Freemasonry in the development of

Mormon ritual. In his 1842 History of the Saints, John C. Bennett (a

former assistant in the First Presidency) indirectly made such an

allegation by reporting Mormon practices in specific language familiar to

15

both Freemasons and readers of anti-Masonic exposés.14 Freemason

Samuel Goodwin made the same accusation in 1921.15

Largely in response to such charges, modern writers have sought to

distance Smith from the Fraternity and have downplayed the significant

influence of Freemasonry on the Mormon Prophet’s thinking. By the

mid-twentieth century, Mormon writer E. Cecil McGavin concluded that

Joseph Smith attended only six Masonic meetings during his lifetime.

Three of these meetings, McGavin explained, were Smith’s initiation

under the direction of Illinois Grand Master Abraham Jonas, on March

15 and 16, 1842:

The Prophet was so busy with Church matters that he never took an active part in lodge work. It seems from the meager records that are extant, that Joseph Smith attended as many meetings on those two days as he did during the rest of his lifetime. . . . In the months that followed, he left the lodge work in the hands of others, never attending more than three subsequent meetings and never receiving a higher degree than the one the Grand Master conferred upon

him at the third meeting he attended.16

Another Mormon historian wrote in 1992 that “Joseph Smith

participated minimally in Freemasonry and, as far as is known, attended

the Nauvoo Masonic Lodge on only three occasions.”17

At the time these writers made their claims, the standard History of

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints included twelve separate

occasions upon which Joseph Smith attended Masonic meetings.18

Additionally, secretaries keeping the minute book of Nauvoo Lodge,

despite occasionally missing some attendees, recorded Joseph Smith’s

attendance at no less than thirty-five Lodge meetings on twenty-seven

separate days between March 15, 1842, and June 27, 1844.19 A

comparison of the official minutes with the History of the Church

indicates that neither provided a complete accounting of the Prophet’s

approximately forty visits. A typical 1840s Masonic lodge would have

met twenty-eight times or fewer during the same period of time. Thus,

Smith attended more lodge meetings than members of most Masonic

lodges. While some writers appear to have performed inadequate

research, resulting in errors which have been carelessly repeated over

subsequent decades, others seem to have intentionally minimized the

historical record.

Some writers have attempted to explain Smith’s involvement in

Masonry as a nineteenth-century equivalent of social and political

networking.20 However, to allege that he became a Mason in order to

court social connections or political power is defamatory. In his petition

16

to receive the degrees of Freemasonry, Smith would have submitted a

written statement that he had no mercenary motive for entering the

Fraternity.21 Thus, to claim that “Joseph Smith and his brethren sought

membership in the Masonic lodge” because they “desired the prestige,

protection, and power such an alliance should have guaranteed” is to

argue against the integrity of the Prophet and his companions.22

Furthermore, the proceedings of the Nauvoo Lodge under Smith’s

direction demonstrate his unmitigated lack of concern for making friends

and cementing alliances among local Freemasons. Still, this reasoning

has been accepted among members of The Church of Jesus Christ of

Latter-day Saints to the present day.

In honor of the 150th anniversary of Joseph and Hyrum Smith’s

martyrdom in 1994, Gary James Joslin produced a tribute volume

entitled Saint Masons: The Divine Restoration and Freemasonry. Joslin

described his own work as “An account of the Restoration from the

Heavens to this Planet of the Ancient Science of Righteousness, along

with its Brief Contact with and the Testimony to Freemasonry in the

Latter Days as a witness and Grand Sign from the Supreme Architect of

the Universe.”23 His writing suggested that Mormonism was the

fulfillment of Freemasonry, concluding that the Masonic “torch had been

passed” to a triumphant Mormonism. To make his case, Joslin points out

several of what he interpreted as parallels between the Masonic legend of

Hiram Abiff and Hyrum Smith, the Prophet’s older brother. Joslin’s

observations, however, have been taken seriously by only a few Latter-

day Saints.

On April 20, 1974, at a meeting of the Mormon History Association,

Latter-day Saint educator Reed C. Durham Jr. attempted to objectively

examine the relationship between Mormonism and Freemasonry.

Unofficial transcripts of his speech, “Is There No Help for the Widow’s

Son?” spread rapidly through the Mormon historical community.

Durham’s insightful but controversial lecture reached its climax in

stating “that there [were] few significant developments in the Church,

that occurred after March 15, 1842, which did not have some Masonic

interdependence.” Expanding on this theme, Durham noted,

The parallels of Joseph Smith and the history of Mormonism are so unmistakable, that to explain them only as coincidence would be ridiculous. . . . Aspects of [Masonic] legend seem transformed into the history of Joseph Smith, so much so that . . . it appears to be a kind of

symbolic acting out of Masonic lore.24

17

While Durham touched upon some of “these aspects of [Masonic]

legend,” he focused chiefly on the coming forth of the Book of Mormon

and Joseph Smith’s assassination, leaving later researchers the task of

fully investigating other possible parallels.

The reaction to Durham’s lecture was strong and immediate. His

suggestions that Freemasonry had influenced Mormon doctrine and

practice were interpreted by some Mormon scholars as an attack on the

divine origins of the Church. By the following morning, Masonic

iconography was removed from the angelic weathervane atop a Nauvoo

Temple model in the local LDS Visitor’s Center in that city. And, as an

employee of the LDS Church Educational System, Durham was required

to issue a public “clarification,” reaffirming his belief in the prophetic

mission of Joseph Smith.

In another controversial treatment, “The Treasure of the Widow’s

Son,” researcher Jack Adamson noted parallels between Masonic legend

and the Book of Mormon as well as the history of Joseph Smith. Taking

a naturalistic approach, Adamson asserted that Smith had plagiarized

Masonic legend and that Mormon scripture was filled with anti-Masonic

“clang” (psychologically influenced morphing of words and terms). Still,

even Adamson acknowledged certain inexplicable coincidences in the

details of Smith’s death, in which he reportedly cried, “Is there no help

for the widow’s son?”—an important phrase in Masonic ritual. This final

scene constitutes a “symbolic acting out of Masonic lore”:

In this event, symbol is not merely transformed into Joseph’s inner history or his sacred

writings. Rather, the action goes beyond metaphor and the symbol merges into tragic reality.25

The study of Freemasonry and Mormonism has been greatly

influenced by the many writings of the late Mervin B. Hogan, a leading

light in the Utah Masonic Lodge of Research. Hogan argued strongly

against the long-standing prohibition by the Grand Lodge of Utah

barring active Latter-day Saints from Masonry in their jurisdiction. His

nominal participation in Mormonism during this time allowed him to

become a Utah Freemason despite this strictly enforced restriction. As a

Mason, he would eventually come to play a critical role, positively

influencing a change in the Masonic policy of exclusion. At the same

time, the Church’s leader, President Spencer W. Kimball, sought to

improve relations with the Masonic community by omitting language

that discouraged participation in Freemasonry from the Church’s official

policy book. Hogan’s work was undoubtedly groundbreaking and, in his

numerous monographs, he frequently discussed the shared history of the

two groups. Yet, as one of Hogan’s reviewers stated, “A definitive

18

history on the subject of Freemasonry and Mormonism has yet to be

written.”26

In 1994, Michael W. Homer provided what was then the most

significant scholarly analysis of Mormon involvement with

Freemasonry: “‘Similarity of Priesthood in Masonry’: The Relationship

between Freemasonry and Mormonism.” 27 Homer’s essay reviewed the

oft-tempestuous relationship between the two groups throughout the

history of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Briefly noting

parallels between Joseph Smith’s life and Masonic legend, Homer

observed that “[t]he mythology associated with Smith’s martyrdom also

has Masonic undertones” and that certain “images are similar to portions

in the legend of Hiram Abiff.”28 In 2014, Homer expanded his article

into a book-length treatment titled Joseph’s Temples: The Dynamic

Relationship between Freemasonry and Mormonism. In this work,

Homer added a creative but controversial connection between

Freemasonry and the LDS Church’s position on blacks and the

priesthood.

Furthermore, Matthew B. Brown and Jeffrey M. Bradshaw have both

compared Mormon temple ritual with the ancient past, and they both

downplay the relationship of the Mormon endowment with Masonic

rites;29 Clyde Forsberg has explored esoteric aspects of Mormonism and

Freemasonry in two books and several articles;30 a chapter in Samuel M.

Brown’s book on the early Mormon conquest of death has included an

insightful chapter on Freemasonry in Mormonism;31 and numerous

others have made their own contributions. Yet none of these writers have

captured the full scope of the influence of Masonry on the culture in

which Joseph Smith lived, nor have they recognized the incorporation of

so many aspects of the Fraternity into the early Church.

Official LDS publications have been reticent to discuss the influence

Freemasonry had on the Church. In the 2018 church-published volume,

Saints: The Story of the Church of Jesus Christ in the Latter Days:

Volume 1: The Standard of Truth: 1815–1846, despite several chapters

covering Nauvoo, Masonry is mentioned only to discount its similarity

with the temple endowment.32 An entry on “Masonry” on the Church

official website covers the subject more fully but takes a similar

approach. “There are some similarities between Masonic ceremonies and

the endowment, but there are also stark differences in their content and

intent,” the essay states. It also perpetuates the view that Joseph Smith’s

19

purpose in becoming a Freemason was to make social and political

connections:

In joining, Joseph may have assumed he would gain a network of allies who could give him access to political influence and protection against persecution. After being betrayed by some of his closest associates in Missouri, Joseph may have found Masonry’s emphasis on

confidentiality and loyalty appealing.33

This book will present evidence that Joseph Smith’s actions, in tandem

with those of the Mormon Masonic Lodges, were diametrically opposed

to what they would have been if the object in joining with Freemasonry

was gaining allies. It will demonstrate the strength of Masonry’s

presence in the culture that surrounded Joseph Smith, from his birth to

his death. Throughout his life, Smith was deeply enmeshed in the

esoteric tradition that surrounded the Craft, and he developed groups and

associations within his new Church organization modeled upon the

Fraternity. Masonry would thus influence the Mormon restoration from

Vermont to New York, Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois. Believing himself to

be a Masonic restorer, Smith called upon God to inspire him to create

ritual in the Masonic mold. In doing so, he sought to know the true name

of Deity—which in Masonic tradition had been “long lost”—and to bring

his followers into the presence of the Divine.

To ground the discussion, we will begin with general background on

Freemasonry, then move to an overview of the prevalence of

Freemasonry throughout the Northeast United States during Joseph

Smith’s formative years. We will then provide an explanation of Masonic

midrash and the way Joseph used it to produce canonical LDS texts,

social structures, and rituals. This Masonic technique affected the way

Smith explained his own experiences in restoring “true Masonry” from

his first vision to his presidential campaign. We will explore the

proliferation of Mormon Masonic Lodges during the Nauvoo period and

the Masonic imagery that surrounded the Mormon leader’s death.

Finally, we will demonstrate how the perpetuation of Masonic elements

in numerous sects that succeeded Smith’s Mormonism highlights the

essential value of Freemasonry in the founding movement.

Opinions in this book are our own and do not attempt to represent the

official views of any church organization. However, our approach comes

from the perspective of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

headquartered in Salt Lake City. Therefore, the spelling, capitalization,

and hyphenation of the phrase “Latter-day Saints” in the name of the

Church is used regardless of time period. We do use the words

“Mormon” and “Mormonism” for ease of expression and because this

20

convention has been liberally employed throughout the era we are

writing about. Furthermore, we have the greatest of respect toward both

Latter-day Saint endowment and Masonic rituals, and we have taken

great care when discussing the content of these ceremonies. Also with

due respect, we generally refer to people by surnames, except when first

names are needed to distinguish between family members.

In researching the topic at hand, we have identified both broad ideas

and specific items that have been overlooked, misunderstood, or even

misrepresented by both Mormons and Masons. In other cases, 160 years

have buried the details to the point where conclusions must be reached

by circumstantial evidence. Wherever this is the case, we have tried to

demonstrate clearly the reasoning behind our conclusions. We believe, as

Franklin D. Richards taught, that Joseph Smith’s claimed “restoration of

all things” contains far more of Freemasonry than either his critics or his

supporters have previously imagined.

Notes

21

22
