LEGENDS OF THE CRAFT: THE

PHILOSOPHIC SYSTEM OF

FREEMASONRY

Of the various modes of communicating instruction to the

uninformed, the masonic student is particularly interested in two;

namely, the instruction by legends and that by symbols. It is to these

two, almost exclusively, that he is indebted for all that he knows, and

for all that he can know, of the philosophic system which is taught in

the institution.

—Albert G. Mackey, The Symbolism of Freemasonry

From its earliest known history, Freemasonry had a rich and colorful legendary tradition, blending truth and fiction in a soup intended to both reinforce its allegorical instruction and give legitimacy and support to its existence. Its historical beginnings were in

associations of actual (or “operative”) stonemasons who used tokens and

signs to distinguish professional Masons from frauds and then

safeguarded those hand signals and body positions with keywords.

These, in addition to rites and rituals of progression through the craft of

stonemasonry, fostered a sense of fraternalism. Members of the trade

guilds viewed themselves as successors of the great builders of old,

going back to the construction of Solomon’s Temple.

During the Medieval period, men who were not stonemasons began to

be accepted into the existing network of lodges and guilds relating to the

building craft that existed across Europe. These “Accepted Masons”1

provided financial support through membership fees, placing men who

laid stone for a living together with a congregation of educated middle-

class and wealthy men who had “an active interest in esotericism,

alchemy, Qabala, Hermeticism and utopian ideals.”2 The history of the

Craft during this era is shrouded in mystery. Some writers, for example,

like to entertain the possibility that Knights Templar fleeing from

persecution in France in 1307 came to Scotland and “hid themselves

among the stonemasons.”3 Others dismiss this notion. In any case,

operative Freemasons were steeped in mystical teachings and magical

traditions then associated with the building lore. Some of these ideas

23

were indeed quite ancient. About 280 BCE, for example, the philosopher

Mencius taught,

[M]en should apply the Square and Compasses figuratively to their lives, and the Level and the Marking Line besides, if they would walk the straight and even paths of wisdom and keep

themselves within the boundaries of Honour and Virtue. 4

An early example of an operative Mason moralizing upon his working

tools is a brass square excavated from under the foundation of the old

Baal’s Bridge in Limerick, Ireland, dated 1517 and inscribed with the

words “I will strive to live with love and care, Upon the level, by the

square.”5

The Baal’s Bridge Square, 1507.

As Freemasonry transitioned into a speculative rather than a primarily

operative institution, it attracted churchmen and antiquarians with a keen

interest in history. They combed religious and historical records,

embellishing their descriptions of the Masonic past with what they found

there. Over time, speculative Masonry developed a significant body of

legend and myth. It drew upon legends as old as humanity, tracing the

Craft to ancient Egypt, to King Solomon’s Temple, and all the way to the

biblical Enoch and Adam. Begun as an oral tradition, this body of work

24

appears in written form in various documents known as the “Gothic

Constitutions,” the earliest of which is dated as far back as the late

fifteenth century.6

Masonic constitutions and their associated histories were the

institutional counterpart of a royal genealogy. Both the monarchs’

genealogy and the Masons’ books of constitutions connected the present

with the mythological past to establish the appearance of long continuity

and therefore legitimacy. Further, both genealogy and constitutions

provided historical stories, embroidered with rich details intended to

illustrate and promote the virtues and chief values of their respected

institutions. The literal truthfulness of these accounts was far less

important than the ethical lessons they imparted. When a man was made

a Mason, the ceremony included a reading of both the moral obligations

he was charged with and the legendary history of Freemasonry found in

the constitutions. The earliest positively identified speculative Masons

were Englishmen Sir Robert Moray (initiated in 1641) and Elias

Ashmole (initiated in 1646).7

In the year 1717, a date sometimes understood as marking the

beginning of organized Freemasonry,8 four lodges located in London

joined together to form the first Masonic Grand Lodge.9 Six years later,

a member of this Grand Lodge, Dr. James Anderson, consulted past and

present Grand Masters as well as previously existing regulations to

publish The Constitutions of Freemasonry, Containing the History,

Charges, Regulations, &c. of that Most Ancient and Right Worshipful

Fraternity. This definitive work, still in use in the present day,

established and formalized the “landmarks” of Masonry.

From the time of Anderson’s Constitutions, the degree system, based

upon mystical and oral traditions, became evident. Framers of the rituals

used the tools of operative masonry, such as trowels, hammers, and rules

of architecture, to symbolize spiritual truths. The metaphors of stone

working were thus transformed into morality plays representing human

development and enlightenment.

The Three Degrees of Craft, or Blue Lodge Masonry

In “Craft” or “Blue Lodge” Masonry, an applicant is “initiated” into

the first or Entered Apprentice degree. Following a period of time during

which he studies and becomes proficient, he is “passed” into the

Fellowcraft degree. Finally, he is “raised” a Master Mason. Every Mason

is a Master Mason, and the term should not be confused with the Master

25

of a Lodge (or “Worshipful Master”) who is the chief of several officers

over a group (or “lodge”) of men. The principal offices of a lodge are

Worshipful Master, Senior Warden, Junior Warden, Secretary, and

Treasurer, as well as Senior and Junior Deacon, Steward, and Tyler.

A grand lodge presides over groups of lodges in a similar relationship

as that of Mormon stakes over wards. Grand lodges consist of the same

officers as lodges, but with a “grand” preceding their title, such as

“Grand Master,” “Grand Senior Warden,” “Grand Secretary,” and so

forth. In the United States, there is generally one grand lodge in each

state, with jurisdiction over all the lodges therein.

Blue Lodge Masonry’s three degrees are presented as ritual dramas

that are acted out by the initiate and assisted by the lodge brothers.

Catechisms and lectures are used to reinforce the lessons taught.

In the Entered Apprentice degree, a candidate is offered “an

opportunity to prove himself by his ability to fulfill a solemn obligation

and to keep secret those things entrusted to him as such,” while being

taught moral lessons. Tools formerly used by operative masons to assist

them in their work are given allegorical functions that are explained in

this degree. The twenty-four inch gauge, once used to measure and lay

out the day’s work, is now symbolically employed to divide a twenty-

four-hour day into equal parts: eight hours set apart for duty to God and

one’s fellow man, eight for vocational activities, and eight for

refreshment and sleep. The common gavel, a tool used to break the rough

edges off stones, is presented as a symbol of ridding the mind of vices

and the superfluities of life.10

In the Fellow Craft degree, the candidate is introduced to the “seven

liberal arts and sciences”: grammar, rhetoric, logic, arithmetic, geometry,

astronomy, and music, which, taken together, are said to represent all

human knowledge. Symbolic tools for this degree, the square, the level,

and the plumb, are used to test and evaluate one’s work. The candidate is

instructed in the legendary building of King Solomon’s Temple and is

given symbolic wages of corn, wine, and oil.11

Finally, in the Master Mason degree, the candidate’s working tools

comprise all the implements of Masonry but most particularly the

Trowel. Employed by operative Masons to spread mortar onto bricks,

joining them together, it is used symbolically to spread the cement of

brotherly love and affection. Through the performance of the ritual

drama of this degree, candidates are taught the allegorical legend of

Hiram Abiff.12

26

Loss and Recovery: The Legend of Hiram Abiff

The entire Masonic tradition is rife with themes of loss and recovery.

This is clearly seen in Masonry’s central myth. The Hiramic legend, an

expansion of a biblical story, was presented in its early iterations as an

historical artifact. At the same time, it emerged as an allegorical telling

of the death, burial, and resurrection of Jesus Christ. As told in

seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Masonic “exposures,”13 Hiram, the

master builder of Solomon’s Temple, would not reveal the secret of the

Master’s Word to three impatient craftsmen before the completion of the

Temple. To Freemasons, the Master’s Word is a symbol of Divine truth, a

word of great value that was known to very few people. Seeking to extort

this word so that they could “receive Masters’ wages,” the craftsmen

killed Hiram and buried him on the brow of the hill of Mount Moriah.

Searchers were sent out under the direction of King Solomon, and one of

them found the body under a sprig of acacia. The body of Hiram Abiff

was raised and reinterred in a more suitable place, in or near the Sanctum

Sanctorum of the Temple, a symbol of the human heart. The three

ruffians were found and punished for their crime, but through the death

of Hiram, the Master’s Word had been lost. Freemasons are now tasked

to search for and recover this sacred Word, as demonstrated in this

dialogue from Samuel Prichard’s 1730 exposé, Masonry Dissected:

Ex. You’re an heroick Fellow; from whence came you?

R. From the East.

Ex. Where are you a going?

R. To the West.

Ex. What are you a going to do there?

R. To seek for that which was lost and is now found.

Ex. What was that which was lost and is now found?

R. The Master-Mason’s Word.

Ex. How was it lost?

R. By Three Great Knocks, or the Death of our Master 14 Hiram .

Through the rest of the eighteenth century, Freemasons expressed

desires to learn progressively deeper mysteries. This resulted in the

development of additional Masonic degrees and Orders such as York

Rite and Scottish Rite Masonry. These supplemental degrees are called

“appendant” and are not to be considered superior or higher than the

Master Mason degree. They add to the foundations established in the

first three degrees by further expounding upon and illustrating the moral

lessons taught.

York Rite Masonry

27

York Rite Masonry consists of three cooperative groups that confer a

total of ten degrees: four for the Royal Arch, three for the Cryptic Rite,

and three for the Chivalric orders.

Like Craft Freemasonry, the Royal Arch imparts moral lessons through

the use of ritual and legend. Its ritualized allegory is based on the Old

Testament story of the return of the Jews to Jerusalem following the

Babylonian captivity. The Masonic legend portrays three companions

who learn certain philosophical lessons on their way to the Holy City to

assist in the rebuilding of Solomon’s Temple. While clearing the ground

of the temple, they make important discoveries that lead them to

contemplate man’s spiritual nature. These discoveries are meant to both

support what the candidate has learned from his own religion and to

extend and enhance the practical lessons of the first three degrees.15 The

Royal Arch ritual includes the ceremony of “passing the veils,” which

had a Christian origin and has been removed from English Masonry in

modern times. American Freemasonry, however, has retained the

ceremony, during which candidates obtain passwords and signs that

enable them to pass successive veils and ultimately be “exalted.”16

The Scottish Rite

The Scottish Rite is a progressive series of thirty-three degrees that are

recognized in the United States as an extension of the three degrees of

Craft Masonry. Early “Scott’s” degrees, ancestors of the Scottish Rite,

were conferred in Bristol, England, from 1733–40. In the United States,

a governing body for the nascent Scottish Rite degrees was first

constituted in May 1801 at the formation of the Mother Supreme Council

at Charleston, South Carolina. During the 1870s, Albert Pike compiled

and standardized the modern Scottish Rite degrees, culminating in his

extensive book, Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish

Rite of Freemasonry.

Nineteenth-Century Development of Masonic Degrees

While the Blue Lodge degrees had achieved a measure of stability by

the 1800s, appendant degrees continued to be formulated and expanded.

During Joseph Smith’s lifetime, Freemasonry continued to be a

developing art, with new rituals springing into form and old rituals being

codified and standardized. Smith followed this same tradition by not

simply borrowing from the Masons, nor harking back to an earlier

tradition, but by creatively adapting Masonic rites. His work was not

28

essentially unlike that of Freemasons John Mitchell, Albert Mackey, or

Albert Pike, who were also creating and reworking Masonic rituals

throughout the nineteenth century.17

The Nature of Symbolic Instruction

A basic knowledge of Freemasonry, with its associated ritual and

tradition, is necessary to understand how the Craft relates to Mormonism

and how Joseph Smith’s life and work reflected foundational Masonic

myth. A simple and classic definition of the Craft is credited to Dr.

Samuel Hemming: “Freemasonry is a system of morality, veiled in

allegory, and illustrated by symbols.”18 A more modern definition

expands upon this by both emphasizing Masonry’s underlying principles

and beliefs and recognizing the lodge as its fundamental organizational

unit:

Freemasonry is a system of moral philosophy structured on the principal [sic] of the Brotherhood of Man and a belief in God and immortality, imparted symbolically and

allegorically through a coordinated complex of Masonic Lodges. 19

The symbols populating Masonic ritual are employed in a context

giving them the broadest possible range of interpretations, although some

specific symbols have relatively fixed traditional meanings. Thus, while

ritual elements may have one general signification, it is the privilege of a

Freemason to interpret those symbols he has received in a way most

genial to his own personal religious views. This may provide some

difficulty in making authoritative or definitive statements regarding the

meaning of Masonic ritual; however, one can at the very least look at (1)

what the rituals themselves suggest, (2) what Freemasons have

historically said about their own rituals, and (3) what Masonic critics

have said about the shape of the ritual. Of this interpretive complexity,

Albert Pike writes,

All religious expression is symbolism; since we can describe only what we see and the true

objects of religion are unseen. 20

The ancient symbols and allegories always had more than one interpretation. They always had

a double meaning, and sometimes more than two, one serving as the envelope of the other.21

Masonic ritual brings participants together to share in divine mystery

and divine power. This forges a brotherhood bound by voluntary oaths,

ethical standards, and common moral and spiritual values. The rituals’

mystic ties use symbolism to teach Masons to achieve union with the

Divine. Furthermore, one of the most exalted and sublime uses of

scriptural accounts is to ritualize them, as Masons do, in order to conduct

29

a candidate into sacred time and space. Affiliates thus not only read the

stories but ceremonially enter them to become partakers of divine

power.22

As speculative Masonry developed, symbolism was seen in the

following categories (as identified by Masonic author Alex Horne):

a) The Working Tools: which we now moralize upon.

b) Some geometrical patterns: such as the oblong rectangle; the square; the equilateral triangle;

the interlaced double-triangle; the circle; the five-pointed star; the point-within-a-circle; etc.

c) Certain numbers having special significance: the 3, 5, and 7, etc.

d) Certain colors: white; blue; and (in the early days) gold; etc.

e) Certain physical objects: the Sun, Moon, and Stars; the Rough and Perfect Ashlars; the Trestle-

Board; the Cable-tow; etc.

f) Some architectural features: the Pillars of Solomon; the Winding Staircase; the Mosaic

Pavement; the North-East Cornerstone; etc.

g) Symbolic acts: such as Circumambulation;23 the Rite of Discalceation;24 Signs and Tokens;

the Five Points of Fellowship; the Laying of Cornerstones; and other “acted out symbols.”

h) Biblical references: Jacob’s Ladder; the Burning Bush; etc.

i) Allegorical legends: the Lost Word; the Hiramic Legend; etc.25

Christian Character of Freemasonry

Speculative Masonry, with its historical roots in fourteenth-century

England, began as a mystical Christian impulse.26 Freemasons were

tasked with responsibilities that showed clear Christian values, such as

caring for widows and the fatherless, an injunction described in the New

Testament as distinguishing “religion that is pure and undefiled” (James

1:27). Because the framers of Masonic rituals were devout Christians,

Old Testament characters such as Adam, Enoch, and Noah all appear in

Masonic legend with their Christian allegorical significances.27 In

Masonry, even Jewish history takes on a decidedly Christian reading.

Masonic texts such as the Schaw Statutes,28 29 the Old Charges, and the

Edinburgh Register House Manuscript30 all show a clear Christian

alignment and a requirement for members to be Christians.

30

God as Great Architect, fifteenth-century French manuscript.

According to Masonic author Robert G. Davis, Freemasonry “clearly

evolved from a Christian base.” As evidence, he points to “eighteenth

Century English Masonic ritual [that] was sprinkled throughout with

references to the Christian faith.”31 For example, a Masonic pamphlet

dated 1722 contains the following statement of belief:

[B]elieve only in one God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and of all Things visible and invisible, the most grand, essential, the prime, eternal, everlasting, fundamental Article of the most holy, catholick [sic], universal, and Christian Faith (of which we are). . . . [A]ll Christians, under whatever other Denomination distinguished . . . cannot . . . take

Umbrage at those who believe the prime Article of their (that is, our) holy Faith. 32

Further, Freemasonry’s interior teaching—its very heart—was both

Christian and mystical. By 1766, the French ritual exposer M. de Bérage

31

claimed that the “mysteries of Masonry were nothing more in their

principle, & are still nothing more, than those of the Christian

religion.”33 However, through the eighteenth and the nineteenth

centuries, Christian elements began to be gradually removed from

Freemasonry.34 In 1723, James Anderson’s Constitutions had

theoretically opened lodges to those who could profess belief in the

“Great Architect of the Universe”:

A Mason is oblig’d, by his Tenure, to obey the moral Law; and if he rightly understands the Art, he will never be a stupid Atheist, nor an irreligious Libertine. But though in ancient Times Masons were charg’d in every Country to be of the Religion of that Country or Nation, whatever it was, yet ’tis now thought more expedient only to oblige them to that Religion in

which all Men agree, leaving their particular Opinions to themselves.35

Thus, men needed only to profess a belief in God to join the Fraternity

and were no longer required to be Christian. The order was beginning to

be characterized as exemplifying universal moral principles rather than

any specific religion. At the union of the “Antient” and the “Modern”

Grand Lodges of England in 1813, there was a wave of expansion to

open the way for more Jewish members and those of other faiths. The

more non-Christians who became Masons, the less Masonry was to be

read as a Christian allegory. At the resurgence of Freemasonry in the

United States following a steep decline in the 1820s and 1830s, the Craft

distanced itself even further from its overt connection with Christian

symbolism. This dechristianization was encouraged by those in the anti-

Masonic movement who could not bear to think of Masonry as a

Christian institution analogous to themselves.

Not all Masons liked this development, however. In his 1767 A Candid

Disquisition, Wellins Calcott asserted that Freemasonry is “a society

founded upon wisdom and cemented by morality and Christian-love.”

Further, he charged his listeners to love one another as Christians love

one another in order to “convince the scoffer and slanderer, that we are

lovers of Him, who said, If ye love me keep my commandments; and, this

is my commandment, that ye love one another as I have loved you.” This,

he said, would not only demonstrate that a Mason was “a good

Christian,” but it would afford Freemasons “a well-grounded hope of

admittance into a lodge of everlasting felicity 36 hereafter .” Likewise, in

his popular The Antiquities of Freemasonry, George Oliver wrote:

Who then shall say that Masonry contains no Christianity? Or rather, who shall assert that its illustrations are not principally Christian? For if the virtues and doctrines I have enumerated be Christian virtues and doctrines, they are also Masonic; nay, they contain, with their parallels, the whole system of speculative Masonry; and I do not know, were Masonry

32

minutely analyzed, that it contains a single illustration which does not enforce a Christian

doctrine, or recommend a Christian virtue.37

Whether or not an individual Mason is Christian, the fact remains that

Freemasonry’s rituals and legends were framed by Christians in order to

appeal to individuals with rational Christian and mystical inclinations,

and when seen as Christian allegories, they take on deep meanings. For

example, the incorporation of Christian mysticism emphasized the

transforming effect of divine grace, and theosis—taking on the divine

nature and becoming like God—is apparent in much Masonic

symbolism.

While no Freemason is obliged to view the legends as purely Christian

allegory, it is important to understand that they were largely seen that

way by many nineteenth-century Freemasons who were in fact

Christians.38 Furthermore, although Masons are cautioned to regard

their instruction as allegorical and symbolic, many American

Freemasons in the 1800s, including early Mormons, accepted the legends

portrayed in the degrees as not just allegories but literally true.

Nurtured in the company of cherished companions, a Masonic initiate

is admitted to the fellowship of those engaged in building a symbolic

edifice—King Solomon’s Temple. Symbolically, he is learning the skills

he needs to perfect himself and recover the name, or the essence, of

Deity. As will be discussed in Chapter 4, the Christian aspect of

Freemasonry was profoundly appealing to Joseph Smith Jr. Even as a

young man, he found Masonry a fitting vehicle for his spiritual longings.

The fact that the continued relevance of Christian Freemasonry was

debated by Masons may be one reason Smith saw a need for its

restoration, and he would make it his life’s work to recover what he

considered lost and missing aspects of religion and Freemasonry in order

to restore them to a prominent place in the lives of his associates.

The First Freemasons

Not wanting to limit the legends to mere Christian allegory or the

building of Solomon’s Temple, three important Masonic authors,

William Hutchinson, Salem Town, and Reverend George Oliver,

expounded the belief that the ancient patriarchs and prophets were

Masonry’s chief promoters in past ages. While these writers were careful

to explain that Freemasonry did not exist in its modern organized form,

they claimed that Adam, Enoch, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, and

other holy men were all Masons,39 in that they taught “geometrical and

33

moral principles” that were fundamental to the establishment of

speculative Freemasonry.40

Hutchinson, Town, and Oliver, however, went beyond a simple

comparison of moral philosophy. Town wrote that “Joseph, the son of

Jacob . . . became, in a certain extent, the Grand Master of Egypt,”41 and

Oliver credited Moses as the first to systematically organize Masonic

ritual:

But it was not until the erection of the Tabernacle that our Craft was reduced to the perfect form which it has ever since retained. Moses, when, by the revelation of God, he was dividing the priesthood into three distinct heads, modelled Masonry after the same fashion; himself

being grand master. 42

According to Oliver, following the exodus of the Israelite nation from

Egypt, Moses, acting as Grand Master, “opened the FIRST LODGE of

which we possess any certain tradition since the time of Joseph.”43 To

him, the Israelite priesthood and Freemasonry existed side by side, fully

cooperative, and both were presided over by the prophet of God.

The idea that the ancient men of God were also Masonic officials was

pervasive enough during the 1820s (and perceived as threatening

enough) that it elicited specific responses from anti-Masonic writers.

John G. Stearns, another New York clergyman, specifically and

repeatedly attacked Salem Town’s writings on this topic in his An Inquiry

into the Nature and Tendency of Speculative Free-Masonry:

It is pretended, that masonry originated among the pious men of old, to whom the Lord communicated in a very faint manner, the great mystery of redemption. Mr. Town has told us, that Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Melchizedek, Moses, and all those ancient men were masons, and patrons of the institution. . . . [T]here is not the least shadow of evidence that the system of free-masonry ever entered their hearts. Masons may as well undertake to prove that the

inhabitants of Saturn are masons.44

A New Dispensation

The notion of Masonic dispensationalism, including both “apostasies”

and “restorations,” dated back at least to 1775, when William Hutchinson

discussed the history of the Craft in his oft-reprinted The Spirit of

Masonry: In Moral and Elucidatory Lecture. Hutchinson asserted that

Adam, as the first Mason, taught his children the philosophical principles

contained in Freemasonry:

[W]hen men came to multiply exceedingly upon the face of the earth, and were dispersed to the distant regions of the globe, then the inestimable lessons of KNOWLEDGE and TRUTH, taught by the first men, fell into confusion and corruption with many, and were retained pure

and in perfection but by few.45

34

Hutchinson wrote of three successive stages of Freemasonry extending

from Adam to Moses, from Moses to Jesus, and from Jesus to the

present.46

In 1823, George Oliver expanded upon Hutchinson’s ideas, writing

that the purity of religion was inextricably linked with the purity of

Freemasonry; when one deteriorated, so did the other.47 When false

Freemasonry caused a degeneration, a restoration and new dispensation

was invariably needed. As a result, Freemasonry had gone through at

least five “grand periods,” each presided over by the ancient patriarchs

and prophets, considered “grand masters” of Masonry in their day.48 In

an 1826 work, Oliver further discussed the distinction between

Freemasonry and the “pagan” mystery religions of the world. He applied

the term “spurious Masonry” to corruptions of truths first taught by Noah

and passed down through his heathen or Gentile line.49

The approximately fifty years between Hutchinson’s and Oliver’s

Masonic writings reflects the development of an expectation that was

fully ripened by the time of Joseph Smith’s early prophetic career. This is

the lens through which to see Smith’s efforts to translate the Book of

Mormon and to “restore” both a church and an inspired revision of the

Bible.50 It also influenced the Mormon prophet’s own notions of

Freemasonry and his behaviors relating thereto. For example, some have

seen a great disparity between Smith’s earliest expressed opinions and

actions regarding the Craft and what he said and did in Nauvoo. It may

seem inconsistent for the same man who told his brother to “beware the

Freemasons” in 1826 to not only become a Freemason himself but

encourage the majority of his adult male followers to do so as well.

However, if Smith held to the view of Town, Hutchinson, and Oliver

regarding authentic and spurious Masonry—and his own inspired

revisions of the Bible suggest that he did—this might significantly alter

our understanding of his recorded statements on Freemasonry. It suggests

the possibility that Smith’s remarks, behaviors, and perspective on

Masonry were consistent and fundamentally unchanged throughout his

prophetic ministry. With such views, Smith could have condemned what

he saw as false or spurious Masonry while championing a pure and

restored version of the Craft—just as he did of Christianity as a whole.

Throughout the 1820s, particularly in upstate New York, both Masons

and anti-Masons publicly debated the ideas of Masonic

dispensationalism and ancient prophetic connections. That these ideas

35

were current in and around Palmyra is demonstrated by a Masonic

discourse given at a St. John’s Day celebration in Palmyra’s Mount

Moriah Lodge No. 112 in 1822. Extolling the example of John the

Baptist, one of the two “ancient Christian patrons of Masonry,” the

speaker summarized:

It may not, indeed, fall to our lot to engage in the office of a public reformer; nor shall we be summoned to the high vocation of ushering in a new dispensation of religion, or of promulgating a new code of morals. . . . But each man may, in private life, however low, or

exalted, be his condition, and in his own domestic sphere, become a reformer. 51

Thus, it was once again the “pious men of old” who were revered as

examples of Masonic philosophy, even in young Joseph Smith’s

backyard. It is ironic that, despite the last speaker’s words, a new prophet

from Palmyra would indeed declare himself to be “summoned to the

high vocation of ushering in a new dispensation of religion.”

Notes

36

37

three points of condemnation against Christ, at the High Priest’s Caiphas, Herod, and Pilate. It was from the last that he was led to that most violent and excruciating death. The said three blows with the square, guage [sic], and gavel, are symbols of the blow on the cheek, the flagellation, and the crown of thorns. The brethren assembled around the tomb of Hiram, is a representation of the disciples lamenting the death of Christ on the cross.” David Bernard, Light on Masonry: A Collection of All the Most Important Documents on the Subject of Speculative Free Masonry, 299.

38
