THE ENCHANTED LAND: THE SMITH

FAMILY’S MASONIC ENVIRONS

Thou land of milk and honey, land of corn and oil and wine,

How longs my hungry spirit to enjoy thy food divine!

I hunger and I thirst afar, the Jordan rolls between,

I faintly see thy paradise all clothed in living green.

—Rob Morris, Masonic Odes and Poems

In its formative years, the United States was wild and green, its rural communities imbued with the spirit of Masonry. The fragrance of philosophical, ethical, moral, and social progress permeated American lodges, and these ideals were broadly disseminated to the

public by individual members. Then, Freemasonry had a dynamic role in

revolutionary and post-revolutionary America, with the leading lights in

the struggle for American independence being attracted to the Masonic

brotherhood. These founding fathers saw Masonry’s endeavors to bring

together men from different regions and backgrounds in an increasingly

republican and Christian framework as a “harbinger of the new

American society.”1 Until the early 1800s, Freemasons could be found

among America’s socially privileged—its political, religious, and

business leaders. “[T]he period of Masonry’s greatest power and

prestige,” notes historian Stephen Bullock, were “the years from 1790 to

1826, when Americans used Masonry to respond to a wide range of

needs, including their hopes for an enlightened Republic, their attempts

to adapt to . . . [a rapidly changing] society, and their desire to create a

separate refuge from this confusing outside world.”2

For its disciples, Freemasonry’s mythic connection with the ancient

past provided a vision in which unsettling social disruptions were

understood as natural developments. The turmoil accompanying

advances in Enlightenment thinking could optimistically be seen as the

birth-pangs of a coming Christian utopia, firmly rooted in the Christian

past. Historian David Hackett observed that the “growing convergence of

Christianity and Freemasonry around Enlightenment ideals marked the

first quarter of the nineteenth century.” Masonry “avoid[ed] the extremes

of both sectarianism and nonbiblical rationalism,” and it thus attracted

ministers and members of liberal denominations such as Episcopalians,

39

Congregationalists, and Unitarians as its leaders. Until the social

unravelling of Freemasonry during a scandal known as “the Morgan

affair,”3 the fraternity served as a kind of secular priesthood.4

The doctrine of this secular priesthood was well known and well

appreciated by the average American. The twenty-first-century mind can

scarcely comprehend the influence Freemasonry once held over every

aspect of society. Books elucidating the legends of the Craft and relating

its many virtues were eagerly read and enthusiastically circulated to a

public hungry for what Freemasonry promised to provide. For example,

William Hutchinson’s wildly popular The Spirit of Masonry, first

published in 1775, opened to the general reader the world of Masonry

and its purported connection with the ancient past.5 Masonic articles and

poetry appeared in local newspapers,6 while by the late 1820s the

content of Masonic ritual was detailed with some regularity in the press.7

Vermont served as a crucible for this fertile mix of social idealism,

political independence, and religious exuberance. One of the

unanticipated byproducts was a new American hybrid religion whose

roots were firmly established in the soil of Vermont Freemasonry.

This potent atmosphere provided the context for many key activities of

the Smith family. Joseph Smith Sr., the father of the Mormon prophet,

was born at the cusp of the American Revolution, on July 12, 1771, in

Topsfield, Essex County, Massachusetts. Soon after, the Smiths located

close to Vermont’s border, a disputed region hotly contested by New

Hampshire and New York, both of which made liberal land grants in the

area. In July 1777, an assembly convened and declared Vermont to be a

territory independent of both New York and New Hampshire and thus

effectively a sovereign entity. Vermonters and some historians refer to

the territory in the period between 1777 and 1791, when Vermont finally

ratified the Constitution and joined the United States, as the “Republic of

Vermont.” During this period, residents established an autonomous

postal system and state currency. Freemasonry went hand in hand with

Vermonters’ independent ideals, as seen by their locally minted coins

replete with Masonic symbolism 8 .

40

Coins from the Republic of Vermont, 1785. Images courtesy of US Mint.

During Joseph Smith Sr.’s growing up years—between the ages of six

and twenty—he would have been regaled with stories of the rugged

independence of Vermont’s “Green Mountain Boys.” This group, headed

by Ethan Allen and members of his extended family, and largely

consisting of Freemasons,9 fiercely resisted both New York’s and New

Hampshire’s attempts to control the territory.

Ethan Allan, leader of Vermont’s Green Mountain Boys. From S. G. Goodrich, A Pictorial

History of the United States, 1883.

Quaker poet John Greenleaf Whittier penned a ballad called “The

Song of the Vermonters” to describe the temperament of the period. The

last stanza was so successful in imitating Ethan Allan’s activist prose that

it was attributed to him for almost sixty years:

Come York or come Hampshire, come traitors or knaves,

If ye rule o’er our land ye shall rule o’er our graves;

Our vow is recorded—our banner unfurled,

41

In the name of Vermont we defy all the world!10

Another illustration of Vermont-style experimentation with Masonic

ideals to form a brotherhood may be seen in the Nathaniel Wood group, a

quasi-religious association organized around the nucleus of Wood’s large

family. The family patriarch was a would-be preacher and

excommunicate of the Congregational church. The group was located in

Middletown, Rutland County,11 not far from the Smith family

homestead. Known as the “Fraternity of Rodsmen,”12 this “band of

mystics” held several beliefs derived from Masonry, especially the

Craft’s Royal Arch tradition. Wood’s followers began using divining

rods to ascertain the mind of God, and Wood received a revelation that

they “must build a temple,”13 an esoteric practice rooted both in the

Bible and in Masonic tradition and allegory. As a religious exercise, the

Wood group also made excavations in local mountains from which

valuable ore was to be taken, recalling the subterranean cavern of

Masonic legend wherein lay the gold plate of Enoch.14 Also reminiscent

of the Royal Arch tradition, Wood instructed his followers that they were

“descendants of the ancient Jews, and lawful inheritors of the whole

country,”15 and that the “divining rods would designate who they

were.”16 Jacob Wood, one of the sons of Nathaniel Wood, prophesied by

means of one of these divining rods that he named “St. John’s rod.” In

Royal Arch Masonry, Aaron’s rod—which budded, blossomed, and

brought forth flowers in a single day—is connected with the concept of

restoration, and the figure of Saint John has an important role. Overall,

the Wood congregation was a remarkable manifestation of increasing

religious pluralism and the fracturing of traditional religious constructs.

The group called themselves “Latter Day saints” and made liberal use of

Masonic millennialism.17 However, their misplaced belief in an

imminent apocalyptic event on January 14, 1802, combined with their

militant fervor, led to an embarrassing incident known as the “Wood

Scrape” and the eventual decline of the movement.18

The furor surrounding their pronouncements became so intense that it

is unfeasible to maintain that the Smiths were not aware of it. Indeed, it

has been suggested that both Joseph Smith Sr. and William Cowdery—

fathers of two of the founders of the Latter-day Saint movement—were

directly involved with the Wood group. Vermont historian Barnes Frisbie

presented a series of lectures in 1867 in which he detailed these men’s

42

involvement.19 Of Joseph Sr. he asserted, “I have been told that Joe

Smith’s father resided in Poultney at the time of the Wood movement

here, and that he was in it, and one of the leading rods-men.”20 Frisbie

also placed William Cowdery with the Wood group both when Cowdery

lived in nearby Wells, Vermont, and after he moved even closer to the

Woods’ home in Middletown. Because of this, D. Michael Quinn has

theorized that “a connection between William Cowdery and the Wood

Scrape would help explain why his son Oliver had a rod through which

he received revelations.”21

Whether or not the Smiths and the Cowderys participated personally in

the Nathaniel Wood group, the Woods’ brand of Masonic religious ardor

was thought by contemporaries to have been replicated in early

Mormonism. Methodist circuit rider Laban Clark recalled that about the

year 1840 he had heard two Mormon preachers in Connecticut who held

to the “same or much the same doctrines which the Woods did in

Middletown.” Clark firmly testified, “I have no doubt that their

movement gave origin to the Mormons.”22 Frisbie claimed that the

“system of religion inaugurated by the Woods was transmitted to the

Mormons” and that Mormonism could indeed be traced back to

Middletown.23

This allegation is strengthened by the migration of many of the group’s

principal leaders and followers into the same area in upstate New York

where the Smiths would later relocate and where would become the

cradle of the Restoration. In 1881, the Reverend Osborne Myrick called

Wood “the virtual father of Mormonism,” since among his followers

“were the fathers of Joe Smith, of Oliver Cowdery and of A. M. Pratt . . .

[who] practise there the same experiments with the hazel rod and

advocate the same doctrines as here until 1830, Joe Smith’s time, when

he vitalized Woodism into Mormonism.”24

Asael Smith and Freemasonry Arrive in Vermont

Still fiercely independent, the Republic of Vermont became the

fourteenth of the United States in 1791, and the border between New

Hampshire and the Green Mountain country was set at the Connecticut

River in that same year. Between 1763 and 1791, the non-indigenous

population of Vermont rose from 300 to 85,000.25 Along with this

expansion, the first two Masonic lodges in Vermont were chartered in

1781 and 1785,26 under the authority of the St. Andrews Grand Lodge

43

of Massachusetts.27 Each of their charters bear the signature of Paul

Revere. The third Vermont lodge was chartered by the Provincial Grand

Lodge of Canada, and the fourth and fifth by the Grand Lodge of

Connecticut. Finally, a Grand Lodge of Vermont was formed in Rutland

in 1794, enabling forthcoming lodges to be approved within their own

state.28 A Grand Chapter of Royal Arch Masons was formed in Vermont

on December 20, 1804, at Rutland.29

In 1791, Asael Smith, grandfather of Joseph Smith Jr., moved his

family to Tunbridge in Vermont. No regular lodge existed within

reasonable travel distance until October of 1798. In that year, when

Joseph Sr. was twenty-seven years old,30 Federal Lodge No. 15 was

constituted in Randolph, located roughly seven miles from Tunbridge.31

Joseph Sr.’s brother-in-law John Curtis Waller had joined the Smith

family in Tunbridge in 1798 or 1799, just as this lodge was

established.32 Waller petitioned for membership and received the first or

Entered Apprentice degree in 1801.33 By 1804 at age forty-two, Waller

was serving as Senior Warden (second in the lodge hierarchy).34 It is

possible that several of the Smith brothers were members of this lodge as

well. Unfortunately, the existing abstract of members of the Grand Lodge

of Vermont is an incomplete record.35

44

Masonic Lodges near the Joseph Smith Sr. home in Vermont, 1798. Map by Sariah Swick.

Despite its shortcomings, the Register of the Grand Lodge of Vermont,

1794 to 1846 contains additional important information pertaining to the

Smith family. In November of 1801, the year John Waller joined Federal

Lodge, the register records the rejection of a “Joseph Smith” who

petitioned for membership.36 While one other “Joseph Smith” lived in

Tunbridge at the time,37 the involvement of a close relative in the lodge

suggests that this record may pertain to the Joseph Smith whose son

would eventually found the Latter-day Saint movement. When this

Joseph Smith petitioned Federal Lodge for admission, his request would

have been submitted to an investigating committee to verify his

45

reputation and suitability for the lodge. Then a balloting would have

taken place. Masonic literature often refers to the “sanctity of the ballot

box,” whereby each Freemason has an unquestioned and anonymous

right to determine by ballot who shall or shall not become a member of

his lodge. A single negative vote from a member is enough to block

admission. Except in the most unusual circumstances, Masonic law

forbids asking any member of the lodge how he voted—let alone his

reasons—making it nearly impossible to clearly identify the cause of this

man’s failure to pass the ballot. However, assuming for the sake of

argument that this Joseph Smith was the son of Asael Smith, it is

possible to hazard a guess as to several potential reasons one or more

members of Federal Lodge rejected this petition.

In a day when Freemasons were deliberately escaping from early

reputations of revelry, the abuse of alcohol was particularly frowned

upon. It appears that at some point in his life, Joseph Smith Sr.

overindulged.38 Habitual drunkenness was a fairly common cause for

expulsion of members from the Fraternity and would have been

considered firm grounds to prevent admission.

Another possible reason for rejection arose out of Joseph Sr.’s

mercantile activities. Sometime between February and August of 1800,

the family left Tunbridge, relocating in Randolph well in advance of the

November 1801 rejection.39 Soon after, Joseph Sr. began to raise

ginseng as a cash crop. According to recollections of Lucy Mack Smith,

her husband had accumulated a quantity of ginseng worth at least $4,500

(about $108,000 in today’s dollars) by 1802. Joseph Sr.’s plans to market

ginseng would have been known well before November 1801, when

Federal Lodge voted on his petition. Lucy’s record indicates that another

local merchant by the name of “Stevens” was also involved in ginseng

cultivation with unfortunate results for the Smith family. While it is no

longer possible to precisely identify the “Stevens” mentioned, at least

one Stevens was a member of Federal Lodge. If, as appears likely, the

merchant Stevens (or one of his relatives) was involved with the local

lodge, he may have resented Joseph Sr.’s venture as undesirable

competition, leading to a questionably motivated blackball. In any event,

the “Stevens” described by Lucy maneuvered to take possession of the

proceeds of the Smiths’ crop, leaving them nearly four thousand dollars

in debt. Joseph Sr.’s resulting insolvency, albeit due to another man’s

dishonesty, would have presented a further barrier to admission.

46

A third possible reason for lodge members to vote against Joseph

Smith Sr.’s admission to Federal Lodge appears from his reputation as a

youth. The collections of the Chicago Historical Society contain an

affidavit signed in 1884 by Moses Thompson, of Perry, Ohio. According

to Thompson,

Joseph Smith, the father of the Mormon Prophet, lived with my parents when I ws a boy. Mother said she was afraid of him,—he had such a violent temper, and was so malicious. Some=time after he was discharged<,> he was overtaken in Cornish [a New Hampshire town 25 miles from Royalton, Vermont] with a horse he had stolen. He sent a messenger to [father]

to co[m]e and help him out of his trouble. 40

Historian Dan Vogel has shown that Moses Thompson confused Smith

with another man who also had a son named Joseph.41 However, this

same mistake could have been made by others or promulgated among

members of Federal Lodge. Dudley Chase Jr. was born in Cornish in

1771, making him the same age as Joseph Sr. Chase subsequently moved

to Randolph, Vermont, where he served as Worshipful Master of Federal

Lodge at the time Joseph Sr. was rejected. If he or other members of the

Lodge believed that the senior Smith had a poor reputation for honesty in

Cornish, it might have prompted a negative ballot, assuring that he

would not join the Lodge.

Joseph Sr.’s drinking, frequent moves, and penurious condition all

could have been reasons why he never became a Freemason in Vermont.

The bylaws of the Grand Lodge of Vermont, which were typical of other

grand lodges in the United States, indicate that brothers could be

suspended or expelled for failing to attend three or more monthly

meetings, or for falling behind in annual dues. Restoration to full

membership required a unanimous vote of the members of the lodge, and

Masonic practice generally required that past dues be either paid or

remitted before any restoration to membership. A man might be turned

down for lodge membership if there was a concern that he would be

suspended or expelled as the family struggled with meeting basic needs.

The Smith family moved many times in the short space of fifteen years.

Particularly during the latter part of this period, it would have become

difficult for Joseph Sr. to maintain membership in any lodge, even had

his petition not been rejected by Federal Lodge.

Despite these obstacles, Joseph Sr. had ample opportunities to become

familiar with Masonic legend via family members, Universalist ties, and

local newspapers. This familiarity would color the family’s destiny

throughout the decades to come.

The Mystic Word Encounters Enlightenment Ideas

47

Freemasonry had a genial relationship with the Deist, Rationalist, and

Universalist trends of the day. Its unique ability to merge mystic ritual

with rational thought was attractive to men at all levels of society. A

certain tension between folk magic, mysticism, and scientific

enlightenment can be noted in the proceedings of Federal Lodge. At the

St. John’s Day festival of 1804, the brothers sang a “Masonic song” that

included lines specifically referring to Royal Arch Masonry:

When orient wisdom beam’d serene,

And pillar’d strength arose;

When beauty ting’d the glowing scene,

And faith her mansion chose,

Exulting hands the fabric view’d;

Mysterious powers ador’d;

And high the Triple Union stood,

That gave the Mystic Word.

Pale envy wither’d at the sight,

And frowning o’er the pile,

Call’d murder up from realms of night,

To blast the glorious toil.

With ruffian outrage join’d in woe,

They form the league ahhorr’d;

And wounded science felt the blow,

That crush’d the Mvstic Word.

. . .

To depths obscure, the favour’d Trine,

A dreary course engage,

’Till through the arch, the ray divine,

Illumes the sacred page!

From the wide wonders of this blaze,

Our ancient Sign’s restor’d;

The Royal Arch alone displays,

The long lost Mystic Word. 42

Published in a local newspaper, this hymn celebrated once-secretive

legends now squarely placed in public view. Masonic legend told of

certain inscriptions whereby the sacred name of God—Freemasonry’s

“Lost Word”—was preserved. Here, non-Masonic readers such as Joseph

Smith Sr. would have understood the author’s basic concept of a “mystic

word” long buried in “depths obscure” and crushed by the blow of

faithlessness. Simultaneously, Enlightenment thinkers would celebrate

the new knowledge and truth that a modern understanding of science

would “restore” to the Craft.

Struggling for respectability in a rational society that distrusted

“antiquated” mysticism, Freemasons nonetheless regarded the legends

undergirding Masonic ritual as valuable allegories. Masons began to take

a modern, scholarly approach to lore that was traditionally infused with

48

folk magic and mysticism. Freemasonry advocated an enlightened,

rational esoterica. As such, it was believed by many American brothers

to be the mechanism that would bring about the Millennium.

Federal Lodge, with its appreciation of these principles, was

remarkably cosmopolitan for its time and place, with members among

the educated class of society. The Reverend Hosea Ballou held the

Lodge’s most enduring legacy. Born in 1771, the same year as Joseph

Smith Sr., Ballou became the central figure in Orange County and other

New England Universalist congregations. In the course of his preaching,

he found himself profoundly affected by Ethan Allen’s 1784 Reason:

The Only Oracle of Man and Thomas Paine’s 1794 Age of Reason.

Adopting their message that religious faith must be consistent with logic

and reason, Ballou soon changed the face of Universalism. His teachings

were both applauded and reviled, and Ballou rose to local Masonic

prominence amid Vermont’s volatile atmosphere. In 1803 he served as

Senior Warden of Federal Lodge, and in 1807 he served as Worshipful

Master of Warren Lodge No. 23 in Woodstock, Vermont. As both a

reverend and a Mason, Ballou promoted both Universalism and

Freemasonry among the inhabitants of central Vermont, having what

appears to have been a direct and significant impact on the extended

Smith family.43

Despite dearly held folk magic beliefs, Joseph Sr. was strongly drawn

to such Enlightenment ideas. In late 1797, he joined his father Asael, his

brother Jesse, and fourteen others in the formation of a Universalist

Society in Tunbridge.44 Following the birth of Hyrum in 1800, the

Joseph Smith Sr. family moved seven miles from Tunbridge to

Randolph, Vermont, the seat of Federal Lodge. Like seventy-one other

Randolph heads of the household at the time, Joseph Sr. took advantage

of an 1801 Vermont law to object to the local Congregationalist tax. His

oath that he did “not agree in Religious opinions With a Majority of the

Inhabitants of the Town” was attested to on July 1, 1802, by town clerk

John Woodward Jr.45 Joseph Sr. was said to have frequently declared

“that the whole bible was the work of priestcraft . . . that Voltair[e’]s

writings [were] the best bible then extant, and Thomas Paines age of

reason, the best commentary.”46 His spiritual struggles reflected some of

the same tensions apparent in Masonry.

When the Smith family returned to Tunbridge after a short stay in

Randolph and the ginseng debacle, Lucy felt in need of religious

comfort. She began to attend the Methodist church and prevailed upon

49

her husband to join her. Apparently worried that he was abandoning his

enlightened principles, Joseph Sr.’s father and his brother Jesse paid him

a visit, carrying Paine’s Age of Reason with them. Throwing the book

into the house, they suggested he should read it until he believed it and to

keep his wife away from church meetings.47

Lucy later reflected that her husband was “more pliant and flexible” to

“the breath of heaven” than Asael or Jesse. She hoped that “when Joseph

should be more advanced in life,” he would hear and respond to “the

pure and undefiled Gospel of the Son of God.”48 Whether consciously

or unknowingly, his attempts to do so retained a strong flavor of

Freemasonry.

A Masonic Name

The word “mason” is one of the many French words imported into

English after French Normans invaded England in 1066 CE; it replaced

terms like “stonecutter” or “stoneworker.” And although there is little

historical record for the term “stonesmith,” it is sometimes used today by

masons as a business name. Thus, while unquestionably common, the

surname “Smith” is particularly appropriate to Freemasonry. Webster’s

1828 dictionary defined “smith” as

Literally, the striker, the beater; hence, one who forges with the hammer; one who works in metals. . . . He that makes or effects any thing. . . . The name Smith, which, from the number of workmen employed in working metals in early ages, is supposed to be more common than

any other. 49

The central figure in Freemasonry, Hiram Abiff, was thus a smith, as he

is described in the bible as “a worker in brass: and he was filled with

wisdom, and understanding, and cunning to work all works in brass” (1

Kgs. 7:14).50

Joseph Smith Jr.’s older brother was named “Hiram” during a time

when the name was extremely popular in the Smith family’s environs

(though, as was common with names in the early nineteenth century, no

one minded much if it was subsequently spelled Hyram or Hyrum or

some variation thereon).51 In Windsor and Orange counties, where the

Smith family variously lived, the name “Hiram” was very rarely given to

newborns prior to 1794 when the Grand Lodge of Vermont was formed.

But between 1795 and 1834, in the Vermont counties of Orange and

Windsor where Hyrum and Joseph Jr. were born, at least 357 male

children were given the name “Hiram.” The largest increase in the

name’s use occurred in 1798—the year in which Federal Lodge was

50

installed—and peak usage came in 1806. A comparison with other male

biblical names demonstrates that this was not part of an ecclesiastical

trend. Rather, as Freemasonry became more popular and established in

the Smith family’s immediate vicinity, numerous locals named their sons

after one of the central figures in Masonic legend. In some cases, the

clear Masonic intent of these names is demonstrated by the use of middle

names such as “Hiram Abiff Morgan,”52 “Hiram Mason Fisher,”53

“Hiram Mason Chafee,” “Hiram King Wiles,”54 “Hiram King

Noyes,”55 and “Hiram Solomon Morse.”56 The decline in the name’s

usage likewise followed the rising influence of anti-Masonry in Vermont.

Treasures Hidden in the Earth and a Son to Find Them

While yet in Vermont, Joseph Smith Sr., who would later be described

as “prone to the marvelous,”57 became a treasure digger.58 At the time,

this activity was a relatively common folk practice, and Joseph Sr.’s

surroundings would have uniquely encouraged his quests. Historian

Mark Ashurst-McGee has provided a view of this folkway in early

America:

Many believed that treasures had been secreted in the earth by the ancient inhabitants of the continent, Spanish explorers, pirates, or even the dwarves of European mythology. Treasure hunters usually looked to hills, caves, lost mines, and Native American mounds as places to find these hidden deposits. A legend, a map, or a dream of buried wealth initiated the treasure quest. Local specialists were enlisted to use their divining rods or seer stones to locate the

treasure. 59

As a tenant on the Solomon Mack farm, Joseph Sr. was surrounded by

stone curiosities, including seven-foot-tall monoliths, man-made stone

chambers, and fragments uncovered by farmers’ plows. On the adjacent

Macintosh farm, numerous saucer-shaped stones stood in parallel

arrangements. In the early twentieth century, a Macintosh descendant

discovered a stone chamber on the property—one of at least six in the

immediate vicinity. Excavations of the site revealed a variety of Native

American artifacts. With the annual frost-heave cycle, “an abundance” of

inscribed stones were plowed up in nearby fields. A modern investigator

of “strange sites” speculated on the effect these ubiquitous curiosities

could have had on young Joseph Smith Jr. (and, by extension, his father

and brothers):

Smith spent his boyhood in a part of central Vermont that’s filled with strange lithic remains— from inexplicable stone chambers to boulders etched with curious markings and grooves (see South Royalton, Vermont). Records indicate that the young Smith was quite curious. He supposedly roamed around Vermont’s hillsides searching for unusual things, including buried

51

treasure. Given his surroundings, it’s impossible that Smith missed all of the weird

underground stone rooms found within walking distance of the many places where he lived.60

Joseph Sr. reportedly found an allure in the legendary Captain Kidd’s

pirate treasure,61 and he passed his interest on to his sons. Under the

influence of Masonic legend and physical environment, there is little

wonder that the Smiths would take an active interest in treasure digging.

There was an overt Masonic quality to this activity, because Masons are

interested in the recovery of a lost sacred word, once engraved upon a

triangular plate of gold. Thus, the Smiths’ treasure seeking was

connected with a sacred holy meaning from the beginning. Much as the

true alchemist’s search to transmute lead into gold symbolized his

spiritual effort to purify the human soul, the family became involved in

seeking for a literal but equally important spiritual “treasure” buried in

the earth of New England. The activity included special rituals and

ceremonies that were performed for the purpose of obtaining buried

items thought to be guarded by evil spirits.

It was during the family’s time in Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont,

that the Smiths’ third son was born on December 23, 1805. The attending

physician, Dr. Joseph A. Denison, was a member of Federal Lodge,

having joined the Fraternity in September of 1800.62 The birth of Joseph

Jr. appears to have been fraught with meaning for his father, who

apparently saw great spiritual importance in his son’s birth. Joseph Jr.

was born four days before the feast day of Saint John the Evangelist, one

of the two patron saints of Masonry. Traditionally, this day is chosen for

the installation of a new master within an established Masonic lodge. His

birth also came one day following the winter solstice, a time representing

the rebirth and the restoration of light to the world.

In addition, Joseph Jr. was born in a caul, or with a portion of the

placenta over his head, so that he appeared, like Moses, to have “a veil

over [his] face” (2 Cor. 3:13). As with many cultures to this day, New

Englanders often believed that being born in the unbroken amniotic sack

portended the gifts of prophecy and seership.63 The Masonic timing and

prophetic nature of Joseph Jr.’s birth may have led his family to believe

him to be the fulfillment of a legendary Masonic restorer who would aid

in their search for the Lost Word. It was later recalled that Joseph Sr.

intended to provide his son a seer stone.64 From this evidence, historian

Dan Vogel drew the conclusion that “Joseph Sr. evidently intended to

pass his gifts as a dreamer and treasure-seeker to his namesake. . . . Like

the biblical Jacob, Joseph Sr. would bypass the tradition of first-born

52

inheritance and give his greatest blessing—the only blessing he had to

impart—to a younger son.”65

While it cannot be proven what Joseph Sr. had in mind while naming

his sons, circumstances render it quite possible that, having named one

son Hiram/Hyrum, he chose to make another son his namesake. The

importance of this would be referenced in LDS scripture when the

Mormon prophet was identified specifically with Joseph of Egypt and as

a “Joseph” named after his own father (2 Ne. 3:15).

Residences and Relocations of the Smith Family

After Joseph Smith Sr. lost his potential fortune in the ginseng trade,

the young father sold his Tunbridge farm to settle resulting debts and

began renting farmland owned by his father-in-law, Solomon Mack, ten

miles away on the border between South Royalton and Sharon, Vermont.

Though they moved frequently during the following years, the family

stayed within a comfort zone of three counties clustered around the

Connecticut River. All these residences were well within a twenty-mile

circumference of the homestead in Sharon.66

Perhaps hopeful that migration to another state would allow him to

escape the obstacles he faced in Vermont, Joseph Sr. moved his family to

Lebanon, New Hampshire, in 1812. Lucy Mack Smith’s history does not

seem to detail how the family supported themselves in Lebanon, but their

efforts “met with success on every hand.”67 After two years of

prosperity, however, the family was afflicted by an epidemic of typhus

fever. The disease interrupted the academic career of Hyrum, who came

home ill from Moor’s Academy. It then spread to all the Smith children,

nearly killing young Sophronia. The illness eventually settled in the leg

of Joseph Jr. Had the family not had connections to prominent doctors in

the area (many of whom were Masons), who were able to provide an

experimental treatment, it is likely that the leg would have required

amputation to save the young Joseph’s life.

This year of sickness, with its attendant expenses, devastated the

family’s finances and necessitated yet another move.68 The Smiths

found a home and farm to rent across the river in Norwich, Vermont,

where they eked out a meager living, aided by the proceeds of a small

orchard and Lucy’s in-home industry.69 The new location was within the

seat of Franklin Lodge, and several members of the Lodge lived there.

While Hyrum was able to attend an additional year at Moor’s Academy,

53

unfortunately the next three years’ harvests were so poor that the family

was never able to regain their financial footing in New England.

In the fall of 1816, Joseph Sr. again relocated, this time to Palmyra,

New York. After a journey that exhausted nearly all their means, Lucy

and her children joined him there in January 1817.70 Lucy made a

business of painting oilcloths for decorative use, by which she gathered

“an abundance of good and wholesome provision” and even began to

replace the “fine” furnishings lost in making the journey from

Vermont.71 Palmyra resident Pomeroy Tucker noted that soon after the

Smiths’ move to New York, Joseph Sr. “opened a cake and beer shop” in

their rented home, situated at the end of Palmyra’s Main Street.72 From

here, the family sold “gingerbread, pies, boiled eggs, root-beer and other

like notions of traffic.” The family establishment was popular with the

youth, and sales were particularly brisk during holidays. Such income

generated from the family store was supplemented by Joseph Sr. and his

elder sons hiring out as common laborers, engaging in “gardening,

harvesting, well-digging,” and the like.73 Additionally, Joseph Sr. and

his son Hyrum worked at the cooper’s trade. Given that cargo for the

upcoming Erie Canal would be shipped via the casks, barrels, and tubs

fashioned by coopers, this was a wise decision, as the occupation would

provide relatively stable and profitable work. As noted by historian

Richard L. Bushman, the Smith family was “in a better position by 1818

than they had occupied for fifteen years.”74

The improvement in the family’s economic circumstances may have

helped pave the way for Joseph Sr.’s long-awaited initiation into

Freemasonry. After his apparent rejection by Federal Lodge in 1801,

Joseph Sr. would not have been allowed to join any lodge within the

jurisdiction of the Grand Lodge of Vermont without the express and

unanimous approval of Federal Lodge No. 15. Most of the Smith

family’s Vermont residences were located relatively close to Federal

Lodge, making it exceedingly difficult to circumvent this rule. However,

the move to New York provided a new start in a different Masonic

jurisdiction. The village of Palmyra had been home to Mount Moriah

Lodge No. 112 since October of 1804, and Masons in the adjacent

village of Farmington (later called Manchester) had only recently formed

Manchester Lodge No. 269. Both lodges were preceded by the 1791

formation of Ontario Lodge No. 23, thirteen miles south at Canandaigua.

54

During this time, Freemasons were held in high esteem by the

American public, and the Fraternity labored to maintain the public trust.

While recognizing that not every Mason lived his profession, they made

efforts to ensure that applicants were worthy of initiation.75 Candidates

for membership were required to have lived in the area for at least a year,

and they were expected to be industrious, stable, trustworthy, and not

addicted to vicious habits. Moral integrity was a prerequisite, and it was

a requirement that a man petitioning a lodge be vouched for by a Mason

who had opportunity to observe his behavior. In this way, a brother could

first verify to his own satisfaction the qualifications of an individual

before signing his petition to the Lodge. It was hoped that new members

would live in the area for many years thereafter, contributing to the

annual dues and assisting with initiation of those who followed in their

footsteps looking for light in Masonry.

Freemasons generally looked with favor upon a recommendation from

a family member who was already a Freemason. The elder Joseph

Smith’s brother-in-law, John Curtis Waller, had served as a lodge officer.

His brothers, John and Samuel Smith, and nephew, Calvin Waller, were

Masons in Potsdam and could also vouch for him. Thus, it would have

been relatively easy for Joseph Smith Sr. to successfully petition a lodge

for membership, as long as his overall personal behavior was viewed

favorably by other members of the lodge.

The only question was which lodge Joseph Sr. would join. Two lodges

were within easy traveling distance—Palmyra’s Mount Moriah Lodge

No. 112 and nearby Canandaigua’s Ontario Lodge No. 23. Formed in

1804, Mount Moriah was the newer lodge, and it had less time to

accumulate the paraphernalia that added luster to the degrees. The Lodge

was created in response to a joint petition from brothers in two

townships: Palmyra and Phelps (twelve miles southeast of Palmyra and

thirteen miles from Canandaigua). For the first few years of its existence,

the Lodge met alternately in the two towns. Had he petitioned this lodge,

Joseph Sr. would have needed the unanimous affirmative vote of

members from two communities for admission.

Although Ontario Lodge was located approximately twelve miles from

the Smith home on the Palmyra-Manchester border, it was clearly the

older and more prestigious of the two. It had been founded in 1792 by

some of Canandaigua’s finest citizens. With the Erie Canal only

beginning construction in 1817, Canandaigua was still a primary

commercial center in the region. Other conditions, such as personal

friendships or business interests, influenced which lodge a candidate

55

might petition. Joseph Sr. would likely have been required to make

periodic trips to the county center to sell crops and deal with land

brokers. Since many brothers also farmed, lodge meetings were a chance

to travel into town, take care of Masonic business, perform the rituals to

induct new members, and afterward enjoy a sumptuous meal

accompanied by a few pints and the company of Masonic brothers. Many

lodges met in the evening, and the men would stay the night and take

care of business in town the next morning. It was not uncommon for

brothers to travel ten to fifteen miles to lodge, which was usually only

held once a month.

A search of Mount Moriah Lodge’s records has not revealed the

induction of Joseph Sr., but he does appear on the records of Ontario

Lodge No. 23. The Lodge’s 1818 annual report of newly initiated

Masons indicates that a “Joseph Smith” was initiated as an Entered

Apprentice on December 26, 1817, passed to the degree of Fellowcraft

on May 2, 1818, and raised to the degree of Master Mason on May 7,

1818.76 The date of December 26 indicates that he was initiated on the

day Ontario Lodge was celebrating St. John the Evangelist’s Day,77 one

of two Masonic feasts held at the Summer and Winter Solstices.

The “Joseph Smith” who was initiated on December 26, 1817, would

have had to petition the lodge for degrees at least thirty days prior, thus

placing his request in late November—just over one year from the arrival

of Joseph Sr. in New York. A comparison of the records of Palmyra’s

Mount Moriah Lodge No. 112 with 1820 census records demonstrates

that the Lodge included members residing in not only Palmyra but also

in over a dozen nearby towns, including even Canandaigua itself. Some

of these towns, such as Lyons, were further from Palmyra than Palmyra

was from Canandaigua.

Some historians have questioned if this is our Joseph Smith Sr. or

some other person with that name, because Ontario Lodge record lists

Canandaigua as the residence of the “Joseph Smith” initiate. The same

record indicates Canandaigua as the residence of every listed member,

with all but the first being mere ditto marks. The 1820 census, however,

lists two of these men as living in nearby Gorham, with others of unclear

residence. This would indicate that the secretary was less than careful in

specifying the precise residence of each member. Additionally, there is

some ambiguity as to whether this column meant where the brother was

currently residing, where the brother legally kept a permanent homestead

or business, or if there was a declared intention to reside at that location.

56

The Road Census in April of 1817 and 1818 does list Joseph Smith Sr.

as living in Palmyra. However, was there another Joseph Smith living in

Canandaigua at the time who was of legal age and properly vouched for?

The 1820 census shows that there was no Joseph Smith living in

Canandaigua in 1820, but there were nine Joseph Smiths listed in

Ontario County.

Since Masonic lodges did not initiate transients and would likely not

have raised a brother who did not plan a long-term residence in the area,

we are left with the residents listed. While strictly speaking, residence

did not determine which lodge a man must attend, the most obvious

feature of the list is that in 1820 the closest man to Ontario Lodge No. 23

was none other than our Joseph Smith Sr., who was enumerated in

Farmington.

The one-hundred-acre parcel of land that Joseph Sr. and his son Alvin

“articled” in 1820 was purchased from Zachariah Seymour, a

Canandaigua land broker. According to historian Michael Marquardt,

“Seymour had long been a land agent in the area and was a close

associate of Oliver Phelps, who with his partner Nathaniel Gorham had

opened a land office in Canandaigua and had instituted the practice of

‘articling’ for real estate.”78 Thus, Joseph Sr. would have necessarily

travelled to Canandaigua on occasion to contract for his 1820 land

purchase. One notable member of Ontario Lodge from at least 1815 was

Harris Seymour, son of Zachariah Seymour, indicating a possible

fraternal connection that allowed the Smiths to purchase their property.

57

The Smith family quickly established business and personal

relationships with local Freemasons. A search of extant local records

indicates at least 314 known Masons in the community during their

residence.79 The Smith family physician, the owner of the local

drugstore patronized by the family, and even their next-door neighbors

were members of the local lodges. Among the values of Freemasonry

was education in the liberal arts and sciences, and thus it was no surprise

that local Masons would take the lead in those fields.80 Many local

public officials, physicians, and businessmen took their places in lodge

meetings alongside farmers. Furthermore, the two lodges included

veterans of both the Revolutionary War and the War of 1812. With so

many Masonic connections, and with relatively ample access to libraries,

bookstores, and newspapers, the Smith family was surrounded by

opportunities to be exposed to Masonic ritual, literature, and thought. As

one author has suggested, Palmyra became known as “a strong Masonic

Town.”81

Affiliations of Alvin and Hyrum

During the family’s Palmyra years, Joseph Smith Sr.’s two eldest sons,

Alvin and Hyrum, reached the proper age for initiation. While no

documentary evidence has appeared that Alvin was a Freemason, hints

of this possibility lie in the chest later used to store the gold plates of the

Book of Mormon. Prior to building the Smith family’s wood frame house

on the Palmyra/Manchester farm, Alvin built a lap desk from tulip poplar

and walnut. Family lore indicates that Alvin used this lap desk in

designing the home and that he kept his architectural tools inside. When

Alvin passed away, the lap desk came into the possession of his brother

Hyrum, who supplied it to Joseph Jr. to serve as a temporary chest for the

plates, breastplate, and Urim and Thummim. There is no indication that

any member of the Smith family may have possessed architectural skills,

and such would not be particularly necessary for planning a standard

frame house. No information supplies the eventual fate of these

architectural tools; however, it is possible that they may actually have

been the symbolic “working tools” used in Freemasonry, such as the

square, compasses, plumb, and level. If so, this adds significance to the

lap desk or chest, with its contents, being passed directly to Hyrum, the

only active Freemason in the family.82

Hyrum Smith’s Masonic affiliation is more certain, for in the later

Nauvoo Lodge records he identified his preceding lodge as Mount

58

Moriah No. 112 in Palmyra. It is easy to imagine why a young man

would find the Palmyra Lodge more appealing than the staid Ontario

Lodge: construction of the Palmyra portion of the Erie Canal, which

passed through Palmyra’s village center, was completed in 1822,

increasing the community’s importance and the opportunities available to

its citizens. By 1824, the town boasted of three gristmills, eight sawmills,

one fulling mill, an iron works, five distilleries, two asheries, and two

tanneries.83

While it is entirely possible that Hyrum first received his degrees in a

different lodge, the earliest known record of his membership is his

quarterly dues on Mount Moriah’s financial report dated June 4, 1827,

through June 4, 1828.84 Because he does not appear with those being

initiated or admitted that year, we can know that he was initiated prior to

June of 1827; however, the exact date of his initiation remains unknown.

The earliest he could have been able to petition the Lodge for

membership was following his twenty-first birthday on February 9,

three degrees of masonry in Ontario County, New York.” This points to

Hyrum becoming a Mason before 1823, since county lines shifted in that

year and Palmyra became part of Wayne County.85

Under normal circumstances, if he had not been raised in the Lodge,

he would have been listed as paying an “adjoining” fee for transferring

from another lodge. At least in Hyrum’s case, the records are incomplete,

and the correct explanation may be lost as a result. The Lodge’s next

existing return, prepared on June 1, 1831, no longer listed Hyrum as a

member. This is consistent with Hyrum having moved his family to

Colesville, New York, in September or October of 1830.86

“By Which He Could Discern Things Invisible to the Natural Eye”

In towns where Rationalism and Universalism coexisted with

Methodists and Freewill Baptists—especially when alchemy, treasure

digging, and other forms of hermeticism were in operation—one was

likely to find a Masonic presence. The Craft congenially brought

together antipodes like treasure seeking and rationalism. In these New

England towns, as well as in the state of New York, there was a high

concentration of individuals who would eventually be amenable to the

new Mormon message. Historian John L. Brooke recognized that it was

“the combination of sectarian and hermetic influences in a given town”

59

that would eventually correlate with conversions to the new faith.87

According to Lance Ownes, “the treasure sought by the alchemist was

often termed the ‘philosopher’s stone,’” while the alchemist himself was

considered a “priest in a hallowed, ancient priesthood,” “a knower of

creation’s ancient secret,” and “a digger after hidden treasure.”88

Freemasons believed that this hidden treasure was no more nor less than

divine knowledge—the very secrets of Nature and Nature’s God. Like

the Nathaniel Wood group before them, the Smiths would eventually mix

these powerful elements into a potent new faith centered upon a long-

lost, newly found holy relic.

Not long after their arrival in Palmyra, the Smith family resumed their

quest for hidden treasure in earnest. Even before leaving Vermont,

Joseph Sr. had told others that he “intended to procure a stone for

[Joseph Jr.] to see all over the world with.”89 Father Smith believed

there was “a stone of this quality, somewhere, for every one.”90

At an 1826 trial in which Joseph Jr. was accused of being a “disorderly

person,” a court scribe recalled writing the young man’s words as he

regaled the court with his seeric adventures. In this telling, Joseph Jr.

heard of a neighbor girl’s “glass,” went to visit her, and was permitted to

look into the seer stone. After it was placed in a hat to exclude the light,

He was greatly surprised to see but one thing, which was a small stone, a great way off. It soon became luminous, and dazzled his eyes, and after a short time it became as intense as the mid-day sun. . . . This singular circumstance occupied his mind for some years, when he left his father’s house, and with his youthful zeal traveled [some one hundred and fifty miles] west in search of this luminous stone. . . . With some labor and exertion he found the stone, carried it to the creek, washed and wiped it dry, sat down on the bank, placed it in his hat, and discovered that time, place, and distance were annihilated; that all intervening obstacles were

removed, and that he possessed one of the attributes of Deity, an All-Seeing Eye.91

The object Joseph Jr. had found was described as a hard, smooth stone

about the size of a small hen’s egg and shaped like a “high-instepped

shoe.” It was “composed of layers of different colors passing diagonally

through it.”92 Such stones, hermetic symbols of transformation and

change, were of interest to Freemasons, as was the attribute of the “All-

Seeing Eye.”

Later stories of Joseph Jr.’s seer stones contain common elements but

are difficult to harmonize.93 In the fall of 1819, Joseph Sr. and his three

older sons were apparently hired to help dig a well on the Chase

property.94 In an 1830 conversation with the senior Smith, Palmyra

resident Fayette Lapham claimed that the “pretense of digging a well”

60

was subterfuge for money digging. The group found water and a “dark

stone” at a depth of twenty or twenty-two feet.95 Willard Chase

excitedly brought it to the top of the well, and “as we were examining it,

Joseph [Jr.] put it into his hat, and then his face into the top of his hat.”96

Pomeroy Tucker, a member of Mount Moriah Lodge, gave further details

in a later account:

This stone attracted particular notice on account of its peculiar shape, resembling that of a child’s foot. It was of a whitish glassy appearance, though opaque, resembling quartz. . . . Joseph Jr. . . . manifested a special fancy for this geological curiosity; and he carried it home with him, though this act of plunder was against the strenuous protestations of Mr. Chase’s children, who claimed to be its rightful owners. Joseph kept this stone, and ever afterward refused its restoration to the claimants. Very soon the pretension transpired that he could see wonderful things by its aid. This idea was rapidly enlarged upon from day to day, and in a short time his spiritual endowment was so developed that he asserted the gift and power (with

the stone at his eyes) of revealing both things existing and things to come. 97

With the discovery of a seer stone, it appeared that his father’s

expectations were on their way to being fulfilled. Young Joseph’s 1819–

20 discovery of his own seer stone allowed him to take an active part in

the family’s treasure quest. Joshua Stafford, a treasure digger who lived

two miles south of the Smiths, reported that the family “commenced

digging for hidden treasures” soon after moving to the farm.98 Once

again, the family found themselves surrounded by the remnants of

Native American burial mounds and other relics. At least one source

claimed that Joseph Sr. told him the local hills were “nearly all erected

by human hands” and that the family was not digging for money but

rather “for the obtaining of a Gold Bible.”99 For this reason, Alan

Taylor, noting the spiritual dimension of the search, prefers to “call them

treasure-seekers rather than the more sordid-sounding money-

diggers.”100

Joseph Sr. was said to have declared that “his son Jo” had seen “the

spirit, (which he then described as a little old man with a long beard,)”

who would help the young man obtain great treasures.101 In a paean to

Masonic legend, the elder Smith prophesied that his son would bring

forth a book telling the account of the antediluvians who, at the approach

of the great Flood, had deposited their substance in large and spacious

underground chambers.102 This later account, which foretells the

coming forth of the Book of Mormon, was doubtless influenced by later

events. But its connection with Masonic lore is further evidence that

61

local residents viewed Father Smith as having promoted his son as a

Masonic restorer.

In the meantime, Joseph Jr.’s reputation as a treasure seer was

spreading. His introduction to Josiah Stowell occurred within a month of

his 1825 visit to Cumorah. Stowell, a native of Vermont, had received

land grants in Bainbridge (now Afton), New York, after the 1791

settlement of longstanding border disputes. A deacon in the local

Presbyterian Church, Stowell gained respect as an industrious and frugal

pillar of the community. Based on his good character, he was initiated in

Friendship Lodge No. 129, of Bainbridge, between April and June of

1816.103 After spending considerable time in search of a lost Spanish

mine, Stowell made a visit to his son, Simpson Stowell, in Manchester,

where he met young Joseph Smith Jr.104 According to Lucy Mack

Smith, Josiah Stowell “came for Joseph on account of having heard that

he possessed certain keys, by which he could discern things invisible to

the natural eye.”105 The suggestion of “certain keys” is an important

piece of information as to Stowell’s motivations. The idea of “keys” by

which certain hidden information could be discerned was important

within Freemasonry, particularly in the Royal Arch rituals. Notably, later

editors of Lucy Mack Smith’s record uniformly substituted “means” for

“keys” in published versions of her memoirs, thus obscuring the Masonic

connotations of Lucy’s words.106

Stowell offered “high wages” for Joseph Jr.’s labor, but according to

his mother, the boy was reticent in accepting employment. This

reluctance on young Joseph’s part became even more evident during a

trial in 1826, when the sons of Josiah Stowell, fearing their father was

being cheated of their future inheritance, had Joseph Jr. arrested as a

“disorderly person and an Imposter” for “pretending” to find hidden

things in the earth.107 This trial was remarkable, if for no other reason

than the number of lodge members who became involved. Peter Goff

Bridgeman, the son and half-brother of lodge members Reuben

Bridgeman and Adna Bridgeman, formally brought charges. Local

constable Philip M. DeZeng, another member of Friendship No. 129,

took Joseph into custody, spending two days and one night with him

before delivering him to trial.108 Arad Stowell, another lodge member,

testified for the prosecution. Justice Albert Neely, who presided over the

hearing, was a Mason, as were the other two South Bainbridge judges,

Levi Bigelow and Zechariah Tarble.109

62

William D. Purple, of Greene, New York, was secretary of the local

lodge.110 Justice Neely assigned Purple to keep minutes of the trial, in

keeping with his experience in taking secretarial minutes. According to

his written notes, Joseph Sr. testified regarding his son’s gifts of seership,

and that

both he and his son were mortified that this wonderful power which God had so miraculously given him should be used only in search of filthy lucre, or its equivalent in earthly treasures . . . [and that] his constant prayer to his Heavenly Father was to manifest His will concerning this

marvelous power.111

Joseph Jr. would later downplay his involvement in the Josiah Stowell

diggings:

In the month of October Eighteen hundred and twenty five I hired with an old Gentleman, by name of Josiah Stoal who lived in Chenango County, State of New York. He had heard something of a silver mine having been opened by the Spaniards in Harmony, Susquahanah County, State of Pensylvania, and had previous to my hiring with him been digging in order if possible to discover the mine. After I went to live with he took me among the rest of his hands to dig for the silver mine, at which I continued to work for nearly a month without success in our undertaking, and finally I prevailed with the old gentleman to cease digging

after it. Hence arose the very prevalent story of my have been a money digger. 112

On another occasion, Joseph Jr. answered the question of “Was not Jo

Smith a money digger?” with, “Yes, but it was never a very profitable

job to him, as he only got fourteen dollars a month for it.”113 It seems

that both father and son believed that there was a higher purpose to their

treasure seeking, which they didn’t always achieve.

Nineteenth-century Latter-day Saints saw the Smiths’ treasure seeking

activities at least in part as allegorical, similar to how they appear in

Masonic ritual. This is admitted in an 1875 newspaper article:

The father had one favorite speculation: that of buried money—vast fortunes hidden with incantations and only to be exhumed with exorcising. This passion he indulged, and many were the pits dug by him in the search for the concealed treasures. . . . Believers in the faith see in this profession an allegory practically expressed of a searcher after truth in the locality

where that virtue is proverbally placed.114

Thus, the Smiths were physically expressing an allegorical activity.

Mormon writer Alan Taylor observed, “We cannot fully understand the

treasure seekers if we continue to think of them as simple anachronisms,

as practitioners of the timeless occult who were oblivious to, or

rebellious against, the larger, cosmopolitan culture’s trend toward

empirical rationalism.”115

Winning the Faculty of Abrac

63

Throughout these years, the Smith family continued their involvement

with the legends and quests associated with the Fraternity. In her

retrospective family history, written around 1845, Lucy Mack Smith

defended the family from accusations of slothfulness by insisting that

these pursuits did not cause them to disregard their obligations:

I shall change my theme for the present but let not my reader suppose that because I shall pursue another topic for a season that we stopt our labor and went trying to win the faculty of Abrac drawing Magic circles or sooth saying to the neglect of all kinds of buisness we never during our lives suffered one important interest to swallow up every other obligation but whilst we worked with our hands we endeavored to remmember the service of & the

welfare of our souls. 116

Lucy’s intended audience would have included over one thousand male

Mormons who had been initiated by that time into the Masonic fraternity.

Surely, therefore, she knew the implications that her words would carry.

Freemasons had long made use of the “Leland Manuscript,” a

document containing questions and answers about Freemasonry. It is

important for its accurate reflection of the traditions surrounding the

Fraternity during that time period.117 One of the most widely distributed

publications of the Leland Manuscript was in William Hutchinson’s The

Spirit of Masonry, which is quoted as follows:

Q. What dothe the Maconnes [Masons] concele and hyde?

A. They concelethe the arte of ffyndyng neue artes, and thattys for here own proffyte and preise, they concelethe the arte of kypynge secrettes, thatt so the worlde mayeth nothinge concele from them. Thay concelethe the art of wunderwerckynge, and of foresaynge thynges to comme, that so thay same artes may not be usedde of the wyckedde to an euyell [evil] ende; they also concelethe the arte of chaunges, the way of wynnynge the facultye of Abrac, the skill of becommyng gude and parfyghte wythouten the holpynges of fere and hope; and the

universelle longage [language] of Maconnes.118

It is noteworthy that Lucy used the precise wording of the Leland

Manuscript, “winning the faculty of Abrac.” Unfortunately, Mormon

authors have generally dismissed the Masonic significance of Lucy’s

words. Concentrating on folk magic, these historians have focused on

“Abrac” as a reference to healing or protective amulets. Many

representations exist showing the word “ABRACADABRA” at the top

of a descending triangle, with the word repeated on each line, minus one

letter, as follows:

ABRACADABRA

ABRACADABR

ABRACADAB

ABRACADA

ABRACAD

ABRACA

ABRAC

ABRA

64
