AB

A

Just as each line of the charm was diminished by one letter, so the

wearer’s malady was expected to diminish. This usage was exoteric, and

in some Masonic circles it functioned as a convenient way to deflect

inquiries from the deeper import of the faculty of Abrac. Hutchinson

wrote that he could hardly expect a non-Mason to be anything but “in the

dark” as to the meaning of the faculty of Abrac—yet he provided a

notably evasive answer:

Abrac is an abbreviation of the word Abracadabra. In the days of ignorance and superstition, that word had a magical signification, and was written in a certain form peculiar to the craft.

The explanation of it is now lost. 119

Likewise, Christian Freemason George Oliver wrote of this talismanic

use of Abrac as bringing “perpetual health and happiness, and protection

from temporal dangers.”120

Notably, no evidence has been found that any member of the Smith

family carried a version of the “Abracadabra” parchment amulet.121

Instead, they were likely to have understood the faculty of Abrac in light

of esoteric writings of Freemasons such as Albert Pike and George F.

Fort. These writers interpreted these workings as the obtaining of a

divine name—the “Lost Word” referred to repeatedly in Masonic ritual.

Discussing the nature of this quest, Pike wrote:

The True Word of a Mason is to be found in the concealed and profound meaning of the Ineffable Name of Deity, communicated by God to Moses; and which meaning was long lost by the very precautions taken to conceal it. The true pronunciation of that name was in truth a secret, in which, however, was involved the far more profound secret of its meaning. In that

meaning is included all the truth that can be known by us, in regard to the nature of God.122

Fort, writing in the mid-nineteenth century, acknowledged the

talismanic use of “Abracadabra” as an “irresistible charm to avert evil,

cure fevers, and dispel diseases, particularly if written in the shape of a

triad,” even to the point of early duelists being required to swear that

they were not carrying such a charm. He went further, however, to claim

that Jews believed that arrangements of the word “Abrac” were “all-

powerful and profound in mystical lore.” Moses, he said, used the name

“Jehovah,” or a substitute, “Schemhamphorasch,” to perform the

miracles that astounded the wizards of Egypt. Likewise, he claimed that

“Jews, in the time of Christ, boldly charged that the wonder workings of

our Savior were accomplished by means of the sacred word or

name.”123

65

Having suggested the power of the Divine Name, Fort proceeded to

explain the role of the faculty of Abrac therein:

After the correct pronunciation of the word, Jehovah, had become lost, substitutes seem to have been employed for purposes of magic and amulets. . . . Abrak, or abraksax, signifies also, according to Bellerman, “the adorable, blessed name,” and . . . corresponds exactly with . . . the unspeakable, omnific, and ineffable Tetragrammaton, the Jehovah of the Jews, both of which are engraven on abraxas stones. The word . . . has descended as an elemental portion of Freemasonry to the fifteenth century, and as representative of a lost name.

The “way of winning the faculty of abrac,” thus understood, signifies the means by which

the lost word may be recovered, or, at least, substituted. . . . When the faculty of acquiring [Abrac] had been gained by an investiture with [Masonic] craft secrets, a specific magical

power was attributed. 124

In other words, from the fifteenth through the nineteenth century,

Freemasons were understood to conceal, and reveal to initiates, the

means by which the sacred name of deity—the “lost word”—may be

discovered. This ability is suggested in a biblical passage quoted in the

Royal Arch degree: “To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the

hidden manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new

name written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it” (Rev.

2:17). Joseph Jr. would later expand upon this idea, teaching that after

the earth was purified,

Then the white stone mentioned in Rev. c 2 v 17 is the Urim & Thummim whereby all things pertaining to an higher order of kingdoms even all kingdoms will be made known and the a white stone is given to each of those who come into this the celestial kingdom, whereon is a new name written which no man knoweth save he that receiveth it. The new name is the key

word.125

Thus, Joseph Jr. combined the ideas of a seer stone (Urim &

Thummim) and the discovery of a sacred divine name. The Smith

family’s practice of “folk magic” was ultimately a means to one end—

that of winning the faculty of Abrac, or in other words, obtaining the

sacred lost name of God. Not only is this far from the supposition that

the Smiths were employing magic healing charms, but it is also essential

to understanding the treasure hunting activities of the family.

Researcher Clinton Bartholemew has noted three important Smith

family heirlooms that date to this period: a knife, a Jupiter talisman, and

a magical papyrus. The making of these esoteric items was outlined in

the occult writings of Henry Cornelius Agrippa:

According to D. Michael Quinn Agrippa’s book The Three Books of Occult Philosophy (DOP) was available in Palmyra. Why in particular was the Smith family interested in Agrippa’s work? As it turns out both Masons and Anti-Masons claimed that Agrippa had been one of the key founders of Masonry in Europe; and Masons contemporary with Joseph Smith spoke highly of Agrippa. Intriguingly, DOP also contains a cipher called the [aiq beker] cipher which

resembles the Royal Arch cipher, but it uses the Hebrew language.126

66

Rational Mysticism—Smith Style

The early American Republic was a heady brew of Enlightenment

philosophy, combined with measured doses of political, social, and

religious experimentation. During the period when Joseph Smith Jr.

came of age, the old folkways persisted in the cultural backwaters of

Vermont and New York State. Simultaneously, the rising tide of

rationalism dominated most of the educated population.127 Adding to

this mix were the many Protestant sects grown out of the Reformation.

Though supernatural elements remained, and progressive ideas were

often resisted, the churches of the Smiths’ day deliberately attempted to

purge magic from religion.

Freemasonry provided gentlemen with a means of engaging the

“religious pluralism and the social disorder of the early nineteenth

century,”128 seeking to blend and harmonize Enlightenment ideals with

religious belief into a kind of rational mysticism. David G. Hackett notes

that “in its emphasis on the recovery and restoration of ancient truth,

postwar Masonry resembled Protestant primitivism,” and that Masonry’s

rituals “paralleled . . . forward-pointing tendencies in

Evangelicalism.”129

The Smith family was immersed in the full spectrum of social issues of

the day. Asael Smith (Joseph Sr.’s father) and his eldest son Jesse laid

down the gauntlet on the side of Enlightenment philosophical notions.

They dismissed what they saw as the vagaries of revealed religion and

the irrational emotionalism of the organized churches of the day. They

held to reason as the ruling principle, where individuals obtain truth

through the rational power of the human mind. Yet, other members of the

extended family—including Joseph Sr.—sought to find a genial meeting

place between extremes. The spiritual significance of Joseph Sr.’s

treasure seeking and his belief in both the Bible and the need for

salvation suggest a reliance upon intuitive wisdom rather than strict

rationality. The appeal of Masonry as “a way of common men to

God”130 may have encouraged members of the Smith family who

wrestled with the issue of the relevance of institutional religion in an

increasingly rational age.

Throughout the post-Revolutionary period of Joseph Sr.’s lifetime and

during the childhood of his children, Freemasonry’s mythical history

saturated the collective unconscious of the nation. It provided a sense of

continuity with the past, appealing to the primitivist yearnings of many

67

men who intuitively felt that something—perhaps spiritual, political, or

personal innocence—had been lost. Masonic tradition and ritual made

measured use of non-rational methods in order to help the individual

transcend his conventional way of thinking about and experiencing the

world. Masonry provided an allegorical background that spiritualized the

physical act of treasure seeking. Prevalent in the communities in which

the Smiths lived, “digging in the earth” represented an exteriorization of

the desire to recover something buried deep within. Like many men in

ages of uncertainty, Joseph Smith Sr. certainly felt the sting of “That

Which Was Lost” and sought to restore it through the Masonic “working

of the Faculty of Abrac.”

The enchantment of the land where Joseph Smith Jr. was reared was

no common magic. It was the enchantment of the imagination: the belief

that humans lived in a world of endless spiritual possibility—the belief

that they could speak directly with God and with angels. America was a

new order for the ages; the hand of Providence had given Americans a

special role in history. Theirs was a new land of treasures lying just

beneath the earth, a land of ideas springing to life from human hearts, a

land in which dreams and allegories gained objective reality.

Notes

68

69

70

71

72

73

court hearing, wherein Joseph Jr. was tried as a “disorderly person and imposter.”

74

Standard Authors, 47, 104–5, an 1828 exposé ridiculing the Craft: “This is truly Free Masonry; the art of finding new arts, and the way of winning the faculty of Abrac.”

E

EVE

EVOVE

EVOLOVE

EVOLSLOVE

EVOLSISLOVE

EVOLSIDISLOVE

EVOLSIDODISLOVE

EVOLSIDOGODISLOVE

EVOLSIDODISLOVE

EVOLSIDISLOVE

EVOLSISLOVE

EVOLSLOVE

EVOLOVE

EVOVE

EVE

E

W. W. Phelps, “God is Love,” 144.

75
