A GATHERING OF CROWS: WILLIAM

MORGAN, MASONRY, AND DEATH

I conceive [of Freemasonry] to be founded on benevolence and to be

exercised for the good of mankind. If it has been a Cloak to promote

improper or nefarious objects it is a melacholly proof that in

unworthy hands, the best institutions may be made use of to promote

the worst designs.

—Attributed to George Washington

The deposition of Mary W. Hall, wife of the keeper of the Canandaigua jail, was splashed over every Ontario County newspaper. Her husband was away when a group of Freemasons made an evening call to collect one of the prisoners, she testified. After

negotiating the payment of his trifling debt, the men convinced her to

discharge the inmate. Hall heard a signal whistle and watched as they

hauled their quarry out the door, two of them having hold under his arms

on either side. The prisoner struggled and cried out in the most

distressing manner, but it was to no avail. One of the men struck a

violent warning blow to the curb with a stick, a carriage drew up, and

under a full, late autumn moon, William Morgan was unceremoniously

tossed inside.1

The Smith family was located at the epicenter of the greatest

excitement concerning Masonry in American history. As long as they

were able to hear a conversation or read a newspaper, they would have

known of the episode. The shocking events involving infamous

Freemason William Morgan scandalized the nation and powerfully

shaped the environment in which Mormonism first appeared.

Although he was destined to shake American society at its roots,

Morgan was born in virtual obscurity on what many writers have

accepted as August 7, 1774. His service as an army private in the War of

1812 led him to self-importantly title himself “Captain” Morgan. A few

years following the end of the war, he married Lucinda Pendleton, the

petite, blue-eyed daughter of a Methodist minister who was twenty-six

years her husband’s junior.2 Following the death of a baby daughter,

Morgan moved his family to Batavia, New York, where they obtained

76

lodging above the jewelry shop of Freemason George Washington

Harris.

While he may have cut a handsome figure when he courted the fair

Lucinda, Morgan did not age well. He was short and balding with a set

of supernumerary teeth conspicuous enough as to be described as

“double teeth all around.”3 Despite his somewhat odd appearance,

Morgan was adroit enough to win a respected place among New York

Masons for some time.

Morgan the Mason

Morgan’s Masonic career is as uncertain as his birth. Though he was

undoubtedly an operative Mason, historians have repeatedly noted that

no proof exists to demonstrate that Morgan received the three degrees of

Speculative, or Craft, Masonry. Masonic records of the period, however,

are notoriously incomplete. The first documented evidence of Morgan’s

involvement with the Fraternity appears at Rochester, where, according

to Judge Ebenezer Mix, Morgan claimed to have received his three

degrees in a lodge in Canada.4 If Morgan made any errors when being

examined at the door of the lodge by New York Masons, it could easily

be explained by the fact that Canadian ritual was somewhat different

than the American.5

Under the tutelage of Blanchard Powers, a Masonic “Grand Lecturer”

of the time, Morgan developed a reputation among nearby Masons for

his ritual skills, and he participated actively in degree work for various

lodges. He was considered a “bright Mason,” meaning he had a great

deal of skill and natural facility for ritual work.6 Samuel D. Greene

stated that when he became a member of Batavia Lodge No. 433 in

December 1825, Morgan was not only an active lecturer in the Lodge but

also his coach in learning the necessary catechism.7

Whether or not Morgan had been legitimately made a Mason, his skill

persuaded local Royal Arch Masons that he was not only a Master

Mason in good standing but that he had received the additional degrees

of Mark Master, Past Master, and Most Excellent Master. As such, he

was considered qualified as a candidate for Royal Arch Masonry and

was subsequently exalted (the Masonic term for receiving the Royal

Arch degree) on May 31, 1825, in Western Star Chapter No. 35 at nearby

LeRoy, New York.8

77

Yet, Morgan’s signature was quietly dropped from a petition by Royal

Arch Masons requesting a charter for a new Royal Arch chapter in

Batavia.9 When the charter was granted, Morgan was surprised to find

that he was not included as a member and harsh feelings ensued.10

Stung by this rejection, Morgan began plotting to avenge himself by

exposing the Masonic fraternity. Perhaps intentionally, he was overheard

in public places sharing his plans, and word soon spread throughout the

area. At first, many Masons were indifferent to Morgan’s threats. He was

not, after all, the first to publish an account of the three degrees of

Ancient Craft Masonry.11 As the winter snows began to melt in 1826,

Morgan filed an application for copyright on a work to be entitled

Illustrations of Masonry, intentionally mimicking and mocking two

standard Masonic monitors of the same title. Preston’s Illustrations of

Masonry, popular in the United Kingdom, was an aide de memoire for

the lectures of the first three degrees. In the United States, Thomas Smith

Webb’s was another popular book so named. A “monitor” such as

Preston’s and Webb’s includes only the non-secret parts of a ritual. By

contrast, Morgan’s version was an exposé. Freemasons in the United

States were shocked and disturbed to learn that he planned to make

public for the first time in this country the ritual of the Holy Royal Arch

—including the carefully guarded “Omnific Word” and its “Covering

Word”—that he had promised never to reveal.

On March 13 of that year, Morgan contracted printer David C. Miller

and others to produce the work. Some twenty years earlier, Miller had

taken the first degree of Freemasonry (Entered Apprentice) and failed a

ballot within his lodge to receive further degrees.12

The activities of Morgan immediately after filing for his copyright are

somewhat unclear, though it can be assumed he was working on his

manuscript.13 A Batavia pro-Masonic newspaper holds a key to

Morgan’s whereabouts at the time:

In the spring of 1826, he [Morgan] was absent, and the general impression among his acquaintance was, that he had absconded—at least he had gone to parts unknown.—During Morgan’s absence, his wife had her second child, and claimed assistance from Masons for the necessaries of life, as she said Morgan was a Royal Arch Mason. . . . During this period, it

since appears that Morgan was in Ontario county, writing his “Book.”14

The seat of Ontario County was Canandaigua, the same town where

Joseph Smith Sr. had become a member of Ontario Lodge No. 23. While

one newspaper advertisement confirms Morgan spent at least part of

78

May 1826 in Canandaigua, the busy commercial and social hub would

have been a difficult place to remain hidden while writing a manuscript.

Interestingly, Ontario County also included the village of Manchester,

location of the Smith family farm. John Whitney, one of the principal

conspirators in the Morgan disappearance (and relative of prominent

early Mormon, Newel K. Whitney), reported in later years that Morgan

“had been a half way convert of Joe Smith, the Mormon, and had learned

from him to see visions and dream dreams.”15 LDS scholars have

generally dismissed this claim, but surrounding circumstances suggest

that Morgan may indeed have had connections with the Smith family. If

Morgan spent the spring of 1826 in Ontario County, he may have had a

rare opportunity to become acquainted with Joseph Smith Jr. After being

employed by Josiah Stowell to search for a rumored Spanish silver mine

near South Bainbridge, Joseph Jr. had been brought up on charges of

being a fraudulent “glass looker” in March of 1826. According to some

sources, the twenty-year-old treasure seer had been allowed to escape

conviction by leaving the area for at least six months.16 Assuming

Joseph Jr. spent those six months back at home, he was present in

Ontario County at the same time as Morgan.

Another possibility is that “Joe Smith, the Mormon” referred to Joseph

Sr., who was a Masonic peer of John Whitney and closer in age to

Morgan. Lucy Mack Smith’s narrative demonstrates that Joseph Sr. was

a “dreamer of dreams,” while the Smith family’s interest in “working the

faculty of Abrac” may have held the interest of a spiritually minded

“bright” Mason. Joseph Sr.’s later actions as a patriarch in Missouri

would reveal his sympathies for the deceased anti-Masonic martyr (see

the end of this chapter).

Whisperings and Warnings

Once he returned to Batavia, Morgan’s efforts were met with prompt

opposition. On August 9, 1826, the following unsigned notice appeared

in Canandaigua and other nearby newspapers:

NOTICE AND CAUTION

If a man calling himself William Morgan should intrude himself on the community, they should be on their guard, particularly the MASONIC FRATERNITY. Morgan was in this village in May last, and his conduct while here and elsewhere, calls forth this notice. Any information in relation to Morgan can be obtained by calling at the MASONIC HALL in this village. Brethren and Companions are particularly requested to observe, mark and govern themselves accordingly.

—Morgan is considered a swindler and a dangerous man.

—There are people in this village who would be happy to see this Capt. Morgan.17

79

Samuel Greene, a nominal Mason at the time, was disturbed by the call

upon “brethren and companions,” in the language of the ritual, to

“observe, mark, and govern themselves accordingly.” Even to a man of

his limited inside understanding, this seemed a “distinct summons to acts

of violence, and to spread the intelligence far and wide.”18 A

“whispering campaign” began to disseminate reports of Morgan and

Miller’s poor character. Word spread among local Masons that Morgan’s

publication must be stopped.19 Using their positions as law enforcement

officers, they arrested their quarry on charges of nonpayment of debts

and searched his lodgings for the offending manuscript. Feelings among

the brethren became so heated that an effort was organized to burn

Miller’s printing office. By his own heroic account, Greene could no

longer remain silent. He wrote a note of warning that he delivered to

George W. Harris: “Compressing this paper into a shapeless wad, as

small that it might be crowded into a thimble, I called at Mr. Harris’s

door, and said to him, ‘I have important intelligence to communicate . . .’

I threw the roll upon his counter, and left him suddenly.”20

Little is known of silversmith and future Mormon George Harris’s part

in blocking the arson attempt. But in his shop below the Morgans’

apartment, he was well situated to provide warning. Thomas Knight, pro-

Masonic writer, avowed that Harris was “keeping track of Morgan’s

most intimate movements.” It is a matter of record that soon after the

aborted scheme, at a regular communication of Batavia Lodge on August

15, 1826, Harris was “expelled by a unanimous vote of said lodge, for

the enormous depravity of his Masonic conduct.” The Republican

Farmers’ Free Press elaborated, stating the “enormity” for which Harris

was expelled “consisted in apprizing his friend, Captain Morgan, that the

Batavia Lodge was making arrangements to destroy him.”21

Harris’s efforts to protect William Morgan proved to be in vain. On the

auspicious date of September 11, 1826, an event occurred that caused

repercussions to shake the country and topple the grand edifice of

Freemasonry nearly to ground level. Upon the accusation of Freemason

Ebenezer Kingsley that Morgan had neglected to return a borrowed shirt

and cravat, two men seized the bewildered reprobate in Batavia and

brought him to the county jail in Canandaigua. The fifty-mile trip was

made necessary due to a series of highly questionable, coordinated

actions on the part of a mob of Masons living in several surrounding

communities.22

80

Upon his appearance before the justice of the peace in Canandaigua,

Morgan was released on the larceny charge. Immediately, however, he

was rearrested on an uncollected debt of $2.68. Unable to satisfy the debt

on the spot, Morgan was held in the Canandaigua Jail. From here, he was

whisked away in the jailer’s absence.23 Following his removal, little is

certain as to Morgan’s fate. Most witnesses agree that he was taken to a

series of towns along the route from Canandaigua to the United States

fort at Niagara, with a change of horses and escorts at each location.

The first change took place at the tiny village of Victor, New York,

home to Milnor Lodge No. 303. Located less than twelve miles from

Canandaigua, Milnor Lodge was deeply affected by the Morgan

kidnapping. Depositions in the case described the abductors’

tempestuous passage through western New York, including details such

as the exchange of horses with other Masons in villages along the way

beginning at Victor.24 At least four members of Milnor Lodge were later

identified as principals in the kidnapping: James Gillis, Loton Lawson,

John Sheldon, and John Whitney.25 Another young and recent member

of the Lodge, however, would later figure prominently in Mormon

history. A newly established local potter, Heber C. Kimball had been a

Master Mason in Milnor Lodge for less than a year. As a relatively new

member of the lodge, he may well have been involved in providing the

change of horses at Victor. Whatever information Kimball knew of the

circumstances he never revealed. He would later testify to his strict

faithfulness to Masonic obligations, including keeping a brother Master

Mason’s vouchsafed secrets: “I have been as true as an angel from the

heavens to the covenants I made in the lodge at Victor.”26 After

enduring several additional changes of horses and drivers, Morgan was

handed over to Niagara County Sheriff Eli Bruce, who held him prisoner

in the powder room at Fort Niagara for a short time. It is the last place

Morgan was seen alive.

81

The Abduction of William Morgan. From Edmund Ollier, Cassells History of the United States,

1874.

David C. Miller, Morgan’s printer, claimed to have been falsely

arrested on a civil warrant, released by the justice of the peace, then

harassed by his captors, all in an effort to keep him from his printing

office while it was being vandalized.27 This commotion, however, did

nothing to prevent the publication of an exposé he attributed to Morgan.

On December 15, 1826, Miller published the following notice:

Just published

And for Sale at The Advocate Office.

The First Part of Masonry Unveiled,

containing a full Exposition of the Secrets and Ceremonies of that ‘Ancient and Honorable’

Order.

FREE MASONRY

And God Said, “Let there be Light and there was light.”

The remaining part is now in press, and will shortly be published. 28

Due to repeated invasions of Morgan’s and Miller’s offices, it is

difficult to say how much of Miller’s publication was actually prepared

by William Morgan. Distinct similarities were drawn to the earlier

Jachin and Boaz, suggesting that Miller may have cribbed the

manuscript and attributed it to his lost partner.29 More importantly, this

“first part” included only the three Craft Lodge degrees with nothing

from Royal Arch Masonry. No “second part” was ever published.

82
