Because William Morgan was never seen again after September 1826,

a great mystery grew up around the event. Several speculations as to his

fate appeared in the press of the day. One writer suggested that as part of

the acknowledged negotiations between Morgan and local Masons, he

was handed off to Canadian Masons with a sum of cash under promise to

start a new, anonymous life. Some Masonic sympathizers claimed

sightings of Morgan as a simple farmer in Upper Canada, “the first

honest work he ever voluntarily engaged in.”30 Various other fanciful

stories circulated, such as Morgan being hanged as a pirate in 1838,

fleeing to Turkey, or living on the “Island of Deseret” in St. Lawrence

Bay.31

Others, however, were not so optimistic about Morgan’s fate.

Accusations of murder flew through the countryside assuming Morgan to

have been drowned in the Niagara River. He had been kidnapped by

Royal Arch Freemasons and never seen again. It was as though a

gathering of crows had settled upon him and carried him away without a

trace.

In October 1827—nearly thirteen months after Morgan’s

disappearance—an unidentified body was recovered from Oak Orchard

Creek, a tributary of Lake Ontario. One week after the local coroner,

Robert Brown, buried the body, he was approached by Thurlow Weed,

an anti-Masonic newspaperman from Rochester, and others who

suspected the body might be the remains of William Morgan. Weed

orchestrated a public exhumation attended by nearly two hundred

onlookers. Two medical professionals expressed doubts that the corpse

was in the advanced state of decay expected from one who had been

dead so long. But many of Morgan’s acquaintances stepped up to

positively identify the body down to the double row of teeth. Included in

this group were the widow of the deceased and his neighbor, George W.

Harris. No sooner was the body released to the family and reburied in

Batavia that another claim was made concerning the identity of the

corpse. The wife of Timothy Munro of Canada, who had drowned in the

Niagara River a month before, was brought forward by a group of

Masons to present an alternative claim. Thurlow Weed found it

disturbing that she was able to describe minute details of the clothing

worn by the victim, but that the features of the body she described

differed substantially from the coroner’s report.32 Once again, the body

was raised from the grave before a crowd of onlookers. This time,

83

Weed’s politically motivated anti-Masonic attempt to demonstrate that a

murder had indeed taken place was foiled. A jury at the scene was unable

to unequivocally decide that the remains were those of Morgan. With no

body, Freemasons were exonerated from the charge of murder,

kidnapping now being the most serious crime that could be charged.

The coincidental correspondence to the three burials of Hiram Abiff

(see Chapters 1 and 17) could not have escaped the Masons when the

corpse was buried a third and final time.

Convention of Seceding Masons

The disappearance of Morgan became a national obsession, focused on

the vicinities of Le Roy and Batavia, fifty miles from Palmyra. New

York Governor DeWitt Clinton, a prominent Masonic leader in the

country, issued two proclamations seeking information on Morgan’s true

whereabouts. Throughout the region, citizens banded into anti-Masonic

groups, having both spiritual and political motives.

One such citizen group styled itself the “Convention of Seceding

Masons.” At a meeting on July 4, 1828, the group drafted a widely

circulated “Declaration of Independence from the Masonic

Institution.”33 While reasons listed for separation from the Fraternity

echoed claims made in a variety of anti-Masonic publications, the

declaration illustrates how close to home (figuratively and literally) the

anti-Masonic movement was for the Smith family. Signers included

prominent authors of anti-Masonic books, including David Bernard,

David C. Miller, Solomon Southwick, and John G. Stearns. Others were

more directly connected with the Smiths. One signer of the declaration,

Timothy C. Strong, had been a member of Mount Moriah Lodge No. 112

at Palmyra. He was a newspaper publisher in Middlebury, Vermont,

before moving to Palmyra, New York, in September 1817. In 1823, he

sold his Palmyra newspaper to fellow Masons Egbert B. Grandin (soon

to become printer of the Book of Mormon) and Pomeroy Tucker.34

Furthermore, six of the signers had recently been expelled from Federal

Lodge No. 15, the lodge to which Smith family members had

belonged.35 Traveling approximately three hundred and fifty miles, the

party would have passed close by the Palmyra area on their way to the

convention.

The timing of the Convention of Seceding Masons at Batavia

coincided with notable events in Mormon history. From April to June,

Joseph Smith Jr. worked on his translation of the Book of Mormon with

84

Martin Harris as his scribe. Harris, a mature, bearded veteran of the War

of 1812, was politically active on an anti-Mason vigilance committee

near Palmyra, and his farm was situated close to the course of the Erie

Canal. In the summer of 1828, Harris had just returned from his visits to

Utica, Albany, and New York City in an attempt to obtain endorsements

of translations of the Book of Mormon characters from noted scholars.

The endeavor was beginning to be publicized far and wide and would

surely have been known and discussed by at least the journalists in the

group. In mid-June, Smith allowed Harris to take the translated pages to

his farm to show his skeptical family. Harris would have had the

manuscript in his possession during the last two weeks of June, just at

the time that any seceding Masons would have been passing through the

area on their way to the conference held July 4 and 5. Whether any of

those who were disaffiliating with Freemasonry were able to view the

pages of what Harris would term “the anti-Masonic Bible,”36 or if they

had anything to do with the manuscript’s coincident disappearance, is

unknown but physically possible.

The declaration’s third signer was William Wines Phelps, former

editor of Tompkins County’s anti-Masonic newspaper Lake Light. The

first issue had been published on October 10, 1827, and Phelps

announced his formal renunciation of Masonry three months later on

January 14:

Considering secret societies incompatible with the principles and derogatory to the constitution of a free government; living in a land of liberty;—being engaged in conducting a paper devoted to “equality to all,”—and having been regularly initiated, passed and raised to the degree of Master Mason, I hereby withdraw myself from any connexion with masonic

lodges, and renounce the self-organized institution of free masonry. . . . W. W. PHELPS.37

Shortly thereafter, Phelps moved to Canandaigua, where he published a

similarly critical newspaper, The Ontario Phoenix, and involved himself

heavily with the Anti-Masonic Convention in LeRoy. Phelps converted

to Mormonism within the next three years.

The Question of Freemasonry

At the Morgan trial in January of 1827, Judge Throop sentenced

several men accused in the kidnapping of William Morgan.38 Of the

handful of people who were tried and convicted, Eli Bruce received the

harshest sentence. Bruce was the sheriff of Niagara County, New York,

and Worshipful Master of the lodge in Lockport, located on the shores of

Lake Ontario. This county official apparently used his office to arrange

the location for Morgan’s imprisonment in the battery of Fort Niagara.

85

Bruce spent a scant twenty-eight months in jail for his part in the affair.

During that time, he shared a cell with Joseph Smith Sr., who was in

prison for debts.39 Lucy Smith’s comments that her husband shared a

cell with “a man committed for murder” may provide insight into the

Smith family’s opinions on Freemasonry at the time.40 Eli Bruce, of

course, had not been imprisoned for the crime of murder, since the body

of William Morgan had never been found. Lucy’s words, however,

reflect her opinion on whether the Masons had killed Morgan.

As the Smiths were close to the participants and events of the Morgan

affair, it is natural that they would wrestle with the “question of

Freemasonry.” How could an institution like Freemasonry—believed by

many to be of divine origin and claiming stewardship of sacred Christian

mysteries—be engaged in such behavior as kidnapping, murder, and

conspiracy? The information that Hyrum Smith was a dues-paying

member of Mount Moriah Lodge in 1826 demonstrates that they may

have believed something remained in Freemasonry worth preserving. His

brother Joseph’s own answer to that question unfolded over time,

culminating in the theological developments in Nauvoo, Illinois, over a

decade later.

The appearance of a broad Masonic conspiracy among different

locations and lodges, the seeming obstruction of justice by well-placed

Masons in the court system, and the refusal of Masonic witnesses to

testify set off a great anti-Masonic furor in the United States. Citizens

became aroused by the apparent effort of leaders of the Masonic order to

shield, if not exonerate, the abductors of Morgan.

Presses were mobilized both for and against the Masons. The country

became flooded with almanacs containing ritual scenes, books with ritual

exposés, and travelling troupes publicly performing burlesques of the

degrees. Bernard’s Light on Masonry, published in 1829 in Albany, New

York, included over forty rituals, representing the single largest exposure

of Masonic degrees to that date. Between 1827 and 1830, Masonic

bibliographer Kent L. Walgren cites the publication of nineteen anti-

Masonic Almanacs, six proceedings of New York anti-Masonic

conventions, and no less than 365 American publications on the subject

of William Morgan.41 One author noted that between December 1826

and September 1827, twenty anti-Masonic conventions were held in New

York State, half of which were within a short distance of the Smith farm

at Manchester.42 And in December 1827, two to three thousand

protestors confronted about two hundred Masons participating in their

86

annual St. John’s Day festival in Batavia.43 So strong was this new

opposition to Masonry that the nation’s first plausible third political

party, the Anti-Masonic Party, formed over the loudly proclaimed threat

of American Freemasonry and elected large numbers of its candidates to

office. It was within this charged atmosphere that Joseph Smith Jr.

matured from diviner to prophet.

It would be difficult to overstate the excitement and outcry transpiring

during this time. Anti-Masonry was ubiquitous in Joseph Smith’s New

York, making information regarding the Craft both directly and indirectly

available to the enquiring mind. Public opinion came down largely

against the fraternity, and scores of Freemasons renounced their

membership. This led to hundreds of lodges throughout the country

being forced to close, decimating Masonry in the United States for

decades.

For many, Masonry as a social institution was dead.44 Freemasons

were chagrined over the resulting losses in both membership and in

public trust. They bemoaned what they perceived as the hypocrisy of the

anti-Masons, pointing out that it was anti-Masonry itself that had almost

overnight become a political juggernaut, grinding to dust a harmless

society dedicated to Christian principles. For anti-Masons, the

conspirators who killed Morgan brought upon themselves the just

condemnation of all good men of conscience. Anti-Masonic jeremiads

trumpeted the evils of the Fraternity and warned against the imminent

destruction it would surely bring upon the nation:

The disclosures made by Capt. Morgan, and the atrocious act of violence in consequence thereof which deprived him of liberty and life, instigated by high dignitaries of the order far and near, executed by an extensive band of Masonic conspirators, and since, very frequently justified by Masons . . . confirmed the truth of those disclosures, and evinced the deep depravity of speculative Masonry; –these circumstances opened my eyes. . . . My own reflections, and the facts and arguments which have since come in my way, have convinced me of the utter depravity, the absurdity, and dangerous and pernicious tendency of the institution. . . . It truly pains me to know, that Free Masonry is not the noble and beautiful

system I vainly fancied it to be.45

With near-evangelical zeal, anti-Masonic societies published books,

papers, tracts, and almanacs, all devoted to the proposition that

Freemasonry was fundamentally demoralizing and harmful to American

liberties. In the worst telling, the institution of Freemasonry was little

more than a murderous gang, seeking political and social power through

covert means and combining to shield “wicked and designing men”

harboring murderous designs. 46 Anti-Masons opined Masonry deserved

87

to be utterly destroyed as a just and necessary defense of the common

good.47

Both in and out of the Fraternity were those who were pained that

Freemasonry, once held in “the highest regard,” failed to live up to its

reputation as a “noble and beautiful system” based as it was “on the

immutable principles of the purest morality; as having existed from time

immemorial, and been patronized by the wise and good in all enlightened

and civilized nations.”48 It was an astounding turn that an organization

believed by many to have existed since the creation of the world, and to

be of divine origin, could be brought low in the matter of a few short

years.49 How could this be true of an institution that professed that its

principles shared “the same co-eternal and unshaken foundation,”

contained and inculcated “in substance, the same truths,” and proposed

“the same ultimate end, as the doctrines of Christianity”?50 Freemasons

claimed that Cain and his offspring did not share in the secrets of

Masonry, yet Masons apparently shared in the sins of Cain.51 Not only

did they combine to destroy William Morgan, they also conspired to

cover it up.

To one who sought a reason for such betrayal of principle, it may have

seemed that Freemasonry had its origins with Cain, after all. Or perhaps

Masonry had begun pure, but had since fallen into sin and error. Perhaps

like their Tyrian predecessors, Masons had allowed their Craft to

degenerate into a spurious imitation of the pure, authentic tradition.

The False and the True

William Morgan may have disappeared, but Lucinda had not. While

the late turncoat was eulogized, his young widow was the darling of the

presses and an object of national pity and charity for both Masons and

anti-Masons. On several occasions, the Fraternity offered Mrs. Morgan

money, accommodations, and assistance. However, Lucinda would not

accept their aid, as she looked upon them as “the guilty authors of all her

troubles.”52 On February 1, 1830, Lucinda wrote to an anti-Masonic

charity group acknowledging receipt of their gift of fifty dollars, which

had been presented to her by George W. Harris. She wrote of the comfort

their thoughtful gesture had afforded her “though [she was] destitute of

property and bereaved of him to whom [she] was accustomed to look for

support for [herself] and [her] infant children, by a merciless and cruel

institution.” Readers of Lucinda’s thank-you letter may discover she had

88

a similar perspective on the institution of Freemasonry as some of the

other seceding Masons. “My bereavement,” she wrote, “will contribute

to the happiness of the present, as well as future generations, in the total

eradication of 53 ” Her words seem indicative of a false Free Masonry.

belief in spurious Masonry, which had become corrupted and needed to

be eradicated, while leaving open the possibility of a true and restored

form of the Craft.

In the shakeup of Freemasonry following the Morgan affair, some

Masons held fast to their views while others renounced the institution,

many suspending their membership. This last group of men agreed with

criticisms that Masonry had become tainted, and they desired to find a

mechanism to bring about the restoration of the ancient and pure form.

Such a restoration, they knew, would require a prophet equal to

Solomon, Hiram of Tyre, and Hiram Abiff.

George Washington Harris was one who would find such a prophet.

He joined the ranks of signers of the “Declaration of Independence from

the Masonic Institution” at the Convention of Seceding Masons at

Batavia. Sixteen months later, on November 23, 1830, he married

William Morgan’s widow.54 This union agitated Masons and anti-

Masons alike. Fifty-four-year-old George and his still-young wife and

her children moved to Indiana in an attempt to remove themselves from

the center of the Morgan controversy.

In the fall of 1834, Orson Pratt came to Terre Haute, Indiana, as a

missionary. Pratt “preached a few times, and baptized George W. Harris

and his wife.”55 In late 1837, the Harris family abandoned their home

and silkworm farm in Indiana and gathered to “Zion” in the state of

Missouri with a group of Latter-day Saints. Here, Harris owned one of

the more substantial houses in Far West and became a church leader

serving on the high council. He would also meet the Joseph Smith Jr.

family as they fled to Missouri amid growing dissent and legal problems

in Ohio. Harris hospitably offered a portion of the building to Smith for

his living quarters and office, and he provided for the Smiths during the

first two months of their sojourn in Missouri.56 Some historians believe

that it was here that Smith introduced the principle of plural marriage to

the Harrises and married Lucinda in a polyandrous union.57

During this period, on September 2, 1838, Joseph Smith Sr., patriarch

of the Church, took the opportunity to give a patriarchal blessing to both

George and Lucinda. Such a blessing contained a declaration of sacred

89

lineage coupled with individualized prophecy. The ritual prayers were

transcribed by Ebenezer Robinson, scribe and recorder. Lucinda’s

blessing identified her as “Daughter of Joseph Pendleton, and wife of

George Washington Harris, and formerly wife of William Morgan.”

Joseph Sr. promised Lucinda that she had been cleansed of sin: “Thy

name is written in heaven the Lamb’s Book of life, thy sins are forgiven

thee, and there is no stain upon thee.” Additionally, he added words of

comfort concerning her deceased husband:

I feel to say thy husband is in the Paradise of God, thou shalt strike hands with him in the Celestial Kingdom, and sing a song of Zion. Thy children shall be blessed with thee, and I seal the seal of God upon thee, and I bless thee with the blessings of God; and I seal thee up unto

Eternal life in the name of Jesus Christ, even so, Amen.58

While many Masons saw William Morgan as a deceitful traitor, Joseph

Sr. saw him as destined to inherit the highest glory within Mormon

theology. In 1841, when the practice of baptism for the dead was

revealed, Morgan was one of the first to receive the vicarious ordinance.

Notes

90

due to lack of proper vouchers.” See the Masonic Intelligencer (March 14, 1827), cited in Stephen Dafoe, Morgan: The Scandal that Shook Freemasonry, 41n35.

91

92

93
