FROM DARKNESS TO LIGHT: THE

PROPHET’S MASONIC INITIATION

Brother, to you the secrets of Masonry are about to be unveiled, and

a brighter sun never shone lustre on your eyes.

—Master’s observations to the newly obligated Entered

Apprentice, in William Morgan, Illustrations of Masonry

People in all societies through all ages have engaged in the making and performing of ritual. It helps to ground them in the world, find meaning in their personal and collective experiences, and discover the significance of their lives. Rituals fulfill human desire for

order, creativity, and what theologian Tom F. Driver calls communitas.

“Their business in society,” he writes, “is to effect transformations that

cannot otherwise be brought about.” Driver explains that the

performance of a ritual “articulates something” difficult to put into words

and brings myths and symbols into being.1 Ritual contains an innate

power that, when enacted, triggers internal change. When these rituals

are shared, the resulting transformation builds a sense of community

spirit.

In both Freemasonry and in Christianity, this potent change is known

as “illumination” or “enlightenment.” Both traditions are premised upon

the notion that men are asleep to the innate truth of the nature of the

world. Without the regeneration of consciousness brought about by true

initiation, they cannot perceive the relationship between themselves and

the outer manifest world. Enlightenment, initiated by ritual, provides that

fundamental shift in perception that transforms faulty understandings.

Ritual helps bridge the gap between the ordinary world of human

experience and the innate holiness concealed in everyday objects.

The Masonic Rite of Illumination

As its ceremonies are largely based upon mystical Christian tradition,

it is perhaps unsurprising that Freemasonry is largely an exercise in

spiritual transformation, initiated by the Rite of Illumination. This rite, in

which the candidate is symbolically “brought to light,” is a fundamental

aspect of the Ancient Craft Degrees. Without it, the candidate is unable

94

to successfully recover what Masonry describes as “That Which Was

Lost.”

The Masonic candidate is sent on a symbolic search for light (i.e.,

truth) in the darkness of a fallen world. To convey this emblematically,

he is blindfolded and bound with a cable-tow, symbolizing the darkness

and impotence of ignorance. The seeker is then brought to the door of the

lodge, where he knocks and asks for light. Once admitted, the

candidate’s first ritual act is to “kneel for the benefit of prayer” as a

token of his trust in God’s power to lead him through the darkness of an

unregenerate world. Alluding to this mortal sojourn, the candidate is led

in a circumambulation of the lodge. At the apex of his journey, he finds

himself at the altar of Masonry, where he is placed under covenant and

“brought to light.”2 He then receives the symbolic “secrets” of the

degree: the light or knowledge that he came to the door seeking.

The purpose of this ritual in the first degree (Entered Apprentice) is to

provide a “shock” that wakes an initiate to his true condition and the

condition of the world. The fundamental premise is that the mind is dark,

confused, and even chaotic. Illuminating light dispels that darkness,

allowing a person to act in a rational and spiritually informed manner.

Ritual forms are useful in exteriorizing internal landscapes and objects,

allowing participants to see and work with them. Masons recognize the

difference between ordinal initiation (found in ordinance and ritual) and

real initiation (grounded in experience).3 Ordinal initiation plants a seed

in the subconscious mind, which, nourished by water and warmed by the

sun of life’s experiences, is intended to blossom and grow into a tangible

and real event.

An example of this is found in the conversion experience of Charles

Grandison Finney, a Master Mason who became a well-known

nineteenth-century evangelist. Writer Mark Carnes has shown how

Finney used the ordinal ritual of Masonry to describe his religious

conversion experience:

Much as the initiate circumambulated the temple, Finney set himself in motion to find places to pray, traveling first to a “kind of closet” in the woods and going later into a back room in his house. Masons, after journeying around the lodge, searched for their departed master, Hiram Abiff; Finney received as revelation a passage of Scripture concerning a similar quest:

“Then shall ye seek me and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart.” 4

Carnes continues by comparing the metaphysical journey of a Mason

toward “more light” with Finney’s preoccupation with light and secrecy.

He saw Jesus Christ in a darkened back room that nonetheless appeared

“perfectly light.” When he confided his vision to a church elder, the man

95

laughed at him, and a darkness came over Finney. This was dispelled the

following morning when he awakened to the sun “pouring a clear light”

into the room.

Later in his life, Finney came to believe that fraternal ritual provided a

kind of “counterfeit salvation.” Nonetheless, Finney’s experience was a

materialization of what he learned in the Rite of Illumination, and the rite

provided a framework to grasp the significance of his vision.5

Accounts of the First Vision

The foundational myth of the Latter-day Saint movement is Joseph

Smith Jr.’s “First Vision” account of seeing God the Father and Jesus

Christ, with the earliest surviving record of his vision being a

handwritten account of his early life written in 1832.6 Other extant first-

person accounts of Smith’s vision were histories he dictated to his

scribes in 18357 8 and 1838, a historical sketch solicited by journalist

John Wentworth in 1842,9 and an interview with David Nye White

(editor of the Pittsburgh Weekly Gazette 10 ) in 1843. Four additional

accounts were written previous to Smith’s death by contemporaries who

heard him speak about the vision. These include Orson Pratt’s 1840

account, published as a pamphlet in Scotland;11 Orson Hyde’s 1842

account, translated into German for publication in Frankfurt;12 Levi

Richards’s diary account of an 1843 public church meeting;13 and

Alexander Neibaur’s 1844 journal account of a visit to the Smith home,

where Joseph related the circumstances of his experience.14

These various accounts were written twelve to twenty-four years after

the vision was said to have occurred. By the time of the earliest 1832

telling, it appears the story had developed a fixed structure. In each of

the accounts, the elements are arranged in precisely the same order, an

order mirroring the Masonic Rite of Illumination. As in Charles Finney’s

case, Smith chose to clothe his experience in Masonic garb, implying his

exposure to the ritual from an early date.

In the several accounts of the First Vision, Smith described his

confusion “in matters that involve eternal consequences.”15 As

described in early nineteenth-century sources, the Rite of Initiation of an

Entered Apprentice into a Masonic lodge is symbolic of the individual

search for knowledge and understanding. This provides a perfect

structure for transmitting Smith’s encounter with the Divine. What a

96

Mason receives through types, figures, and allegory was literalized in

Smith’s experience, and then re-ritualized for his followers; not only did

the First Vision story develop into a ritualistic narrative, but the Mormon

prophet later developed the initiation experience into temple ritual in

Kirtland and finally in Nauvoo.

Setting

Each account of the First Vision begins with prefatory remarks

discussing the reason for the telling, as well as explanatory details that

lead to the heavenly vision. In an early version, Joseph Smith states his

intention to provide a “brief history of the establishment of the Church of

Christ in these last days.”16 In doing so, he expresses a concern with the

skepticism of the public and a desire that true and honest seekers will

receive correct information. Three years later, in what became the

official account of his vision, he elaborated:

Owing to the many reports which have been put in circulation by evil disposed and designing persons in relation to the rise and progress of the Church of Latter day Saints, all of which have been designed by the authors thereof to militate against its character as a church, and its progress in the world; I have been induced to write this history so as to disabuse the publick mind, and put all enquirers after truth into possession of the facts as they have transpired in

relation both to myself and the Church.17

After establishing the setting for his story, Smith gave the details of his

birth and family background. His experiences in his immediate

environment had prepared him in a significant way for his visionary

encounter. As an Entered Apprentice Mason is examined to ensure he is

worthy and prepared, Smith presented the reader with his own proven

qualifications. Masonic lodges generally require that candidates come of

their own free will, believe in a Supreme Being, and be of good morals

and good reputation. Additionally, lodges have age and residence

requirements. Notably, Smith mentioned all these conditions. He wrote

that he was the child “of goodly Parents who spared no pains to instruct

me in christian religion,”18 satisfying the Masonic requirement

that an applicant be “worthy and well qualified.”19 Anderson’s

Constitutions specified that “a Mason is oblig’d, by his Tenure, to obey

the moral Law; and if he rightly understands the Art, he will never be a

stupid Atheist, nor an irreligious Libertine.”20 Besides declaring his

upbringing as a Christian, Smith identified his various residences:

“When ten years old my parents removed to Palmyra New York, where

we resided about four years, and from thence we removed to the town of

97

Manchester.”21 His experience took place “sometime in the second year

after our removal to Manchester.”22 The accounts vary with regard to

Smith’s exact age at the time of the vision: he was about fourteen years

old,23 which was his “fifteenth year,”24 or “in the sixteenth year of my

age.”25 The age of fourteen hearkened back to the days of Craft

Masonry, when a boy was required to work as an apprentice for seven

years until he reached his majority at twenty-one and became a

craftsman.

In William Morgan’s exposure of the Entered Apprentice degree, the

Senior Deacon asks a question before the Candidate is presented at the

door of the lodge: “Is he duly and truly prepared?”26 In order for the

ritual to be of most effect, a man must be in a ready state to absorb the

teaching which will be presented: “Except a man’s mood be right, except

his will be in the appropriate attitude, except he act from true motives,

and in a reverent prayerful frame of mind, the ‘work’ will be to him as

meaningless as an old wives’ tale.”27 The first Degree of Speculative

Freemasonry emphasized preparation and worthiness, test and probation.

From the very beginning, the future prophet stepped into this Masonic

pattern. The various accounts of Smith’s First Vision commenced with a

verification of his qualifications and then proceeded to demonstrate how

his heart and mind were prepared for the illumination he was to receive.

Hoodwinked

Between 1819 and 1820, young Joseph Smith attended various church

meetings in search of truth. Each First Vision account details the clash

among the different sects that the Smiths encountered in the upper

western New York area:

There was in the place where we lived an unusual excitement on the subject of religion. It commenced with the Methodist, but soon became general among all the sects in that region of country, indeed, the whole district of Country seemed affected by it, and great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties, which created no small stir and division amongst the people, some Crying, “Lo, here” and others, “Lo, there.” Some were contending

for the Methodist faith, Some for the Presbyterian, and some for the Baptist.28

Upon enquiring each of their views of the plan of salvation, he found

“a great clash in religious sentiment.”29 Smith called “the contentions

and divi[si]ons[,] the wicke[d]ness and abominations and the darkness

which pervaded the minds of mankind” a “grief to my soul.”30 The

98

action planted the seed of religious change out of which the Restoration

would grow.

Smith reported that “[s]o great was the confusion and strife amongst

the different denominations” that he found it “impossible for a person

young as [he] was and so unacquainted with men and things to come to

any certain conclusion who was right and who was wrong.”31 “If God

had a church,” he reasoned, “it would not be split up into factions. . . .

God could not be the author of so much confusion.”32 The young man

became “wrought up” in his mind, “concidering it of the first importance

that [he] should be right, in matters that involve eternal

consequences.”33 Orson Pratt’s account described his conundrum thus:

[T]he thought of resting his hopes of eternal life upon chance, or uncertainties, was more than he could endure. . . . He then reflected upon the immense number of doctrines, now, in the world, which had given rise to many hundreds of different denominations. The great question to be decided in his mind, was—if any one of these denominations be the Church of Christ, which one is it? Until he could become satisfied, in relation to this question, he could not rest

contented.34

This situation was described in terms of “darkness,” which “covered the

earth and gross darkness the nations.”35

Masonic allegory similarly traces man’s initial spiritual darkness and

subsequent search for illumination. William Morgan’s exposure

portrayed the initial state of the applicant after he had been

recommended, investigated, and accepted as a candidate:

The candidate is then blindfolded, his left foot bare, his right in a slipper, his left breast and

arm naked, and a rope called a Cable-tow round his neck and left arm. 36

This condition symbolizes the darkness and impotence of ignorance. The

“hoodwink” of cloth or leather that is placed over the candidate’s eyes is

not intended to conceal information. Instead, it symbolizes the fact that

he is yet in darkness. The real hoodwink, that which Freemasonry

undertakes to remove, is human unawareness of spiritual truth.

99

Masonic candidate as portrayed in Duncan’s Masonic Ritual and Monitor, 1866.

Smith’s 1835 account depicts the fourteen-year-old as being “wrought

up” in his mind respecting religion and the different denominations that

taught such differing paths to salvation. His wording that he was

“perplexed in mind”37 over the issue is remarkably similar to a widely

circulated exposure of the day, where the candidate’s blindfolding is said

to cause him “Uncertainty” and to “throw his mind into great

Perplexity.”38 Later First Vision accounts make it clear that this

condition of “blind uncertainty”39 caused the poison of contention,

resentment, and anger among the various systems of religion.

Like Smith in his tender years, Freemasonry had been wrestling with

the issue of religious pluralism since the early eighteenth century. The

1723 Masonic Constitutions addressed the controversy in this way:

Though in ancient Times Masons were charg’d in every Country to be of the Religion of that Country or Nation, whatever it was, yet ‘tis now thought more expedient only to oblige them to that Religion in which all Men agree, leaving their particular Opinions to themselves; that is, to be good men and true . . . by whatever Denominations or Persuasions they may be

distinguish’d.40

Thus, Masonry was considered “a Sanctuary in which are garnered all

dogmas and all traditions of [the Christian] religion.”41 Smith struggled

with the same issue, but he was to be instructed by his encounter with

Deity to handle pluralism differently. While Masonry compromised on

100

this point by saying all religious traditions should be respected, he would

conclude that the point of union should be one Truth, authored by

God.42

Petition

As the future prophet attended meetings of various Christian

denominations, he determined by an appeal to scripture to resolve his

conviction of personal sin and his uncertainty over which church was

right. Several scriptures are mentioned in the various First Vision

accounts as having been significant in Joseph Smith’s decision to pray

directly to God for an answer. The earliest account shows the influence

of no fewer than eight well-known Bible verses, all strung together in

one emotional composition:43

[F]or I learned in the scriptures that God was the same yesterday

today and forever [Heb. 13:8], 44

that he was no respecter to persons for he was God [Acts 10:34], 45

for I looked upon [the sun, moon, stars, earth, beasts, fowls, fish,

etc.] and when I considered upon these things my heart exclaimed

well hath the wise man said it is a fool that saith in his heart there is

no God [Ps. 14:1]. 46

[M]y heart exclaimed all these bear testimony and bespeak an

omnipotent and omnipresent power [Ps. 19:1],47

a being who maketh Laws and decreeeth and bindeth all things in

their bounds [Acts 17: 24-26], 48

who filleth Eternity who was and is and will be from all Eternity to

Eternity [Ps. 90:2].49

[A]nd when I considered all these things and that that being seeketh

such to worship him as worship him in spirit and in truth [John

4:24].50

[T]herefore I cried unto the Lord for mercy for there was none else

to whom I could go and to obtain mercy [Ps. 27:7]. 51

Many of these scriptures underscore Masonic issues and concerns, and

the language used in Smith’s History is similar to what one finds in

Masonic discourse.

101

Historian Richard Bushman has speculated that Smith may have

considered the Deist question of “how to know of God’s existence” in

context of the Palmyra debating club of which he was a member.52

Other club members would later remark of Smith’s able skill in public

speaking. Significantly, however, the rationalist response provided by

Smith to this particular Deist question is framed in language regularly

used by Freemasons. In answer to the qualifying Masonic question of

whether he believed in a “Supreme being,” Smith gave the appropriate

reply. After describing the planetary motions of sun, moon, and stars as

bespeaking “a being who maketh laws and decreeth and bindeth all

things in their bounds,”53 he concluded, quoting Psalm 14:1: “It is a fool

that saith in his heart, ‘there is no God.’”54 In Masonry, the heavenly

constellations are foundational for providing a source for belief in a

Divine being. These celestial lights are intended to impress on the

memory “that All Seeing Eye! whom the sun, moon, and stars obey, and

under whose watchful care even comets perform their stupendous

revolutions, beholds the inmost recesses of the human heart, and will

reward us according to our works.”55

In his 1835 telling, Smith cited just two scriptures that influenced him

as he considered the different systems of religion:56

[B]eing thus perplexed in mind I retired to the silent grove and bow[e]d down before the Lord, under a realising sense that he had said (if the bible be true) ask and you shall receive knock

and it shall be opened seek and you shall find. [Matt. 7:7; Luke 11:9] 57

[A]nd again, if any man lack wisdom let him ask of God who giveth to all men libarally and

upbradeth not. [James 1:5]58

The first of these, “ask, seek, and knock,” is also cited in the Entered

Apprentice Degree. Three distinct knocks at the door of a Lodge are the

beginnings of every Mason’s adventure. As described in Morgan’s

exposé, a candidate approaches the entrance of the Lodge for the first

time, “hoodwinked, slipshod and awry.”59 He is instructed to give “three

distinct knocks” at the door, “which are answered by three from

within.”60 Among other things, these knocks allude to Jesus’s promise in

Matthew 7 and Luke 11.61 One early (1795) exposure quotes the Entered

Apprentice catechism at the end of the degree thus:

Mas. Brother, you told me you gave Three distinct Knocks at the Door: Pray what do they signify?

Ans. A certain Text in Scripture.

Mas. What is that Text, Brother?

102

Ans. Ask, and you shall have; seek, and you shall find; knock, and it shall be open’d unto you. Mas. How do you apply this Text in Masonry?

Ans. I sought in my Mind; I ask’d of my Friend;62 I knock’d, and the Door of Masonry

became open unto me.63

Masonic ritual often involves a three-times-three pattern. Thus, there is a

three-fold repetition of the three knocks at the door; they are repeated

while the initiate kneels in prayer, and then again at the altar.

By 1838 (and in every subsequent version), the telling of the First

Vision mentions James 1:5 exclusively as the stimulus for Smith’s

determination to ask of God.64 Yet, this scripture had Masonic

implications as well:

While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James, First Chapter and fifth verse which reads, “If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.[”] . . . At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion or else I must do as James directs, that is, Ask of

God.65

From the promise in James, Smith learned “that it was the privilege of

all men to ask God for wisdom, with the sure and certain expectation of

receiving.”66 Orson Hyde stated, “He [Smith] considered this scripture

an authorization for him to solemnly call upon his creator to present his

needs before him with the certain expectation of some success.”67

Likewise, Orson Pratt wrote that this “was cheering information to him:

tidings that gave him great joy.” And in terms a Mason would approve,

Pratt continued, writing, “It was like a light shining forth in a dark place,

to guide him to the path in which he should walk. He, now, saw that if he

inquired of God, there was, not only, a possibility, but a probability; yea,

more, a certainty, that he should obtain a knowledge.”68

Reflection

Joseph Smith meditated carefully upon his situation and upon the

scriptures he had read. From the age of twelve to fifteen, the time of

religious revival in the area, he “pondered these things in [his] heart.”69

Especially compelling is his depiction of the effect that James 1:5 had

upon him:

Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man that this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected

on it again and again.70

The heart is noted in the Fraternity as “that place where a man is first

made a Mason.” From the Lecture on the First Degree of Masonry, in

103

Morgan’s exposé:

Q. Where were you first prepared to be made a Mason?

A. In my heart. 71

The darkened human heart is the setting for spiritual illumination.72

The subsequent interior radiance—referenced in both Christian and

Masonic tradition as the “daystar” or “[the bright] morning star”—

bestowed certain blessings.73

A Secret Place in the Woods

So in accordance with this my determination to ask of God, I retired to the woods to make the attempt. It was on the morning of a beautiful clear day early in the spring of Eightteen hundred

and twenty. 74

Joseph Smith’s description of his First Vision is deeply moving and

spiritually persuasive, as it is clothed in the language of archetype and

symbol. First, the confused young innocent stepped deep into a wooded

spot—entering nature to commune directly with “Nature’s God.”75 The

woods to which he retired was already known to him: he described it as a

place where he had been with his father. “I immediately went out into the

woods where my father had a clearing,” he affirmed, “and went to the

stump where I had stuck my axe when I had quit work, and I kneeled

down, and prayed.”76

Masonic author Kirk MacNulty describes the lodge as “a model of the

psyche,” and its workings as an interior psychological process.77

Smith’s grove is such a place. Designated in two of the First Vision

accounts as “a secret place,” the setting for the vision suggests the

interior, sacred space of the human heart. In this private psychological

landscape, the individual performs an “interior work,” integrating the

outside world with his inner reality.78 Smith set forth into his “wood” in

private response to the confusion brought about by the preachers of the

day. There he sought an inner reality among the trees of the forest. In his

own recitation, the young Smith was spiritually lost as he entered the

grove to face a challenge: having “departed the path,” he was concerned

about his sins and eventually received a remission via Jesus Christ.

Similarly, the Masonic candidate is challenged as he circumambulates

the lodge (representing the world). He is led to kneel in prayer, following

which he is presented with a lambskin apron. Described as an “emblem

of innocence,” the apron symbolizes covering for sin, typifying the

Atonement of Christ, and suggests to the Christian Freemason the

104

equally symbolic “coats of skins” provided Adam and Eve in the

Garden.79

Kneeling for Prayer

The First Vision narrative speaks of Joseph Smith’s response to

scripture as the first time in his life he had endeavored to pray out loud:

“[F]or amidst all anxieties I had never as yet made the attempt to

pray vocally.”80 With “a fixed determination” to obtain information, he

“called upon the Lord for the first time.”81 “And so,” wrote Orson Hyde,

“he began to pour out to the Lord with fervent determination the earnest

desires of his soul.”82 Some of the accounts link the desire of his soul

with his question, “[W]hich of all the sects were right[?]”83 The 1835,

1838, and 1843 accounts, as well as accounts by Pratt, Hyde, and

Neibaur, include the detail that Smith knelt as he prayed.

In Morgan’s exposure of the Entered Apprentice degree, the door of

the lodge is opened to the blindfolded candidate, and he is warned not to

“attempt to reveal the secrets of Masonry unlawfully.”84

Q. How were you then disposed of?

A. I was conducted to the center of the Lodge and there caused to kneel for the benefit of a

prayer.85

Q. After prayer what was said to you?

A. I was asked in whom I put my trust.

Q. Your answer?

A. In God.86

Upon giving the correct answer, the candidate is told to rise and is

conducted around the lodge three times. He is then instructed in the

proper kneeling posture in which he will take his obligation.

Another early catechism reviewing this sequence in the Entered

Apprentice degree underscores the importance of the initiate’s kneeling

position during this prayer:

Q.—What is the first point in Masonry?

A.—Left knee bare and bent.

Q.—Wherein is that the first point?

In a kneeling posture I was first taught to adore my Creator and on my left knee bare and bent

I was initiated into Masonry.87

In the first degrees of Masonry, the candidate does not pray himself;

rather, others pray in his behalf until he is raised to the Master Mason

degree. At that point, the candidate is required to make a personal

oblation, either silently or vocally, as he prefers. This is reminiscent of

105

Smith’s confession that his experience in the grove was the first time he

had attempted to pray vocally.88

Bound by an Unseen Power

Initially, Joseph Smith’s effort to pray had a strange result. In some of

the accounts, he explained that as he attempted to pray, darkness

gathered around him, and he was overcome by an evil influence. The

official history of the Church attributes the incident to “some actual

being from the unseen world who had such a marvelous power as [he]

had never before felt in any being.” For a time, it seemed as if he were

“doomed to sudden destruction.”89 Hyde’s account expands upon the

notion of an unseen being’s effect upon the boy:

On one occasion, he went to a small grove of trees near his father’s home and knelt down before God in solemn prayer. The adversary then made several strenuous efforts to cool his ardent soul. He filled his mind with doubts and brought to mind all manner of inappropriate images to prevent him from obtaining the object of his endeavors; but the overflowing mercy of God came to buoy him up and gave new impetus to his failing strength. However, the dark

cloud soon parted and light and peace filled his frightened heart.90

Smith’s 1835 account describes the endeavor to pray as initially

“fruitless.” He wrote, “[My tongue] seemed to be swol[l]en in my mouth,

so that I could not utter.”91 He explained the unseen power had “such

astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not

speak.”92 The binding effect described is reminiscent of the condition of

the Masonic candidate who is similarly fettered as he makes his way to

the altar in search of light. He is “hoodwinked” with a blindfold, and a

“cable-tow” is wrapped around his neck. In the initiation, the cable-tow

“is to prevent any attempt at retreat.”93 Occultist Arthur Edward Waite

sees in the rope “a representation of the gross earthly ties that hold

unregenerated men to their appetites and passions.”94

To a Freemason, the cable-tow additionally refers to his obligation: his

tongue is bound from discussing what he has seen. Two questions found

in the Dumfries Manuscript of 1710 mention this piece of equipment:

Q. hou were you brought in

A. sham[e]fully w’ a rope about my neck . . .

Q. whay a rop[e] about your neck

A. to hang me if I should Betr[a]y may trust95

At the beginning of the degree, the rope is placed upon the candidate as a

symbol of those forces that regulate a man’s conduct from without.

When he takes the obligation, he shows he is now able to control and

106

govern himself from within, and thus the cable-tow is no longer needed.

In the Third Degree obligation,96 the initiate promises to obey signs and

summons “if within the length of [his] Cable-tow.”97 As clarified by the

Baltimore Convention of 1843, the length of a cable-tow represents the

scope of a man’s reasonable ability to perform.98

The Cabletow, as portayed in Duncan’s Masonic Ritual and Monitor, 1866.

The cable-tow can also be compared with the Mystic Tie in Masonry,

which author Albert Mackey explains thus:

The cable tow is emblematic of the cord or band of affection which should unite the whole

fraternity, as in Hosea xi. 4, “I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love.”99

Masonic writer Samuel Lawrence sees it as “the Mystic Tie binding

the initiate to God, to the Order, and to Righteousness; a tie which both

binds and draws, and which holds a man fast, lest he drift like a ship at

sea.”100 When Smith entered the grove, he was bound to worldly

passions and earthly foibles. By the time the vision closed, he was bound

to God.

Brought to Light

107

The zenith of Joseph Smith’s visionary experience was the interior

illumination he received as he was brought into the presence of Deity. He

was released from the enemy who held him bound, his “mouth was

opened,” and his “[tongue] liberated.”101 As Smith renewed his efforts

to call on the Lord “in mighty prayer,”102 he was filled with the Spirit,

and “the Lord opened the heavens” unto him.103

Smith’s description of the light that appeared in the process of

illumination is similar in all the accounts. He emphasized its brightness,

shape, and mystical effect. In his 1832 entry, he records: “[A] piller of

fire light above the brightness of the sun at noon day come down from

above and rested upon me.”104 The 1835 journal account reports: “[A]

pillar of fire appeared above my head, it presently rested down upon my

head, and filled me with joy unspeakable. . . . [T]his pillar of flame . . .

was spread all around, and yet nothing consumed.”105 The familiar 1838

account goes: “I saw a pillar light exactly over my head above the

brightness of the sun, which descended gradually untill it fell upon

me.”106 In 1842, Joseph explained his mind was taken away from the

objects with which he was surrounded, and he was “enwrapped in a

heavenly vision.”107

The two published apostolic accounts add details that augment Smith’s

experience with the mystical tradition. Orson Pratt writes:

He, at length, saw a very bright and glorious light in the heavens above; which, at first, seemed to be at a considerable distance. He continued praying, while the light appeared to be gradually descending towards him; and, as it drew nearer, it increased in brightness, and magnitude, so that, by the time that it reached the tops of the trees, the whole wilderness, for some distance around, was illuminated in a most glorious and brilliant manner. He expected to have seen the leaves and boughs of the trees consumed, as soon as the light came in contact with them; but, perceiving that it did not produce that effect, he was encouraged with the hopes of being able to endure its presence. It continued descending, slowly, until it rested upon the earth, and he was enveloped in the midst of it. When it first came upon him, it produced a peculiar sensation throughout his whole system; and, immediately, his mind was caught away, from the natural objects with which he was surrounded; and he was enwrapped in a heavenly

vision.108

Orson Hyde elaborated on this last point: “At this sacred moment, the

natural world around him was excluded from his view, so that he would

be open to the presentation of heavenly and spiritual things.”109

The language of these accounts calls to mind the Hebrew description

of the Shekinah, which served as the physical manifestation of the Divine

Presence for the ancient Israelites. Resting upon the ancient Tabernacle,

the Shekinah appeared in the form of a fiery pillar—a powerful symbol

108

of the light and glory of God. Masonic writers in Smith’s day were

preoccupied with this concept in both its ancient Hebrew and later

Christian iterations. Nineteenth-century Masonic writer and lecturer

George Oliver wrote, “[T]he divine Shekinah vouchsafed to the prophet

Isaiah, is declared by St. John to be the actual glory of Jesus Christ the

Saviour of mankind.”110 This was known to some of the faithful

ancients who knew the secret and true form and worship of God, Oliver

claimed. They “transmitted the sublime science of Lux [Light]; and it has

descended to our times pure and unadulterated.”111 Wherever light

appeared in a Masonic lodge, it was emblematic of divine truth—an

expressive symbol of the manifested glory of God.

As the visible sign of the presence of Deity, the Shekinah was coupled

with the Masonic Rite of Illumination. Masonic exposures of the day

explain how the candidate was ceremonially “brought to light” in the

Rite of Illumination. There, the darkness was suddenly removed from his

eyes. In a column of light, the Master of the Lodge, dressed in glittering

finery, stepped down from his Throne in the East to stand before the

newly enlightened candidate. For Christian Freemasons, this Master of

the Lodge was a representation of the Lord of the Universe’s

condescension from his divine throne to instruct individuals on earth.

William Morgan described this transition from darkness to light as the

“shock of illumination” in his 1826 Masonic exposure: “After having

been so long blind, and full of fearful apprehensions all the time, this

great and sudden transition from perfect darkness to a brighter [if

possible] than the meridian sun in a mid-summer day, sometimes

produces an alarming effect.” Morgan added that he “once knew a man

to faint on being brought to light.”112

When the blindfold is taken from the initiate’s eyes, he perceives a

different arrangement of things, opening his mind to a new perspective.

“Let him see the Light;” says the Master; they then take the Handkerchief from his Eyes, and whilst they are so doing, the Brethren form a Circle round him with their Swords drawn in their Hands, the Points of which are presented to his Breast. The Ornaments borne by the Officers, the glittering of the Swords, and the fantastic Appearance of the Brethren in White Aprons, all together, creates great Surprise, especially to a Person, who for above an Hour has

been fatigued with the Bandage over his Eyes.113

The “pillar of light above the brightness of the sun” resting upon

young Smith, his subsequent vision of God, and his receiving of

instruction are impressively reminiscent of the Masonic ceremony. Smith

entered the grove to recover the secret of the true form and worship of

Deity. Even before he penned the earliest surviving history of the First

109

Vision in 1832, a description of such an experience appeared within the

verses of the Book of Mormon. The narrative of Lehi’s vision includes

some of the same Masonic aspects that were present in Smith’s:

And it came to pass as he prayed unto the Lord, there came a pillar of fire and dwelt upon a rock before him. . . . And being thus overcome with the Spirit, he was carried away in a vision. . . . [H]e saw God sitting upon his throne, surrounded with numberless concourses of angels in the attitude of singing and praising their God. And it came to pass that he saw One descending out of the midst of heaven, and he beheld that his luster was above that of the sun at noon-day. (1 Ne. 1:6–9)

Smith later expounded to his followers that only by understanding the

true character of God can He be properly worshipped.114 As Smith’s

doctrine on the nature of Deity further developed, he disclosed additional

details about the vision, including the presence of two figures who

appeared in the grove. While the earliest account does not specify more

than one personage having appeared (“I saw the Lord”), each of the

others clearly state that both the Father and the Son were present.115 The

young seeker “saw a personage in the fire[:] light complexion[,] blue

eyes[,] a piece of white cloth drawn over his shoulders[,] his right arm

bear [bare.] [A]fter a w[h]ile a[n] other person came to the side of the

first.”116 The two beings “exactly resembled each other in their features

or likeness.”117

110

“Inception Of Mormonism—Joseph Smith’s First Vision.” From T B. Stenhouse, The Rocky

Mountain Saints, 1874.

111

One may see Smith going to the grove in terms of the individual

search for light. Any Entered Apprentice at the altar similarly asks for

light.118 The one who gives him that light—the Worshipful Master in

the East—represents God. Additionally, the ceremony has the Junior

Warden representing Christ. In the opening ritual of a Masonic lodge,

one is told “as the sun in the south, at high meridian, is the beauty and

the glory of the day, so stands the Junior Warden in the South.”119

At the close of his vision, after regaining consciousness, Smith found

himself in the position of a Mason in the Third Degree: “lying on

back looking up into Heaven.”120

Instruction by Degrees

The Masonic initiate is instructed in the progressive science of

Masonry by degrees. Initially, he is entrusted with a small portion until

he has proven himself true and faithful, and then the full light of

Masonry is unveiled. According to one exposure, “One was extremely

scrupulous to entrust these important secrets only to those whose

discretion was proven & of whom one was sure. This is why degrees

were made, to test those to whom they would be given.”121

Several aspects of the First Vision experience were evocative of the

Freemasons’ reception of ritual and knowledge by degrees. A compelling

visual illustration of this principle is the light that “descended gradually

untill it fell upon [him].”122 Further, the young boy was told to join

none of the churches, while “at the same time receiving a promise that

the fulness of the gospel should at some future time be made

known.”123 Not only was the future prophet given keys of knowledge

by degrees, but he would also be given priesthood authority and power

dispensed in the same manner. The preface to Joseph Smith’s 1832

history, written by his scribe, Frederick G. Williams, set forth what was

to be covered in the history, beginning with his First Vision:

firstly he receiving the testamony from on high

seccondly the ministering of Angels

thirdly the reception of the holy Priesthood . . .

forthly a confirmation and reception of the high Priesthood after the holy order of the son of the living God power and ordinence from on high to preach the Gospel in the administration and demonstration of the spirit

the Kees of the Kingdom of God confer[r]ed upon him and the continuation of the blessings of

God to him &c—— .124

112

From this preface, it is evident that the idea of a “high Priesthood,” a

concept that can be found in the Royal Arch Degree, was being

discussed in the Church as early as 1832. Jeremy Cross’s Masonic Chart

outlines the Order of High Priesthood, which “appertains to the office of

High Priest of a Royal Arch Chapter.”125 Cross describes it as “a station

highly honorable to all those, who diligently perform the important

duties annexed to it.”126

Ritualizing the First Vision

Joseph Smith’s First Vision was a literal manifestation of the Masonic

initiation ritual. The purpose of ritual is to prepare the mind in an ordinal

way to experience the encounter in a real way. Smith, having attained

this state, took steps to provide a similar opportunity to his followers.

According to Masonic writer Colin Dyer, Masonry is based on

progression to the “ultimate perfection.” He postulates that “the

proliferation of masonic degrees in the eighteenth century was perhaps

caused by the realization that perfection is unattainable” and that there

always remains further progress to be made. Thus, the “keen Mason”

continued to “hive off” new degrees from the basic three, utilizing Bible

stories to formulate new ceremonies and instruction.127

Similar to this development of new degrees in Masonry, Smith acted as

a “keen Mason” when he ritualized his divine initiation experience and

created new, Masonic-like degrees in Kirtland and Nauvoo. An early

form of the Kirtland temple endowment took place in the School of the

Prophets located in an upper room in Newel K. Whitney’s general store.

The brethren who participated arrived in a state of preparation, having

fasted, washed themselves, and put on clean linen. A ritual greeting was

then given, drawing the brothers into fraternal comradery.128 Following

the Masonic example of “hiving off” new degrees with biblical

underpinnings, the prophet drew upon two New Testament events to

create a sacramental ceremony. The washing of feet and partaking of

bread and wine were already used in an ordinal way by many Christian

sects of the day. Smith, however, gave them the Masonic term

“endowments.”129 The meaning he applied to these ritual acts prepared

the brethren to enter into the presence of Deity and be “sealed . . . up”

unto eternal life.130

The rite began with each Elder washing his own feet first. The prophet

then draped a towel over his shoulder in imitation of the Savior’s actions

113

described in John 13 and ceremonially washed the feet of each of his

brethren, wiping them with the towel. He then said to the Elders:

“As I have done so do ye:” Wash ye, therefore, one another’s feet: and by the power of the Holy Ghost I pronounced them all clean from the blood of this generation; but if any of them should sin willfully after they were thus cleansed, and sealed up unto eternal life, they should

be given over unto the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption.131

Remarks by Smith published in the Millennial Star shortly before the

completion of the Kirtland Temple connected the washing of feet with

fraternal unity and with an “endowment” consisting of a heavenly

manifestation:

[T]he ordinance of washing of feet . . . is calculated to unite our hearts, that we may be one in feeling and sentiment, and that our faith may be strong, so that Satan cannot overthrow us, nor have any power over us. . . .

[W]e must be clean every whit. . . .

All who are prepared, and are sufficiently pure to abide the presence of the Saviour, will

see him in the solemn assembly.132

Indeed, as early as December 1832, the year of the first extant First

Vision account, Smith had penned a revelation promising the faithful that

if they would sanctify themselves and place their thoughts upon God,

“the days will come that you shall see him, for he will unveil his face

unto you” (D&C 88:68).

Zebedee Coltrin described an instance of real initiation such as this

that took place during a meeting of the Kirtland School of the Prophets.

According to Coltrin, Smith instructed the brethren to kneel in silent

prayer with hands uplifted. While praying, Coltrin and others in the room

saw a personage who “walked through the room from east to west.”

Smith told the company that they had just seen Jesus, the Son of God,

and asked them to resume their former position in prayer. When they all

had knelt, another personage, identified by Smith as “the Father,” came

through the room “surrounded as with a flame of fire.” Coltrin’s detail of

the progress of Jesus through the room from east to west connects this

event more closely with a Masonic ceremony than a Christian service.

He described his experience of real initiation as “a sensation that it might

destroy the tabernacle as it was of consuming fire of great brightness. . . .

This appearance was so grand and overwhelming that it seemed I should

melt down in his presence.” Coltrin shook with a powerful thrill that he

felt “in the marrow of [his] bones.”133 The phrasing is a strong Masonic

identifier.134

Real initiation continued to be described in Masonic terms as it was

experienced by many of the Latter-day Saints in the Kirtland Temple

following its completion. Visions of God and angels surrounded in light

114

were reported. Many felt the Holy Ghost “like fire in their bones.”135

During solemn assembly services in March of 1836, Joseph Smith

instructed the priesthood quorums on the ordinance of washing of feet

and the spirit of prophecy. George A. Smith then “arose, and began to

prophesy, when a noise was heard like the sound of a rushing mighty

wind, which filled the temple.” The entire congregation stood up

together, “being moved upon by an invisible power; many began to

speak in tongues, and prophesy; others saw glorious visions.” Even

people of the neighborhood gathered around the temple and were said to

have heard “an unusual sound within” and seen “a bright light like a

piller of Fire resting upon—the Temple.”136

The First Vision: A Masonic Allegory Made Literal

The story of Joseph Smith’s First Vision was not widely circulated

during the early years of the Restoration. However, by 1832 Smith found

it important enough to be included as a vital feature of the history of the

Church. His experience was an archetypal event, but the elements of the

archetype that he used to share the experience came from his exposure to

Freemasonry. The first account of his vision dates to within six years and

fifty miles of the Morgan affair with all its publicity and excitement

regarding the Fraternity. The Craft was being discussed and grappled

with by the Christian ministers in the New York area and warned against

in their revivals. It was Masonry, all-pervasive in Smith’s family and his

environment, that supplied the particular wording and images Smith used

as he recounted his vision. From there, the First Vision story developed

into a ritual retelling, containing expected elements in a rote order,

including each component that makes Masonic initiation potent and

powerful.

Masonic parallels in Smith’s recounting of the vision cannot be

overlooked or easily attributed to other factors; this is because they occur

together, using specific language. Similar theophanies among young

seekers were common during the revivals in early America, but they did

not include such depth of Masonic imagery. Smith’s drawing upon

Masonry in his recounting of his First Vision was a tacit approval of its

content. It indicated that, rather than being anti-Masonic, Smith had

found something authentic in the ritual early in his life. At a time when

Masonry was not received favorably in many places, Smith had the

aptitude to use its transformative potential.

115

The Fraternity offers a set of ritual actions that draw its participants

into the presence of the Divine. Ideally, a Masonic initiate enters the

lodge and, within a few brief hours, a seed is planted. When fully grown,

this plant will fundamentally change and transform the initiate with the

fruit of personal gnosis. What a Mason receives through types, figures,

and allegory was literalized in Smith’s description of his initiating

experience. He was physically brought into the presence of God; he had

been illuminated in the light of the Divine; he had seen a vision. “I knew

it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it,” he insisted.137

Those few brief hours in the grove changed Smith, imparted confidence,

and set his future course. He received answers to his questions about

religion. His tongue was loosed as a sign of his prophetic office. He

stepped out of the grove transformed, initiated into a calling as the

anticipated restorer of both true religion and its spiritual handmaiden,

Freemasonry.

Devotional readers of Smith’s story are invited to recognize their

internal spiritual darkness and ignorance. In a search for knowledge and

understanding, they are summoned to enter the deep forest of their inner

being and “come to light” in their own experience with the Divine. For

those acquainted with Freemasonry, the accounts have an additional

layer of significance. Familiar rituals of illumination and ascent are

slightly modified. They remain similar enough to be recognizable but are

altered enough to strike the mind. The framing of the First Vision in

Masonic language reveals divine secrets to those who are worthy and

well qualified. Smith’s story, then, reminds these readers of one of the

Masonic axioms—that God continues to reveal his secrets to men.

Notes

116

117

118

119

and become a member of the Church. One day while praying a glorious light encircled him.” See William I. Appleby, Autobiography and Journal, 1848–1856, 30.

120

121
