THE BOOK OF THE LAW, LONG LOST,

NOW FOUND

’Twas there, impressed with holy awe,

A gold engraven plate I saw

With dazzling splendor shine.

To us, the “Grand Elect” alone,

Its secret characters are known,

Ineffable-divine.

—“Ode for a Grand Elect Perfect and Sublime Mason,” 1823.1

In his 1992 book, Joseph Smith’s Response to Skepticism, author However, he also 2 Robert N. Hullinger rightly observed that many elements in Joseph Smith’s history were familiar to Freemasons. assumed that Smith invented his accounts from whole cloth. This need

not be the case, as it is also possible that Smith was describing genuine

experiences, informed by his familial and cultural exposure to Masonry.

The story of Joseph Smith and the coming forth of the Book of

Mormon is archetypally Masonic. Accounts of the recovery of the

golden plates are intimately connected with the backstory of the Royal

Arch Degree and its discussion of the discovery of the Book of the Law

and the restoration of true religion. The symbolic nature of these

elements fits into Smith’s witness of this uniquely American book of

scripture. The use of Masonic language in his history demonstrates that

the coming forth of the Book of Mormon was seen as a fulfillment of

Masonic expectations. The elements of the tale—a delving into the

depths by means of interior illumination to recover something long lost

—are described in Richard Carlisle’s Manual of Freemasonry as “moral

similitudes of material things.”3 The young prophet brought

Freemasonry’s internal spiritual quest into physical reality through the

medium of the folk practice of treasure-seeking.

Later accounts written by Smith’s family members and close

associates perpetuated the Masonic elements, often extending and

intensifying them. The fact that later writers put the story in Masonic

terms, without prompting from their deceased leader, suggests that they,

too, understood the cosmological significance inherent in the Craft.

122

Smith and his nineteenth-century followers saw ideas in Freemasonry

that expanded the mind and prepared it for religious salvation.

The chronicle of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon derives

from many sources, some written years after the actual events. In his

tellings, Joseph Smith freely recast events, continuing to add material

and introduce concepts in order to meet later needs.4 Despite his

accounts and those of his family and friends often displaying certain

disparities, it is nonetheless interesting to note correspondences in these

accounts with Masonic legends.

The culmination of Smith’s treasure-seeking efforts was the discovery

of the golden plates from which he would later claim to translate the

Book of Mormon. Early accounts describe the young seer using a stone

to determine the precise location of the plates, concealed in a coffer

buried in a nearby hill on neighbor Randall Robinson’s property.5 This

sacred record was inscribed with mysterious characters, requiring a

special key to translate. Just as Smith’s retellings of his First Vision share

similarities with Masonic initiation rites, from the beginning, narratives

of the discovery of the plates share similarities with the legends of

Freemasonry, most especially that of the Holy Royal Arch. By 1833, a

Masonic connection with these events was conclusively forged, with

later narratives augmenting the relationship.

Together with the Hiramic legend, the story of Enoch’s recovery and

preservation of the Sacred Word and that of the Foundation Stone

comprise the central and most significant legends associated with

Freemasonry. Nearly every Masonic story is an embellishment or an

expansion upon these themes, especially as they relate to the

construction of Solomon’s Temple. Those familiar with Freemasonry

could not fail to see the resemblance between the Royal Arch allegories

and the developing tradition in the early Church.

An Ancient American Angel

In an account used in the History of the Church, Joseph Smith

described a vision he had on the evening of the twenty-first of September

appeared, growing brighter until “the room was lighter than at noonday.”

A personage appeared at his bedside, “standing in the air for his feet did

not touch the floor.” The messenger told Smith of a book written on

golden plates “giving an account of the former inhabitants of this

continent and the source from whence they sprang.”6 In 1840, Orson

123

Pratt wrote of this event, explaining that the angel made manifest to

Smith “that the ‘American Indians’ were a remnant of Israel; that when

they first immigrated to America, they were an enlightened people,

possessing a knowledge of the true God.” Inspired writers among these

Native Americans—Smith’s angel being one of them—“were required to

keep a sacred history of the most important events transpiring among

them: which history was handed down for many generations.”7

Numerous printed works in Smith’s milieu suggested that Native

Americans were of Israelite descent.8 But more accessible to the young

Smith than these printed works were contemporary Freemasons who

were fascinated with Native American antiquities, as many of Masonry’s

rituals were patterned on Native American customs and terminology. In

the first years of the Republic, Masons adopted the Indian mystique and

made it part of their culture, using its unique traditions and noble

qualities to embellish their activities, name their lodges, and dress up at

events.9 Authors of an 1824 New York state history John Van Ness Yates

and Joseph W. Moulten asserted that some Native American groups had

private societies resembling Freemasonry, including rites of initiation,

degrees, and secret signs.10 Claims of ancient inscriptions and Israelite

origins captured the attention of New Englanders versed in Masonic

legend, and some were led to theorize that a record or artifact containing

the Lost Word may have been carried by displaced Israelites and

deposited among their ruins in North America.

The angel who appeared to Joseph Smith that Sunday evening in

September quoted several scriptural passages, among them Malachi 3

and 4, Isaiah 11, Acts 3:22–23, and Joel 2:28–32. In Masonic fashion,

the angel imparted confidential instruction to the young man, “many

explanations which cannot be mentioned here.”11 The secret of the

plates came with a penalty for disclosing it. “I should not show

to any person,” Smith was told. “If I did I should be destroyed.”12 At the

close of the vision, the angelic visitor ascended through a conduit leading

into heaven, but Smith’s miraculous experience wasn’t over yet. Masonic

instruction is often given in groups of three, and so were the teachings of

the angel that night. Twice more he appeared to the boy prophet,

repeating the same words with a few additions. At the conclusion of that

final visit, a vision of the exact place where the plates were deposited

was opened to Smith’s mind, with the clarity of detail such that he would

know the place without question when he found it.13

124

On the road between Palmyra and Canandaigua was a drumlin of

considerable size and elevation that would eventually be called Cumorah

by Smith’s followers, after the name of the plates’ resting place in the

Book of Mormon. It was heavily forested and a popular destination

among treasure-seekers, and it was to the west side of this hill, not far

from the top, that the angel directed Smith to find the golden plates.

While Smith was fairly restrained with his rehearsals of his First Vision,

keeping most details private, he was much more open and willing to

share his experience of finding these plates. Upon examination we can

readily see how aspects of Smith’s story of the discovery of these plates

bear striking resemblance to the legend of the golden plate of Enoch,

long part of the Masonic Royal Arch tradition.

The Masonic legend of Enoch—the account of that prophet’s vision

and restoration of the Sacred Word, and its subsequent various burials,

losses, and recoveries—has significant variations in its renderings. Yet,

for Freemasons, these tales do not demand absolute consistency. When

Smith added his account of the Sacred Word being buried and

rediscovered, he made the same kinds of changes and embellishments we

would expect to see in Freemasons’ own expansions of their

traditions.14

Joseph Smith’s Visits to the Hill

In 1817, Freemason Samuel Cole, speaking figuratively of his

experience performing one of the Masonic degrees, wrote, “I dug deep

for hidden treasures, found them, and regained the omnific word.”15

Joseph Smith transformed this symbolic passage into literal reality.

After his initial visit to the mound in 1823, Smith returned four

additional times before he was able to obtain the plates and begin the

work of translation. The most complete accounts of these five visits

contain a mélange of folk magic elements and Masonic language and

symbolism. In addition, contemporary witnesses of the events, many of

whom had assisted Smith in his treasure-seeking quests, were steeped in

the Masonic legends of the day.16 Their narratives seem to assume a

familiarity with mystical practices and an acumen for symbolism. In

order to analyze Smith’s and his contemporaries’ accounts of the plates’

discovery, each of many early and late statements will be used as they

were given, with accuracy and harmonization being a secondary concern.

As will be seen, the magical and Masonic elements included in these

125

stories demonstrate important perceptions regarding the coming forth of

the record.

The Hill Cumorah, ca. 1910.

The accompanying table shows one reconstruction of Smith’s first visit

and each of the four returns to Cumorah between 1823 and 1827. At all

but one of these visits, he found the same messenger there. Just as a

Mason enters the Lodge for more light and learns “by degrees,” Smith

did not obtain the plates right away; instead, he returned year after year

for further tutoring. And each time, he “received instruction and

intelligence . . . respecting what the Lord was going to do, and how and

in what manner his kingdom was to be conducted in the last days.”17

1823 Visit: Pursuing the Plates

In 1823, Joseph Smith was directed to go to the hill and ask for the

book “in a certain name.”18 This is reminiscent of a Masonic practice of

giving a certain sign or name to demonstrate one’s qualifications.19

Until the candidate recovers the real name that was lost, he is required to

give a substitute. Assuming that the Book of Mormon represented the

lost book of the Law, or lost Word of God, then, like all Masons, Smith

would be obliged to supply a substitute name prior to learning the real

one.

According to Willard Chase, after obtaining the record, Smith was

instructed to “go directly away, and neither lay it down nor look behind

126

him.” Chase’s articulation of Smith’s experience exemplifies myth-like

telling, melding Masonic elements with treasure-seeking lore. Chase said

that Smith “demanded the book” from the spirit that had charge of it. He

removed the book of gold from the unsealed stone box, and “fearing

some one might discover where he got it, he laid it down to place back

the top stone.” To his surprise, when he turned around, “there was no

book in sight.” Opening the box again, he saw the holy record but was

“hindered” in taking it out. In the box was “something like a toad, which

soon assumed the appearance of a man, and struck him on the side of his

head.”

Chase said that Smith was unfazed by a “trifle” such as this. Treasure-

seekers of the day often encountered spirits or familiars who endeavored

to obstruct the acquisition of the treasure. When he stooped down and

tried to take the book once more, “the spirit struck him again, and

knocked him three or four rods, and hurt him prodigiously. After

recovering from his fright, he enquired why he could not obtain the

plates; to which the spirit made reply, because you have not obeyed your

orders.”20

Other accounts of this first visit to the Hill Cumorah contain similar

features. In Joseph Knight’s 1833 account, Smith lay the book down, and

it disappeared back into the box just as above.21 According to historian

Michael Quinn, the term “slippery treasures” was used in the eastern

United States in the early 1800s before the phrase appeared in the pages

of the Book of Mormon (see Hel. 13:35; Morm. 1:18).22 The term

describes buried valuables that move away from the seeker when his

search does not go in exactly the prescribed manner. When the young

Smith attempted to grasp the plates, Knight reports: “Behold he Could

not stur the Book any more then he Could the mountin. He exclaimed

‘why Cant I stur this Book?’ And he was answered, ‘you cant have it

now.’”23

In his official history, Smith stated that he made three attempts to get

the plates before he “cried unto the Lord in the agony of [his] soul why

can [he] not obtain them.”24 Adding to this, his mother Lucy Mack

Smith detailed why her son may have been unable to procure the record:

He put forth his hand took them up when he lifted them from their place the thought flashed across his mind that there might be something more in the box that might would be a benefit to him in a pecuniary point of view in the excitement of the moment he laid the record down in order to cover up the box least some one should come along and take away

127

whatever else might be deposited there When he turned again to take up the record it was gone

but where he knew not.25

John Corrill’s account agrees with Lucy Smith’s. After Joseph

obtained the plates, Corrill says that he “began to contemplate the vast

riches that he would acquire by their means.” Because of his mercenary

thoughts, “the Angel hid the plates from his view, and chastised him for

his wickedness in acting contrary to the commandment” when the plates

were “for the bringing about of God’s purposes in the salvation of his

people.”26 According to Oliver Cowdery, the angel told Smith the plates

were “not deposited here for the sake of accumulating gain and wealth

for the glory of this world.” Instead, they were sealed by the prayer of

faith and were of no worth to the children of men except for the

knowledge which they contained.27 Perhaps not without coincidence,

Masonic writer George Oliver expressed this same apprehension in

connection with Enoch’s golden plate: if it had fallen into the wrong

hands, Oliver remarked, they might have treasured it merely for its

monetary worth and not for its intrinsic spiritual significance.28 At a

certain place in the Royal Arch Degree, the Master of the Lodge places

Enoch’s gold plate on the Bible on the altar and tells the brethren that its

recovery has been fortuitous: “If it had fallen into improper hands, they

might have prized it for its metallic value, but they would not have

understood its symbolical worth. These four letters [engraved on the

plate] compose the Tetragrammaton, or sacred name of the only true and

living God.”29

Joseph Smith was seventeen years old during his first attempt to

retrieve the record from the Hill Cumorah. He was not allowed to take

the plates at that time but was instructed instead to return one year later,

accompanied this time by his “older brother.”30

1824 Visit: Raising the Dead

Notably, all these accounts present the angelic messenger as referring

to Joseph Smith’s “oldest brother” rather than mentioning Alvin Smith

by name.31 However, scarcely two months after Joseph’s first visit to

Cumorah, his brother Alvin succumbed to an overdose of calomel given

to him by a country physician. The idea that Alvin was to accompany

Joseph to the hill nevertheless spread throughout the community, and

Alvin’s absence during that second visit to Cumorah was assumed to be

the reason why Joseph was unable to acquire the plates at that time.32

128

As discussed by Michael Quinn, rumor that Alvin was to accompany

Joseph may have given rise to rumors that Alvin’s corpse had been

exhumed to fill the angel’s directive.33 Joseph’s treasure-seeking

companions would have recognized the necessity of following their

spiritual guide’s instructions exactly, even to the point of bringing his

oldest brother’s dead body to the digging site. In addition, Freemasons

also had a legend that would match such a seemingly grisly action. The

1726 Graham manuscript details a tradition that Noah’s sons, Shem,

Ham, and Japheth, went to their father’s grave to try to find something

that would lead them to “the vertuable secret.” Finding nothing but the

dead body, they “took a grip at a finger,” which came away from joint to

joint, wrist to elbow. They next “reared up the body,” and took it upon

the five points of fellowship:

setting foot to foot knee to knee Breast to breast Cheeck to cheeck and hand to back and cryed out help o father as if they had said o father of heaven help us now for our earthly father cannot so Laid down the dead body again and not knowing what to do—so one said here is yet

mar[r]ow in this bone and the second said but a dry bone and the third said it stinketh.34

From this experience, the three were said to have formulated a secret

name as a stand-in for the true name they were unable to recover. This

legend parallels the Master Mason degree when the initiate, imitating

Hiram Abiff, is symbolically raised from the grave in an attempt to gain

a secret name or word. In combination with esoteric practices, it resulted

in early speculative Masonry exhibiting a strain of necromancy.35 Thus,

Freemasons in New York, hearing that Joseph Smith Jr. had been told by

an angel to bring his oldest brother to their next meeting, might have

assumed that he would dig up the body either to perform a ritual or

obtain a token.

Within one week of Joseph Jr.’s 1824 visit to the hill, his father found

it necessary to publish a public announcement denying Alvin’s body had

been disinterred. It ran for six weeks in the local newspaper:

TO THE PUBLIC: Whereas reports have been industriously put in circulation, that my son Alvin had been removed from the place of his internment and dissected, which reports, every person possessed of human sensibility must know, are peculiarly calculated to harrow up the mind of a parent and deeply wound the feelings of relations—therefore, for the purpose of ascertaining the truth of such reports, I, with some of my neighbors, this morning repaired to the grave, and removing the earth, found the body which had not been disturbed. This method is taken for the purpose of satisfying the minds of those who may have heard the report, and of informing those who have put it in circulation, that it is earnestly requested they would desist therefrom; and that it is believed by some, that they have been stimulated more by a desire to injure th[e] reputation of certain persons than a philanthropy for the peace and welfare of

myself and friends. JOSEPH SMITH. Palmyra, Sept. 25th, 1824. 36

129

Despite his death, Alvin still played an important part in the recovery

of the plates. As the eldest of the Smith sons, Alvin had also participated

in treasure-seeking and demonstrated a great concern for obtaining the

plates.37 His last words to Joseph Jr., according to their mother, were

telling him to “do everything that lays in your power to obtain the

records” and to “be faithful in receiving instruction and keeping every

commandment that is given you.”38 For a time after Alvin’s death, the

family could scarcely bear speaking about the plates;39 however, the

time eventually came to move forward with what was required of them.

In no case did Lucy express concern that the plates would be

unobtainable following the death of Alvin.

Joseph returned to the hill on the autumn equinox, September 22,

1824, exactly one year after the angel had first directed him to that

location.40 In Masonry, the equinox is observed as a day of waning light

and the descent of the soul from its spiritual home into incarnation. As

Willard Chase describes the meeting, when Joseph demanded the book,

the “spirit of the prophet who wrote the book” enquired for his brother.

Joseph replied that he was dead. Chase continues: “The spirit then

commanded him to come again, in just one year, and bring a man with

him. On asking who the man might be, he was answered that he would

know him when he saw him.”41 With only a few obvious options before

him, Joseph may have believed that Samuel T. Lawrence, his treasure-

seeking partner and benefactor, was the man alluded to by the spirit.

1825 Visit: Treasure Seeing

In 1825, Joseph Smith was still immersed in many of his treasure-

seeking expeditions, including his stint with local Freemason, Josiah

Stowell, who had been digging to discover a silver mine. Though official

church history, including that of Smith’s, would come to downplay it, the

“magical world view” permeated the minds of Smith, his family,

neighbors, and associates.42 Porter Rockwell, a childhood friend of

Smith, was still telling colorful tales of his associations with the Smiths

when he lived in Utah at age 79.43 There, Rockwell told stories of the

failures and ultimate success in obtaining the plates in images that

“sounded like the German legends of the demons of the Harz

Mountains.” Elizabeth Kane, chronicler of Rockwell’s narrative, mused

that religious excitement coexisted with searches for “the phantom

treasures of Captain Kidd.” She said, “Even in places like Cumorah

130

where the primeval forest still grew undisturbed . . . the most sober

settlers of the district . . . stole out to dig of moonlight nights, carefully

effacing the traces of their ineffectual work before creeping home to

bed.” As a boy of twelve, Rockwell frequently heard his mother and

Lucy Mack Smith comparing notes on treasure-seeking expeditions,

telling “how the spades often struck the iron sides of the treasure chest,

and how it was charmed away, now six inches this side, now four feet

deeper, and again completely out of reach.”44

There is some confusion as to whom Smith brought with him on this

second return to the hill. It stands to reason that he would choose a

fellow treasure seer to assist him in the endeavor that had twice been

unsuccessful. In a near-contemporary account, Willard Chase proposed

that Samuel T. Lawrence, one of the members of the Smith’s company of

money-diggers,45 accompanied Smith to the hill. The somewhat garbled

recitation leaves some doubt as to whether it was Lawrence who told

Smith to look into his seer stone and “see if there was not a large pair of

specks with the plates.” Another reading could portray Smith as planting

the suggestion in Lawrence’s mind that there might be a pair of

spectacles under the ground, suitable for translating the Book of

Mormon. Regardless, Lawrence cautioned Smith not “to let these plates

be seen for about two years, as it would make a great disturbance in the

neighborhood.”46

Several sources confirm this choice of escort. Joseph Knight Sr.

intimated that Lawrence “had Bin to the hill and knew about the things

in the hill.”47 While these witnesses suggest that Lawrence accompanied

Smith to Cumorah in 1825, other accounts leave it in question. Lorenzo

Saunders remembered that “Joseph chose Samuel Lawrence. But he did

not go.” Michael Quinn reconciles these statements by suggesting that

Smith took Lawrence to the hill at an earlier date than September 22 of

that year.48

Chase’s recollection may reinforce this possibility, and it suggests that

Smith may have brought another older brother to the hill as a

replacement for Alvin:

I believe, some time in 1825, Hiram Smith (brother of Joseph Smith) came to me, and wished to borrow the same stone [the seer stone from the Chase well], alledging that they wanted to accomplish some business of importance, which could not very well be done without the aid

of the stone.49

The “business of importance” was almost certainly again locating the

plates’ hillside repository. In his 1859 interview, Martin Harris said that

131

the Smith family had all witnessed that he had found the plates by means

of the “stone which was dug from the well of Mason Chase, twenty-four

feet from the surface.”50

The Masonic characteristics of the record’s depository may have been

tied to the angel’s directive to bring an older companion. At the 1824

visit, Smith was only eighteen years old, three years short of being able

to be initiated into the mysteries of Freemasonry. His brother Alvin, on

the other hand, could have become a Mason as early as February of

initiated that year, three years after he became eligible. It may be that the

underground hiding place, with its stone masonry and pillars, presented a

message in itself that would be communicated to a worthy Master

Mason.51

Thus, it is possible that Joseph and Hyrum Smith, with the Chase seer

stone in hand, made the third annual visit to Cumorah as required by the

angel. Further details of this visit remain unknown, other than that the

young seer was again deferred to the following year’s visit. Still lacking

the longed-for record, the Smith family’s attention began to focus on

raising the final payment for their Manchester farm, which was nearly

due.

1826 Visit: Finding a Wife

Joseph Smith first met his future wife, Emma Hale, in the month

following his 1825 visit to Cumorah while engaged in treasure-seeking

activities in Harmony, Pennsylvania. The next year he made his third

return to the hill alone and was probably a bit despondent. According to

Joseph Knight, the angelic keeper of the sacred record told Smith that if

he would “do right,” he would obtain the plates the next year.52

However, the angel told Smith that in order to acquire them he must first

be married.53

Emma Hale’s cousins Joseph and Hiel Lewis attested that “when

Smith saw Miss Emma Hale, he knew that she was the person” who must

come with him. She had been designated a “key” who would later help

him make sense of his experiences in a religious context. The cousins

scandalized readers with a lurid tale of a bleeding ghost with a long

beard who told Smith that he could not get the plates by himself.54 The

ghost’s throat was cut “ear to ear” in a parody of a Masonic penalty,

perhaps indicating that what the spirit was teaching must not be revealed.

132

The two cousins defamed Smith as lacking spiritual motivation during

his quest to obtain the golden plates, but they did say that the “embryo

prophet . . . claimed to possess the supernatural power of second

sight.”55 Second sight was an ability claimed by magicians, but toward

the beginning of the seventeenth century, it began to increasingly be

identified with Freemasonry. Early Rosicrucian Henry Adamson wrote of

this prophetic gift:

For we be brethren of the rosie cross;

We have the mason-word and second sight,

Things for to come we can foretell aright.56

The Mason word, second sight, and prophecy are firmly related in the

person of Joseph Smith.

Smith’s official account describes the persecution that followed him

due to his assertion that he had seen a vision. Thus, he said, “my wife’s

father’s family were very much opposed to our being married. I was

therefore under the necessity of taking her elsewhere, so we went and

were married at the house of Squire Tarbill, in South Bainbridge,

Chenango County, New York.”57 The marriage took place on January

18, 1827, and the young couple proceeded to the home of Smith’s

parents to set up housekeeping.

1827 Visit: The Three Ruffians

In 1827, the year that Joseph Smith was finally able to recover the

plates, he was an adult of twenty-one, the age of majority when a man

may join the Masonic fraternity. September 22 was both the autumnal

equinox and the night of a full moon. The esoteric significance of these

coincidences, as well as the celebration of a Jewish holy day, the feast of

Rosh Hashanah,58 were equally important to Freemasons. Brigham

Young later declared that the night Smith found the plates “there was a

wonderful light in the heavens.” Living about seventy miles distance

from Cumorah, Young had observed the celestial display directly for

hours:

There were lances darting and the sound of cannon and armies just at hand, and flashes of light, though there were no clouds. Joseph’s discovery was in the papers directly, and everywhere people remarked the coincidence, because for hundreds of miles they had been out

watching like myself. 59

Heber C. Kimball also claimed to have witnessed the miraculous event:

according to his autobiography, it involved “a white smoke” arising on

133

the horizon, growing “clear and transparent of a bluish cast” to reveal an

army on the move “in platoons.”60

Joseph Knight Sr. recalled that “Joseph was some afraid of Samuel

Lawrence that he might be a trouble to him.” For several reasons,

Lawrence felt he should have a share in any financial gains the golden

plates might bring. Therefore, prior to his trip to the hill, Smith sent his

father to Lawrence’s residence “to see if there was any signs of his going

away that night.”61 In her 1853 memoir, Lucy Mack Smith recalled her

husband’s visit to the Lawrence house. Members of the “Gold Bible

Company,” a band of treasure-seekers who had been involved with Smith

in the past, were present. They had sent for a “conjurer,” probably

Luman Walters, to help them discover where the plates were buried.

Lucy wrote that her husband “could overhear their conversation,” and

they were “devising many plans and schemes to find ‘Joe Smith’s gold

bible.’” Reportedly, Lawrence’s wife warned her husband that the elder

Smith was listening. “‘Sam, Sam’ said she. ‘You are cutting your own

throat.’ At this, the conjuror bawled out at the top of his voice, ‘I am not

afraid of anybody—we will have them plates in spite of Joe Smith, or all

the devils in hell.’”62

As well as bringing his wife, Smith was given specific instruction on

how he should be dressed. He was to wear an “old-fashioned” suit of

black clothing and procure a black horse with which to appear at the

hill.63 This attire seems more suited to a man attending a Masonic event

than one who is to be out treasure-digging. Michael Quinn identifies it as

a style popularized when US President James Madison attended his

inauguration “dressed in a plain suit of black broadcloth with a single-

breasted coat and waistcoat with flaps, in the old fashion.”64

Following directions he had been given, Smith “arose early in the

morning, and took a one horse wagon . . . and, together with his wife,

repaired to the hill which contained the book.” Leaving Emma by the

road in the wagon, he walked about 600 feet up the hill.65

Smith’s history says that the heavenly messenger delivered the plates

to him with a charge that he “should be responsible for them” and “use

all [his] endeavours to preserve them.” He soon discovered the reason

why he had received such strict instructions: “[F]or no sooner was it

known that I had them than the most strenious [sic] exertions were used

to get them from me. Every stratagem that could be invented was

resorted to for that purpose.”66

134

To keep the book safe after he had removed it from the ground, Smith

wrapped it up and placed it in “a cavity in a birch log” about two or three

miles from his home.67 He then went to the town of Macedon to work.

After about ten days, he “became concerned about the plates.” Willard

Chase reported, “He hired a horse, and went home in the afternoon, staid

long enough to drink one cup of tea, and then went for his book, found it

safe, took off his frock, wrapt it round it, put it under his arm and run all

the way home, a distance of about two miles.”68 On his return home,

carrying the forty- to sixty-pound plates under his arm, Smith was

attacked in the woods. Expressed in a manner reminiscent of the Hiram

Abiff legend, his mother’s telling of the encounter has him given three

blows by a set of ruffians who came after the treasure. In the Masonic

legend, as the construction of Solomon’s Temple was nearing

completion, three fellowcraft Masons from the workforce ambushed

Hiram, the master craftsman, one evening. Each challenged him in turn,

demanding the secrets of a Master Mason. At each refusal to divulge the

information, his assailant struck him with a Mason’s tool.69

The first blow to Smith took place as he “struck through the timber

where there was a large windfall to cross.” As he jumped over a fallen

log, “a man spran[g] up and gave him a heavy blow with a gun.” Being a

young and sturdy fellow, Smith soon leveled the attacker to the ground.

At the top of his speed, he ran about a half mile farther, where he was

struck a second blow by another man. He was able to bring this foe down

as well, and he ran on. But before he arrived home, “he was accosted the

3 time with a severe stroke with a gun.” As he defended himself with his

fists, he dislocated his thumb. When he finally came within sight of

home, “he threw himself down in the a corner of the fence to recover his

breath and as soon as he could get on he rose and finished his race for the

house—where he arrived altogether speechless from fright and

exhaustion.”70

Now that they had been recovered, Smith set about translating the

plates’ contents into English, with the assistance of his wife and other

scribes, “who wrote as he dictated.” One of his followers noted that

“through much difficulty, on account of persecution and poverty, he

translated it by degrees.”71

Truth from the Earth

135

In what would later become the official church history, Joseph Smith

described the discovery he made on the Hill Cumorah. The plates lay

deposited in a stone box, he said, under a stone of considerable size.

“This stone was thick and rounding in the middle on the upper side, and

thinner towards the edges, so that the middle part of it was visible above

the ground, but the edge all round was covered with earth.” Clearing

away the remaining accumulated debris, the young Smith “obtained a

lever,” which he “fixed under the edge of the stone, and with a little

exertion raised it up.”72

The Royal Arch Degree is in part a matching story of the recovery of a

holy treasure. As recounted in exposures of the day, three Mason

companions of noble lineage return from Babylonian captivity for the

express purpose of rebuilding the holy city and restoring its sacred

temple. The three are sent to Mount Moriah to begin the work of

“removing the rubbish”73 preparatory to the work of restoration, and

they are tasked by the Grand Council at Jerusalem to observe and

preserve anything of significance relating to Solomon’s original temple.

After days of fruitless efforts, the companions discover “what seemed to

be a rock, but on striking it with a crow, it gave a hollow sound.”74

Redoubling their efforts, they remove the rubbish from around the stone

and discover that it is an arch with a curiously wrought stone at its

crown.75 Using the crow, the companions “with great difficulty . . .

succeeded in removing” the stone, the keystone of the arch.76 Beneath it,

the workmen find a sacred treasure—Enoch’s gold plate upon which was

inscribed the Lost Word. Knowledge of this Masonic legend was

ubiquitous both within and without Masonry. Its details were especially

well known in the United States, where its strong Christian character was

particularly cherished.

In common with the Royal Arch tradition that it echoes,77 one

perceives elements of Smith’s own struggles to “remove the dirt and

rubbish” in his life, to confront those flaws he felt marred his own

character, and to bring forth truth from the earth—in other words, to

recover from deep within himself something true, authentic, and holy.

John Sheville and James Gould’s monitorial Guide to the Royal Arch
