referring to truth from the Book of Mormon being buried in the earth:

The Royal Arch Mason cannot fail to learn further from the diligent use of these implements, that he must search to the very foundations which underlie all human knowledge if he would find that great object of all his earthly pilgrimage—the end of his labors. Truth may be buried

136

for a time under a cumbrous mass of error; the ruins of a better civilization may have been thrown down upon it; its very existence may be forgotten, but the diligent seeker after it will surely find it.

“Truth crushed to earth shall rise again,

Th’ eternal years of GOD are here.”78

Reports by others of the recovery of the stone box that contained the

Book of Mormon deepen and expand the tale to include additional

elements from the Masonic legend. Smith depicted the box as being

“formed by laying stones together in some kind of cement.” In the

bottom of the box, two stones were laid “crossways . . . and on these

stones lay the plates and the other things with them.”79 In the pages of

the Latter Day Saints Messenger and Advocate, Oliver Cowdery

described an arched stone that overlaid the cemented box. The box was

large enough to hold a breastplate, from which “arose three small pillars,

composed of the same description of cement used on the edges; and upon

these three pillars were placed the record.”80 Writing in 1839, Apostle

Orson Pratt provided an account similar to that published by Cowdery,

mentioning the cement, breastplate, and pillars. The whole was overlaid

with “a crowning stone, a small part of which was visible when he first

visited the spot.”81

Smith’s description of the plates’ hiding place featured certain

elements that clearly stood out in the minds of his family and close

associates. These details were striking and powerful for those familiar

with Masonic lore: the recovery of a golden treasure or long-lost sacred

book concealed by an ancient prophet on a holy mount, deposited

beneath an arched stone, and resting upon pillars. Each of these elements

skillfully enhances and amplifies the Masonic themes of loss and

restoration inherent in the legendary history of the Craft. At once, pillars

suggest a divine repository and remind Freemasons of the expression “in

strength He shall establish His kingdom forever.” The threefold pillars—

representative of the Trinity—additionally hint at the idea that God

himself has preserved the record and provided the means of translation.

The perfect cubic stone, finished with cement, alludes to the divine

nature of both what that stone contains82 and the love of God which

preserved it.83

The keystone in Masonry suggests the Word of God, both in the sense

of the person of Jesus and the scriptural record he embodies. These

elements, and the Masonic legend behind them, pointed to themes of

recovery and restoration, and they strongly hinted at precisely what that

137

restoration would entail. “I told the brethren,” Smith later declared, “that

the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the

key stone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding

by its precepts, than by any other book.”84 Duncan Moore explained the

keystone’s significance to Freemasonry similarly:

The keystone is important both in architectural terms because it is locking the other stones together to support the weight above it and in symbolic terms because it is, in the words of the

Mark Degree, ‘ The most important stone in the building 85 .’

Masonic illustrations have preserved this symbolism by placing a book

—representing the Book of the Law—above the keystone of an arch.

Another well-known image shows Craft Masonry’s conception of the

vertex of an arch: the point within a circle bounded by two straight lines.

This allegorical concept is flanked by the two “Saints John” and

surmounted by the Book of the Law.

The Book of the Law and the Golden Plates

Masonic legend teaches that deity appeared to the prophet Enoch “in

the shape of a bright, golden triangle” and said to him, “Enoch, thou hast

longed to know my true name. Arise and follow me, and thou shalt know

it.” The golden triangle had bright rays of the sun coming from it and

was thenceforth known as the Delta of Enoch.86 In commemoration of

this vision, the Masonic Enoch and his son Methuselah built a temple

underground and dedicated it to God. This temple consisted of nine brick

vaults, situated perpendicularly beneath each other. In the crown of each

arch, he left a narrow aperture, closed with a square stone. Modeled upon

the vision that he had, Enoch created a triangle made out of pure gold.

Placing it on a cubical pedestal of white marble, known thereafter as the

“stone of foundation,” he deposited the whole within the deepest arch.

When this subterranean building was completed, he made a door of stone

and attached to it a ring of iron by which it might be occasionally raised.

He then placed it over the opening of the uppermost arch and covered it

over so that the aperture could not be discovered. Enoch himself was

only permitted to enter it once a year. Upon the death of Enoch,

Methuselah, and Lamech, and the destruction of the world by the deluge,

all knowledge of this temple and the sacred treasure that it contained was

lost. In later times, it would be accidentally discovered when King

Solomon was engaged in the erection of a temple on the same spot.87

According to George Oliver, the plate of gold was “in the form of an

equilateral triangle, each of whose sides was eighteen inches.” Enoch

138

had also enriched it “with precious stones, and encrusted it on a

triangular agate of the same dimensions. On this plate he engraved the

ineffable characters he had seen in his vision.”88 A similar description is

offered in David Bernard’s exposé of the Knights of the Ninth Arch

degree, where the initiate is asked:

Q. What is the Delta?

A. The triangle of gold, enriched with precious stones and affording great light, and upon

which was engraved by Enoch that great and mysterious name, Jehovah.89

Masonic authors’ descriptions of the golden plate of Enoch bore

similarities to the appearance, unearthing, repository, and purpose of

Joseph Smith’s golden plates, as described by his contemporaries.

Masonic features in accounts describing the coming forth of the Book of

Mormon continued to appear years later, such as in a magazine article by

Fayette Lapham. Ostensibly an 1830 interview with Joseph Smith Sr., it

was published forty years after the fact. This source is notable for its

overt masonic connection. According to Lapham, Joseph Sr. told him

that under the first golden plate (or “lid”) lay the stone spectacles that

would later be named the Urim and Thummim, and “on the next page

were representations of all the masonic implements, as used by masons

at the present day.”90

Another secondhand account describes a “large iron ring” in the center

of the stone box’s lid, “into which a man could comfortably put his

hand.” Smith pulled upon this ring in an attempt to retrieve the plates on

his first visit to the Hill Cumorah. 91 This, of course, calls to mind the

aforementioned keystone in the uppermost arch of Enoch’s underground

temple that could be lifted by means of the ring of iron to uncover

Enoch’s triangular plate.

139

Enoch’s Vision and Burial of the Golden Plate, from Jeremy Cross, True Masonic Chart and

Hieroglyphic Monitor, 1820.

Similarities between the golden plate of Enoch and Joseph Smith’s

golden plates go far beyond simple physical correspondences; namely,

they were both made of gold and found in stone enclosures under

elevated mounts named, respectively, Moriah and Cumorah. On the one

hand, Enoch’s mountaintop vision of a triangular plate of gold is a veiled

allusion to the visio dei—that beatific vision of God, which is both the

end and summit of the Christian’s journey and the promised reward of

divine transformation and glorification.92 On the other, it is a symbolic

representation of the Word of God—both the written scripture restored to

mankind and the glorious Person of Jesus Christ, the Living Word,

140

restored to each believer. For Latter-day Saints, the story Joseph Smith

related of his own experience on a mysterious mountaintop in upstate

New York mirrors this Masonic legend. The Restoration is a symbol of

the recovery of the God of Heaven’s personal association with

humankind—the long-lost Word of God in all its purity and power

restored to the earth. In both cases, God demonstrated his approval of the

prophet by bestowing upon him a peculiar revelation and the restoration

of the Word.

Urim and Thummim: A Masonic Key

In his history, Joseph Smith recounted the angel’s prophecy given to

him during his evening vision in September 1823. God had prepared a

means of translating this restored scriptural record: “[T]here were two

stones in silver bows and these put into a breast plate . . . deposited with

the plates, and that was what constituted seers in ancient or former

times.”93 Described as “interpreters” in the Book of Mormon record, the

Prophet would come to call this divine key the “Urim and Thummim.”

Joseph’s brother William Smith explained that when wearing the breast

plate and “by pressing the head a little forward, the rod held the Urim

and Thummim before the eyes much like a pair of spectacles.” Because

the instrument was too large for Joseph’s eyes, he sometimes resorted to

removing them from the breastplate and “covering his eyes with a hat to

exclude the light in part to prevent eye strain.”94 Joseph continued this

practice when he later used his seer stone for translation.

One of the most detailed descriptions of the interpreters was given by

Martin Harris. In 1859, Harris recalled the object as “two stones set in a

bow of silver . . . the stones were white, like polished marble, with a few

gray streaks.” He provided the precise measurements of “two inches in

diameter, perfectly round, and about five-eighths of an inch thick at the

centre; but not so thick at the edges where they came into the bow.” The

round bar of silver joining them was “about three-eighths of an inch in

diameter, and about four inches long, which, with the two stones, would

make eight inches.” Harris further cautioned that only those selected by

God were allowed to use the interpreters:

I never dared to look into them by placing them in the hat, because Moses said that “no man could see God and live,” and we could see anything we wished by looking into them; and I could not keep the desire to see God out of my mind. And beside, we had a command to let no

man look into them, except by the command of God, lest he should “look aught and perish.”95

Harris makes it clear that Joseph Smith used the Urim and Thummim to

do more than translate the plates. For example, Harris says that Smith

141

was told by the angel to look in the spectacles to be shown the man who

would assist him. “That he did so, and he saw myself, Martin Harris,

standing before him. That struck me with surprise,” Harris recalled. “I

told him I wished him to be very careful about these things. ‘Well,’ said

he, ‘I saw you standing before me as plainly as I do now.’”96

The objects constituting the Urim and Thummim are depicted slightly

differently in these accounts. They are variously described as “crystal

stones,”97 “transparent stones, clear as crystal,”98 white stones “like

polished marble,”99 100 101 Smith’s

“glasses,” or simply “stones.”

mother, Lucy Mack Smith, described them as “two smooth three-

cornered diamonds set in glass, and the glasses were set in silver bows,

which were connected with each other in much the same way as old

fashioned spectacles.”102 The variation may be due to contemporary

folklore surrounding seer stones. The words “diamond” or “glass” were

local colloquialisms for seer stones, regardless of their appearance.103

After Harris’s loss of the first group of translated manuscript pages, the

“spectacles” were taken, and Smith began to use his chocolate-colored

seer stone to translate the record (D&C 10:1).104 He legitimized and

biblically inflected this relic of folk magic by renaming it a “Urim and

Thummim” as well, making it clear that the term was not reserved for the

relics in the Israelite temple or the stone spectacles accompanying the

plates.105 Noting the inclusivity of the term, Orson Pratt later

elaborated: “The Urim and Thummim is a stone or other substance

sanctified and illuminated by the Spirit of the living God.”106

Metaphorically, anything that God touches is spiritually transformed.

While Smith continued to receive revelation through the Urim and

Thummim, he would eventually lay aside all tools of translation, because

he himself had become the illuminated object through which revelation

came. This process of divine alchemy is what the symbols of

Freemasonry are meant to elucidate.

142

Depiction of the Urim and Thummim by W. A. Bailey, early Mormon pioneer and first

photographer in the Salt Lake Valley.

Religious reference books from the 1820s and 1830s contained

comments about the biblical Urim and Thummim, but as Michael Quinn

notes, “Joseph Smith’s description of the Urim and Thummim’s

revelations to him was inconsistent with the scholarship of his time.”107

Instead, his portrayal of the translation process is more Masonic than

ancient Hebrew. Contemporary Masonic writings show an interest in this

biblical item and illuminate Smith’s use of the implement. In New York

City in 1820, the Reverend John Stanford’s 1801 “Discourse on the Urim

and Thummim” was in sufficient demand by Freemasons to justify an

enlarged reprint.108 Stanford, not a mason, reviewed for the members of

Hiram Lodge No. 72 the various theories then current in regard to the

composition and use of the Urim and Thummim, noting his personal

disagreement with each. In particular, Stanford disagreed with the

opinion that the Urim and Thummim were one and the same with the

143

twelve jewels on the breastplate of Aaron.109 This accords with Smith’s

description of the Urim and Thummim as separate and distinct from the

breastplate. Stanford began by analyzing the name:

By the Septuagint they are called “Manifestation and Truth.” Jerom calls them “Doctrine and Judgment.” The Seventy, “Declaration,” nearly following the Septuagint. The Vulgate, “Doctrine and Truth,” that is, instruction proceeding from the perfection of wisdom and truth. An excellent Hebrewist of the last century says, Urim is clear, lucid, transparent; Thummim, perfect, complete. But, to me, the best and most critical interpretation of these two Hebrew

nouns, which are of the plural number, are “Lights and Perfections.”110

As for usage, the reverend indicated “the specified use of the Urim and

the Thummim was, to inquire before the Lord 111 .”

A few years later, George Oliver discussed the Urim and Thummim in

his 1823 Antiquities of Freemasonry. Here, Oliver included this

“mysterious power” as part of the “five distinguishing particulars” that

made up the “principal excellence” of the Solomonic Temple. “It is

clear,” wrote Oliver, “that oracles were delivered by them.” This

information thus obtained “led the Israelites safely though so many

dangers, and placed them at length in undisturbed possession of the

Promised Land.”112 Oliver’s discussion adds a possible reason for

Smith’s interest in the Urim and Thummim—its widely recognized

Masonic conception as a power to deliver oracles would legitimize the

Mormon scripture he was producing.

Further Masonic interest can be seen in William Hutchinson’s The

Spirit of Masonry. First published in 1775, its 1800 and 1810 New York

editions enjoyed robust circulation among Masons and non-Masons in

Smith’s early environs.113 In a chapter titled “The Secrecy of Masons,”

Hutchinson spoke of an ancient Jewish legend in which the Savior had

taken the Urim and Thummim, containing “the mystic words, the

TETRAGRAMMATON,” from the foundation of the temple, and was

said to carry it “concealed about him, whereby he was enabled to work

his miracles.”114

Later teachings by Latter-day Saint leaders on the Urim and Thummim

show a clear Masonic influence. For example, in the Times and Seasons,

W. W. Phelps speculated that Aaron’s Urim and Thummim “was as old

as Adam.”115 Likewise, Orson Pratt taught that Noah “had a Urim and

Thummim by which he was enabled to discern all things pertaining to

the ark, and its pattern.”116

More important than any discussion of the biblical Urim and

Thummim was the Royal Arch Masonic tradition of the “key” found

144

with the stone box containing Enoch’s gold plate. This key, subject of

many Masonic lectures, is both literal and symbolic. Not only could it

open the box, but it was also the means whereby the mysterious

characters on the plate of gold might be read. In this Degree, the High

Priest examines the box and finds a key with which he is able to read the

words of the book inside. It is discovered to be the Book of the Law:

“Long lost, now found, Holiness to the Lord.”117

For Smith, that key was the Urim and Thummim—a revelatory device

and a creative expansion upon a Masonic theme. Like the key in

Masonry, it is found within the box together with the mysterious

characters upon the golden plates. His identification of the interpreters

with that Masonic key is seen in Lucy Mack Smith’s account of the

discovery:

“Mother,” said [Joseph] “do not be uneasy. All is right. See here: I have got the key.” . . . The thing which [I] spoke of that Joseph termed a Key was indeed nothing more nor less than a Urim and Thummim, by which the angel manifested those things to him that were shown him in vision, [and] by the which he could also at any time ascertain the approach of danger either

to himself or the record and for this cause he kept these things constantly about his person. 118

Masonry, Anti-Masonry, and the Book of Mormon

Some have wondered why, if the discovery of the golden plates was

associated so closely with Masonry, there are elements in the Book of

Mormon that seem anti-Masonic. For example, the phrase “secret

combinations”—a pejorative commonly applied to nineteenth-century

Freemasons, especially in the wake of the William Morgan affair—is

used to describe secretive groups within the Book of Mormon that show

marked similarities to popular images of the Masonic fraternity (Ether

8:18–25).119 Their clandestine nature, claims of ancient origin, oaths to

protect one another in iniquity, and commandeering of high offices are

roundly condemned in the narrative, leading contemporaries to describe

the book as anti-Masonic. However, those who promote this view seem

not to have noticed the other positive Masonic correspondences

throughout the book.120 Conversely, those who discredit anti-Masonry

in the Book of Mormon because of its implications of anachronisms in

the narrative attempt to distance the work from any Masonic influence

whatsoever.121

Both of those responses fail to recognize that the Book of Mormon

“combinations” are put in their proper perspective when seen as textual

evidence of “spurious Masons”—those who use their power as members

of an oath-bound community for immoral purposes. As discussed in

145
