purification and restoration came to characterize Smith’s own theological

perspective. Rather than being merely anti-Masonic, the Book of

Mormon presents a comprehensive view of two rival groups: the

authentic Masons and the spurious Masons. Nephites—the followers and

descendants of the founding prophet Lehi and his son Nephi—

correspond with authentic Masons as described by Masonic writer

George Oliver (see Chapter 1). They descend from a patriarchal

priesthood line connected to Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and Moses,

and they possess skills of metalworking, woodcraft, shipbuilding, and so

on. In a symbolic act of true religion, they marked their arrival in their

promised land by building a Solomonic Temple in the Masonic tradition

(2 Ne. 5:16).

Throughout the Book of Mormon, the reader also encounters those

who contend against the pure and righteous strain of Priesthood. These

peoples are a corrupt version of the Nephites. They take oaths, form

clandestine conspiracies, and cover the iniquity of their fellows. At their

place of worship, they build a Babel-like tower, the Rameumptom, which

for Latter-day Saint readers has long stood as a symbol of priestcraft

(Alma 31:13–22).122 Gadianton, leader of one of these secret societies,

exemplifies political corruption and conspiracy, becoming a foil to the

more righteous political and ecclesiastical leaders like Mosiah and Alma

(Hel. 2:4–5).

In addition to these narrative parallels, several small references

indicate the Masonic connection of these secret combinations. In one

passage, Satan leads them by the neck with a “flaxen cord” into works of

darkness “until he bindeth them with his strong cords forever” (2 Ne.

26:22). This implement is similar to the Masonic cable-tow. In a later

passage, the Gadianton robbers are described as having “a lamb-skin

about their loins” (paralleling the lamb-skin aprons worn by Masons) and

being “dyed in blood” as they come forth in battle against the Nephites

(3 Ne. 4:7). George Oliver’s description of spurious Masons fits the

actions of these groups: “Their rites of divine worship became fierce and

bloody, implacable and severe; and this produced a corresponding

change in the disposition of the heart.”123 Just as the spurious Masons

are “a retrograde movement from original purity,”124 the secret

combinations of the Book of Mormon are a corruption of the Nephite

priesthood order and act as a modern warning against spurious Masonry

and a prefiguration that Smith would overcome the apostate Masonry of

146

his day. Such a split between the true and spurious is acknowledged by

Mormon apologist Stephen Smoot, who frames the Gadianton robbers of

the Book of Mormon as a corruption of the temple priesthood:

To summarize, Mormon found the Gadianton Robbers such a grave threat to the Nephites precisely because he saw them as reviving an ancient counterfeit temple priesthood. They were more than political insurrectionists. To Mormon, they were no less than false priests of

Satan who were fundamentally perverting the Nephite sense of holiness.125

In an environment ripe with debates over the value of Freemasonry,

the Masonic elements in the Book of Mormon were immediately pointed

to by both believers and critics of the new religion. In an article in the

Geauga Gazette appearing in March of 1831, editor Billy Perkins wrote:

The Mormon Bible is anti-masonic, and it is a singular truth that every one of its followers, so far as we are able to ascertain, are anti-masons. . . . Martin Harris is quoted as saying The Book of Mormon is “the Anti-masonick Bible,” and that all who do not believe in it will be

damned. 126

However, the following week, Eber D. Howe, editor of the nearby

Painesville Telegraph, took Perkins to task, saying that it was an error to

believe that all who had embraced the Book of Mormon were anti-

Masons.

You appear not to be aware that some “zealous masons” and several “republican jacks,” have beset Jo Smith for “more light.” And perhaps you have yet to learn that the Mormon bible was

printed and sent forth to the world, from a masonic printing office,127 under a masonic, or some other injunction of secrecy. You may also discover a very striking resemblance between

masonry and mormonism. 128

Contemporary descriptions of the circumstances of the Book of

Mormon’s discovery make it evident that Latter-day Saints and those

who wrote about them disagreed about whether the Book of Mormon

was pro- or anti-Masonic. While Alexander Campbell, writing in 1831,

suggested that the Book of Mormon answered all the great controversies

of the day, including the “question of Freemasonry,”129 it is less certain

in the early press how the question was resolved. If Smith had indeed

“decided” the question of Freemasonry, what conclusion were its readers

to make?

In his book The Refiner’s Fire, John L. Brooke agrees that “Smith’s

controversy was not with the fundamental ideals of Freemasonry.”

Instead, Brooke contends that Joseph Smith embraced the pure Masonic

tradition but condemned aspects of the brotherhood he believed had

fallen into disrepute and apostasy.130 Smith’s teaching and actions

suggest a belief that just as there was a spurious and Satanic Masonry

that was subverted to evil ends, there was also a true and Celestial

147

Masonry that would be the vehicle for the ushering in of the Christian

millennium.131 Both of these Masonic iterations find space in the Book

of Mormon. From this perspective, the newly restored “Book of the

Law,” long lost in the Americas but now found, was not condemning

Freemasonry; instead, it spoke against “spurious Masonry,” a corruption

of the true Craft, the restoration of which the record itself presaged. This

understanding challenges the common assumption that Smith drastically

reversed his views of Masonry over time from being “anti-Masonic”

during the period of the translation to fully adopting Masonry in the final

years of his life. Instead, through the lens of the divisions of authentic

and spurious Masonry, we can see that Smith’s opinions about Masonry

remained consistent.

Notes

148

149

150

151

enclosed in a circle, the Greater Triangle itself is conceived as surrounded by the Companions in the Chapter.” These brothers arrayed themselves into a circle representing “the Sphere of the Universe” and “a type of God.” He continues: “On the plate of gold there is an upright Triangle; a second Triangle is needed to form the Star and Seal of Solomon, but this is outside the Triangle of Light. The two form an antithesis, one pointing downwards the other upwards, the two being harmoniously interlaced.” F. de P. Castells, Antiquity of the Holy Royal Arch: The Supreme Degree in Freemasonry, 142–43.

152

doubled, a span shall be the length thereof, and a span shall be the breadth thereof. A span is 10 inches, which is the estimated size of the breast of a man of an ordinary stature. The length was double; so that being folded, in the interior, it formed a sort of purse, or pocket, into which the Urim and the Thummim might be deposited; and, as easily taken out for the purposes intended.” John Stafford, A Discourse on the Urim and Thummim, Delivered Before Hiram Lodge, No. 72, at Mount Pleasant, Westchester County, on St. John’s Day, Dec. 27, 8; emphasis in original.

153

soured on what he then perceived to be an “anti-Masonic” project and required serious persuading to publish. Even then, he had an interest in allowing Obadiah Dogberry access to the Book of Mormon galleys on which he based his anti-Mormon Book of Pukei.

154
