MORMONISM’S MASONIC MIDRASH

Joy! the secret vault is found; full the sunbeam falls within,

Pointing, darkly underground, to the treasure we would win;

They have brought it forth to light, and again it cheers the earth;

All its leaves are purely bright, shining in their newest worth.

—The Royal Arch Song, or Leaves of the Sacred Treasure Made

Bright Again1

Like many of the prolific nineteenth-century Freemasons, Joseph Smith was fascinated by the ancient Jewish world. As he began producing his own scriptural texts, he dove into a readily available pool of Jewish antiquity collected by Masonic writers of the

day. Much of Smith’s oeuvre of religious literature can be described as

“Mormon Masonic midrash” because of the simultaneous influence of

both Jewish and Masonic writing.

In the Jewish tradition, midrash is an interpretive expansion of a text

of scripture that transcends simple analysis of religious, legal, or moral

teachings. It fills in gaps left in biblical narratives regarding events and

personalities that are only briefly mentioned. The purpose of midrash

was to resolve problems in the interpretation or harmonization of

difficult passages of the Hebrew Bible. For example, the story of Lilith

as Adam’s first wife originated as an explanation for the two separate

accounts of women being created in Genesis 1:27 and 2:21–23.

Midrashic expansions of the biblical text resulted in oral as well as

written supplements to the scriptural canon.2

Freemasonry borrowed vigorously from Jewish midrash, and the

ancient tales were further embellished as they were brought into Masonic

lore and ritual. Many of the Masonic degrees employed rewritten and

mythologized biblical stories, furnished with layers of allegorical content

to teach moral lessons. The Hiram Abiff legend is one such midrash, an

expansion of the biblical account of building Solomon’s Temple. As in

the case of Jewish midrash, literal historicity in Masonic lore was not as

important as the lessons supplied.

Following Masonic convention, Smith increasingly functioned as a

prophet called to restore lost or corrupted tradition. He used creative

textual expansions to fill in gaps in religious understanding, grounded

155

upon his revelations and prophetic authority. His inspired reworking of

texts was often intended to establish, extend, reframe, or legitimize new

doctrines and concepts, or to clarify ideas that had been only partially

elucidated. In doing so, Smith used the Masonic worldview to provide a

mythical backdrop for the emerging LDS ritual tradition and to imbue

the religion he was founding with meaning and appeal.

The Book of Mormon

Latter-day Saints accept the Book of Mormon as a prophetic

restoration of long-lost ancient scripture. Whether or not one accepts the

historicity of the Book of Mormon, the process of bringing forth this

book was affected by several factors present in Joseph Smith’s

environment. While some have noted the presence of “a mixture of New

Testament passages and nineteenth-century revivalisms” in the text,3 it

also contains elements included in the Masonic expansion of the Bible

story. A mélange of Jewish midrash-like textual expansions and a

reliance upon Masonic legendary history is readily observable.

Mormon and Masonic Exoduses

Notably, the Book of Mormon begins at the same period of time as the

Royal Arch degree: the reign of biblical Zedekiah and the Babylonian

captivity (1 Ne. 1:4). The Mormon narrative relates the adventures of the

prophet Lehi, who preached repentance to the people of Zedekiah’s

Jerusalem and warned them of the desolating scourge and captivity to

come. Prior to the arrival of Nebuchadnezzar’s armies, Lehi escaped the

city into the desert with an extended family group. According to the

Book of Mormon, Zedekiah’s son Mulek also escaped death and

captivity by fleeing across the ocean. In the same Promised Land, he

founded a nation that later encountered and merged with Lehi’s

descendants.

Both the Masonic and the Mormon midrash develop similarly by

building a story around the biblical narrative and adding details and

figures possessing a great deal of symbolic meaning. In doing so, they

introduce new values or provide new settings for familiar tales.

Historically, the Royal Arch degree has utilized the story of Moses and

the burning bush (see Exodus 3) to develop the theme of prophetic

theophany and the return and recovery of truth. An enactment of the

scripture is narrated and led by the Principal Sojourner immediately

following the taking of the obligation for Royal Arch Masonry.4 The

156

Book of Mormon includes its own adaptation of Exodus 3, in which Lehi

plays the part of the Principal Sojourner:

And it came to pass as he [Lehi] prayed unto the Lord, there came a pillar of fire and dwelt upon a rock before him; and he saw and heard much; and because of the things which he saw and heard he did quake and tremble exceedingly. (1 Ne. 1:6)

One of the most powerful biblical themes is the Exodus from Egypt,

which is recalled throughout the Old and New Testaments, emphasizing

the principle of deliverance and Divine guidance. The Royal Arch degree

overtly compares the Egyptian Exodus with the escape from Babylon.

After the three representative “Most Excellent Masters” symbolically

traverse the desert wastes and rugged roads lying between Babylon and

Jerusalem, they arrive at the first of several partitioning veils. Here they

are told that “none are permitted to engage in this great and glorious

work” of rebuilding the temple “except the true descendants of the

twelve tribes of Israel”; they must therefore trace their genealogy and

state their intentions. “We are of your own brethren and kin,” they

confidently assert, “. . . true descendants of those noble families of

Giblimites who wrought so hard at the building of the first temple.”5

Being liberated by Cyrus, they “are now returned to assist in rebuilding

the house of the Lord.”6 Principles taught in this ritual highlight the

importance of following a spiritual path and relying upon God over the

rough passages of life. Restoration is also a strong leitmotif, through

building upon strong foundations laid by others.

Miniature book fob circa 1919. Seven leaves, each engraved with Masonic implements. From the

collection of Wor. Bro. Paul McEvoy of Goulburn Menturia Lodge 3478, England. Made by

Joseph Woolfson, of Glasgow, Scotland. Used with permission.

157

In a similar way, the Book of Mormon repeats the themes of escape

and deliverance. In his exodus from Jerusalem, Lehi passes through the

same Arabian desert to which the Masons refer in their Royal Arch

ritual. At one point, Lehi asks his son Nephi to return to Jerusalem to

obtain a book of scriptural writings inscribed on brass plates from a

relative, the nefarious Laban. Nephi’s courageous response to this

difficult directive is the ringing declaration, “I will go and do the things

which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no

commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for

them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them” (1

Ne. 3:7). The statement is strongly evocative of the Royal Arch ritual,

wherein the initiates are told they are needed to rebuild the city and

Temple: “[W]e will endeavor to overcome every obstacle, endure every

hardship, and brave every danger, to accomplish the great and glorious

work upon which we have entered.”7 In the Book of Mormon, the

Nephites are the genealogical heirs of the true builders of Jerusalem.

Lehi’s son Nephi leads the group to a promised land in the Americas

where they establish a city and a temple of their own “after the manner

of the temple of Solomon” (2 Ne. 5:16).

Smiths

Nephi is an important character in the construction of the Mormon and

Masonic midrash. His return to Jerusalem composes a mythic reversal of

the Masonic legend of Akirop. In the Masonic tale, the protagonist

Joabert is sent out of Jerusalem with eight others to avenge the murder of

Hiram Abiff. In a cave, Joabert finds one of the assassins, Akirop, asleep

with his sword lying by his feet. Joabert takes up the sword and pierces

the villain in the head and heart, then decapitates Akirop as bloody

retribution for his treachery. With the spoils found in the cave, he and his

brothers return to the Holy City.8 In Masonry, the action of beheading is

used in story form as an archetype to represent vengeance. In the

Mormon version, the decapitation is performed as a response to divine

command. When Nephi finds Laban lying in a drunken stupor, he

determines that he must listen to the voice of the Spirit and make the

acquisition of the brass plates his priority in order to preserve a scriptural

tradition from being lost. Nephi takes Laban “by the hair of the head”

and decapitates him with his own sword (1 Ne. 4:8–18). He then assumes

Laban’s identity by dressing in his clothes.

158

By impersonating Laban, Nephi is able to convince his servant Zoram

to open the treasury. The two make their way outside the gates of the city

with the brass plates. When Zoram discovers that Nephi is not his master,

he begins to flee, but Nephi binds him fast with the strength of his arms.

Zoram takes an oath of secrecy and is promised he will become a “free

man” (1 Ne. 4:19–33). The pattern of binding, covenanting, and loosing

—or freeing—is common in every degree of Freemasonry. Additionally,

the Royal Arch midrashic expansion of the themes of exile, return, and

recovery is also a major point of emphasis in Nephi’s story.

Nephi is skilled in shipbuilding as well as metallurgy. He forges tools

that help his family survive in the wilderness (1 Ne. 17:8–16); he builds

a boat that ensures the survival of his people and carries them to the

Promised Land (18:1–2); and he engraves a holy record—a sacred

artifact—on thin plates of ore (19:1–5). Thus, he calls to mind the

Masonic “Legend of the Smith,” an iconic figure represented by several

characters.9 First, the biblical Tubal Cain is described as someone who

“forged all kinds of tools out of copper and iron” (Gen. 4:22 NIV).10 His

profession is closely connected with the Masons’ craft and thoroughly

described in Masonic lore. Noah, builder of the ark, is another who fits

into this tradition. He is an individual with great mystical significance in

Masonry, and his story is prevalent in early Masonic documents.11 For

example, Masonic author Manly Hall connects the Legend of the Smith

with Noah and his cosmic ark,12 and the 1726 Masonic Graham

Manuscript ties Noah to Hiram Abiff, a later smith who forges the

implements for the temple.13

159

Depiction of the legend of Akirop in David Bernard, Light on Masonry, 1829.

The Book of Mormon opens and then closes with Masonic “smiths.”

In its final pages, the brother of Jared, clearly a smith, comprises aspects

of Tubal Cain, Noah, and Hiram Abiff. He builds barges as directed by

the Lord, and he melts stones from a rock, which are then touched by the

Lord’s finger to provide light during his oceanic journey (Ether 3).

Lineage and Language

The Book of Mormon emphasizes the importance of lineage and

affirms the tradition of a pure Hebraic language (see 1 Ne. 5:14–16;

Morm. 9:33; Omni 1:17–18). Masonic writer Francisco Castells points

out that in 1687 the Mason Word was understood to be “a secret

Signal”—a Hebrew word coming from “at least the time of Solomon”

and perhaps “as old as the Tower of Babel.” In those days, it was

commonly understood that Hebrew had been the original form of

speech.14 This idea is first mentioned in the Book of Mormon in

association with the people of Jared, a family group who, with a few

others, “came forth . . . from the great tower, at the time the Lord

confounded the language of the people, and swore in his wrath that they

should be scattered upon all the face of the earth” (Ether 1:33). Their

prophetic leader, the brother of Jared, asked the Lord not to confound

their language as he had others (v. 35),15 and through him the Lord led

the Jaredites through the wilderness to the seashore where they built

small watertight barges with peaked ends. The barges, which would carry

160

the Jaredites to the Promised Land, are suggestive of the Masonic

version of Noah’s Ark, built upon the same principles of “true

Geometry” utilized in the Tower of Babel.16

Illuminating Stones

One tracing board—a teaching aid depicting the various emblems and

symbols of Freemasonry—used in the mid- to late 1700s includes some

interesting elements.17 This particular board depicts Noah’s Ark, the

Tower of Babel, and a rough stone being smoothed by a hammer and

fire.18 It brings to mind the story of the brother of Jared with sixteen

stones he fashions, which the Lord touches with his finger so that they

would glow and illuminate the darkness of the barges (Ether 3–16; 6:2–

3).

Masonic tracing board pictured in Le Parfait Maçon, 1744.

The Book of Mormon verses here are similar to Jewish midrash on

Genesis 6. In this chapter, God instructs Noah to illuminate the ark by

tzohar taaseh, meaning “a brightness you will make.” Jewish esoteric

161

tradition considers the tzohar a luminous gemstone holding the

primordial light of creation. Targum Yonatan elaborated: “During the

entire twelve months that Noah was in the Ark he did not require the

light of the sun by day or the light of the moon by night, but he had a

polished stone which he hung up—when it was dim, he knew it was day,

when it was bright, he knew it was night.”19

The Polychronicon, an epic fourteenth-century work of world history

and theology, contains a similar story. Mormon apologist Hugh Nibley,

writing in the 1960s, considered the correspondence between Jaredite

stones and Noah’s tzohar an indication of Smith’s prophetic ability.

Nibley insisted the archaic sources could not have been known to Smith

in the early 1800s.20 However, Smith may have been familiar with this

curious tale through Freemasonry, which draws upon sources such as

Higdon’s Polychronicon for its legends of Enoch and Noah.21

Passing through the Veil

The brother of Jared provides an example of a Book of Mormon exile

who achieves a Royal Arch-inspired exaltation. In the degree, the

candidate is instructed with the knowledge that will allow him to pass

through the veils and into the presence of the Divine Council, situated

within the Holy of Holies. This passing through veils is a critical part of

the Royal Arch “exaltation” of the candidate, where he has the Word

restored to him as a reward for his labors and is then crowned as a

companion to “those who know.” The Book of Mormon describes the

brother of Jared thus: “And because of the knowledge of this man he

could not be kept from beholding within the veil. . . . Wherefore, having

this perfect knowledge of God, he could not be kept from within the

veil” (Ether 3:19–20). As in Freemasonry, this instruction was

confidential: “Behold, thou shalt not suffer these things which ye have

seen and heard to go forth unto the world. . . . [W]herefore, ye shall

treasure up the things which ye have seen and heard, and show it to no

man” (v. 21).

The brother of Jared was instructed to record these confidential

teachings and “seal them up” for a future generation, and to do so in a

language that “no one can interpret,” that is, “in a language that . . .

cannot be read” (v. 22). In order for the writings to be read at a future

time, two interpreter stones, which Joseph Smith would call a “key,”

were divinely created and given to the brother of Jared to include with

his record (vv. 23–24).

162

Swarm of Bees

One of the most enduring early Mormon symbols is the beehive, an

emblem which has been described as “link[ing] the Mormon community

across time while symbolizing the Mormon pioneer past.”22 Given the

many additional symbols of Masonry that appear alongside the beehive

in early Mormon art and architecture, it is imprudent to disregard the

influence of the Fraternity in association with this iconic symbol. The

beehive predates Mormon use and is a conspicuous part of Masonic

symbolic teaching. According to Jonathan Swift, writing in the

eighteenth century,

A bee has in all ages and nations, been the grand hieroglyphick of masonry, because it excels all other living creatures in the contrivance and commodiousness of its habitation or comb. . . .

[M]asonry or building, seemeth to be of the very essence or nature of the 23 bee .

Swift explained that what Masons of his day called a lodge was

anciently known as “a HIVE of freemasons. . . . [W]hen a dissention

happens in a lodge, the going off and forming another lodge, is to this

day called SWARMING.”24 One of the earliest Mormon appropriations

of the bee is found in the Book of Mormon description of what the

Jaredites brought with them on their journey to the New World: “And

they did also carry with them deseret, which, by interpretation, is a

honey bee; and thus they did carry with them swarms of bees, and all

manner of that which was upon the face of the land, seeds of every kind”

(Ether 2:3; emphasis added). This passage expresses to those familiar

with the Masonic symbolism of the honeybee that the Jaredites are a

remnant of Israel, or a “swarm of bees” separated from the main hive in

Jerusalem and brought to the Promised Land to spread true religion.

Drawing further similarities between the ark-building Noah and the

brother of Jared, George Oliver reports,

The Beehive . . . teaches us that as we came into the world rational and intelligent beings, so we should ever be industrious ones; never sitting down contented while our fellow creatures

around us are in want.25

It is thus an appropriate symbol for the prophets who individually

saved their families and began new peoples on uninhabited lands after

departing from their vessels. Thus, Oliver writes that the swarm of bees

“symbolized only the just man [Noah] and his pious family, not the

incorrigible race which perished beneath the waves of the deluge.”26

Freemasons have long been fascinated with Jewish Kabbalah, a form

of midrash kept secret and hidden from all but a select group initiated

into its mysteries. The bee and beehive symbols are a Masonic example

163

of using kabbalah. Outwardly, the bee is presented as a representation of

the quality of “industriousness.” The hive suggests a harmonious social

order brought about by enlightened, transformed individuals who strive

to bring about the Grand Design. Yet, there is a secret meaning.

Freemason George W. Bullamore postulated that the symbol possesses a

meaning that was kept from the Entered Apprentice in many lodges but

was more fitted for the third degree: that is, resurrection, or the return of

the soul.27

It has been suggested that the symbol had a Kabbalistic meaning in

Mormonism as well. Fred Collier, compiler of Brigham Young’s sermons

and teachings, correctly noted that although the beehive is readily

recognized as the Utah state emblem, “very few comprehend the essence

of its symbolism as it existed in the mind of Brigham Young.” Collier

explained it was represented to the public as “a capitalistic symbol for

industry” but that its inner meaning went far deeper. The beehive, a

symbol pertaining to the temple, signified “the order and government of

the Kingdom of God as it will exist under the administration of the Royal

Priesthood.”28

Prophet, Priest, and King

In the Royal Arch tradition, the Book of the Law is restored through

the prophet Haggai, high priest Jeshua, and king Zerubbabel. The

threefold classification “prophet, priest, and king” was symbolically

applied to Royal Arch Masons after the passing of the veils. George

Oliver considered this threefold office God’s perfect system of

government, and Royal Arch Freemasons hold that this is the “perfect

patriarchal order” exemplified by Adam, Shem, Abraham, Noah, and

Moses—each considered a prophet, priest, and king (as well as a Grand

Master) in Masonic tradition.

Latter-day Saints applied this munus triplex to the Old Testament

patriarchs and dispensation heads, including additional prophets of their

own. As early as 1830, Alexander Campbell recognized and took issue

with the Book of Mormon’s portrayal of Nephi as “prophet, priest, and

king,” a phrase that Christians have reserved solely for Jesus Christ.29

By 1844 Joseph Smith had assumed these offices in his organization of

the Council of Fifty.30 Additionally, he made it a critical part of his

theology that Latter-day Saints, like Royal Arch Masons, could

participate in that perfect patriarchal order.

164

The “Joseph Smith Translation”

As chronicler and developer of Masonic lore, George Oliver amplified

his readers’ understanding of the prophetic office by elaborating on the

lives of the biblical patriarchs and their descendants. Pulling from

various legends and lore, he gave these characters vocations and

professions, many based on Masonry. For example, Lamech is depicted

building a walled city on the principles of operative Masonry, thus

forming a society with civil government and social order.31 Oliver

describes Enoch as a scientific researcher, devoting his attention to the

investigation of celestial bodies.32 Abraham was pictured as “eminently

distinguished for a competent knowledge” of arithmetic, which he taught

to his family and friends, eventually introducing this science into

Egypt.33

Certainly aware of these extra-biblical narratives of these prophetic

characters, from the early 1830s, Joseph Smith was concerned with the

Masonic idea that portions of the biblical record had been lost. He

observed, “[M]any important points, touching the salvation of man, had

been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled.”34 While this

theme is developed in the pages of the Book of Mormon (see 3 Ne. 23:6–

13; 1 Ne. 13:26, 40), by the time the book was being printed at Egbert

Grandin’s print shop, Smith determined to directly remedy the

shortcomings he saw in the Bible. A large edition of the King James

Version that included the Old Testament Apocrypha was obtained from

Grandin’s bookstore in Palmyra on October 8, 1829, for $3.75.35 By

June of 1830, Smith was using the volume “to restore and clarify vital

points of history and doctrine missing from the Bible.”36 Although he

called his work a “translation,” it was not a literal translation from

ancient documents. Rather, it is perhaps described best as an inspired

commentary that is clearly midrashic in nature.

Philip Barlow observed that Smith made six basic types of changes

from the King James Version in the Joseph Smith Translation. Besides

common-sense changes and grammatical corrections, these included four

types of revisions that epitomized Jewish scriptural midrash:

Lengthy revealed additions that had little or no biblical parallel,

such as the visions of Moses and Enoch, and the passage on

Melchizedek;

165

“Interpretive additions,” often signaled by the phrase “or in other

words,” which Smith appended to a passage he wished to clarify;

“Harmonization,” in which Smith reconciled passages that seemed

to conflict with other passages;

“Not easily classifiable”: here one can observe only that the

meaning of a given text was changed, often idiosyncratically. 37

Smith appears to have drawn deeply from the well of Masonic legend

and tradition to frame his expansions as he worked through the Bible,

particularly within the book of Genesis.38

Among Christian churches in the nineteenth century, Latter-day Saints

were largely unique in teaching that God created the earth out of

preexisting materials.39 In explaining his rendering of Genesis 1:1,

Smith taught,

Now the word create came from the word baurau, which does not mean to create out of nothing; it means to organize. . . . God had materials to organize the world out of chaos. . . . The pure principles of element are principles which can never be destroyed; they may be

organized and re-organized, but not destroyed; they had no beginning, and can have no end.40

The principle “order from disorder”—ordo ab chao—is one of the

oldest mottos of Ancient Craft Masonry. The idea hails back to ancient

Near Eastern mythologies and classical Greek creation myths that

describe the creation of the world as resulting from the actions of a god

or gods upon already-existing primeval matter, or chaos. Both John

Browne in his 1802 Masonic Master-Key and James Hardie in his 1818

The New Free-Mason’s Monitor spoke of the elements and materials

making up the earth as existing “without form or distinction.” God

commanded the world into being by bringing these resources “from

chaos to perfection.”41 Thomas Starr King, Grand Orator of the Grand

Lodge of California in 1853, explained:

The Almighty is the Organizer. He creates elements in order to mingle and fraternize them in composition and products. In the original chaos, matter was unorganized. The process of death is disorganization. All the marvels of beauty, all the victories of life, are exhibitions and

triumphs of organizing force.42

The notion of creation out of existing materials (ordo ab chao) makes

perfect sense for a craftsman or builder who works in precisely this way.

Finding it in religion—especially in Christianity, which interprets

Genesis 1:1 to be creatio ex nihilo—is unusual.

As he continued revising the book of Genesis into what is known to

Latter-day Saints as the Book of Moses, Smith crafted an explicitly

166

Masonic tale. In it, Adam and Eve were given commandments to

worship God and offer Him “the firstlings of their flocks”:

And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me. And then the angel spake, saying: This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth. (Moses 5:6–7)

This idea is echoed in George Oliver’s analysis of animal sacrifices. He

places them as far back as Adam and Eve and explains they must be

“typical of the one sacrifice of the Lamb without spot, as a propitiation

for the sins of the whole world,” so that they may “preserve alive in

men’s minds the true knowledge of God.” He continues,

Hence Abel’s sacrifice was more acceptable than that of Cain, because it was an animal sacrifice, and offered conformably to the divine appointment; while that of Cain, being unbloody, was an abomination, because it did not contain any reference to the atonement of

Christ.43

In Smith’s revision, after the ritual sacrifice by Cain and Abel, the older

brother was angry because God rejected his offering while accepting

Abel’s sacrifice of a sheep carcass. This prompted Cain to make a secret,

recognizably Masonic, pact with Satan. “Swear unto me by thy throat,”

demanded the devil, “and if thou tell it thou shalt die; and swear thy

brethren by their heads, and by the living God, that they tell it not; for if

they tell it, they shall surely die” (Moses 5:29).

Upon making this oath, Cain exclaimed, “Truly I am Mahan, the

master of this great secret, that I may murder and get gain.” The

arrangement was referred to as a “secret combination,” and thereafter

Cain became known by the title “Master Mahan” (Moses 5:31, 51).

Several commentators have attempted to account for this name. Hugh

Nibley has suggested that the term means “great keeper of secrets,”

deriving from an Arabic word Mustirr (keeper of secret), and a Sanskrit

word 44 Maha (great). D. Michael Quinn traces “Mahan” to a Scottish

name for Satan, Mahoun 45 However, equally (pronounced “mahan”).

plausible as these two proposals is the idea that “Master Mahan” is

simply a variation of “Master Mason.” Clearly, the word “master” is not

at issue, as Cain himself confirms it: “truly I am . . . the master.” As he

has been initiated into a degenerate or corrupted tradition, the notion that

the word mason has become corrupted into mahan—suggesting a

degenerate or spurious form—makes literary sense. Further, Cain not

only “swear[s] by his throat,” as described in Light on Masonry’s

exposure of the Entered Apprentice degree, he announces “I am free,”

apparently alluding to the Free-Mason.46

167

The story continues to support a Masonic interpretation as Cain

produces a son named Enoch,47 whose descendants “entered into a

covenant with Satan, after the manner of Cain” and also become “Master

Mahan, master of that great secret which was administered unto Cain by

Satan” (Moses 5:49). In doing so, these cursed children of Enoch act as a

foil to the righteous Enoch and offer an illustration of George Oliver’s

authentic-versus-spurious theory of Freemasonry.48

In Oliver’s view, God, the “Great Architect of the universe,” was the

founder of Freemasonry and initiated Adam into the principles of

speculative Masonry in the Garden. This authentic form of the Craft was

passed down over the generations to Seth, Enoch, Noah, Shem (who

Oliver identifies as Melchizedek), Abraham, and down through the

Jewish line to Solomon.49 Then it was passed on through Christianity. In

opposition to God, Satan was the author of spurious Masonry, which he

taught to Cain. This was then disseminated through Cain’s posterity to

Lamech, ultimately leading to the Deluge. Following the Flood, spurious

Masonry survived through Noah’s son Ham and was eventually passed

on to the pharaoh of Egypt who preserved the corrupted secrets of false

Masonry.50

Smith’s revision of the Genesis stories adds a lengthy passage about

Cain’s descendant Lamech, who learns that “Irad, the son of Enoch,

having known their secret, began to reveal it unto the sons of Adam”

(Moses 5:49). In response, “Lamech, being angry, slew him, not like

unto Cain, his brother Abel, for the sake of getting gain, but he slew him

for the oath’s sake” (v. 50; emphasis added). Such a murder corresponds

to the William Morgan abduction in which Morgan was believed to have

been killed by Freemasons to enforce the Masonic obligation of secrecy.

Royal Arch Masonry’s Enoch: The Authentic Tradition Restored

Just as Freemasonry includes an Enoch midrash, so does Latter-day

Saint scripture revealed by Joseph Smith.51 A lengthy portion of Smith’s

revision of the Bible is a textual expansion of three short verses in

Genesis 5:

And Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah three hundred years, and begat sons and daughters: And all the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty and five years: And Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God took him. (vv. 22–24)

While recent scholarship has shown that Enoch pseudepigrapha

expanding on these passages may have been available on the western

168

frontier by 1830,52 it seems more plausible that Smith would utilize

Masonic tradition rather than other sources for inspiration in his Enoch

writings.53 Not detailed anywhere in the Masonic ritual itself, the

theophany and heavenly ascent in the 1 Enoch pseudepigrapha and other

ancient sources formed the basis of a legendary background to the

culminating Royal Arch degree, created between 1725 and 1730. Here,

Enoch was the archetypal seeker who held the ability to uncover and

preserve the name of God for future generations.54 Given the saturation

of Masonic discussion, exposés, and resources in the early nineteenth

century, a thorough education in the Masonic Enoch legend was readily

available to Smith both through Masonic authors Thomas Webb and

George Oliver and by way of anti-Masonic activity in the New York

area.55

Thomas Smith Webb’s highly influential monitor of early American

Masonic ritual presents Enoch as a righteous man, devotedly studying

the seven liberal arts and sciences with special attention to astronomy. 56

In the Masonic telling of the Enoch story, humanity is elevated by the

sciences,57 and Enoch’s own studies have such a life-altering effect upon

him that God promises him a special revelation according to his desire.

He is then transported to the top of a mountain where God appears in a

vision. The characters of the Divine name are given upon a triangular

plate of gold and restored to mankind. Enoch is then called to preach to

the degenerate inhabitants of the world who, he has foreseen, will soon

be destroyed in a great flood.

The Masonic legend emphasizes Enoch’s acquisition of specialized

knowledge (gnosis). To preserve this knowledge, he builds two pillars

atop a mountain, and upon these he engraves knowledge of the arts and

sciences, as well as directions on how to find the name of God so it will

not be lost to the world in the general destruction. One pillar is made of

brass to withstand water; the other is made of marble to withstand fire.

In the ritual, the candidate participates in the appendant story of the

revelation of the Divine Name of God to Moses on Mount Horeb. Later,

the candidate will make a symbolic ascent to the celestial temple to seek

the divine name. Thus, Enoch, Moses, and the candidate are thematically

linked in a recurring motif.

The Masonic Enoch tradition, with its esoteric, mystical, and symbolic

aspects, provides important spiritual insights to Masons. Enoch’s journey

represents the apotheosis each Royal Arch Mason seeks to achieve.

169

Through ritual, the initiate, like Enoch, is called by God, experiences a

theophany, receives a token of his calling (the divine name), and

experiences a heavenly ascent. The candidate sees this dramatic

reenactment as a symbolic journey inside himself to discover that which

is lost. Having accomplished this task, he is transformed into a

companion of the company of heaven. He literally stands beside the

throne (i.e., “Metatron”) and becomes the reflection of the divine. As a

part of the Western mystery tradition, one of the fundamental

preoccupations of Masonic ritual and tradition is this same perfection of

human personality and subsequent transformation of human society. Of

the legend of Enoch, Freemasons say: “We must view it, therefore, as an

allegory; but as one which has a profound symbolic character. It was

intended to teach the doctrine of Divine Truth.”58 Restored to each

Mason by a theological working within the ritual itself, the lost name is

recovered by the initiate, and then a crown is symbolically placed upon

his head.

Joseph Smith’s Enoch experiences a similar theophany and call to

preach as in the Masonic legend. On the mount Simeon, he is “clothed

upon with glory” and sees the Lord face-to-face. He is then shown the

world and all the people in it and is taught about Jesus Christ, the coming

Savior (Moses 7:2–11). Here, Enoch is a patriarchal “type,” whose

experience is mirrored by other key figures. When they receive their

commissions, Smith’s Enoch, Moses, Abraham, and the Book of

Mormon’s Nephi and brother of Jared—like the Enoch of Masonic

legend—experience reviews of history and visions of the peoples of the

earth, followed by cosmic transformation.

In both the Masonic and the Mormon traditions, Enoch works to

impart spiritual knowledge to others and bring them with him as he

ascends. Thus, divinization occurs only within community, extending

from the individual to society at large. Just as radical social

transformation was emphasized in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century

Masonry, in Smith’s revision, Enoch continued his preaching to the

people of God and built a city of holiness: “And the Lord called his

people Zion, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in

righteousness; and there was no poor among them” (Moses 7:18). In

time, Enoch and the entire city were taken up into heaven by the

transforming power of divine love.

In light of the probable interface between Mormonism, Freemasonry,

and ancient sources, it is unsurprising that many similarities would exist

among the three traditions. However, Smith’s Enoch most closely

170

resembles that of the Masonic legend. For instance, Smith’s version and

the Masonic ritual both contain a restoration emphasis, making Enoch an

appropriate figure for Smith to associate himself with.59 Thus,

Freemasons and Mormons used the Enoch stories in much the same way

by drawing upon threads of mystical tradition that shed light on human

spiritual yearnings.60

Doctrine and Covenants

In addition to expanding the scriptural canon, Joseph Smith received

divine revelation in response to his own concerns or to the questions of

his followers. These cherished texts were collected by scribes and

historians and published in a book that came to be known as the Doctrine

and Covenants.61 Many of the sections in this book included

Masonically inspired midrash delivered as a dynamic response to events

occurring in the immediate vicinity, again highlighting Smith’s intimate

familiarity with Freemasonry.

The Saints John

The Royal Arch Degree is believed to have been fashioned from a tale

told by the ancient Greek historian Philostorgius. In his account, when

the Roman Emperor Julian ordered the rebuilding of the temple at

Jerusalem, a cavern was found built into the rock of the foundation. One

of the workmen was lowered down with a long rope. When he was

pulled up, he had recovered a scroll containing the Gospel of John. The

author of this Gospel and John the Baptist are considered the two patron

Saints of Freemasonry. Their feast days are celebrated yearly in Masonic

lodges, and early Masons took their obligations on the Bible opened to

the Gospel of John and were known as “St. John’s men.”62

Joseph Smith’s writings show a familiarity with the Masonic

veneration of the “Saints John.” In April 1829, while Smith and Oliver

Cowdery were working on the Book of Mormon translation, a question

arose regarding the final chapter of the Gospel of John. A common

debate among the religions of the day was whether John the Apostle had

died or whether he would continue on earth until the second coming of

Christ. Through the Urim and Thummim, Smith dictated a revelatory

answer that was described as being “Translated from parchment, written

and hid up 63 On this hidden parchment seen through by himself [John].”

a vision, the Lord confirms that John would continue to live until the

171

second coming: “Verily, verily I say unto thee [John], . . . thou shalt tarry

till I come in my glory” (D&C 7:1).

When writing of John the Evangelist and John the Baptist, Smith

focused on the Masonic theme of restoration. In 1833 he dictated a

revelation found in Doctrine and Covenants 84, which describes what

happened when Moses was taken out of the midst of Israel and the High

Priesthood was lost. The lesser priesthood, which “holdeth the key of the

ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel” (D&C 84:25–26),

continued with the house of Aaron until the birth of John the Baptist,

who Smith described as “being filled with the Holy Ghost from his

mother’s womb.” John was baptized “while he was yet in his childhood”

and was “ordained by the angel of God at the time he was eight days

old” (D&C 84:27–28).

These two sections of the Doctrine and Covenants provide examples of

Joseph Smith’s use of the Masonic concepts of a bifurcated Priesthood,

restoration, and the Saints John in order to create a distinctive Mormon

midrash. Rather than merely copying the Masonic legends, Smith did the

imaginative work to provide details on the two biblical characters, giving

them their own personal stories. Through them, Smith literalized the

view that legitimate Levitical priesthood was restored, gathering together

all authority from all dispensations.

Keys

The frequent mention of “keys” in Mormonism is typically connected

with priesthood authority. Some passages in the Doctrine and Covenants

mentioning keys seem to come from a unique understanding of

continuity in Matthew 16 (where Peter is promised the keys of the

kingdom), Matthew 17 (where Moses and Elijah appear on the Mount of

Transfiguration), and Matthew 18 (where the power to bind and seal is

mentioned). Yet, these passages are also infused with the idea of secrecy

and confidential instruction by the Savior to his Apostles.

In Masonic thought, the symbol of a key serves as a hieroglyphic

reminding the Mason of the prudence that should afford the sacred

mysteries being unfolded.64 As noted by Albert Mackey, “In the rituals

of the First Degree, in the eighteenth century, allusion is made to a key

by whose help the secrets of Masonry are to be obtained.” The symbol of

the key

is still preserved as a symbol of secrecy in the Royal Arch Degree. . . . In many of the German Lodges a . . . key is . . . part of the Masonic clothing of each Brother, to remind him that he

172

should lock up or conceal the secrets of Freemasonry in his heart. But among the ancients the

key was also a symbol of power.65

Secrets entrusted to a Freemason by a friend must be kept in confidence,

that they may thus be trusted with the weightier secrets and associated

power of God.

This is the implication of Joseph Smith’s statement that “[t]he secret of

Masonry is to keep a secret.”66 He similarly taught that keeping

confidences both human and divine is a preliminary virtue without which

revelation cannot be imparted to man from God:

The reason we do not have the secrets of the Lord revealed unto us, is because we do not keep them but reveal them; we do not keep our own secrets, but reveal our difficulties to the world, even to our enemies, then how would we keep the secrets of the Lord? “I can keep a secret till

Doomsday.”67

Degrees of Glory

By the year 1717, Freemasonry included three speculative degrees. In

Masonic degrees, heavenly knowledge is increasingly imparted to the

initiate as he is brought from darkness to light. The third degree of

Masonry specifically engages the idea of resurrection and the perfection

of human personality.68 This Masonic view of degrees is utilized in two

separate revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants: sections 76 and 93.

Doctrine and Covenants 76, a vision of three degrees of heavenly glory

given to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon in 1832, draws upon 1

Corinthians 15 and relates it to 2 Corinthians 12:2.69 Each degree is

pictured as a separate kingdom governed by its own laws such that

the glory of the celestial is one, even as the glory of the sun is one. And the glory of the terrestrial is one, even as the glory of the moon is one. And the glory of the telestial is one, even as the glory of the stars is one; for as one star differs from another star in glory, even so differs one from another in glory in the telestial world. (D&C 76:96–98)

Which glory a person attains is determined when “they shall be judged

according to their works, and every man shall receive according to his

own works, his own dominion, in the mansions which are prepared” (v.

111).

A similar discussion of these biblical passages and the concept of

degrees of glory are found in George Oliver’s writings:

If an inspired Apostle speaks of a third heaven: (2 Cor. xii.., 2,) of the righteous differing from each other in glory, as one star differs from another; (1 Cor. xv. 41,) if the plural number be commonly used by Christ and his apostles, when speaking of the place of supreme bliss; (Mark i., 10. Acts vii., 56. Eph. iv., 10. Heb. i., 10. 2 Pet. iii., 5, &c.,) and if the Saviour himself should acknowledge that heaven contains many mansions; (John xiv., 2,) then we may also conclude that as there are many heavens, so there are also degrees of reward proportioned

to the measure of man’s faith and obedience. 70

173

Receiving the Fulness

Doctrine and Covenants 93, a revelation received on May 6, 1833,

depicts a vision of the glorified Savior experienced by the Apostle John.

In the Doctrine and Covenants expansion, John beheld “the glory of the

Only Begotten of the Father” who came and dwelt among humankind in

the flesh. He saw that Jesus “received not of the fulness at first, but

continued from grace to grace, until he received a fullness” (D&C

93:12).

Just as Masonry is “a progressive moral science taught by degrees

only” and is meant to bring men to the truth,71 enlightening them step by

step, the same seasoning process is offered in Smith’s revelation: “If you

keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be

glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall

receive grace for grace” (D&C 93:20). This idea is a mystical Christian

concept utilized by Freemasons in their Rite of Illumination. There, men

are brought to the truth by receiving “light” or knowledge progressively.

Symbolically, along with the prophets Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham,

and Solomon, they discover, learn, and apply the “seven liberal arts and

sciences.” In the Doctrine and Covenants, followers are similarly urged

to “obtain a knowledge of history, and of countries, and of kingdoms, of

laws of God and man, and all this for the salvation of Zion” (v. 53), for

“the glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth” (v.

36).

Celestial Lodges

Partakers of the “fulness” become what is termed “the church of the

Firstborn” (D&C 93:22), another concept with a counterpart in

Freemasonry. Masonic ritual teaches of a celestial lodge above, “where

the supreme architect of the universe presides.”72 The celestial lodge

represents heaven and the revolutionary social order—the goal of which

is the transformation of society. We see this idea picked up and fleshed

out in Smith’s revelatory writing. “I shall prepare,” announces the Lord,

“an Holy City, that my people may gird up their loins, and be looking

forth for the time of my coming; for there shall be my tabernacle, and it

shall be called Zion, a New Jerusalem” (Moses 7:62). This city would

meet the translated city of Enoch, which had been taken up into heaven:

And the Lord said unto Enoch: Then shalt thou and all thy city meet them there, and we will receive them into our bosom, and they shall see us; and we will fall upon their necks, and they shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other. (vv. 62–63)

174

Adam-ondi-Ahman

Another closely related example of midrash in the Doctrine and

Covenants is found in section 116, received as revelation on May 19,

Ahman,” believed by Latter-day Saints to be the place where Adam and

Eve lived after being expelled from the Garden of Eden. The term also

inspired a popular Latter-day Saint hymn written by W. W. Phelps and

published in 1835 in the Messenger and Advocate:

This earth was once a garden place,

With all her glories common,

And men did live a holy race,

And worship Jesus face to face,

In Adam-ondi-Ahman.73

The Masonic Enoch legend as described by George Oliver seems a

likely source for Mormon teachings surrounding Adam-ondi-Ahman.

Because degenerate humankind would not listen to his preaching, the

Grand Master Enoch called a special assembly of Masons “in whom he

could confide.” In the presence of Adam, Seth, Jared (Enoch’s father),

and Methuselah (Enoch’s son), Enoch lamented the wickedness of men

on earth and asked for advice and assistance in stemming the torrent of

evil. As part of this remarkable meeting, Adam communicated a great

and terrible prophecy “that all mankind, except a few just persons,

should so far swerve from their allegiance to God, as to cause the

destruction of all created things by water and fire.”74

Mormon scripture includes similar elements. In accord with the

Masonic description, revelation from Smith reports that, three years

before his death, Adam called his children together, including Enoch and

all the faithful down to the generation of Methuselah. In the company of

the Lord, Adam “stood up in the midst of the congregation; and,

notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy

Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest

generation” (D&C 107:56).

In Mormonism, this teaching is expanded to include restoration and

eschatological themes. Latter-day Saints teach that at the Second

Coming, a vast meeting will be held at the same place: a spot in Jackson

County, Missouri, near where the Garden of Eden was once located. At

this time, the city of Enoch, taken up into heaven due to the great

righteousness of its inhabitants, will return to the earth. These righteous

people and many others will join all the dispensation heads such as

175

Adam, Enoch, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus Christ himself, with Adam

again holding a special role at this council.75

Eternal Matter

In his popular book, The Spirit of Masonry, William Hutchinson

described early Christians who had become “infected with the Egyptian

philosophy.”76 They held that the Supreme Being “was not the creator of

the universe, nor the alone independent Being: for, according to them,

matter too was eternal.”77 This teaching became a core theological

notion in Mormonism during the 1830s and 1840s,78 when declarations

on the subject were first formulated in relation to work on the Book of

Abraham in Kirtland and found their way into the Doctrine and

Covenants: “Man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and

element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy” (D&C 93:33).

While imprisoned in Columbia, Missouri, in 1838 and 1839, Apostle

Parley P. Pratt wrote a treatise on the “eternal duration of matter,”

wherein he explained that matter and spirit were the two great principles

of all existence:

Everything animate and inanimate is composed of one or the other, or both of these eternal principles. . . . Matter and spirit are of equal duration; both are self-existent,—they never

began to exist, and they never can be annihilated. 79

[M]atter as well as spirit is eternal, uncreated, self-existing. However infinite the variety of its changes, forms and shapes . . . , it is there, durable as the throne of Jehevah [sic]. E is

inscribed in indelible characters on every particle.80

Expansions upon the doctrine continued to be articulated and

formalized throughout the Doctrine and Covenants. In May 1843, Smith

declared: “There is no such thing as immaterial matter. All spirit is

matter, but it is more fine or pure, and can only be discerned by purer

eyes; we cannot see it; but when our bodies are purified we shall see that

it is all matter” (D&C 131:7–8). By April 1844 Smith taught from the

pulpit that the elements had existed “from the time [God] had. The pure

principles of element are principles that can never be destroyed.”81

More specifically, Smith also taught that the mind of man was as

immortal as God:

The spirit of man is not a created being; it existed from eternity, and will exist to eternity. Anything created cannot be eternal; and earth, water, etc., had their existence in an elementary

state, from eternity.82

This was expressed again in an 1844 discourse, in which Smith utilized a

well-known Masonic allegory:

176

I take my ring from my finger and liken it unto the mind of man, the immortal spirit, because it has no beginning. Suppose you cut it in two; but as the Lord lives there would be an end. . . . God never did have power to create the spirit of man at all. God himself could not create himself: intelligence exists upon a self existent principle, it is a spirit from age to age, and

there is no creation about it. . . . The first principles of man are self existent with God. 83

Eternal Bonds

Joseph Smith frequently referred to priesthood ordinances as the

“welding link” in a chain to bring together all of humanity.84 He also

referred to the welding bonds of friendship, a more Masonic idea. A

well-known 1843 teaching by Smith expounds upon the relationship

between God and mortal man as well as the association that humankind

will have among themselves in the eternal worlds:

When he [the Savior] shall appear we shall see him as he is. we shall see that he is a man like ourselves.—And that same sociality, which exists amo[n]g[s]t us here will exist amo[n]g us

there only it will be coupled with etern[a]l glory, which glory we do not now enjoy.85

Mormon scholar Don Bradley has written about the Masonic ideal of

oneness through fellowship influencing Joseph Smith’s “Grand

Fundamental Principles of Mormonism.” In Smith’s dexterous hands, the

Masonic principles of brotherly love and sacred kinship evolved into the

doctrine of eternal union through the priesthood.86 Samuel Brown’s In

Heaven as it is on Earth contains a discussion that he terms the Mormon

“chain of belonging.”87 This phrase owes a debt to Freemasonry both in

concept and terminology. For example, George Oliver wrote:

Our secrets embrace, in a comprehensive manner, human science and divine knowledge; they link mankind together in the indissoluble chain of sincere affection; and, which is of far greater import, they incite to the practice of those virtues, which may do much towards

securing happiness in a future state.88

Masonic writer Rob Morris put this same sentiment into poetry in 1854:

Hands round! Ye faithful brotherhood, the bright fraternal chain, We part upon the Square below and meet in Heaven again;

And the words of precious meaning, those words Masonic are:

“We meet upon the Level and we part upon the Square.”89

In the words of these authors, the bonds of brotherhood form an

indissoluble chain forged by the hand of God, each link bright and

virtuous.

Joseph Smith recognized the importance of midrash in a vibrant

religious tradition, and he utilized it for purposes similar to those found

in Judaism and in Freemasonry: as a vehicle for moral instruction and the

building of complex theological concepts. It provided both permission

and framework to explore, expand, borrow, adapt, and innovate when

177

considering any aspect of religious life or thought. Because the building

blocks of his work were typically Masonic beliefs that permeated his

environment, Masonic-like expansions are found in every Mormon

scripture from the Book of Mormon to Joseph Smith’s inspired revision

of the Bible, and from the Doctrine and Covenants to the Book of

Abraham. Numerous ideas from these works that Latter-day Saints have

come to believe are uniquely Mormon have antecedents in popular

Masonic sources of Smith’s day.

In his work as latter-day prophet, Smith established ideas expressed by

such Masonic luminaries as William Hutchinson, George Oliver, Joshua

Bradley, and Salem Town as part of Latter-day Saint scriptural tradition.

He emphasized elements of Masonic culture to provide a narrative that

looked and felt familiar to its audience. Yet, he was not merely

appropriating Masonic concepts. Smith reframed foundational myths of

Freemasonry in light of his unique understanding of God.

Notes

178

Honourable Fraternity, as well as for the Information of those, who may be Desirous of Becoming Acquainted with its Principles, 311.

179

that the passage “And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name Jehovah was I not known to them” (Ex. 6:3 KJV) should be read interrogatively, thus “by my name Jehovah was I not known unto them?” See Oliver, Antiquities of Freemasonry, 232. This particular insight is also found in Joseph Smith’s inspired revision of the same passage: “I am the Lord God Almighty; the Lord JEHOVAH. And was not my name known unto them?” See Joseph Smith Translation, Exodus 6:3.

180

Freemasons. See James Anderson, The Constitutions of the Free-Masons, Containing the History, Charges, Regulations, &c. of that Most Ancient and Right Worshipful Fraternity, 7–23.

In New York in 1818, Salem Town argued that Freemasons had secretly preserved the original text of the Old Testament from the time of Moses until its recovery after the Babylonian captivity. See Salem Town, A System of Speculative Masonry in its Origin, Patronage, Dissemination, Principles, Duties, and Ultimate Designs, Laid Open for the Examination of the Serious and Candid, 207–38. Thus, New York Masons such as the Smith family would likely not have been surprised at the claims made in Antiquities.

181

moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead” (1 Cor. 15:40–42). “I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, (whether in the body, I cannot tell; or whether out of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;) such an one caught up to the third heaven” (2 Cor. 12:2).

182

183
