THE BOOK OF ABRAHAM: ADVANCING

THE INTERESTS OF TRUE MASONRY

Abraham was born; a man who was destined to impede the rapid

progress of idolatry, to reduce the influence of the Cabiric mysteries,

and to advance the interests of true Masonry and religion amongst

mankind.

—George Oliver

Napoleon Bonaparte’s Egyptian campaign of 1798 to 1801 launched the worldwide scientific study of ancient Egyptian remains and culture. In the United States as well as the rest of the world, Egyptian culture spurred conversation on topics ranging from

art and architecture to independent nationhood, national identity, race,

and slavery. Freemasonry, with its specific interest in the ancient past,

was particularly influenced by this nineteenth-century Egyptomania.1

By late 1832 or early 1833, the enigmatic Irish American entrepreneur

Michael Chandler mysteriously obtained eleven Egyptian mummies

from the estate of their deceased Italian discoverer, Antonio Lebolo.

Aware of the interest that Freemasons took in Egyptian antiquities,

Chandler first displayed the mummies and other curiosities at the

Masonic Hall in Philadelphia on April 3 and April 22, 1833. In

September of that same year, the exhibit was also shown at the Masonic

Hall in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.2 Chandler arrived in Ohio by March

1835 with four remaining mummies. In Painesville, Chandler allowed

them to be examined by a phrenologist, who attempted to identify them

based on the shape of their heads.3

At the end of June 1835, Chandler traveled to Kirtland to meet the

controversial Mormon prophet, Joseph Smith. Chandler had heard from

believers and skeptics alike the claims of Smith translating a holy book

from ancient Egyptian writings engraved on plates of gold, and he

believed the Mormon leader would be interested in viewing, and perhaps

purchasing, the mummies and Egyptian funeral papyri found with them.

Smith soon identified the mummies as a pharaoh and his family, but he

was most captivated by the accompanying papyri. The scroll on the

oldest woman’s chest, Smith declared, was a record kept by the biblical

Joseph during his sojourn in Egypt, while the roll discovered on the

184

male’s chest comprised the record of Abraham “written by his own

hand.”4 The Mormons purchased the four mummies, three papyrus rolls,

and a few remaining scraps of papyrus in Chandler’s collection. For

these items they raised $2,400, the equivalent of the average yearly

salaries of five farm families.5

To those who believed the legendary history of Freemasonry was

literally true, the Kirtland Egyptian papyri must have held an incredible

fascination. As Joseph Smith unrolled the scroll that he would believe to

be the writings of Abraham, the first figure to catch his eye was what

appeared to be the attempted sacrifice of Abraham at the hands of

spurious Egyptian priests. A drawing of what he perceived as Abraham

in Pharaoh’s court teaching the principles of astronomy to the Egyptians

was pictured at the end of the scroll. It seems that to the mind of the

prophet, God had miraculously delivered the original scriptural stories of

the patriarch Abraham into his hands. By rendering the hieroglyphic text

on the papyrus into modern language, he took up the role of a Masonic

restorer, bringing to light the heretofore concealed Masonic and priestly

mysteries.

Reconstructed scroll of the “Breathing Permit” of Hor.

LDS scholars disagree on precisely how the text of the Book of

Abraham was produced. Some have speculated it was translated directly

185

from papyrus that Joseph Smith had in his possession.6 Others believe

the hieroglyphic characters functioned as a mnemonic device.7 Still

others claim that the Egyptian papyri stimulated revelation by which

Smith wrote the text.8 Each of these variations constitutes the creation of

a scriptural midrash, and this midrash was influenced by nineteenth-

century Freemasonry.

Although some authors exult in pointing out the similarities of

Mormon scripture, especially the Book of Abraham, with the ancient

past, one must follow the chain of influence from the closest to the

furthest out. Masons had been studying and drawing comparisons

between their rites and ancient Egyptians for a very long time, providing

Joseph Smith and those in his environs with ample and readily available

interpretations of the biblical and ancient world. Thus, even where

similarities exist between restoration scripture and the ancient past, they

are best explained by the long tradition of Masonic interest in that past.

Recovered Text of the Egyptian Papyri

Joseph Smith’s Book of Abraham traces the “first government of

Egypt,” which “was established by Pharaoh, the eldest son of Egyptus,

the daughter of Ham, and it was after the manner of the government of

Ham, which was patriarchal” (Abr. 1:25). During Smith’s day, there were

roughly four streams of thought on Masonic origins, each based more or

less on the legends and myths found in the Old Gothic Constitutions.9 Of

significance to Latter-day Saints, each of these legends engages the

transmission of Masonic mysteries through ancient Egypt. Freemasons

claimed the authentic mysteries had descended to them pure and

undefiled over the course of time: first from Adam, then through Noah

and his sons to ancient Egypt, then through Solomon and ancient Israel,

and eventually to modern times. Mason George Oliver theorized that

when Masonry entered Egypt it was corrupted by the magical practices

of the Pharaohs:

It is evident that, before the call of Abraham to restore the true worship along with the purity of Masonry, the efforts of the Cabiri, in conjunction with Thoth and others, had succeeded in substituting their mysteries for truth amongst the posterity of Shem, as well as of Ham and

Japheth.10

Recovering the Order of the Priesthood

Like the works of prominent eighteenth- and nineteenth-century

Masonic writers, the Book of Abraham addresses the use of proper

186

authority when imparting or administering the mysteries. It tells the story

of a righteous Pharaoh, a good man who earnestly sought to imitate the

true order “established by the Fathers” (Abr. 1:26). Despite his righteous

intentions, Pharaoh did not have the proper authority to administer.

Through this story, Smith reveals both his attitude toward the

contemporary and spurious craft of Masonry and his reliance upon

George Oliver’s “two traditions” theory. The text of Abraham 1 implies

that the heavenly order was patriarchal and therefore could not be passed

down any other way. Further, Ham had been cursed by Noah pertaining

to priesthood so he could not bequeath legitimate authority to instruct in

authentic mysteries, nor administer its related rites and ordinances. At

best, he could only imitate that ancient order (vv. 26–27).

Assuming that Smith’s midrash is meant to address the issue of

Masonic authority, it warns that Freemasons may be righteous and good

men, but at best, they can only imitate that ancient order that is the

property of the holy priesthood. Theologically, nineteenth-century

Freemasonry held no salvific power. Royal Arch Masons replicated the

tabernacle in the wilderness, the Ark of the Covenant, and related holy

items in order to provide an allegorical recovery of truth.11 In Smith’s

view, however, this was all a pale imitation of the real thing he could

provide. He thus told his private secretary, Benjamin F. Johnson, that

“Freemasonry was the apostate endowment as sectarian religion was the

apostate religion.”12

It is significant that Smith called Masonry the apostate endowment, as

the fundamental concern of his Abraham midrash was the issue of

legitimate versus spurious Masonry.13 His translation of the Egyptian

papyri tells of Egyptians who “would fain claim [the right of Priesthood]

from Noah, through Ham” (Abr. 1:27), alluding to the Masons who

claimed to receive their doctrines and “Geometry” pure from Ham

through the priesthood of the Egyptians. In nineteenth-century America,

Ham was considered the ancestor of Africans, and biblical passages like

Genesis 9:25–27 provided justification for those who enslaved them.14

Although the Book of Abraham was later used to justify denying

priesthood ordination to men of African descent, evidence suggests that

Smith was favorable toward the ordination of free black men,15 and he

never used the Abraham passages to establish an anti-Negro policy. This

is because the central issue of this passage of the Book of Abraham is not

187

one of race except in an incidental way; rather, it describes how

legitimate authority is transferred.

Human Intelligences

The pages of the Book of Abraham also contain doctrinal content on

celestial bodies and spiritual beings placed in a Masonic framing. Here,

Smith presented what he saw as the original cosmology of Abraham,

which had been given by the patriarch to the Egyptians in ancient times.

Abraham 3 describes the great and governing stars “nearest unto the

throne of God” (Abr. 3:2), with the star Kolob being “the greatest of all

the Kokaubeam16 [stars] that thou hast seen, because it is nearest unto

[God]” (v. 16).

Masonic writer Will Hutchinson referred to a similar concept in 1775.

He described a Supreme Being who produced “other immortal and

spiritual natures,” some of whom were “placed in the higher regions,

others in the lower.” Those in the lower regions were “nighest to the

place of matter.”17 Thus, Hutchinson described what was later

incorporated into Mormonism as a tripartite theory of spirit creation. In

this theory, intelligence exists in non-created form until organized into a

spirit being by God. The spirit can then inhabit a human body and

become a mortal being.

The Book of Abraham compares these “higher and lower”

intelligences to the very order of the heavens:

And thus there shall be the reckoning of the time of one planet above another, until thou come nigh unto Kolob, which . . . is set nigh unto the throne of God, to govern all. . . .

If two things exist, and there be one above the other, there shall be greater things above

them. . . .

These two facts do exist, that there are two spirits, one being more intelligent than the

other; there shall be another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all. (Abr. 3:9, 16, 19)

The scripture also makes clear that “spirits . . . have no beginning; they

existed before, they shall have no end, they shall exist after, for they are

gnolaum 18 , or eternal” (v. 18).

This language imputed to God in the Book of Abraham—particularly

the use of the word “intelligent”—suggests a broader thematic argument

that spirit and intelligence are eternal. The prophet would later discuss

this in some detail:

The mind or the intelligence which man possesses is co-equal [co-eternal] with God himself. . . . I am dwelling on the immortality of the spirit of man. . . . The intelligence of spirits had no beginning, neither will it have an end. . . . Their [sic] never was a time when there were not

spirits; for they are co-equal [co-eternal] with our Father in heaven.19

188

Smith believed that the human spirit was not a “created being”; instead,

“the Father called all spirits before him at the creation of man and

organized them.”20

In his 1775 The Spirit of Masonry, Hutchinson quotes a “Dr. Prideaux”

who comments on analogous aspects of celestial bodies and spiritual

beings or “intelligencies.” He remarks that in Abraham’s day the

Egyptians believed:

[T]he Sun, Moon, and Stars . . . were Habitations of Intelligencies, which animated the orbs in the same manner as the soul animates the body of man, and were causes of their motion; and that these intelligencies were of a middle sort between God and them: they thought these the properest things to be Mediators between God and them; and therefore the planets being nearest of all the heavenly bodies, and generally looked on to have the greatest influence on this world, they made choice of them in the first place, as their Gods’ mediators, who were to mediate with the Supreme God for them, and to procure mercies and favours, which they

prayed for.21

Council of Heaven

Freemasons also commented on how the divine creative work was

realized. Specifically, the Royal Arch degree alludes to a “Grand

Council” that exists eternally in the heavens. It is first mentioned during

the preliminary prayer of that degree:

And finally, O merciful Father, when we shall have passed through the outward veils of these earthly courts, when the earthly house of this tabernacle shall be dissolved, may we be admitted into the Holy of Holies above, into the presence of the Grand Council of heaven,

where the Supreme High Priest for ever presides, for ever reigns. Amen. 22 So mote it be .

Salem Town, the Grand Chaplain of the Grand Chapter of Royal Arch

Masons in New York, mentioned another function of the council: “Such

the Grand Council of Eternity, which devised and executed that great

plan of man’s redemption.”23 To Royal Arch masons, the work of the

Grand Council is both creative and redemptive.

Midrash in chapter 3 of the Book of Abraham develops a passage in

Psalms in a strikingly similar manner. The Psalm is vague: “God

standeth in the congregation of the mighty; he judgeth among the gods”

(Psalm 82:1). In the Book of Abraham, the reader is told of a group of

premortal souls gathered in the presence of God. In council, they

considered the Father’s great plan of salvation, including the Creation,

Fall, and Atonement:

Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones; . . . And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell; And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them. And they who keep their first

189

estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate. (Abr. 3:22–26)

Stimulated by Masonic concepts, Joseph Smith added his own prophetic

insight to the biblical record.

The Facsimiles: Dating and Descriptions

The Egyptian papyri were adorned with several intriguing drawings

Joseph Smith connected with the story of Abraham. In 1841, he

commissioned artist Reuben Hedlock to engrave printing blocks of three

of the images and accompanied these with keys to explain the figures in

each one.24 Masonic language and symbolism can easily be seen in both

the engravings and their accompanying explanations. Because there is no

manuscript evidence of any of the facsimiles or their explanations before

1842, some have assumed the Masonic influence in these writings comes

from the Nauvoo period. However, much of the material included in the

explanations was mentioned in Smith’s 1835 translation activities. For

example, his journal entry for October 1, 1835, reads: “This after noon

labored on the Egyptian alphabet, in company with brsr. O. Cowdery and

W. W. Phelps: The system of astronomy was unfolded.”25 This evidently

refers to the bound “Grammar and Alphabet,” where, on page 24, the

subject matter shifts from Abraham, Egypt, and the patriarchal

priesthood to astronomy. Additionally, entries in the Grammar document

penned by Warren Parrish shortly after October 29, 1835, introduce “Veh

Kli flos-isis” (the “fo[u]rth fixed governing star”) at the end of the fifth,

fourth, and third degrees, and “Kolob” (the “first creation nearer to the

Celestial, or the residence of God”) at the end of all five degrees.

Influence from the above passages can be seen in the explanatory key for

Facsimile 2.

Thus, the facsimiles’ connection of Abraham with the patriarchal

priesthood and with a knowledge of astronomy persuasively derives

from Freemasonry and substantially dates from 1835. Even at this early

date, Smith and Cowdery would have been intimately familiar with

Masonry through their family connections, and Phelps, as a renounced

Mason, had been involved with the Fraternity directly.

Facsimile 1: Masonic Initiation

Discussing a ritual designed to prepare an aspirant for initiation into

esoteric knowledge, George Oliver mused,

[T]here is scarcely a single ceremony in Free Masonry, but we find its corresponding rite in one or other of the idolatrous mysteries; and the coincidence can only be accounted for by

190

supposing that these mysteries were derived from Masonry.26

Of course, Masonry might have derived from “idolatrous mysteries”

instead of the other way around, but it was nonetheless important to

establish a link between Masonry and “idolatrous” rites, rituals, and

customs: it legitimized the interpretation of any practice similar to

Freemasonry through a Masonic lens. For example, Oliver describes an

ancient mystical custom an aspirant had to perform before he could

participate in the higher secrets: “He was placed within the Pastos, or

Bed, or Coffin.” Here, he fasted for three days and nights in seclusion

and darkness until he reached the proper state of mind to receive certain

great and important truths. “I am inclined to think,” said Oliver, “that

when the aspirant entered into the mystic cell, he was directed to lay

himself down upon the bed, which shadowed out the tomb or coffin of the

Great Father.” While lying on this “holy couch” in simulation of “his

figurative deceased prototype,” he reproduced first “the deep sleep of

death” and then a “resurrection from the bed . . . his restoration to life, or

his regeneration into a new world.”27

191

Book of Abraham Facsimile 1, as published in the Times and Seasons.

This could correspond to the scene Smith saw of Abraham on the

sacrificial bed in Facsimile 1. The resulting Mormon midrash involved

Abraham’s forced immolation on the lion couch by the idolatrous Priests

of Pharoah. Hands raised in the grand hailing sign of a Master Mason,

Abraham was raised from that bed and initiated into the higher

mysteries.

Facsimile 2: Cosmology, Key Words, Signs, Tokens, and Penalties

The higher mysteries received by Abraham are laid out in Facsimile 2.

Joseph Smith described this in the most Masonic terms of any of the

facsimiles, imbued it with religious significance, and used it as

allegorical temple instruction.

192

Smith’s explanation of the facsimile suggests he considered the

circular hypocephalus28 to be Abraham’s teachings on Egyptian

cosmology.29 The shape of the facsimile calls to mind the “eternal

round”—a concept of the universe. Smith understood the figure labelled

“No. 1” to be “Kolob, signifying the first creation, nearest to the

celestial, or the residence of God,” and keeping the same celestial

measurement of time. Next to Kolob was No. 2, Oliblish, “holding the

key of power” pertaining to other planets. These were said to be

“revealed to from God from ^to^ Abraham, as he offered incence

Sacrifice upon an alter [sic].”30 Just as George Oliver did in his Masonic

writings, Smith pictured Abraham as the recipient of heavenly

instruction concerning astronomy and mathematics. He also possessed a

Masonic-like priesthood with its “grand Key words” bestowed by God to

him, Adam, Seth, Noah, and Melchizedek.

In Reuben Hedlock’s facsimile of the hypocephalus, a stylized figure

of God on His throne appears to be giving a Masonic sign. His right arm

is “raised to the square,” surmounted by a pair of compasses; His other

arm is extended at His side.31 This section labeled No. 7 “represents

God sitting upon his throne, revealing, through the heavens, the grand

Key words of the Priesthood; as, also, the sign of the Holy Ghost unto

Abraham, in the form of a dove.” Similarly, section No. 3 “[i]s made to

represent God, sitting upon his throne, clothed with power & authority;

with a crown of Eternal light upon his head.” This crown of light would

be understood in Masonic terms to represent a fullness of understanding.

The section also represents “the grand Key words of the Holy

Priesthood, as revealed to Adam in the Garden of Eden, as also to Seth,

Noah, Melchisedek Abraham and all to whom the priesthood was

revealed.”32

193

Book of Abraham Facsimile 2, as published in the Times and Seasons.

As shown in the explanatory material, the Grand Key Word is

communicated by God and not to be revealed publicly. No. 8 “contains

writing that cannot be revealed unto the world; but is to be had in the

Holy Temple of God.”33 This confidential instruction pertaining to

temples owes a debt to Masonry, where the lodge symbolically

represents King Solomon’s Temple. The secrets mentioned in Smith’s

explication of Facsimile 2 are the same kind of secrets to be had in

Freemasonry. For Masons as well as Mormons, concealed ritual elements

pertaining to key signs and words can only be found in the temple or

lodge.

Smith’s treatment of secret words around the border of the

hypocephalus parallels in interesting ways the writing around the border

of the triangular plate in the Royal Arch degree inscribed in the Royal

194

Arch cipher, which represents the golden triangular plate given to Enoch.

In some depictions there is a double-bordered circle around the triangle.

Royal Arch cipher on golden plate, “The Mistery of the Royal Arch Word,” by Arturo de Hoyos.

Courtesy of the Scottish Rite Research Society.

Additional evidence may suggest that others besides Smith understood

the facsimiles to have Masonic meaning. The earliest extant manuscript

of Facsimile 2 is in the handwriting of Willard Richards. It was created

in late 1841 to early 1842 in Nauvoo. When recording Smith’s

explanatory key for Facsimile 2, section no. 11, Richards utilized a well-

known expression in Freemasonry that concludes every Masonic prayer:

“[A]lso. If the world can find out these n[u]mbers, So mote it be,

Amen.”34

The origin of the phrase “so mote it be” in Freemasonry dates from the

Middle Ages in England. It is found in two important Masonic

manuscripts, the earliest versions of the Old Charges. The Regius

Manuscript, dated to 1390, closes with the words “Amen amen so mote it

be, So say we all for charity.” The Cooke Manuscript, dated to 1410,

contains the words “Amen so mote it be.”35 In modern times, groups

derived from Masonry (such as Wicca) have adopted the Masonic

invocation “so mote it be,” but in the nineteenth century, it was an

identifying Masonic idiom. When the section was reprinted in the Times

and Seasons, the phrase “so mote it be” was changed to “so let it be,”

veiling the Masonic nature of the phrase.

Facsimile 3: Judgment of the Dead

Egyptologists have agreed that the image on Facsimile 3 represents the

judgment of the dead before the throne of Osiris. Interestingly, by the

beginning of the nineteenth century, this scene informed the ritual in the

thirty-first degree of Scottish Rite Masonry.36 The initiate takes part in

195

an allegorical Egyptian judgment ceremony in which his heart is

weighed to determine his character. The Egyptian scene is meaningful to

Freemasons because it reinforces universal moral lessons.

Book of Abraham Facsimile 3, as published in the Times and Seasons.

Joseph Smith interpreted the scene as “Abraham, sitting upon

Pharoah’s throne . . . reasoning upon the principles of Astronomy.”37

This parallels Masonic tradition, where Abraham is first tested before the

heavens open and he is divinely instructed. In his role as patriarch, he

then begins to instruct others in the sciences of astronomy and

mathematics.38

The Facsimiles as Sacred Instruction

The three facsimiles included with Joseph Smith’s Book of Abraham

seem to function in a similar fashion to Masonic tracing boards. A

tracing board is associated with each of the Blue Lodge degrees, for a

total of three. The boards are described as containing “hieroglyphics.”39

They consist of confidential sacred instruction and allow Freemasons to

remember important points in a ritual. Smith assigned the figures on the

facsimiles with certain meanings that would allow Latter-day Saints who

had been instructed in their esoteric significance to progress spiritually.

196

Consequently, the images could function as mnemonic devices for

Latter-day Saints, regardless of their original meanings.

The facsimiles illustrate scenes of universal theological importance.

As George Oliver noted, Abraham represents the perfect theocratic

type.40 The first facsimile denotes the principle of sacrifice and

initiation. In the Mormon midrash, Abraham is delivered from the

attempt of apostate priests to offer him as a sacrificial victim only to face

the Lord’s baffling request to offer up his own son and heir. Once he has

passed his test, the second facsimile illustrates the principle of revelation.

The initiate encounters God who gives him the instructions he needs to

part the veil. Finally, in the third facsimile, he reasons upon the

principles he has mastered, teaching them to others. His position on the

throne indicates heavenly ascent and divinization. The vignette

emphasizes his role as prophet, priest, and king.

The references to astronomy, grand keywords, square and compasses,

signs, tokens and penalties, included together collectively in Joseph

Smith’s explanatory keys to the facsimiles, demonstrates that

Freemasonry had become part of his revelatory process. From the

Kirtland to the Nauvoo period, the Mormon prophet was meditating

upon Masonic ideas, asking questions about them and receiving his

answers. In doing so, Smith actively used Masonic concepts and symbols

to build a framework for the Book of Abraham.

Papyrus Fragments

The description of another set of papyrus fragments further shows the

influence of Freemasonry in Kirtland. The Joseph Smith Papyrus

fragments labeled by Hugh Nibley as V, VI, VII, and VIII were identified

by Egyptologist Klaus Baer as “The Book of the Dead belonging to the

lady Tshenmîn.”41 Smith taught his followers that they were writings of

the biblical Joseph who was sold into Egypt.42 The set of fragments

contains small drawings illustrating the text, and an interpretive exegesis

of the drawings was provided by Oliver Cowdery in the Messenger and

Advocate, published in December of 1835. “Enoch’s Pillar, as mentioned

by Josephus, is upon the same roll,” wrote Cowdery. He noted that our

present version of the Bible does not mention this fact but that

Josephus says that the descendants of Seth were virtuous, and possessed a great knowledge of the heavenly bodies, and, that, in consequence of the prophecy of Adam, that the world should be destroyed once by water and again by fire, Enoch wrote a history or an account of the same, and put into two pillars one of brick and the other of stone; and that the same were in being at

his (Josephus’) day.43

197

A careful examination of the relevant passage by the first-century

Jewish-Roman historian Josephus shows that the antiquarian mentions

the children of Seth as the makers of the pillars of brick and stone, not

Enoch.44 The inclusion of Enoch into the myth comes from nineteenth-

century Freemasons who instead had Enoch as the maker of the two

pillars.45 Thus, although the writings of Josephus were available to the

Latter-day Saints in 1835, it is more likely that Cowdery’s reference to

Josephus comes through Freemasonry.

The Kirtland Egyptian Papers

Several documents preserved from the Kirtland period show Joseph

Smith experimenting with the text of the Book of Abraham and the

Egyptian characters on the papyri. During early July of 1842, the Prophet

worked in conjunction with his scribes W. W. Phelps and Oliver

Cowdery to produce an “Egyptian Alphabet” and, in the latter half of

that month, an expanded version of the project called the “Grammar and

A[l]phabet of the Egyptian Language.” A third “Egyptian Counting”

manuscript pictured hieratic characters with corresponding counting

numbers. Throughout the twentieth- and twenty-first centuries, Mormon

writers believed these to be attempts by Smith’s scribes to translate

Egyptian characters from the papyri and not necessarily the Prophet

himself. More recent LDS scholarship, however, has shown Smith to be

personally involved in all aspects of the Book of Abraham project,

including the “Alphabet,” “Grammar,” and “Counting” documents.46

The question still being asked is what Smith was doing in these papers.

In a 2010 conference for Mormon apologetics, Will Schryver

postulated that the “Alphabet,” “Grammar,” and “Counting” documents

postdated the reception of the Book of Abraham and were an attempt to

put phrases from this and others of Smith’s earlier revelations into a

Masonic-like cipher.47 Challenging this thesis are six consecutive

figures from the “Alphabet” described by Phelps in an 1835 letter to his

wife, which he offers as a specimen of the “pure” Adamic language. This

description of Smith’s project to uncover the ancient Adamic language

was largely extracted from an earlier document titled “A Sample of pure

Language,” issued by Smith in 1832. This demonstrates that Smith’s

explorations into “pure language” predate Chandler’s arrival in Kirtland

with the Egyptian mummies. Additionally, verbiage that would later be

198

associated with the Book of Abraham had been employed by Smith in

writings that also predated his reception of the Egyptian papyri.48

W. W. Phelps’s May 1835 Letter to his wife: “A Specimen of some of the ‘pure language’” (top).

Compare to July 1835 Egyptian Alphabet document (bottom).

Brian Hauglid, an emeritus professor of ancient scripture at Brigham

Young University, postulates that Phelps’s May 1835 “Specimen” letter,

containing the same characters in the Egyptian Alphabet documents,

“may evidence some kind of an ongoing Egyptian language project

occurring before the [July 1835] arrival of the mummies and papyri in

Kirtland.” Additionally, the Egyptian documents begin with over a page

of characters not found on the papyri. According to Hauglid, “it is quite

apparent where the unrelated characters end and the papyri characters

begin,” suggesting that the first part of the Egyptian alphabet documents

also predate the arrival of the papyri in Kirtland.49 While Hauglid

attributes this phenomenon to the general “Egyptomania” present in the

United States at the time, a more particular type of “Egyptomania” was

to be found among American Freemasons who used the term “Egyptian”

to reference a particular form of ancient, legendary Freemasonry, and

“hieroglyphs” to mean the pure, Hebraic language of Adam.50

199

Joseph Smith’s personal involvement with these Egyptian documents

is further evidenced by several references in his diary to time spent

working on the Egyptian Grammar and Alphabet. For example, a July

14, 1835, entry states:

The remainder of this month, I was continually engaged in translating an alphabet to the Book of Abraham, and arrangeing a grammar of the Egyptian language as practiced by the

Ancients.51

What was Smith’s conception of the grammar “as practiced by the

Ancients”? In the same ways mystics expand upon the essential

meanings of tarot cards to divine certain things about an individual or

situation, perhaps Smith was using a divination technique with the

characters. Indeed, certain LDS authors have suggested that the prophet

used the Egyptian characters as a springboard to revelation.52

Mormon Freemason Clinton Bartholomew has pioneered an

investigation into the six consecutive characters of the Adamic written

language in Phelps’s “Specimen” letter and repeated in the “Alphabet”

document. Five out of the six characters come from the Royal Arch.

Using both the Royal Arch and the 53 [ aiq bkr ] ciphers,

רכב קיא

Bartholomew demonstrates a correlation between the definitions Smith

gave for the hieroglyphs and their English and Hebrew letters.54

Additionally, he points to evidence that Smith was taking his conception

of the interrelationship between the Adamic, Hebrew, and Egyptian

languages directly from Masonic texts. Finally, Bartholomew suggests

that Smith was led to believe that the Adamic written language was

related to the Royal Arch cipher by Masonic ritual, specifically the Royal

Arch degree in which the initiate is shown an artifact produced by Enoch

with words written in the Royal Arch cipher.55 The Royal Arch ritual

and tradition ties together themes of ascent, exaltation, and restoration,

specifically the restoration of pure language and the true pronunciation

of the Divine Name.56

Despite continuing efforts to explain Smith’s involvement in a

“translation” project that apparently had little to do with the rendering of

the hieroglyphs into the English language, substantial questions remain.

Hauglid writes,

This Egyptian project has given rise to questions that generally focus on how much Joseph was involved in the project, and whether or not the Abraham translation and Egyptian projects somehow inform each other. If the Egyptian project can be considered separate from the translation project then the question remains as to what those involved in the Egyptian project

were trying to do.57

200

He further points out that modern Egyptologists would find the

Mormon Egyptian translations to be “gibberish.” However, he stresses,

[I]t must be understood that Joseph Smith and his associates took their language study quite seriously. . . . While approaching the Egyptian documents from a purely Egyptological standpoint yields minimal value, analyzing the systematic nature of the documents themselves can tell us something about those who created them. In doing so it becomes quite clear that Joseph Smith and W.W. Phelps, in particular, developed a complex, if not imaginative, system

toward their apprehension of the Egyptian language. 58

It is clear that the Egyptian project was important to the early Latter-

day Saints who worked on it, but scholars have been unable to explain

exactly what they were doing. Freemasonry may provide a solution that

has not yet been considered: the project was an experiment with the

creation of a Masonically based Mormon ritual.

Early Development of a Mormon Ritual

Consideration of Joseph Smith’s Egyptian project as an effort to

prepare a set of rituals for a new temple sheds new light upon these

seemingly scattered and disconnected documents. At the time the

Egyptian papers were being prepared, plans for several temples were in

progress. As part of temple worship, a number of verses in the Book of

Commandments promised the Saints an “endowment” similar to the

“enduement” of divine wisdom given to Masonic initiates.59

Though never completed, work on the Egyptian papers is indicative of

what one might do when developing a new Masonic degree or rite. In

fact, such development was being done in Europe and America

contemporaneously with the advent of Mormonism. For example, the

Crata Repoa, a series of seven Egyptian-inspired degrees written in

German, appeared for the first time in 1770. While nineteenth-century

Masonic scholars Pike, Mackey, and Oliver were in general agreement as

to its probable Egyptian origin, it is more likely that its creator brought

together fragments from many ancient authors into a ritual form.

Furthermore, it is not believed that the Crata Repoa was ever actually

practiced. According to Manly P. Hall, it instead “appear[ed] to belong to

the literature and philosophy of the Craft rather than to its working

degrees.”60 Other ritualists did, however, develop degrees with Egyptian

themes that became working rituals. One such person was Joseph

Balsamo (Cagliostro), who founded the Rite of High Egyptian Masonry

in 1784. Likewise, the Rite of Memphis was constituted by Jacques

Etienne Marconis de Négre in 1838. And slightly later than the Joseph

Smith period, the enthusiastic Rob Morris wrote the Eastern Star

201

Degrees, based on French “Adoptive Masonry” (Maconnerie

d’Adoption), which enabled women with Masonic relationships by blood

or marriage to participate in mixed-sex lodges. Morris drew his

inspiration for the ritual, ceremonies, and lectures from five female

characters in the Bible, and he conceived and arranged these degrees in

1850, often holding them in his Kentucky home.61

Like Morris and the creators of the Egyptian rites, the developer of a

Masonic degree would often construct a biblical midrash upon which to

base the ritual. In the Royal Arch, this backstory recounts the journey of

the liberated Jewish captives in Babylon back to Jerusalem to participate

in rebuilding the temple. In the Book of Abraham, Smith develops just

such a legend: Abraham’s escape from the idolatrous priests of Egypt.62

Additionally, Abraham’s schooling in astronomy provides an opportunity

for allegorical instruction of potential candidates in the seven liberal arts

and sciences.

The Masonic nature of the Egyptian papers is further made clear by the

five “degrees” of understanding for each considered hieroglyph, wherein

Smith arranged several word constructions into degrees, demonstrating

his understanding of the progressive nature of Freemasonry. For

example, the Hebrew beth (house) is expanded by degrees in order to

draw more narrative meaning. Thus, in the first degree “the signification

of Beth is Man’s first residence.”63 In the second degree, beth is “a

fruitful garden or a great valley or plain filled with fruit trees and

flow[er]s.”64 When added to the first degree, the explanation expands

the understanding of what man’s first residence was like—a fruitful

garden. The third degree tells us that beth is “good to the taste, pleasing

to the eye”;65 the fourth, “sweet and precious to the smell.”66 Each of

these degrees describes how the garden is perceived by the senses. In the

fifth degree, beth is a “place of happiness, purity, holiness, & rest.”67

The five degrees of beth in the Joseph Smith Egyptian papers expand the

word’s meaning from residence to fruitful garden, to a pleasuring of the

senses, and finally to joy. This mirrors the Masonic initiate’s progression

through the degrees to greater light and knowledge approaching the

Divine.

Also included in the Alphabet and Grammar is a “second part” of each

degree. The degrees are interspersed throughout the pages of the

notebook with many blank pages between, as if more were to be added.

202

There, the word beth is given a definition in the second part of the fifth

degree:

The place appointed of God for the residence of Adam; Adam ondi=Ahman a fruit garden made to be fruitful, by blessing or promise; great valley or plain given by promise, filled with fruit trees and precious flowers, made for the healing of Man. Good to the taste, pleasing to the eye; sweet and precious ^deligh[t]ful^ to the smell; place of happiness—purity, holiness, and

rest: even Zomar—Zion.68

This signification is even further expanded and spiritualized. It gives

detailed information, including the Hebrew-sounding terms “Adam

ondi=Ahman” and “Zomar.” Parts of the language in these degrees for

the word beth are later seen in the Nauvoo Temple endowment.

This pattern of progressive transformation of meaning is also evident

in the name of the patriarch, Abraham. In the first degree is his name

Abram, or “Ah-broam,” which signifies “The Father of the faithful. The

first right,” and, indicates the priesthood of “The elder.” The next several

degrees use wording matched in Abraham 1:2:

Second degree—same sound—“a follower of righteousness”

Third degree—same sound—“One who possesses great

knowle[d]ge”

Fourth degree—same sound—“a follower of righteousness a

possesser of greater knowledge”

Fifth degree—“Ah bra-aam—a father of many nations a prince of

peace, one who keeps the commandments of God. A patriarch a

rightful heir, a highpriest.” 69

As in the biblical account, Abram’s name and status are transformed in

the fifth degree, where he now holds the patriarchal priesthood of “high

priest.” Similarly, every Masonic initiate undergoes a transformation

connected with a mythic story as the true meaning of their philosophy is

revealed to them through allegory.70 A Mason who advances stage-by-

stage through the thirty-three degrees of the Masonic hierarchy learns

new meanings for each symbol at every stage. While Smith’s attempt at a

Kirtland ritual was more condensed, the later Nauvoo Temple practice

was more centered on the Masonic concept of transformation by degrees.

For Latter-day Saints, the priesthood that transforms them is the

priesthood of Abraham in the fifth degree.

The Royal Arch degree concludes with a catechism where the initiate

reviews what he has learned in a question-and-answer format. A portion

203

of this catechism exposed by Richard Carlile in 1826 looks like this:

Q. Were you intrusted with the grand word?

A. I was. They gave me the grand movement, taught me the sign, and intrusted me with the sacred word, which is too incomprehensible for an individual to express. Q. Was that word ever lost?

A. It was.

Q. In what manner?

A. By the untimely death of our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff.71

This sample is similar to the catechism in “A Sample of pure Language”

issued by Joseph Smith in 1832:

Question What is the name of God in pure Language

Answer Awmen . . . 72

Q What is the name of the Son of God.

A Son Awmen . . .

Q What is man.

A This signifies Sons Awmen . . .

Q What are Angels called in pure language.

A Awmen Angls-men73

Still later, a catechism of questions and answers is seen near the end of

the Nauvoo Temple ceremony when the initiate passes through the veil.

In the Royal Arch, as in other degrees, a Grand Omnific key word is

given and broken into three syllables so that it may easily be repeated by

the companions. This word is similar to the tri-syllabic words that Smith

uses as names of Deity in the Egyptian papers, such as Jah-oh-eh.

Perhaps Smith’s use of strange names to label places and people of the

Restoration has been misunderstood. Rather than concealing their

identities, they may be an attempt to transform names and identities into

the “pure language” and reveal certain aspects of their true character.

Joseph Smith as Prophetic Restorer

Incipient ritual informed by Freemasonry is evident in Smith’s

Egyptian workings throughout the 1830s and 1840s. Temple ordinances

during this time were progressive and later elaborated in Nauvoo. First,

the name of Deity was revealed in the Egyptian papers. Then, in the

Kirtland Temple, the name was used with ritual action. In this temple,

members of the School of the Prophets dropped to their knees, raised

their hands to heaven, and called on the deity “Ahman” who walked

through the room. The name they invoked was the secret name found in

the Kirtland Egyptian papers. Finally, in Nauvoo, names and ritual action

were placed together into a biblically based ritual story—Adam at the

altar representing every man on his knees. The development of a

Masonically based ritual accounts for all the different parts of the

204

Egyptian project in a way that no other theory has. The Mormon

Egyptian papers may not be the product of the translator’s craft, but they

are certainly the product of imagination, vision, and inspiration.

The arrival of the mummies and papyrus in Kirtland was the closest

that Joseph Smith had come to anything from Egypt, and they held great

fascination among early Mormons. Because of Masonry’s Egyptian

connection, it was easy for those who were working with the papyri to

put them into Masonic terms. They connected the papyri with pure

language, higher mysteries, temple instruction and ritual, and the

“ancient order of things.”

In spite of this, what Smith did was not mere slavish borrowing. While

the seeds of Mormon midrash can be observed in Masonry, these

concepts were recontextualized in Mormonism. As demonstrated in this

chapter, Smith used an identifiable process to bring Masonic concepts

into a uniquely Mormon setting. In his hands, many Masonic traditions

were transformed into sacred stories, literalized, and canonized.

Salem Town and others expected that Masonry would be restored to its

pristine beauty before the Second Coming of Christ and that it would

serve as the means by which Christianity would be purified. Smith

conceived of himself as the individual who would both initiate these

changes in Masonry and complete the climactic task of purifying and

restoring true religion. There were three aspects to the work of this

expected restorer.

First, he must create and interpret scripture. Smith fulfilled this

prophetic responsibility by producing a unique Mormon midrash rooted

in a process familiar to Freemasons. The resulting body of work was

different from Jewish midrash, which comes from a number of different

perspectives. Smith’s work advanced a particular opinion.

Next, the prophetic figure must restore the body of legends to a

theologically pure form. Smith selectively took Masonic stories or

traditions and made them sacred by virtue of his prophetic office. He

used the authority of his priesthood to impart integrity to what he

restored. What in Masonry may have been an allegory, encouraging good

moral behavior, was thus transformed into literal or factual spiritual

history, imposing moral imperatives. Eventually, Smith’s Mormon

midrash provided a rich font of symbols and allegories from which to

draw. In Masonry they existed as a secret tradition, but in Mormonism

they became sacred scripture and a backdrop for spiritually powerful

religious ceremonies.

205

Finally, the Masonic restorer, exemplified by King Solomon, must

bring forth a purified ritual. In Masonic legend, Solomon created the

system of Masonry and ritual that governs the Craft to this day. From the

earliest introduction of Mormon scripture, Smith’s midrash began to

introduce concepts evident in the Kirtland Temple ritual and which

continued to blossom into their full form in Nauvoo.

Joseph Smith’s midrashic expansions introduced concepts and

theology in a decidedly hermetic manner, common to Freemasons of his

day. His expansions were scripture in that they were the product of

revelation. In nineteenth-century Freemasonry, the scriptural text was

dynamic and participatory. Individuals were expected to engage the text

and make new discoveries using an established hermeneutic. In today’s

world, the method Smith used to create midrash is largely obscured from

our view.

Modern Latter-day Saint views of how a prophet might approach and

interpret scripture are relatively conservative and Protestant in nature.

This seems different from Smith’s own approach to sacred texts. As in

Masonry, absolute consistency in sacred texts was not demanded of early

Mormonism. Apparent inconsistencies and variants were presented to

engage the mind in what Smith called “the proving of contrarreties.”74

Scriptures were not simply statements of facts; they were a tool to work

upon the mind, providing individual insight and personal transformation.

In this context, the precise facts of the sacred story are less important

than their transformational and revelatory functions. From his scriptural

record and ritual workings, Smith demonstrated that he was, with little

argument, both a “myth-making genius” and a consummate ritualist.75

Notes

206

207

at my Office and the printing Office, correcting the first plate or cut of the Records of Father Abraham, prepared by Reuben Hedlock.” “4 March 1842. At my office exhibiting the Book of Abraham in the original To Brother Reuben Hedlock, so that he might take the size of the several plates or Cuts, and prepare the Blocks for the Times and Seasons; and also gave instruction concerning the arrangement of the writing on the large cut, illustrating the principles of Astronomy.” (Facsimile 2). See “History, 1838–1856, volume C-1 [2 November 1838–31 July 1842],” 1275–76, 1286.

208

firmly believ’d this Tradition: nay Josephus (Lib i. cap.2.) affirms the Stone-Pillar still remain’d in Syria to his Time.” James Anderson, The New Book of Constitutions of the Antient and Honourable Fraternity of Free and Accepted Masons, Containing their History, Charges, Regulations, &c., Collected and Digested by Order of the Grand Lodge from their Old Records, faithful Traditions, and Lodge-Books, for the Use of the Lodges, 3.

209

210
