THE TROWEL AND THE SWORD

This union was made after the example set by the Israelites when

they erected the second Temple who, whilst they handled the trowel

and mortar with one hand, in the other held the sword and buckler.

—Chevalier Andrew Michael Ramsay, Ramsay’s Oration of 1737

The biblical book of Nehemiah contains a story both revered and 2 . As allegorically utilized by Cryptic Masons of the York Rite of

Freemasonry.1 The story is portrayed on English Royal Arch

tracing boards and exposed in Bernard’s 1829 Light on Masonry

recounted in the Bible, after Nehemiah received permission to gather a

group of Jews to rebuild Jerusalem and restore the walls of the temple,

the work was greatly hindered by their enemies so that each laborer

“with one of his hands wrought in the work, and with the other hand held

a weapon” (Neh. 4:17). Freemasons visually depict this scene with an

emblem of the temple masons holding the implements of Masonry: a

trowel and mortar in one hand, and a sword in the other for defense.3

Along with a broken triangle symbolizing the Lost Master’s Word, these

objects are associated with themes of restoration and recovery.4 They are

mentioned in the “old verses” quoted by Joseph Laycock in his lecture

delivered March 8, 1736, at the constitution of a new lodge in Gateshead,

England:

When Sanballat Jerusalem distress’d

With sharp Assaults in Nehemiah’s Time,

To War and Work the Jews themselves address’d,

And did repair their Walls with Stone and Lime.

One Hand the Sword against the Foe did shake

The other Hand the Trowel up did take.5

The first reference to temples in the Latter-day Saint canon shares this

biblical legend. Like Nehemiah, Nephi and his people encountered

opposition as their numbers increased in the new land. In the tradition of

Tubal Cain in Masonic legend, Nephi taught his people smithing skills.

Once they were able to forge metal, he armed his people so that they

could protect themselves from hostile Lamanites while building a

temple. With tools of masonry in one hand and swords in another,

Nephi’s workmen built a structure “after the manner of King Solomon”

211

(2 Ne. 5:14–16).6 This Book of Mormon temple story subtly introduces

elements suggested in the biblical account but more liberally included in

the Masonic sources.

In the early 1830s, Joseph Smith sought to restore keys and authority

preparatory to the literal recovery of Masonry’s symbolic Lost Word.

This endeavor required the construction of temples similar in form and

function to those of the Freemasons. From their first efforts to build and

develop temples, Latter-day Saints shared the Masonic perception of Old

Testament temples, and their encounters with the hostility of the outside

world were also framed in terms of the “trowel and the sword.”

Hiram, Ohio: “A Hill of Zion”

The Latter-day Saint city and temple-building impulse—with a

Masonic flair—can be seen as early as 1831. Late in this year, Joseph

Smith visited a small settlement in Hiram, Ohio (also known as Hiram

Hill), which had coincidentally been founded at the turn of the century

by a group of Freemasons and named for one of their ancient Grand

Masters. Daniel Tilden of Lebanon, Connecticut, was one of the original

purchasers.

After the first schoolhouse was built in Hiram in 1820, another was

begun in the Center District of town. According to a town historian, “A

frame building was put up to subserve the purpose of a schoolhouse, and

with a Masonic Hall above, but it was never completed.”7 The mention

of a building such as this necessitates a group of Masons living in Hiram

or nearby.8 As was common at the time, local Masons may have met in a

large upper room in a private home. The John Johnson farmhouse, where

Joseph Smith would later live, was just such a place.9 It may have even

been built with that purpose in mind—with a large upper room suitable

for meeting, and the square and compasses, implements of speculative

Masonry, etched in two locations on exposed foundation stones.10

212

Foundation of John Johnson home in Hiram, Ohio. Photo by Nicholas S. Literski.

The religious ideas of Alexander Campbell took deep root in this

section of the country. Campbellite views on baptism, the Lord’s Supper,

the necessity of implicit obedience, and the notion of a restoration of

strict biblical constructs were adopted by many of the residents of Hiram.

They called themselves learners, “Disciples,” or “Rigdonites,” after one

of their most ardent converts, Sidney Rigdon. Well educated in eastern

schools, Rigdon became a preacher, and from his cabin home in Mentor

made many long preaching tours in every direction.11 His several

congregations included future Mormon converts Newel K. Whitney,

Lyman Wight, Isaac Morley, Frederick G. Williams, Titus Billings,

Oliver Snow, David Pond, Lucius N. Scovil, Basil Windsor, Walter

Carlton, Rufus Edwards, the Reddens, the Beechers, the Careys, and the

Richersons, to name a few.12

On November 8, 1830, Rigdon was baptized by Oliver Cowdery into

Joseph Smith’s newly formed church, followed by many of his

parishioners in the following year. Two of the leading Methodists in the

area, John Johnson and Reverend Ezra Booth, traveled thirty miles north

to Kirtland with their wives to visit Smith. A miraculous healing of Elsa

Johnson’s arm by the Prophet impelled them to baptism in late March

1831.13 Booth was so roused by his new faith that he returned to Portage

County preaching Mormonism to the Methodists, Baptists, and Symonds

213

Ryder’s Disciples congregation in Hiram. Large numbers of converts

soon filled the small town.

The new Portage County Saints approached Smith with what some

said was “the purpose of getting the settlement removed to Hiram.”14

This scenario seems plausible considering the sizeable group of

enthusiastic converts gathered in the area. While on his way to survey

the possibilities, Smith “had a vision which told him that Hiram Hill was

the ‘Hill of Zion’ for which he had been searching . . . and that the

principal office of the church should be here.”15 Because of this, many

Saints believed Hiram “had been marked to be the Mormon capital

instead of Kirtland.”16

Records indicate the site of the contemplated temple was chosen—a

picturesque elevated spot on Symonds Ryder’s property “near the

Hinckley farm.”17 One local reminiscence states that, as a preparation

for the work of building the temple, rows of beautiful maple trees were

transplanted along the roadside.18

Joseph Smith and his small family relocated to Hiram on September

12, 1831,19 where they were offered a home with John Johnson. The

Whitmers, the eight witnesses of the Book of Mormon, and other leading

members and their families arrived during the winter of 1831–32. Many

built cabins adjacent to the Johnson property. Meetings were held in

local schoolhouses, and men were sent to the surrounding areas on

mission assignments. “There was hardly a family in the township which

was not wholly or in part converted,” one local history indicated. More

than sixty people had been baptized, and, along with those who had

moved into the area, the Church boasted over two hundred members.20

In later years, when older residents were questioned about the Mormons,

they recalled that “the plan of Smith at this time was to build three Zions

—one in Kirtland, one in Hiram and one in the Far West [Missouri].”21

Many of the revelations included in the Doctrine and Covenants were

received by Smith while he lived in Hiram, and they caused a great stir

in the vicinity. According to a close friend, Joseph B. Noble, Smith

became convinced of the theological necessity of polygamy “while he

was engaged in the work of translation of the Scriptures,” evidently a

reference to Smith’s and Rigdon’s early 1830s revision of the Bible.22

The Prophet’s interest in this subject may evidence his seeing himself as

a Solomonic figure in many ways.

214

Another revelation on three heavenly kingdoms resembled one of the

Campbellite teachings so closely that Cecil McGavin called it “the last

straw—the straw that broke the Campbell back.” One opponent,

recognizing the Masonic flavor of the revelations, observed that Smith

“out masoned King Solomon,” but “the ‘Campbellites’ complained that

he had stolen their thunder and was running wild with it.”23 Smith’s

recasting of several Christian doctrines appeared to his contemporaries to

draw from Freemasonry as well as the unique and innovative

Campbellite religion. This angered both opponents and adherents to

those two traditions.

While the practice of consecration of property into a communal society

was not uncommon in 1830s America, Smith’s revelation on the subject

was the cause of great consternation among his followers.24 One source

states that while Smith was away, his “charts and papers” were examined

and found to contain “a plot . . . to take the property of all the converts

out of their hands and form a great stock company, with Smith as the

head or president.” This plan took some members by surprise, and “was

far more than they could endure.”25 In consequence of the ensuing

outrage, both Smith and Rigdon were tarred and feathered by a group of

disgruntled members and townspeople on the night of March 24, 1832.26

Over the next year, the Mormons struggled to maintain their presence

in Hiram as the leading families began to move on. Within a week of

their painful ordeal, Smith and Rigdon left for Missouri to conduct

church business and would not permanently return. Emma and her

adopted daughter, Julia, remained with the Johnsons for six months after

the attack (with the exception of a short stay in Kirtland). They moved to

Kirtland on September 12, 1832, and took up quarters in an apartment

above Newel K. Whitney’s store. The Whitmers and a group of nearly

one hundred members from the Hiram branch departed on May 2, 1832,

and traveled to Missouri. There they formed the Whitmer Settlement (or

Timber Branch) in Jackson County.27

In the face of continued harassment by his neighbors, John Johnson

moved to Kirtland in early 1833 and opened an inn next to Whitney’s

establishment. Many of his adult children and their spouses also obtained

property in Kirtland at this time. Father Johnson sold most of his 160

acres the following spring and donated the $3,000 to the Church’s United

Firm, which managed all financial aspects of the communal order. These

proceeds, along with other funds from donations to the United Firm,

215

were used to pay the mortgage on a large piece of acreage upon which

the Kirtland temple lot was laid out. Thus, Kirtland, rather than Hiram,

became the site for the first Mormon temple.

Kirtland, Ohio: Masonic Architecture, Appurtenances, and Inner

Workings

On June 1, 1833, Joseph Smith received a revelation that the temple in

Kirtland should be built “after the manner which I shall show unto three

of you” (D&C 95:14)—referring to Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick

G. Williams. This instruction is significant in view of the Masonic

tradition that King Solomon’s Temple was built under the direction of

three principals: Solomon, King of Israel; Hiram, King of Tyre; and

Hiram Abiff, skillful artificer. Williams was said to have reported:

We [Smith, Rigdon, and Williams] went upon our knees, called on the Lord, and the building appeared within viewing distance. I being the first to discover it. Then all of us viewed it together. After we had taken a good look at the exterior, the building seemed to come right

over us, and the makeup of this hall seemed to coincide with what I there saw to a minutia.28

Mormons were directed to construct the temple with dimensions of 55

feet in width and 65 feet in length with a “lower court,” a “higher court,”

and an attic story.29 These dimensions were considerably different than

the biblical description of Solomon’s Temple, which was a rectangular

building roughly 30 feet wide, 105 feet long, and 45 feet high.30

By the 1830s, “Solomon’s Temple, Spiritualized”—that is, the

mystical significance of that temple in all its aspects—had been one of

the central allegorical concerns of Freemasonry for nearly two centuries,

and Masonic lodges were said to symbolically represent that sacred

edifice. It makes sense then that the first realized temple of the Latter-

day Saints was more closely aligned conceptually with Masonic temples

than any biblical model. An examination of the use of the Kirtland

temple, as well as its appurtenances, demonstrates a reliance upon a

Masonic rather than an ancient Jewish conception of Solomon’s Temple.

Instead of being strict imitations of the biblical model, Masonic temples

were reconstructions made for allegorical purposes, each aspect being a

“type” of Christ.31

By the time the Kirtland temple was built, several Mormon insiders

were already well acquainted with the signs, symbols, and inner

workings of Freemasonry.32 They participated in and were impacted by

Masonic motifs in the rituals and ordinances performed within the

lodges, in the architecture and use of ritual space, and in the historical

216

backdrop of the temple’s establishment. Even those who were neither

Freemasons nor involved in the inner circle of men who had received

washings and anointings had sufficient cultural awareness of the

Fraternity so that they could recognize Masonic influence as the temple

took shape. According to Edward Tullidge,

There is a grand Masonic consistency in the divine scheme of the Mormon prophet, and the sisters began to comprehend the infinite themes of their religion when they worked in the

temple at Kirtland, and beheld in the service the glory of Israel’s God.33

A significant difference between the Kirtland temple and the Jewish

temple is that while ritual space in the Jewish temple was based on

animal sacrifice, the organization of the inside of the Kirtland temple

was more conducive to Masonic meetings. Although the lower court was

to be “dedicated unto me for your sacrament offering, and for your

preaching, and your fasting, and your praying, and the offering up of

your most holy desires” (D&C 95:16), these offerings were figurative, in

the Masonic tradition, rather than literal. Both Masonic and Mormon

temples illustrate a theme of restoration and an allegorical ceremony of

passing through a veil to come into the presence of God.

The cornerstone of the Kirtland temple was laid on July 23, 1833. At

this time in the United States, cornerstone ceremonies of important civil

and religious buildings were frequently held by Freemasons, with the

cornerstones being most often laid in the northeast corner of the building.

Albert Mackey explained the symbolism of this placement: The east, as

the source of material light, represents a new day arising, “dissipating the

clouds of intellectual darkness and error.” The north is the place of

darkness and symbol of the profane world. With one surface of the stone

facing the north and the other facing the east, it is “neither wholly in the

one part nor wholly in the other, and in so far it is a symbol of initiation

not fully developed.”34

At times, this symbolism did not seem to fit the building being

dedicated. The United States Capitol building, for example, was

considered the center of the Federal City and of the nation. Its

cornerstone was laid in the southwest corner by George Washington,

assisted by members of Maryland’s Lodge No. 9, Virginia’s Alexandria

Lodge No. 22, and Federal Lodge No. 15. Brigham Young later

explained that the first stone of the Kirtland temple was laid at the

southeast corner, the point of greatest light at high noon.35 This was an

overt Masonic reference that followed the example set by Washington

and his Masonic companions.

217

It seems likely that the cornerstone for the Independence, Missouri,

temple, designed at the same time as Kirtland but never completed—was

also laid at the southeast. On August 3, 1831, Smith and seven other

Elders gathered at the site to dedicate the ground and lay the cornerstone.

John Whitmer’s account of the event mentions the cornerstone was laid

at the northeast by Smith, but in 1929, excavations revealed a southeast

cornerstone labeled “SECT” (South East Cornerstone Temple) and a

“witness marker” on the northeast.36 The witness marker is etched with

a “surveyor 4” (backwards numeral “4”) and a zero, referring to it being

forty feet from the southeast cornerstone, and thus subordinate to it.

Ezra Booth wrote a picturesque description of the Missouri temple

site, directing locals who wished to visit to “walk one half of a mile out

of the Town, to a rise of ground, a short distance south of the road.”

There,

they will be able to ascertain the spot, by the means of a sappling [sapling], distinguished from others by the bark being taken off on the north and on the east side. —On the south side of the sappling will be found the letter, T, which stands for Temple; and on the east side ZOM for Zomar; which Smith says is the original word for Zion. Near the foot of the sappling, they will find a small stone, covered over with bushes, which were cut for that purpose. This is the

corner stone for the Temple.37

The Kirtland temple was a notable edifice for a small frontier town.

From the outside, it didn’t look substantially different than many New

England chapels of the day.38 Its inner architecture, however, was

unique. Taken separately, these elements might attract little notice, but

their concurrent presence suggests a strong reliance upon Freemasonry.

First, a set of three pillars frame each side of the seating section. These

are reminiscent of the three Masonic pillars, “Wisdom,” “Strength,” and

“Beauty.” Many Masonic tracing boards include three pillars

representing the three allegorical principles that “support” a lodge.

Pulpits in the east and west of both stories of the Kirtland temple suggest

the organization of a lodge, with officers located in the sections

designated East and West. Gilbert Belnap, a Nauvoo Mason, was

impressed by the “poolpit [pulpit] at each end of those rooms [‘on the

first and second floors’] constructed for the purpose of accommodating

those holding different degrees of the holy priesthood.”39 The pulpits are

arrayed in a tiered pattern of three by three. This arrangement is related

to the Royal Arch and emphasizes the sacred character of the number

three, which suggests the presence of divine power.

The front face of each pulpit was engraved with a series of three

cryptic gilt letters related to the office of the men who were appointed to

218

each pulpit.40 Masons characteristically form abbreviations using the

first letter of each word. These are widely employed throughout the

Masonic system in acronyms, monitors (booklets containing the wording

of ceremonies, rituals, and prayers), signets, and so forth. Following the

letters in a formal Masonic document are placed three points in a

triangular form. These dots indicate a Masonic title or a technical

word.41 The letters P, E, and M carved into the sacrament table in front

of the pulpit are also placed in this triangular formation.

On the west end of the building, behind the sacrament table and

pulpits, is a magnificent window framed by a double arch and keystone

combination, resting upon two pillars. These items were vital to Royal

Arch legend and used in nineteenth-century Masonic lodge rooms.

Smith’s purpose in building a temple was to provide a place for making

covenants, encountering the Lord, and being endowed with “power from

on high” (D&C 95:8). The architectural components symbolized these

objectives. The arch, as represented in some Royal Arch chapters, has

three letters (J Z H)42 engraved upon it representing the three principal

officers of the chapter. It stands for “the Blue Arch of Heaven and the

rainbow which . . . represents God’s covenant with mankind after Noah’s

flood. . . . The legend upon which the ceremony [of the Royal Arch] is

based speaks of not one arch but nine [3X3], supporting and enclosing a

vault beneath the temple of Solomon.”43 Royal Arch history informs us

that “[b]eneath King Solomon’s Temple was a vaulted chamber

containing nine arches and it was within the ninth of these that the

Sacred Name [of Deity] was deposited.”44

Written on the wall between the men and women’s entrance of the

Kirtland temple were three Latin phrases: Laus Deo (praise God), Crux

Mihi Anchora (the cross is my anchor), and Magna Veritas et Prevalebit

(great is truth and it shall prevail). Such Latin mottos are employed by

Freemasons on banners or on the heads of documents to express the

character and design of different branches or orders.45 For example, the

motto for the Order of the Red Cross is Magna est Veritas, et

praevalabit. Both it and the slogan Laus Deo appeared in Bernard’s 1829

Light on Masonry 46 .

219

Kirtland Temple Pulpits, ca. 1912.

The phrase “House of the Lord” emblazoned above the main entrance

to the Kirtland temple and later temples marked with the phrase

“Holiness to the Lord” continue this use of religious slogans in

association with Mormon temple worship. The latter expression is found

in the Old Testament, where it was engraved upon the gold plate of a

crown worn as part of the priestly garments (Ex. 28:36; 39:30).

Freemasons used this biblical axiom since at least 1710 when it appears

in the Dumfries manuscript.47 In the Royal Arch degree, “Holiness to

the Lord” is found upon the mitre of the High Priest, is spoken in praise

three times by characters who have made a marvelous discovery, and is

painted on the central symbol of the arch.48

An elegant, narrow spiral staircase in the Kirtland temple curls

purposefully from the first to the second floor. According to scripture, a

“winding stair” was similarly located within King Solomon’s Temple,

connecting the ground floor of that structure with the middle chamber of

the building (1 Kgs. 6:8). The Freemasons’ appropriation of the winding

stair contains rich allegorical meaning and is featured prominently on

tracing boards and in the design of many lodges, and Royal Arch aprons

often depict pillar, arch, and veil behind a staircase consisting of three,

220

five, or seven steps. In the Fellow Craft degree, the winding stair

suggests spiritual advancement and the imparting of spiritual knowledge.

In the middle chamber of the Lodge, the initiate learns about “the

mystery of the Letter G.”49 The figurative goal of the Masonic version

of the winding stair is to represent heavenly ascent and to bring one near

to God.

In the context of looking for the “Word,” the arch and keystone,

pillars, three multiples of three, mysterious lettering, inscriptions,

winding staircases, and passing through veils are all significant. They are

key elements of the Royal Arch ritual, which points to the restoration of

King Solomon’s Temple and the discovery of “that which was lost.”

Many of these features are biblical; however, they don’t all occur

together and in the context of restoration in the Bible as they do in

Freemasonry.

Kirtland School of the Prophets

During Mormonism’s Kirtland period, Joseph Smith found in Masonry

a system of teaching that enabled him to present complex principles to a

select group of the leading elders of the Church. The first recorded

meeting of the Kirtland School of the Prophets was held in the upper

room of Newel K. Whitney’s store on January 23, 1833, and it was

organized in the same tradition as the Masonic Schools of Instruction.50

The school became a prototype of forthcoming Kirtland temple ritual.

Whitney, a young merchant and businessman, had been a Freemason

since July 26, 1819, when, at the age of twenty-four, he was raised to

Master Mason in Meridian Orb Lodge No. 10 at Painesville, Ohio. Not

content to only receive the three degrees of Craft Masonry, Whitney also

received the Royal Arch Degree, taking an active part in the attempted

formation of a Royal Arch chapter at Painesville.51 He would repeat that

effort in Hancock County in 1843, after the establishment of craft lodges

at Nauvoo and Warsaw.52

For a time, Whitney affiliated with the Campbellite, or Disciples of

Christ tradition, and he was baptized into Joseph Smith’s church in

November of 1830. Meetings of Kirtland’s leading elders in his

respectable dry goods store resembled those of contemporary nineteenth-

century lodges that frequently occupied an upper room in an existing

building, such as a tavern.

An announcement was soon made that a new edifice was to be built to

house the School of the Prophets and to “endow those whom I [the Lord]

221

have chosen with power from on high” (D&C 95:8).53 Language such as

this suggested that, just as the School of the Prophets was an elite and

exclusive group, the endowment would also be given to a chosen and

selective company whom the Lord would honor with his presence.54 Not

unlike the Masonic Fraternity, the Mormon School of the Prophets was a

select body with specific membership requirements (D&C 88:133, 138).

Its meetings began with a ritual greeting of uplifted hands between the

instructor and class members. Zebedee Coltrin recalled:

Elder Orson Hyde was the teacher and saluted the brethren with uplifted hands, and they also answered with uplifted hands. . . . The teacher saluted the brethren (one or more) as they came

in. This salutation was given every morning when they met.55

This formality was described as “a salutation to one another in the house

of God, in the school of the prophets” (v. 136), connecting the school

with the planned temple. In this responsorial greeting, men were received

by covenant as brothers “in the bonds of love” (v. 133). This indicated a

mystic fraternal tie in which they were bound together by mutual

obligations to God.

Masonic tradition identifies prayer with uplifted hands as a Jewish

practice. This type of prayer is likewise found in the Book of Mormon’s

description of the tradition of the apostate Zoramites meeting in their

false synagogue. One person at a time would

go forth and stand upon the top thereof, and stretch forth his hands towards heaven, and cry with a loud voice, saying: Holy, holy God . . . we thank thee . . . that we are a chosen and a holy people. . . . Now the place was called by them Rameumptom, which, being interpreted, is the holy stand. (Alma 31:14, 18, 21)

While the context makes clear it is associated with a false religious form,

the action itself is not spoken of disparagingly. Rather, it is the words

that accompanied this ritual act that are treated with disapproval. Thus,

there was no contradiction when in the School of the Prophets, Joseph

Smith himself inaugurated the practice of prayer with uplifted hands.56

Following the greeting, class members received confidential

instruction. As in Freemasonry, emphasis was placed on learning certain

“liberal arts and sciences” such as astronomy, geography, geology,

history, languages, and politics (D&C 88:77–79). Those who attended in

the winter and early spring of 1833 were instructed in several secular

topics as well as church doctrine to prepare them for their ministry.

Members of the School of the Prophets were given admonitions

concerning their personal habits, spiritual practices, and comportment.

But “above all things,” they were to “clothe [them]selves with the bond

of charity, as with a mantle” (v. 125). This mirrored Masonic injunction:

222

charity is the chief characteristic of the Lodge. From the very first

degree, Freemasons are told that such charity is an identifying mark of

the individual Freemason, for like the soul itself, it endures forever:

“Faith may be lost in sight; Hope ends in fruition; but Charity extends

beyond the grave, through the boundless realms of eternity.”57

One of the courses of study at the School of the Prophets was the

Lectures on Faith, which contains the earliest articulation of the Mormon

doctrine of divinization. As was true of the instruction of candidates in

the Masonic degrees, the lectures utilize a catechismal structure. For

example, members of the school learned in Lecture 5 that by keeping the

commandments they would grow “from grace to grace and become heirs

of the heavenly kingdom . . . being transformed into the express image”

of God. Referencing John 14, Lecture 7 explains Jesus “declares to his

Father, in language not to be easily mistaken, that he wanted his

disciples, even all of them, to be as himself and the Father. . . . [T]he

Savior wished his disciples to understand that they were to be partakers

with him in all things, not even his glory excepted.”58 The perfectibility

of human personality is an idea that was strongly apparent among

contemporary Masonic writers such as Hosea Ballou and was seen

symbolically in Masonic ritual. The members of the School of the

Prophets were to sanctify themselves so that they would become worthy

to see the face of God (D&C 88:68). From among the members of the

School, the “sons of Jacob” were to “build a holy city” (v. 58). The grand

purpose of the school and eventually the temple ritual was to receive the

name of God (D&C 109:9, 19, 22).

The Development of Early Temple Rituals

Masonic rites are known for their appropriation and ritualization of

scriptural stories. Likewise, the first temple ordinances and proto-rituals

seen in the School of the Prophets adapted such biblical precedents.

These included the washing of feet, washing and anointing, the Hosanna

Shout, and the passing through veils of the temple.

Washing of Feet

A ritual introduced in the School of the Prophets that contained a

peculiarly Masonic flavor found its scriptural basis in a scene from the

Gospel of John where Jesus washes the feet of his disciples. As in the

Bible, Mormon washing of feet had been used in several different

223

circumstances, but in the School of the Prophets it took on a more formal

aspect.59 An 1832 revelation to the School directs:

And he shall be received by the ordinance of the washing of feet, for unto this end was the ordinance of the washing of feet instituted. And again, the ordinance of washing feet is to be administered by the president, or presiding elder of the church. It is to be commenced with prayer; and after partaking of bread and wine, he is to gird himself according to the pattern given in the thirteenth chapter of John’s testimony concerning me. Amen. (D&C 88:139–141)

Here, the action of foot washing is specifically termed an ordinance,

ritualizing the practice. In Kirtland temple rites, the washing of feet

began as a preparation for the endowment of “power from on high.”

When the temple was dedicated on March 27, 1836, the hymn “The

Spirit of God,” written for this occasion by W.W. Phelps, was sung. It

included these words:

We’ll wash, and be washed and with oil be anointed,

Withal not omitting the washing of feet.60

Washing of feet took on added significance later in Nauvoo where it

was performed as part of the second anointing, an ordinance connected

with the receiving of the High Priesthood.61 The washing followed the

pattern laid out in the Gospel of John and was accompanied by partaking

of bread and wine, which is not present in the biblical account but is

found in the Masonic Order of High Priesthood.62

Washing and Anointing

The washing of feet that began in the School of the Prophets would

later be followed up with a similar ritual for the whole body. On

Tuesday, January 19, 1836, Joseph Smith noted in his journal history that

he spent the day at the School of the Prophets learning and reading in the

Hebrew language of the Bible: “my prayer is that God will speedily

indue us with a knowledge of all languages and toungs, that his servants

may go forth for the last time, to bind up the law and seal up the

testimony.”63 Amid some turmoil among the Church leadership, Smith

invited his followers to prepare themselves for an induement

[endowment]—a bestowal of divine power and knowledge which would

be given in the temple. The promised gift was especially directed toward

the Council of the Twelve and those elders who were performing

missionary work in the field.

Around this time, Oliver Cowdery and John Corrill met Smith at his

home for an unusual ceremony.64 After preparing a container of pure

water, they “called upon the Lord and proceeded to wash each other’s

bodies, and bathe the same with whiskey, perfumed with cinnamon.”

224

Cowdery later recalled how their “minds were filled” with thoughts of

“how the priests anciently used to wash always before ministering before

the Lord.” Before they had finished their observances, Martin Harris

arrived “and was also washed.”65 Days later, a similar ritual took place

among the members of the First Presidency and other church leaders.66

Smith’s history reports that on January 21, in the attic of the printing

office, the presidency, consisting of Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick

G. Williams, as well as Hyrum Smith, David Whitmer, John Whitmer,

Oliver Cowdery and John Corrill, “attended to the ordinance of washing

our bodies in pure water, [and] we also perfumed our bodies and our

heads, in the name of the Lord.”67 In five days, the washing ceremony

had become an ordinance with a prescribed pattern. The company of

eight then moved to the unfinished temple. Here, they met Smith’s scribe

Warren Parrish and Joseph Smith Sr.,68 along with the bishop of

Kirtland and his counselors,69 and the bishop of Zion with his

counselors.70

A noteworthy detail in Edward Partridge’s account of the events at the

temple that evening informs us that the meeting was “opened” three

successive times, first “by Prest. Joseph Smith, Jun., in behalf of the

Presidency,” next by “Bishop Whitney in behalf of himself and

counsellors,” and finally by Bishop Partridge “in behalf of myself &

counsellors.”71 This procedure is reminiscent of the opening of a lodge

when business is to be conducted for Entered Apprentices, Fellowcrafts,

and Master Masons. The lodge must be opened on each degree.

Furthermore, the charge used at opening a lodge referred to the Old

Testament anointing of Aaron:

Behold! How good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!

It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron’s

beard, that went down to the skirts of his garment:

As the dew of Hermon, that descended upon the mountains of Zion: for there the Lord

commanded a blessing, even life forevermore.72

After the meeting was opened, church leaders beginning with Joseph

Smith Sr. were anointed with consecrated oil—“the same kind of oil and

in the man[ner] that were Moses and Aaron, and those who stood before

the Lord in ancient days.”73 Members of the High Councils of Kirtland

and Zion, who had been waiting in adjoining rooms, were then anointed

in their turn.74 In his description of these first washings and anointings,

historian David Buerger assumes that “these ordinances clearly were

225

patterned after washings and anointings described in the Old and

especially New Testaments.”75 Nonetheless, these types of ceremonies

had been adopted decades before in Freemasonry and exposed in Webb’s

Monitor and Bernard’s Light on Masonry. In the degree called “Knights

of the East and West,” for example, a basin of water and a ewer of

perfume and are placed on the east side of the room. At a certain point in

the ritual,

The Most Puissant then takes the ewer filled with perfumed ointment, and anoints his head, eyes, mouth, heart, the tip of his right ear, hand, and foot, and says, “You are now, my dear brother, received a member of our society; you will recollect to live up to the precepts of it, and also remember that those parts of your body, which have the greatest power of assisting

you in good or evil, have this day been made holy! 76 ”

On February 22, members of the Council of the Twelve, or “traveling

High Council” (D&C 107:33; 124:139), the presidents of the Seventy,

and newly called “president of the high priesthood of the Melchisedek

priesthood,” Don Carlos Smith, were anointed and blessed.77 Anointings

continued throughout February and were accompanied each evening by

an endowment of the Spirit. The heavens were opened, and many visions

experienced. Quite intentionally, the Prophet was building a fraternity of

the first elders of the Church.

The dedication of the temple took place on Sunday, March 27, 1836.

On the following Wednesday, Smith declared that “the time that we were

required to tarry in Kirtland to be endued would be fulfilled in a few

days, and then the Elders would go forth.”78 Speaking of the evening’s

activities of “exhorting, prophesying and speaking in tongues until 5 o

clock in the morning,” with the Savior appearing to some and angels

ministering to others, Smith said that “it was a penticost and enduement

indeed, long to be remembered.”79 This remark makes it clear that the

Kirtland endowment referred to a manifestation of the Spirit, though

accompanied by rites and rituals such as washing and anointing.

Hosanna Shout

Another part of the observances mentioned in accounts of each

anointing session was a ritualized cry of “Hosannah” such as is described

in Masonic ritual.80 On January 21, Joseph Smith’s journal reports, “We

shouted Hosanah to God and the Lamb,”81 while Edward Partridge

recalled, “We shouted Hosanna to the Most High.”82 On January 22,

226

Smith wrote, “The congregation shouted a loud hosanna the gift of

toung[ue]s fell upon us in mighty pow[e]r.”83 Partridge elaborated,

Prest. J.S. Jun., requested Prest. Sidney Rigdon to ask the Lord to accept the performances of the evening, and instructed us, when he was done, to shout Hosannah, Blessed be the name of the Most High God. These things were performed; the shout & speaking in unknown tongues lasted 10 or 15 minutes. During the evening, more especially at the time of shouting, a number

saw visions as they disclosed unto us.84

On January 28, when members of the Elders quorum, Melchizedek

Priesthood quorum, and the Seventies quorum were anointed,85 Smith

instructed the Twelve and the seven presidents of the Seventy “to call

upon God with uplifted hands to seal the blessings which had been

promised to them by the holy anoint[in]g.”86 Then Sidney Rigdon was

called upon “to seal them with uplifted hands. . . . [W]hen he had done

this & cried hossannah that all congregation should join him & shout

hosanna to God & the Lamb & glory to God in the highest.”87

The detail of uplifted hands recalls a point in Masonic ritual where

prayer is offered over Hiram Abiff’s deceased body. While praying, the

brethren raise and drop their hands three times. This gesture would be

carried over into the prayer circle performance in the Nauvoo temple.

Smith spent several of the following days organizing the different

quorums of the Church. On Saturday, February 6, he called together

those who had been anointed to “receive the seal of all their

blessings.”88 He separated the brethren into three different rooms in the

temple; he then went from room to room repeatedly, instructing them in a

very specific ritual that God had shown to him:

first part to be spent in solemn prayer before god without any talking or confusion & the conclusion with a sealing prayer by Pres. Sidney Rigdon when all the quorems are to shout with one accord a solemn hosanna to God & the Lamb with an Amen— amen & amen—& then all take seats & lift up their hearts in silent prayer to God & if any obtain a prophecy or

vision not to rise & speak that all may be edefied & rejoice together.89

A solemn assembly celebrating the seventh anniversary of the

founding of the Church was held on April 6, 1837, at which the previous

week’s anointings were sealed. Elder Wilford Woodruff related that

“with uplifted hand to heaven” those gathered repeated “HOSANNA,

Hosanna, Hosanna, to GOD & the LAMB, Amen, Amen, & Amen” three

times, and that the shout “was repeated by angels on high & caused the

power of God to rest upon us.”90 Thus, the Hosanna Shout was

ritualized and used as a seal for ordinances.91

227

This Hosanna Shout that accompanied the first ordinances was

standardized and more firmly placed into Mormon ritual as part of the

dedication of the Kirtland temple.92 Eliza R. Snow described the shout

at the temple dedication as follows:

One striking feature of the ceremonies, was the grand shout of hosanna, which was given by the whole assembly, in standing position, with uplifted hands. The form of the shout is as follows: “Hosanna-hosanna-hosanna-to God and the Lamb-amen-amen, and amen.” The foregoing was deliberately and emphatically pronounced, and three times repeated, and with

such power as seemed almost sufficient to raise the roof from the building.93

The three-fold shout has been repeated at every Latter-day Saint temple

dedication since that time, as well as other special occasions.94

Some authors have recognized possible Hebrew roots of the Hosanna

Shout.95 However, the focus on “God and the Lamb” betrays a more

Christian emphasis. A similar ritual, more closely related to the Mormon

form of the Hosanna Shout than the biblical version, was developing

simultaneously in the same area of the country. The ritual of the Heroines

of Jericho, a concordant Masonic body associated with the Royal Arch,

was available in upstate New York as early as 1826.96 A Hosanna Shout

is found in several places in the Heroines rituals, and their installation of

grand officers is very similar to the Mormon Hosanna Shout. Here, a

three-fold shout is performed encircling an altar and accompanied by the

clapping of hands and waving of handkerchiefs.97 As this Heroines

shout appears along with the installing of officers, it compares closely

with the endowing of church officials which took place in the Kirtland

temple.

Three other notable performances of the triple Hosanna Shout not

associated with anointings, temple dedication, groundbreaking, or laying

of capstones were evocative of Freemasonry. First, at a Fourth of July

celebration in 1838, Sidney Rigdon gave a rousing sermon declaring the

Mormons’ independence from mobs. One observer reported, “At the

conclusion of the oration the vast multitude shouted, Hosanna!

Hosanna!! Hosanna!!! three times.”98

Seven years later, on April 11, 1844, Joseph Smith met with the

Council of Fifty in the newly completed Masonic Hall and “had a very

interesting time. The Spirit of the Lord was with us and we closed the

Council with loud shouts of Hosanna.”99 William Clayton reported,

“President Joseph Smith was voted our P[rophet] and K[ing] with loud

Hosannas.”100

228

Finally, on December 27, 1847, the reorganization of the First

Presidency under Brigham Young took place at Winter Quarters.101

Participants in this event were “striking the right hand into the palm of

the left at sound of each word: Hosanah! Hosanah! Hosanah! [sic] To

God and the Lamb! Amen! Amen! and Amen!”102 This occasion is

reminiscent of a Masonic installation of officers, a public meeting of

grand honors, and a threefold clapping of hands signaling recognition of

the authority of the person being honored.

Passing of the Temple Veils

On Thursday, March 23, 1837, nearly a year after the temple

dedication, the Saints were asked to set apart the day for prayer and

fasting. Future Church President Wilford Woodruff rose early and set off

for the temple. As he entered the building, he saw that the three veils

separating the pulpits one from another had been lowered. These large

canvas sheets were painted white and hung from the ceiling using an

intricate system of cords and pulleys.103 The heavy fabric provided a

private area where he and several other elders could gather in the

Aaronic stand and offer morning prayer. Later, the congregation took

their seats in the main space of the first floor of the temple. Larger veils

divided this common area into four compartments, and each section was

presided over by church presidency leaders, with women in two of the

compartments and men in the other two. In the late afternoon, the veils

were rolled up, bringing the congregation together, and, according to

Woodruff, “the presence of the LORD filled the house.”104

A similar arrangement of veils was familiar to Freemasons. Four veils

are used to divide the ritual space in Masonry’s Holy Royal Arch degree

for the part of that ceremony known as “the passing of the veils.” Tests

of knowledge are given at each veil, with the successive passing of the

veils of the temple forming an important part of the Royal Arch’s Rite of

Exaltation.105 At the end the candidate is crowned.

A miraculous experience that also occurred behind the Kirtland temple

veils took place following the temple’s dedication on the first Sunday in

April 1836. The Twelve were officiating at the sacrament table, and

Joseph Smith assisted in administering the bread and wine of the Lord’s

Supper to the congregation. Following the meeting, Smith and Oliver

Cowdery knelt in prayer behind the veils separating the pulpits from the

main room. There, they saw a magnificent vision of the Savior, who

229

appeared above them “upon the breastwork of the pulpit” and regarded

them with a piercing, fiery gaze. “For behold I have accepted this

house,” he told them, “and my name shall be here; and I will manifest

myself to my people, in mercy, in this House.”106 This promise that the

Lord’s “name” would be in the temple recalls the Masonic search for the

Lost Word—the true name of Deity.

The experience was recorded by Oliver Cowdery’s brother, Warren, a

Royal Arch Mason from a family of Royal Arch Masons, whose

conversion to the Latter-day work is noted in a canonized revelation:

“there was joy in heaven when my servant Warren bowed to my scepter,

and separated himself from the crafts of men” (D&C 106:6). Aspects of

the vision would have held deep significance to a Royal Arch Mason. In

the Royal Arch ritual, after passing through the veils and giving the

correct passwords, candidates enter the presence of a Divine council

consisting of a prophet, priest, and king. Smith’s experience, as recorded

by Warren Cowdery, followed this pattern. His encounter with Jesus, the

“prophet, priest, and king” of the New Testament, was a literal

fulfillment of the Royal Arch type. The vision continued with biblical

prophets Moses, “Elias,” and Elijah conferring keys of the

Priesthood.107 As this bestowal occurred behind veils, it holds a

remarkable synchronicity with Royal Arch Masonry, where each of the

veils are associated with biblical figures, Moses being one of them.

Joseph Smith as Ritualist

King Solomon was considered by Masons to be a prophetic figure and

one of the three Grand Masters of ancient Craft Masonry. At the

dedication of the House of the Lord in Jerusalem, the biblical potentate

“kneeled down upon his knees before all the congregation of Israel and

spread forth his hands toward heaven” (2 Chr. 6:13). Joseph Smith

openly stepped into Solomon’s role as prophet, priest, and king when he

himself offered the dedicatory prayer for the completed Kirtland temple

on March 27, 1836.

The dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland temple was modeled on

Solomon’s words in 1 Kings 8:22–61. Warren Cowdery, a Royal Arch

Mason, apparently assisted in its composition, and certain wording in the

prayer reveals a Masonic interest.108 This is best seen in specific

reference to ritual that Smith had developed for the School of the

Prophets, further linking them to the newly completed House of the Lord

(D&C 109:17–19); the Royal Arch emphasis on rebuilding both the

230

temple and the city of Jerusalem (v. 73); and the reference to the

Hosanna Shout at the end of the prayer (v. 79). Smith’s assumption of

King Solomon’s role, while only hinted at in Kirtland, would be

startlingly expressed in Nauvoo.

For Latter-day Saints, the purpose of temple ordinances is to bind the

individual to God and to enable them to come into God’s presence. In the

esoteric practice of Freemasonry, confidential instruction on this

objective was passed down through the oral tradition. Masons believed

they possessed a significant oral tradition, one that, when rejoined to

Christianity, would revitalize it. In developing the Kirtland temple rites,

Smith drew upon the oral tradition and legends of the Freemasons and

included all the required components of a Masonic working ritual.109

These included specific forms such as ritual wording, secret names, ritual

gestures, ritual action, and ritualization of biblical passages and stories.

As seen in this chapter, Kirtland temple performances included all of

these Masonic elements.

First, ritual wording was seen in the Hosanna Shout, from its

beginnings in the anointing ceremony, and culminating in a more or less

standard form at temple dedications. The brethren also called upon Deity

using the sacred name Ahman, a secret name found in the Kirtland

Egyptian papers. Responding to this call, Ahman walked among the

members of the School of the Prophets.110 Doctrine and Covenants 82

speaks of code names which were given to some of the brethren. These

names were received and related to an oath or covenant with a penalty

for its violation.111

Next, ritual forms and gestures, including kneeling with uplifted hands

to heaven, were performed in the School of the Prophets and continued

as a part of ordinances such as washings and anointings. These were also

seen at the dedication ceremony of the Kirtland temple.

Finally, ritual action was an important component of incipient ritual at

Kirtland. This was seen in the washings and anointings themselves. They

began as simple foot washing in the School of the Prophets, and later as

part of an endowment of power given in connection with offices in the

priesthood. Later still, washings and anointings would be connected to

the temple ritual in Nauvoo.

Features of Kirtland temple ritual and structural design were as stones

piled one upon the other. As they accumulated, they began more and

more to resemble a Mason’s arch. Each of the Masonic allegorical

231

associations used gave meaning to the temple’s construction and purpose

to the ritual that Joseph Smith was inaugurating.

Building the Fane

The building of the Kirtland temple was done under difficult

circumstances and at great financial sacrifice. Of the several planned

latter-day temples in the 1830s, it was the only one erected, and that

amid much persecution. Looking back upon the Kirtland experience,

Brigham Young couched the building of the temple in language known

to every Cryptic Mason:

[T]he great Prophet Joseph, in the stone quarry, quarrying rock with his own hands; and the few then in the Church, following his example of obedience and diligence wherever most needed; with laborers on the walls, holding the sword in one hand to protect themselves from the mob, while they placed the stone and moved the trowel with the other, the Kirtland temple —the second house of the Lord, that we have any published record of on the earth, was so far

completed as to be dedicated. 112

Brigham Young, a Freemason who used Royal Arch cipher in his

journal, employed the illustration of the trowel and the sword to describe

workers on the Kirtland temple. Later, he used this same imagery to refer

to the Nauvoo temple

But what of the Temple in Nauvoo? By aid of sword in one hand, and trowel and hammer in the other, with fire arms at hand, and a strong band of police, and the blessings of heaven, the Saints, through hunger, and thirst, and weariness, and watchings, and prayings, completed the

Temple. 113

Thus, Young undeniably connected the Kirtland as well as the Nauvoo

temple with Freemasonry. In Ohio, the seeds of Freemasonry that had

been planted in Joseph Smith’s mind and heart early in his life took root,

and his talents as a ritual builder began to take shape. The effect that

building a Masonically inspired temple and participating in early

Mormon rituals had on Smith’s followers would be more clearly seen as

they moved into the state of Missouri.

Notes

Can. ‘Zerubbabel; the first among my equals, by rank a Mason, by misfortune a captive.’

Sov. ‘What is the mercy that you demand of me?’

Can. ‘That, under the protection of the G. A. of the universe, the king will restore our liberty and allow us to return and rebuild the temple of our GOD.’ . . . When the brethren hear the alarm, they detach the trowel from their aprons, and hold it in the left hand, and the sword in the right.”

232

David Bernard, Light on Masonry: A Collection of All the Most Important Documents on the Subject of Speculative Free Masonry, 323, 325.

233

234

its occupants, in letters of stain. There is also a pulpit in the east end for the Aaronic priesthood, which is of the same construction.” West, A Few Interesting Facts Respecting the Mormons, 4–5.

“[Y]ou will see that the Lord commanded us in Kirtland to build an house of God, & establish a school for the Prophets, this is the word of the Lord to us, & we must— yea the Lord helping us we will obey, as on conditions of our obedience, he has promised great things, yea a visit from the heavens to honor us with his own presence.” See “Letter to William W. Phelps, 11 January 1833,” The Joseph Smith Papers, 19.

235

Lift your head, ye golden gate,

Jesus comes in royal state;

Shout Hosanna, shout and sing,

Jesus Christ, the Lord is King!

See Rob Morris, The Poetry of Freemasonry, 24.

236

237

238
