ANGEL AT THE THRESHING-FLOOR

But if any so mean, Thro’ avarice or stain,

Shou’d debase himself in this high station

That person so mean, For such cursed gain,

Should be slain by the hand of a mason.

—Laurence Dermott, Ahiman Rezon

Following the Morgan affair, most Americans became suspicious of the notion of theocratic kingdom-building, and they feared Masonic oaths and the concomitant penalties involving horrific death. American Baptist preacher John Glazier Stearns warned: “[T]o

bind [men] together by solemn oaths secret societies to stand by, and

defend, and promote each other, must be regarded as a dangerous

procedure, both in relation to church and state.”1 An 1829 exposé of the

Royal Arch obligation, widely circulated in the area where Joseph Smith

lived, underscores what alarmed many Americans. A portion reads:

I promise and swear . . . that I will aid and assist a companion Royal Arch Mason, when engaged in any difficulty; and espouse his cause . . . whether he be right or wrong. Also, that I will promote a companion Royal Arch Mason’s political preferment in preference to another of equal qualifications. Furthermore . . . a companion Royal Arch Mason’s secrets . . . shall remain as secure and inviolable in my breast as in his own, murder and treason not excepted . .

. under no less penalty than that of having my skull smote off. 2

To promise to come to the aid of a brother seems harmless enough, but

to take up a brother’s cause whether he was right or wrong, or to promote

his political aspirations above all others, contradicted the average

American’s sense of ethics. Furthermore, penalties that Masons generally

understood as figurative were seen by outsiders to mean that those who

revealed Masonic secrets would be put to death in extralegal bloody and

retributive acts of Masonic vengeance.

The events surrounding the abduction and disappearance of William

Morgan substantiated the fears of many Americans that penalties

mentioned in Masonic ritual were literal and not symbolic. In a series of

letters published in 1828 in the LeRoy Gazette of Genesee County, New

York, an anonymous author compared Morgan’s murder to the

allegorical punishment of Akirop, one of the murderers of Hiram Abiff.

A candidate for the degree represents Joabert, who severs Akirop’s head

from his body with his own sword. This degree includes swearing an

oath to avenge all who may betray Masonic secrets; receiving a

239

password, Nekam, meaning “revenge”; wearing an apron embroidered

with a depiction of a bloody hand holding aloft a severed head; and

embracing other accoutrements of vengeance.3

Depiction of the “Elu of Nine” Degree, from Richardson’s Monitor of Freemasonry, 1860.

“It is preposterous to suppose,” asserts the letter’s author,

that the members of that degree, assembled in their bloody dens, with bloody aprons, and representations of the bloody head of a traitor before them, and seeing VENGEANCE written in capital letters upon the walls of their dark cavern, and knowing Morgan was writing the secrets of Masonry, that they would not, one and all, with the zeal of Joabert and Stokin, arise

in their wrath and strike the villain to the heart. 4

This theme is played out in the opening chapters of the Book of

Mormon, when Nephi beheads Laban with his own sword, placing

himself outside of the law in obedience to the voice of the Spirit. Such a

theocratic ethic would become evident among the Mormons in Missouri

where they clashed with locals in violent conflicts now known as the

Mormon Wars.5 By the late 1830s, the Latter-day Saints themselves had

formed a secret, oath-bound organization designed to sow terror in the

populace—a literal band of “avenging Masons” called the Danites.

In describing the Danite organization, John Whitmer, first official

historian of the Church, placed their beginnings in Kirtland. The brethren

were organized Masonically

into a secret Society which they termed the Brother of Gideon, in the which Society they took oaths that they would Support a brother wright [sic] or wrong even to the shed[d]ing of blood. also to thus [those] who belonged tho [to] this society were bound to keep it a profound Secret never to reveal but ever to conceal these abominations from all and every person axcept those who were of the same Craft. But these things could not be kept a secret in consequence of betreyers who fel[l] from their faith, and revealed their Secrets thus things were carried on by secret plots and midnight machinations, which Society was begin[n]ing to be established in

Kirtland Ohio in the fall of 1836. 6

240

A December 1833 revelation in Kirtland authorized the first

presidency to deal harshly with dissenters. Now Doctrine and Covenants

101, the revelation portrayed the children of Zion as “the salt of the earth

and the savor of men.” If they transgressed, they were “thenceforth good

for nothing only to be cast out and trodden under the feet of men” (D&C

101:40; cf. Matt. 5:13). A subsequent revelation in February 1834, now

D&C 103, likewise used the biblical salt metaphor: “inasmuch as they

are not the saviors of men, they are as salt that has lost its savor” (v.

10).7 Included in these two sections was strong language that

foreshadowed the Danite purposes in Missouri: “they were found

transgressors, therefore they must needs be chastened” (101:41).8 In

Wilford Woodruff’s 1836 diary, he termed Kirtland “the strong hold of

the daughter of Zion,” a biblical name by which Danites were also

known.9

Additional Danite activity occurred at an October 18, 1837, Kirtland

High Council meeting in which the body “concluded that it time

to . . . commence the work of reform, by pruning the vine of God in

Kirtland, and to follow up the work night after night until it should be

thought best to stay the hands.”10 A few weeks later, on November 7,

1836, church leaders and nearly sixty other members threatened non-

Mormon justice of the peace Ariel Hanson into leaving the town. Later,

in Missouri, a group of dissenters were similarly pressured to leave

Caldwell County in what many believe was the first Danite action.11

Mormon historian Leland Gentry hypothesized that the several names

by which the Danite organization was known correspond to changes and

developments in functions over time.12 Because the group and its

purposes evolved quickly, it is difficult to argue for a chronological

progression of nomenclature. Additionally, Danite activity can be seen

some time earlier than Gentry had supposed. However, the different

terms—the Big Fan, Gideonites, Danites, Daughter of Zion—do

correlate with the fundamental objectives of the organization and suggest

a consistent (and Masonically inspired) purpose from the outset. In a

Mormon adaptation of Masonic principles, Danites used biblical

allusions to portray their aims and activities.13

The Big Fan

One clearly identifiable manifestation of a Danite objective was

associated with driving dissenters out of Caldwell County, Missouri,

241

where the Saints had begun to gather. As a depiction of this goal, the

group took the name of the “Big Fan,”14 which John Corrill described as

“figurative of their intentions to cleanse the chaff from the wheat.”15 On

June 17, 1838, Sidney Rigdon preached an inflammatory address known

as the “Salt Sermon,” which compared Mormon dissenters to salt which

had lost its savor. A threatening letter was soon delivered to the

offending parties, which Ebenezer Robinson recalled was “gotten up in

the office of the First Presidency.”16 The letter bore the signatures of

eighty-three men, all members of a newly formed covert society

dedicated to principles espoused by Rigdon. Naming Oliver Cowdery,

David Whitmer, John Whitmer, William W. Phelps,17 and Lyman

Johnson as covenant-breakers and apostates, the dispatch warned these

men to leave town.18

Rigdon delivered a second incendiary speech two-and-a-half weeks

later at a Fourth of July gathering in Far West, Missouri. The event

included the laying of the cornerstone of the Far West Temple and was

held in a style similar to contemporaneous Masonic cornerstone laying

ceremonies. Such observances took place under the jurisdiction of the

Grand Lodge with the Grand Master or his representative present. In the

Mormon ceremony, the powerfully charismatic Joseph Smith appears to

have acted as “Grand Master.” Presiding officers were designated and

consisted of the First Presidency, a group of marshals, and military

officers and generals—all Danites.19

As in Masonic cornerstone ceremonies of the period, a procession was

formed.20 Led by a uniformed militia under Colonel George M. Hinkle

and accompanied by the music of a small band under the direction of

Dimick Huntington, the group of thousands marched to the excavation

and formed three large concentric circles. After a prayer by Joseph Smith

and a musical number, each of the cornerstones were laid in a precise

order. The stones, 7 x 4 x 2 ft. thick, had been quarried by Joseph

Holbrook and others and hauled to the spot the day before. Significantly

to Masons, Brigham Young later said that the first stone was laid in the

southeast, “because there is the most light.”21 This cornerstone was laid

by the presidents of the stake, assisted by twelve men. The southwest

stone was laid by the presidents of the elders, assisted by twelve men; the

northwest cornerstone by the Bishop, again assisted by twelve men; and

the northeast by the president of the teachers and twelve men. Rigdon’s

incendiary oration was then delivered.

242

Danite Parley P. Pratt described the program in a glowing report. Many

thousand people assembled around a liberty pole, surmounted by “the

bald eagle, with its stars and stripes.”22 Pratt reports that after the

cornerstone laying, Rigdon delivered an address “in which was painted,

in lively colors, the oppression which we had long suffered from the

hand of our enemies.” A declaration to “resist all oppression and to

maintain our rights and freedom according to the holy principles of

liberty, as guaranteed to every person by the constitution and laws of our

government . . . was received with shouts of hosanna to God and the

Lamb, and with many and long cheers by the assembled thousands, who

were determined to yield their rights no more.”23

As noted in Chapter 8, the three-fold Hosanna Shout had Masonic

roots. Thus, the ceremony drew upon the Saints’ tender fraternal feelings

of love and loyalty while playing on their nationalistic and religious

sympathies. Participants were stirred to a fever pitch all the while

presided over by their religious, military, and Danite leaders who were

seated above them on a stand of honor.24 Although some historians have

suggested that Rigdon went beyond what the Prophet intended in stirring

up the crowd, there are accounts of eyewitnesses to the speech indicating

the contrary. Ebenezer Robinson believed that Rigdon’s speeches were

fully endorsed, if not actually prepared by the entire First Presidency of

the Church, including Joseph Smith:

Let it be distinctly understood that President Rigdon was not alone responsible for the sentiment expressed in his oration, as that was a carefully prepared document, previously written, and well understood by the First Presidency, that Elder Rigdon was the mouth piece to

deliver it, as he was a natural orator, and his delivery was powerful and effective. 25

Days later, over the weekend of July 6–7, 1838, a quarterly conference

was held at which Sidney Rigdon, playing upon imagery from operative

Masonry, exhorted the priesthood holders to convert the world. He

compared the Elders to “quarriers of Stone” who brought the stone from

the quarry to the building “where the Priests, Teachers, and Deacons, are

polishers, whose duty it is to prepare them for the building.”26

About that time, the liberty pole raised on the Temple grounds was

destroyed by lightning, dismaying many of the Saints. Some saw the

natural disaster as a foul omen that their liberty was about to end.27 But

in a startling, almost ritualistic action, Joseph Smith turned the symbol to

his advantage. Playing the part of Captain Moroni, he identified the

cause of the Latter-day Saints as the same as the Nephites’ and

reaffirmed the covenant nature of the Danite obligations. Striding over

243

the slivers of the pole with a countenance that Oliver Huntington

described “shone white as snow,” Smith prophesied that as the pole had

been “shivered to atoms, so should the Nation be shivered.” In the same

manner, as he walked over the blackened remains of their title of liberty,

so Smith would tread over the ashes of his enemies.28

Just as the biblical prophet Isaiah prophesied those who contended

with the Lord’s people would be destroyed, the “Big Fan” was about to

be turned upon the enemies of the Saints:

Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shalt make the hills as chaff.

Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the whirlwind shall scatter

them: and thou shalt rejoice in the Lord, and shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel. (Isa. 41:15– 16)

Brother of Gideon

Another early name by which the company was known was the

“Brother of Gideon,” or “Gideonites.”29 This name demonstrates the

intention of the group to serve as protectors against outside attack, and

members were told that the major purpose of the group was to “be

perfectly organized to defend ourselves against mobs.”30 Some claimed

they were called Gideonites because they were under the command of

Jared Carter, the “terrible Brother of Gideon,” but the term had been used

much earlier. The men of Zion’s Camp, a group that had marched from

Kirtland to aid the Saints in Missouri in 1834, thought of themselves as

Gideonites. Heber C. Kimball, filled with the Spirit of the Lord which

“diffused strength into my body, and into my limbs, until the very hair of

my head felt all alive,” compared the members of that company with the

biblical Gideonites:

When Brother Brigham and myself and others left Kirtland to go to Missouri with Joseph Smith, was there any fear in us? No. . . . Did they fear us in that upper country? Yes, they ran as though they were never going to stop in the world. We felt perfectly able to clear out that country to Nova Scotia, and we could have done it, with two hundred and five men, if the Lord had commanded us, as the Gideonites in days of old. Yes; two hundred and five men, with the Spirit and power of God upon them and their faces shining like the sun, it cannot be

told what they could accomplish, neither can we form any conception of it.31

This name was also widely used to suggest a larger company with

considerable force. For example, Sidney Rigdon warned that those who

would not comply with the law of consecration should be “delivered

over to the brother of Gideon and be sent bounding over the Prairies as

the dissenters were a few days ago.” Indeed, “all matters comprising

anything not completely subject to the will of the presidency were to be

244

managed by the terrible brother of Gideon.”32 Additional evidence that

the “Brother of Gideon” did not refer solely to Jared Carter is given by

W. W. Phelps’s description of a series of meetings enforcing the

consecration program:

It was observd in the meeting that if any person spoke against the presidency they would hand him over in to the hands of the brother of Gideon. I knew not at the time who or what it meant. Shortly after that I was at another meeting where they were trying several, the first presidency being present. Sidney Rigdon was chief spokesman—the object of the meeting seemed to be to make persons confess and repent of their sins to God and the Presidency and arraigned them for giving false accounts of their money and effects they had on hand and they said whenever they found one guilty of these things they were to be handed over to the brother of Gideon. Several were found guilty and handed over as they said—I yet did not know what was meant by this expression ‘the brother of Gidion’—Not a great while after this [illegible] of private meetings were held I endevored to find out what they were and I learned from John Corrill and others they were forming a secret Society called Danites formerly called the brother of

Gidion.33

John C. Bennett suggested the name had a scriptural allusion he was

unable to discover.34 A likely scriptural explanation, however, is found

in the book of Judges, which thematically links the group’s several

objectives with the concept of threshing and grinding:

And there came an angel of the Lord, and sat under an oak which was in Ophrah, that pertained unto Joash the Abi-ezrite: and his son Gideon threshed wheat by the winepress, to hide it from the Midianites. (Judg. 6:11)

The story of Gideon meeting an angel and threshing wheat by the

winepress is iconic. The winepress represents the suffering of Israel

under Midianite occupation, and Gideon was divinely called to sweep

the Midianites from the land God gave them by covenant. Similarly, the

Latter-day Saints felt that the Missourians had acted the part of

Midianites, disputing the claim of modern Israel to the land God had

promised them and bringing upon them great suffering. Gideon’s covert

threshing suggests the secret nature of the action of the “Brother of

Gideon” and links the group’s activity with the threshing of the “Big

Fan.” Gideon is called a “mighty man of valor” (Judg. 6:12), and the

Brothers of Gideon may have felt an affinity with this title. In Judges 6,

Gideon is urged by God, appearing as an angel, to use his power to

deliver the Israelites. Later in a dream, Gideon is told to break down his

father’s altar erected to Baal and replace it with an altar dedicated to the

true and living God. He does so and names the place Jehovah-shalom (v.

24). Here, then, are revealed some of the objectives of the Danites: to

deliver modern Israel out of the hands of their enemies, within and

without; and to break down false religion, replacing it with the worship

of the true God. The aim was to bring about the peaceful reign of the

245

King of Peace by establishing his millennial Kingdom. In these verses of

Judges, the Mormons found justification for vigilante action.

Danites

John Corrill testified that the organization “afterward grew into a

system to carry out the designs of the presidency; and, if necessary to use

physical force to upbuild the kingdom of God.”35 He pointed to the

group’s ultimate plans, which became increasingly apparent in the

autumn of 1838. The term “Danites” comes from three usages in the Old

Testament. First, the association of the tribe of Dan with judgment and

vengeance is ancient and includes the concept of reclaiming the

promised land by any means necessary. For example, the name “Dan”

itself is derived from the Hebrew word meaning “to contend or judge.”36

And in Jacob’s prophetic words to his sons at the end of his life, Dan is

given this blessing:

Dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel.

Dan shall be a serpent by the way,

an adder in the path, that biteth the horse heels,

so that his rider shall fall backward.

(Gen. 49:16–17)37

Second, Dan is seen as the warrior tribe of Judges 18 that was sent on

a mission to capture new lands. When advance scouts returned, they

admonished the Israelites to “be not slothful to go, and to enter to

possess the land. When ye go, ye shall come unto a people secure, and to

a large land: for God hath given it into your hands” (Judg. 18:9–10). The

destructive nature of the tribe of Dan is illustrated as they plunder, spoil,

and raze a town to the ground.

Finally, the term Danites was rooted in the book of Daniel. According

to Albert Perry Rockwood, this was “because the Prophet Daniel has said

they [the Saints] shall take the Kingdom and possess it for ever”—

alluding to the prophecy of the great stone that will roll forth and beat

into pieces all the nations (Dan. 2:31–45).38 Parley P. Pratt explained the

connection of the Mormon establishment of Zion to the prophecy in

Daniel in his 1837 A Voice of Warning. The eschatological kingdom of

Daniel, Pratt explained, would never cease to roll until Jesus appeared in

the clouds with power and great glory “as the King of kings, and Lord of

lords, and destroy all these kingdoms, and give the kingdom and the

greatness of the kingdom, under the whole heaven, to the saints.” Pratt

insisted this kingdom was the organized government of God on the

246

earth.39 Noting the violent implication of this passage, historians

Matthew Grow and Terryl Givens write in their biography of Pratt,

By 1838, the Saints’ public invocation of Daniel 2:44–45, with its reference to a kingdom that should “break in pieces and consume” all other kingdoms, was common enough—and threatening enough—to be invoked at a court of inquiry as evidence of nefarious Mormon

designs.40

The Daughter of Zion

A final name by which the Danites were known carries the imagery of

all three purposes: fanning and separating the wheat from the chaff of

apostasy, rising and threshing enemies from without the Church, and

establishing the kingdom of God. In the book of Isaiah, the people of

Israel are told to “Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy

beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city.” They are to be cleansed

from “the uncircumcised and the unclean” among them. Sidney Rigdon’s

exhortation to the Saints to oust dissenters from their midst found

justification in the ancient prophet’s words: “Shake thyself from the dust;

arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem: loose thyself from the bands of thy

neck, O captive daughter of Zion” (Isa. 52:1–2).

The appellation “Daughter of Zion” is used symbolically by Old

Testament prophets. Far from referring solely to females as the name

might suggest, it represented the covenant people. Likewise, the term

“Babylon” represented the worldly enemies of God. To the Saints, it was

these enemies of God who were working to hamper their settlement of

Missouri. “Behold, I will raise up against Babylon,” was the powerful

message of the Lord through the prophet Jeremiah,

and against them that dwell in the midst of them that rise up against me, a destroying wind; And will send unto Babylon fanners, that shall fan her, and shall empty her land: for in the day of trouble they shall be against her round about. . . .

[B]ecause it is the vengence of the Lord, the vengeance of his temple. . . . For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; The daughter of Babylon is like a

threshingfloor, it is time to thresh her: yet a little while, and the time of her harvest shall come. (Jer. 51:1–2, 11, 33)

In Micah 4, the “daughter of Zion” is redeemed from the hands of her

enemies. She is told to “Arise and thresh . . . and thou shalt beat in pieces

many people” (vv. 8–13). Though nations are gathered against her, the

daughter of Zion is strengthened by the Lord and given the ability to rise

as combatant against her foes. In Micah, the daughter of Zion is a

woman in travail; she will bring forth and establish the political kingdom

of God, which was the hope of the beleaguered Mormons.

Arise and thresh, O daughter of Zion: for I will make thine horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs brass: and thou shalt beat in pieces many people: and I will consecrate their gain unto

247

the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth. (Micah 4:13)

Here is found justification for appropriating the Missourians’ assets

and belongings and consecrating them to the Bishop’s storehouse. The

Mormons were instructed to do these things both by scripture and

prophetic authority. While Danite morals and ethics seem repugnant

today, Joseph Smith later explained the underlying principle, which he

observed applying “to all of God’s dealings with his children.” In his

letter to Nancy Rigdon, Smith stated:

That which is wrong under one circumstance, may be, and often is, right under another. God said, “Thou shalt not kill”; at another time he said, “Thou shalt utterly destroy.” This is the principle on which the government of heaven is conducted, by revelation adapted to the circumstances in which the children of the Kingdom are placed. Whatever God requires is right, no matter what it is, although we may not see the reason thereof till long after the events

transpire. . . . Everything that God gives us is lawful and right.41

Applying this principle to the Saints’ attempts to establish a theocratic

kingdom in Missouri is startling in its implications.

The three-fold philosophy of “Daniteism” was a response to Mormon

prophecy and scripture in the context of the troubles the Saints

experienced internally in Ohio and externally in Missouri. Each Danite

name-title had a specific function related to this concept, and Danite

actions were consistent with these objectives throughout the Mormon-

Missouri conflicts in 1838. The variant names of the secret society were

neither abandoned nor replaced; rather, they suggested in the aggregate

the full scope of Danite responsibilities in establishing a theocratic

empire. By use of each of these titles, the brothers signaled their

overriding purpose: the restoration of Israel and the threshing of the

nations.

Danite Structure, Signs, and Oaths

In every obligation a Freemason makes, he promises to be subject to

the Constitution of the Grand Lodge in his jurisdiction. Every constituent

local lodge also has a constitution, by-laws, rules, and regulations to

which the initiate promises to conform.42 Accordingly, a Danite

constitution was drawn up, likely by Sampson Avard, a British-born

physician who joined the Church in Pennsylvania with the Campbellites

and eventually became a Danite general.43 Avard told of taking his

penned constitution to Sidney Rigdon’s house where he read it to the

Prophet and his counsellors. They subsequently approved the document,

which vested executive power in these three men. In Freemasonry, a

written constitution is a legitimizing document intended to express

248

formality and durability. Similarly, the existence of a Danite constitution

tends to demonstrate that, while the group may have largely operated sub

rosa, they were considered a formal and legitimate Mormon institution

and not merely an ad-hoc self-defense force. The language of the Danite

Constitution contains complex theocratic aspirations that blossomed both

in Nauvoo and in the Great Basin Kingdom that followed it. A melding

of republican, secessionist, and Mormon millenarian thought, the

preamble of the Danite Constitution calls to mind both the Book of

Mormon account of the “Title of Liberty” as well as the United States

Declaration of Independence:

[W]e the members of the society of the Daughters of Zion do agree to regulate ourselves under such laws as, in righteousness shall be deemed necessary for the preservation of our holy religion and of our most sacred rights, and the rights of our wives and children. But to be explicit on the subject, it is especially our object, to support and defend the rights conferred on us by our venerable sires, who purchased them with the pledges of their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honors. . . . Our rights we must have, and our rights we shall have, in the

name of Israels God. 44

Nineteenth-century Masons referred to the Bible in connection with

their obligations, indicating the Christian character of the pledge:

On yonder book that oath I took,

And break it will I never,

But swear by this, and this, and this,

Forever and forever.45

In a similar vein, Luman Andros Shurtliff wrote of the Mormon Danite

group with fond remembrance, describing its Masonic character and its

Christian fraternal goals:

I received an invitation to unite with a Society called the Danite society and to meet with them at their next meeting which I did And found it was got up for our personal defence also of Our Families Property and our Religion Sighns and passwords given by which each member could know the other wherever they met night or day Each person to settle all difficulty if he had any with a member of the Society before he could be received I considered this a good institution

for the benefit of society and a blessing for this people. 46

Shurtliff’s phrasing, “for our personal defense, also of our families,

property, and our religion,” likewise comes from the Book of Mormon

story of Moroni’s “Title of Liberty” (Alma 46:7–32). This account

depicts a Nephite military captain who becomes angered by dissenters

from among the Nephites. The internal rebellion jeopardizes the

Nephites’ repossession of land they believe the Lord has given them.

Swearing God will not suffer them to be trodden underfoot and

destroyed, Moroni rips a large piece of his clothing and writes upon it:

“In memory of our God, our religion, and freedom, and our peace, our

wives, and our children,” and he fastens it upon a pole to wave as a

249

banner (vv. 12–13). Those faithful to the cause swiftly assemble “with

their armor girded about their loins” and make an oath of faithfulness

complete with a token: pieces of their own rent garments, which they

cast down at Moroni’s feet (vv. 21–22). As an army, they then march

forward against their enemies. This is just one example of how, within

the first decade of the publication of the Book of Mormon, its stories

were being applied directly to the Saints’ situations as typological and

prophetic.47 The story of Captain Moroni was recognized as a portent of

the challenges early Saints faced in their own day as they sought to

establish the millennial kingdom.

The signs and passwords used by the Danites connect them directly

with Freemasonry. Danites took oaths of secrecy, promised to defend

each other, right or wrong, and swore to follow the leadership of the

Church without question. Betrayal was punishable by death. Several

available reports describe Danite oaths, showing how their phrasing

closely followed the words of contemporaneous anti-Masonic exposures.

For example, Sampson Avard testified that a covenant of secrecy was

taken by all the Danite band who held up their right hands and swore in

the name of Christ “ever to conceal, and never to reveal, the secret

purposes of this society called the Daughters of Zion,” holding their lives

as forfeit should they do so.48 This wording is comparable to that of the

obligation for the Entered Apprentice degree exposed by David Bernard

in 1829: “I . . . do hereby and hereon most solemnly and sincerely

promise and swear, that I will always hail, ever conceal, and never reveal

any part . . . of the secrets, arts, and mysteries of ancient Free

Masonry.”49 Avard explained that the Danites were given instructions

that “if any of them should get into a difficulty, the rest should help him

out; and that they should stand by each other, right or wrong.”50 Publicly

exposed Masonic rituals used similar language, promising to extricate a

companion from “any difficulty . . . whether he be right or wrong.”51

Added to these Masonically based oaths, Avard said, was an admonition

that Smith and his counselors were the head of the Church, and the

Danite band should feel themselves “as much bound to obey them as to

obey the Supreme God.”52

Danite John Corrill’s description accords with Avard’s, mirroring

Bernard’s version of the Royal Arch obligation mentioned above. It also

contains principles contained in early Masonic Constitutions directing

250

that a brother “must never go to Law about what concerneth Masonry,”

but to instead bring complaints before the Lodge.53 Corrill testified,

They secretly entered into solemn covenants, before God, and bound themselves under oath to keep the secrets of the society, and covenanted to stand by one another in difficulty, whether

right or wrong, but said they would correct each others wrongs among themselves. As the presidency stood next to God, or between God and the church, and was the oracle through which the word and will of God was communicated to the church, they esteemed it very essential to have their word, or the word of God through them, strictly adhered to. They therefore entered into a covenant, that the word of the presidency should be obeyed, and none

should be suffered to raise his hand or voice against it. 54

Reed Peck’s account corroborates with Avard and Corrill, detailing the

duty to obey the prophet in all things: “It is not our business or place to

know what is required by God, but he will inform us by means of the

prophet and we must perform.”55 Peck also recalled:

If any one of you see a member of the band in difficulty in the surrounding country contending for instance with an enemy, you shall extricate him even if in the wrong if you have to do with his adversary as Moses did with the Egyptian put him under the sand and both pack off to Far West and we will take care of the matter ourselves. . . . The secret signs and purposes of this

Society are not to be revealed on pain of death. 56

Masonic obligations often specified an explicit form of death as a

symbolic penalty in the event of the breaking of the oath.57 David

Whitmer told Zenas Gurley that when he was “appointed in charge of

church affairs in Zion Missouri,” Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon paid a

visit to the various branches of the Church. At this time, “they organized

the Danites by which each member was sworn to sustain the Heads of

the Church whether right or wrong—the penalty of refusing to do so

being death, ‘the throat cut.’”58

With so many Mormons flooding into the Missouri countryside in

1838, members were sometimes hard-pressed to know friends from foes.

William Swartzell, who took Danite oaths in June of that year, detailed

his observations about secret passwords and signs of recognition similar

to those used among the Masonic fraternity. Swartzell revealed the

Danite password “which was to be spoken at the moment of giving the

hand of fellowship—‘Who be you?’ Answer—‘Anama.’” The meaning

of this word was “by interpretation, a friend,” and it was a sign to

distinguish the Mormons “from all other people under heaven.”59

Luman Shurtliff wrote about the importance of Danite passwords, signs,

and countersigns during the Missouri War, describing his part in a Danite

expedition in October of 1838:

251

Under this tree I was stationed one night with orders to let no person

pass except he gave the countersign about nine oclock I he[a]rd two men

comeing from toward camp I knew by their voices it was our Prophet

and his Br Hyrum when they came in hailing distance I hailed them

enquired who they ware the answer was friends I bade them advance and

give the Countersign which they did over the muzzle of my Rifle in true

Military stile.60

Shurtliff used accepted military practices of the day to elicit signs of

recognition from Joseph and Hyrum Smith, suggesting that all three men

knew and used Danite signs and countersigns. Shurtliff humorously

related that later that same night he heard footsteps coming down the

road and called out, but there was no answer. He pointed his rifle up and

shouted “Halt!” To his relief, he saw that the source of the sound was a

cow. “I stepped out of the road and let her pass without giving the

countersign, thus giving the cow more leniency than I did the Prophet of

God.”61

During another expedition, Shurtliff and Apostle John Taylor were

placed on guard to receive teams of horses from the brethren when they

came into Adam-ondi-Ahman, a Mormon settlement in Daviess County,

Missouri. Unable to recognize his fellow Mormons in the dark, Shurtliff

relied upon signs and countersigns to accurately identify those who

would pass into the settlement for safety. By this time in late October

1838, those who knew the Danite signs pervaded the community of

Saints. Shurtliff wrote of his discovery that John Taylor was not a

Danite, and he therefore felt uncomfortable using the signs and

countersigns in Taylor’s presence.62 This passage demonstrates the signs

and countersigns being used were distinctively Danite, not simply

company or military codes.

The Danites, like the Masons, created a sign of distress under which

they were obliged to respond, even at risk of death. Swartzell described it

as follows:

When the High Priest had delivered himself of these charges, agreeably to the order of things, he next informed us that he would give us a sign “whereby ye may know each other anywhere, (either by day or by night,) and if a brother be in distress. It is thus: to clap the right hand to the right thigh, and then raise it quick to the right temple, the thumb extending behind the

ear.”63

John D. Lee explained that when the sign was given,

it must be responded to and obeyed, even at the risk or certainty of death. . . . The sign or token of distress is made by placing the right hand on the right side of the face, with the points

252

of the fingers upwards, shoving the hand upwards until the ear is snug up between the thumb

and fore-finger.64

Lee gave an instance of the Danite sign of distress being used at an

election held at the new town of Gallatin, where pent-up bitterness of

Missourians against Mormons exploded into violence. Nervous that the

arrival of Mormons at the polls would signal their political domination of

the county, locals sought to hinder them from voting. A drunken

aggressor named Dick Weldon knocked one of the Mormons to the

ground and another came flying to the victim’s aid. After a half dozen

other settlers also jumped into the fray, the Danite sign of distress was

given by John L. Butler, one of the captains of “the Host of Israel”:

Seeing the sign, I sprang to my feet and armed myself with one of the oak sticks. I did this because I was a Danite, and my oaths that I had taken required immediate action on my part, in support of the one giving the sign. I ran into the crowd. . . . I was an entire stranger to all who were engaged in the affray, except Stewart, but I had seen the sign, and, like Samson, when leaning against the pillar, I felt the power of God nerve my arm for the fray. It helps a

man a great deal in a fight to know that God is on his side.65

The story indicates the kinds of things one would expect from a

“penny dreadful,” or sensationalist dime novel, version of the

Freemasons. The Danites’ activities were an overblown caricature of

Masonry, but like Lee, the men were fanatically serious about it. After

their rout of the Missouri settlers at the polls, Mormons intentionally

cultivated an atmosphere of terror surrounding the Danites as well as the

perception that they were a Masonic-like body. Danite Albert Rockwood

wrote: “the Missourians have nearly al[l] left Davies[s] Co[.] fear rest[s]

down upon them and they flee when no man pursueth. . . . [N]ot a drop

of blood has been spilt nor a gun fired as I have heard of, the Mob

dispersed by 100ds on the approach of the Danites.”66

Following the surrender, Daviess County Mormons deflected

accusations for their various crimes onto Danites who had fled to Iowa.

For example, Oliver Huntington wrote:

[T]here was a great hu[e]-and-cry about the Danites, all over the county and among the Army. . . . [M]any stories were in circulation the most horrid and awfully distorted opinions their minds could immagine, and they all thought that every depridation was committed by the Danites. . . . [S]uch being their opinion and belief of Danites; and we knowing it, concluded to make the best of it. So every misterious trick and bold adventure which had been transacted, was palmed upon them and every body knew there had a company of Mormons fled to the Indian territories, (for they were pursued by their trail) and they, it was stated, were the

Danites, a most daring band of braves, who were bound together like the Masons.67

It was to the advantage of the Mormons to foster stories about the

fearsomeness of the Danites in order to deter citizens of Illinois and

Missouri from harming their people and property. This had the effect of

253

placing many of the conceptions circulated about the Danites into the

category of folklore, polemics, and propaganda. Nonetheless, Danite

influence, with its decidedly Masonic character, was pervasive among

the Latter-day Saints.

The “Knights Templar” of Mormonism, Danite members pledged their

lives to each other’s defense as literal Christian soldiers. Organized in a

company with an elected leader, they became a band of obligated

brothers in the military sense, committed to a single grand purpose and

dedicated to principles of liberty and true religion. Some from high

station and some low, they would all sacrifice their lives to defend a

brother’s honor. Men who spoke of their initiation into the Danite order

expressed strong feelings and impressions, both positive and negative, in

relation to their experience. For good or for ill, the Danite oath they had

sworn linked them together in a durable brotherly union where their

futures and fortunes were committed to the establishment of a literal

Zion on the earth.

The nature of Joseph Smith’s involvement in Danite activity is an issue

that must periodically be revisited. The notion that Sampson Avard was

the sole actor in the creation and execution of the Danite movement, and

that he was a rogue member acting outside of Church authority, is a

common way to exonerate Joseph of any responsibility for the Danites’

behavior. Some of the first modern scholarly treatments of the Danite

organization have promoted this view.68 But other historians such as

Steven LeSueur have established that Joseph Smith knew of and

approved of the Danites.69 Danite groups met in several locations under

the direction of influential leaders including Jared Carter, Elias Higbee,

David W. Patton, Lyman Wight, and John Smith, the prophet’s uncle.

Court records from Missouri and statements from a range of perspectives

implicate church leaders in general, and Joseph Smith in particular, as

the principal force in Danite activity in Missouri.

While imprisoned in Clay County in 1839, Smith denied his

involvement in Danite misdeeds, expressly mentioning their Masonic

context. With his life in peril, he wrote a letter cautioning the brethren

against the organization of oath-bound bands or companies and

announced his intention to reject such enterprises:

[L]et the time past of our experience and sufferings by the wickedness of Doctor Avard suffice, and let our covenants be that of the everlasting covenant, as it is contained in the Holy Writ, and the things which God has revealed unto us; pure friendship always becomes weakened the very moment you undertake to make it stronger by penal oaths and secrecy. Your humble servants intend from henceforth, to disapprobate every thing that is not in

254

accordance with the fullness of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and which is not of a bold, frank,

and upright nature.70

Here, Smith scapegoated Sampson Avard as instigator of the crimes of

the group.71 A defensive passage in Willard Richards’ Manuscript

History of the Church attempts to distance the Prophet from the Danite

band and placed the blame for its formation on Avard. It asserts that his

teachings were “manfully rejected by all.” However, enthusiastic

paramilitary activity under Avard’s command is described in Mormon

and non-Mormon primary sources. Still, the official history does contain

insight into Danite origins and philosophy. Avard is quoted as saying:

“This being a different dispensation, a dispensation of the fullness of

times; in this dispensation I learn from the Scriptures that the kingdom of

God was to put down all other Kingdoms, and He [Christ] himself was to

reign, and his laws alone was the only laws that would exist.”72 Further,

the Masonic connection of the group was recognized by the author of the

passage.73 Distinctive wording states that Avard’s “craft was no longer

in the dark” and that “little confidence was placed in him even by the

warmest of the Members of his Danite Lodge.” The word “Lodge” was

later crossed out and replaced with “scheme.”74

This account grants that Avard claimed to have been acting under

orders of the first presidency, that he considered Daniteism an order of

the Church, and that he justified the behavior of the Danites with an

appeal to the scriptures.75 Additional sources corroborate Joseph

Smith’s endorsement of the Danite band in its original inception.

According to a testimony by John Corrill, Joseph Smith, his brother

Hyrum, and Sidney Rigdon (the First Presidency) visited a meeting of

Danites and approved the actions of Avard. They exhorted the men to be

faithful and “pronounced a blessing on each” of them. Corrill wrote, “It

was my understanding that Dr. Avard’s teaching in the Danite society

proceeded from the presidency.”76 Simply stated, Sampson Avard did

not have the authority or religious influence to take such actions without

instruction from his superiors.

When defending himself, Joseph Smith went so far as to claim that

Avard was the one who had given the group its name. However, Smith

later contradicted this statement at a Nauvoo City Council session,

saying the moniker grew out of an expression he had used. He clarified

its meaning as follows: “If the enemiy comes, the Danites will be after

255

them, meaning the brethren in self defince.”77 In his journal, the Prophet

wrote of the plan for handling such opposition:

Thus far, according to the ord[e]r of the Dan-Ites, we have a company of Danites in these times, to put to rights physically that which is not righ[t], and to cle[a]nse the Church of verry great evils which hath hitherto existed among us, inasmuch as they cannot be put to rights by

teachings & persuaysons.78

Historian Dale Morgan asserted that Smith was “disingenuous in his

entire explanation of the Danites; it is clear that he knew more of the

Danites, over a longer period of time, than he cared subsequently to

acknowledge.”79 John Cleminson, who was part of the Danite

expedition to Daviess in which Gallatin was burned, testified that Joseph

and Hyrum Smith personally participated. In fact, “it was generally

understood that every movement made in Daviess was under the

direction and supervision of the first presidency.”80 It is difficult to find

any Danite action that did not have precedent in the public words of the

First Presidency. Often, Sidney Rigdon was the spokesman, but Smith

would follow closely after, giving prophetic endorsement to Rigdon’s

words.

In his public interactions with Danite participants, Smith rarely

supported illegal actions overtly, but he preached homilies that made

clear his objectives. For example, after Rigdon delivered the “Salt

Sermon” and urged the Danites to tread dissenters under foot, Smith

addressed the men. Reed Peck describes him as stopping short of

Rigdon’s violent rhetoric:

Joseph Smith in a short speech, sanctioned what had been said by Rigdon, though said he, I don’t want the brethren to act unlawfully, but will tell them one thing, Judas was a traitor and instead of hanging himself was hung by Peter, and with this hint the subject was dropped for the day having created a great excitement and prepared the people to execute anything that

should be proposed.81

Smith’s retelling of the story of the biblical traitor Judas by having

Peter hang him could thus be taken by his audience as an instruction to

execute dissenters while he maintained plausible deniability. Indeed, his

Missouri speeches frequently utilized this strategy. In one discourse, he

“spoke of persons taking, at some times, what, at other times, it would be

wrong to take; and gave as an example the case of David eating the

shewbread, and also of the Saviour and his Apostles plucking the ears of

corn and eating, as they passed through the cornfield.”82

At a later meeting, Smith took the pulpit and described the Latter-day

Saints as “an injured people, driven violently from Jackson county”; that

they had “appealed to the Governor, magistrates, judges, and even to the

256

President of the United States, and there had been no redress”; and that it

was high time they take measures to defend their own rights. He told the

crowd that he could not recommend they take property that did not

belong to them in their upcoming expedition to Daviess County, but then

related an anecdote about a captain who appealed to a Dutchman to

purchase potatoes for his troops. The Dutchman refused to sell. The

captain then charged his company several times not to touch the

Dutchman’s potatoes, but in the morning, there was not a potato left in

the patch.83

By telling this story, Smith surreptitiously advised his followers to

avoid the expenses of war by confiscating the enemies’ property, all the

while claiming adherence to the letter of the law. He used this technique

often enough that these examples are not anomalies. They demonstrate

Smith’s intention and skill in directing military action in such a way as

not to appear the originator.

The Danite band contained members of the leading bodies of the

Church in Missouri and those who later were given positions of the

highest responsibility.84 From the several available journals, it is clear

its members believed they were building that kingdom of God that

Daniel prophesied would fill the earth and break to pieces all other

nations. They felt justified in their actions to cleanse the Church, defend

their occupation of the land, and retaliate against Missouri settlers.

Ecclesiastic and Military Entanglement

By 1838, Missouri Mormons had established a deeply clandestine

militaristic “combination” from which Joseph Smith later distanced

himself. Because of this, Mormon historians have found it difficult to

disentangle the configuration, composition, and conduct of the Danites

from other organized Church or civil endeavors.85 Though the Danites

were inseparably connected with ecclesiastic and military activity, some

observers have attempted to dissociate them, absolving the Church from

Masonic-like Danite activity. For example, though it is clear that the

Danites utilized companies of tens, fifties, and hundreds, Willard

Richards’s Manuscript History claimed that these Danite companies

were “altogether separate and distinct from those companies of tens and

fifties, organized by the brethren for self defence, in case of an attack

from the mob.” The Church companies, it was claimed, were organized

to perform such “righteous purposes” as cutting wood, gathering corn,

butchering and distributing meat, and so forth.86

257

A letter written by Albert Perry Rockwood on October 22, 1838,

counters this idea, demonstrating how contemporary Mormons viewed

the companies as martial, spiritual, practical—and fundamentally Danite:

Beloved parent Far West is the head quarters of the Mormon war. The armies of lsreal that were established by revelation from God are seen from my door ev[e]ry day with their captains of 10.s 50.s & 100. A portion of each Day is set apart for drill. after which they go to their several stations (VIZ.)

2 Companies of 10.s are to provide the famalies with meal[,] 2 provide wood[,] 2 or 3 Build

cabbins[,] 1 Company of 10.s collect & prepare armes, 1 company provide me[a]t, 1 Company are spies, one Company are for express, 1 for guard[,] 2 Companies are to gather in the famalies that are scattered over the counties in the vicinity[,] 1 company is to see to & provide for the sick, and the famalies of those that are off on duty[,] Others are employed in gathering provisions into the city &c &c. Those companies are called Danites because the prophet

Daniel has said they shall take the kingdom and possess it for-ever.87

Joseph Smith’s journal, kept by George Robinson, connected the

several elements of Danites, the principle of consecration, and

companies of tens at an exhibition of the Danite company: “they [the

Danite company] come up to consecrate, by companies of tens,

commanded by their Captain over ten.”88 The Prophet’s language

surrounding consecration often reflected Masonic ideals; in the context

of a lodge, all men were equal under the “leveling principle.”89

Furthermore, in Smith’s revolutionary socio-economic order, members

were expected to take vows to consecrate all of their substance to the

Church. That this principle of consecration was a topic of discussion at

Danite meetings is attested to by John Smith, who noted in his journal on

September 1, 1838: “The Daughters of Zion meet today. Had a lecture on

consecration by President [Lyman] Wight.”90

The county militia under the command of Colonel George M. Hinkle

in predominantly Latter-day Saint Caldwell County, Missouri, has

contributed to confusion surrounding military activities conducted by the

Danites. Not all Mormon military action was conducted by this

sanctioned militia. A council composed of Colonel Hinkle, first

presidency members Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, and Danite

leaders David W. Patten and Lyman Wight determined who would be the

chiefs of the five hundred to eight hundred men constituting the Mormon

troops, and they decided that Smith would carry out military action as

commander-in-chief under the cover of this sanctioned militia.91

According to Sampson Avard,

[The Prophet] assembled the troops together at Far West, into a hollow square, and addressed them, and stated to them that the kingdom of God should be set up, and should never fall; and

258

for every one we lacked in number of those who came against us, the Lord would send angels,

who would fight for us; and that we should be victorious. 92

Avard also reports that in another address at Far West, Smith said that

“those troops were militia, and that we were militia too, and both sides

clever fellows; and he advised them to know nothing of what had

happened; to say nothing.”93 Anson Call went so far as to claim “the

whole of the Military Force” at Far West belonged to the Danite

organization.94 On the strength of his religious authority alone, it is

apparent that Smith intentionally melded Danites and county militia,

giving the vigilantes pseudo-legitimacy.

The manner in which the Mormons fought exhibited the religious and

ritual nature of Danite militarism. This was exhibited at the October 25,

1838, Battle of Crooked River, where an eyewitness placed Parley P.

Pratt in the battle commanding part of the Mormon forces. Wrote one

observer:

[O]n that occasion—the officer who gave the command to the Mormons, after some kind of religious ceremony, [expressed himself] to about this amount: “In the name of Lazarus, God,

and the Lamb, fire, Danites;” and after firing twice, they charged.95

The Mystic Tie

Oliver Huntington was made a Danite a few weeks before the Mormon

surrender at Far West. Using Masonic language, he described his

initiation into the group as taking “the first mistic step in the new and

unknown bonds of the brothers and ites of Dan,” and entering as “an

apprentice in the divine brotherly union.”96 As part of Huntington’s

discussion on the Danites, he mentioned that on June 3, 1844, he was

raised a Master Mason. Historian Michael Quinn notes, “the Masonic

phrasing was no accident, and [Huntington] seemed enthusiastic about

the similarity between his Danite . . . and . . . later Masonic

initiation[s].”97

Huntington’s language of taking a first mystic or apprentice step

suggests the Danite ritual, like the Masons’, was administered by

degrees. An account by W. W. Phelps suggests three degrees may have

been involved in Danite ritual.98 Described in contemporaneous

Masonic exposures, initiates of the Entered Apprentice Degree receive

signs, grips, and words following their obligation. The Master of the

Lodge then presents them with an apron, the working tools of an

operative Mason, and a “new name.”99 Masonic name-titles could

259

indicate a person’s office within a specific degree. Sometimes these were

relatively generic, such as “Father Adam” or “Brother Truth.” Other such

name-titles could be mystical or angelic, such as “Zaphriel,” or “Uriel,”

or “Camiel.” 100 This custom was revealed in Bernard’s 1829 Light on

Masonry.

The practice of giving code names to brethren who were entering into

a covenant seems to have been adopted among the Mormons from at

least the Kirtland period.101 For example, Joseph Smith commanded the

Church’s armed forces in Kirtland as “Barak Ale,” a code name meaning

“Lightning of God,” and he confirmed Lyman Wight a senior leader of

the holy army and conferred upon him the name “Baneemy.”102 Further,

contemporary accounts preserve appellations given to some of the Danite

officers, demonstrating Masonic bestowal of a new name as well as the

particular Mormon usage of new names as aliases. Apostle David W.

Patten was widely known as “Captain Fear-Naught.” Jared Carter, chief

officer of the Danites was “the Brother of Gideon,” a play on both his

command of the Gideonites and his brother who was also named

Gideon.103 Jonathan Dunham was known as “Captain Black Hawk.”104

A lesser officer in the organization, King Follett, was named “Captain

Bull.”105 Lyman Wight was “the Intrepid,” and George Hinkle, though

not generally recognized as a Danite, was “the Thunderbolt.”106

Upon taking the Danite oath, William Swartzell alludes to a rite of

illumination as well as a naming ceremony: “The promised revelations,

said to have been received from heaven by Joseph Smith, Jr., then was,

or should have been, possessed by me,” preparatory to becoming “a man

of God and a son of Thunder.” He elaborated that others received this

name as well, when “the High Priest stood up in the centre of a circle

formed by eleven men, (that being the number initiated at a time,) and

administered to them the oath word by word, each one of the circle at the

same time repeating the word after him, with uplifted holy . . .

hands.”107 The title seems to have been used in the Masonic fashion,

given to each initiate as a reminder of his obligation and is derived from

the name “Boanerges” that was bestowed by Jesus upon his followers

James and John in the New Testament (Mark 3:17).

It is apparent that many of the companies also had code names.

Dunham’s company of fifty men went by the name of “the Fur

Company.”108 Follett was captain of a small group of men called “the

260

Regulators.”109 Orrin Porter Rockwell’s company was called “the

Destroying Angel,” and there was another company labeled “the

Destructives.”110

Joseph Smith, likely the originator of these sobriquets, put them to use

in directing action. At one Sunday meeting in Far West, a man entered

the meetinghouse with a hat on his head. “The prophet ordered the

Brother of Gideon to put that man out, for his presumption in daring to

enter and stand in the house of God without uncovering his head.”111

According to later dissenter John C. Bennett, Smith directed the

assassination of Missouri Governor Lilburn Boggs, who in 1838 ordered

the extermination of all Mormons in Missouri, the same way,

commanding: “The exterminator should be exterminated and the

DESTROYING ANGEL should do it by the right hand of his power. I

say it . . . in the name of the Lord God!”112 Bennett further

demonstrated his understanding of this naming practice when he wrote:

“I feel . . . certain . . . that Rockwell, as a member of the Daughter of

Zion, acted as the conductor or guide; and that one of the twelve

composing the Destroying Angel, assisted by Rockwell, did the

deed 113 .”

In the latter part of October 1838, Latter-day Saint troops were

engaged in offensive military actions such as spying, seizing weapons,

capturing and taking prisoners, firing cannons and other weapons as a

show of force, burning buildings, appropriating property and supplies,

and commandeering food from the farms and livestock of the Missouri

settlers. From this point, some of the brethren, disturbed by the wartime

mentality, began to betray the secrets of the Danite brotherhood. Thomas

B. Marsh, one of the original members of the Quorum of the Twelve

Apostles, was the most eminent among these defectors. Somewhat of a

pacifist, Marsh was disturbed by Rigdon’s speech condemning any of the

male inhabitants who would not join with the Mormon military forces in

the “Daviess county relief effort.” After these Danite companies attacked

the small non-Mormon settlements of Gallatin and Millport, Marsh and

Orson Hyde left Far West with their families. Both testified before a

justice of the peace in Richmond to improprieties committed by the

Danites under the direction of Joseph Smith and David W. Patten.114

Danites in Nauvoo

261

The Danites were never disbanded at the exodus from Missouri in

affidavit made by the city council of Nauvoo, Illinois, on May 19, 1842,

Church leaders testified there was no such thing as a Danite society in

that city and that they had no knowledge of any combination other than

the Masonic lodge.115 However, the historical record shows that former

Missouri-period Danites later became Joseph Smith’s bodyguards and

acted as part of Nauvoo’s police force,116 where they were often

referred to as “life-savers.” The Nauvoo Legion, with at least one-fourth

of its officers being known Danites, were similarly called

“lifeguards.”117 The diary of police chief and former Missouri Danite

Hosea Stout makes it clear that Danites formed the “old police” or “high

police” of Nauvoo, secret reinforcements to the “new police,” and

describes these men swearing “additional oaths” on top of their public

oaths of office.118 Far from being censured outcasts, they were among

Smith’s most trusted and loyal followers. Their vows were never

renounced but were considered to be in effect for the rest of their lives;

the hundreds of men who took the oaths continued to live those

principles and were bound by them regardless of the different faces the

organization took.

A telling meeting of the Nauvoo City Council demonstrates that men

who had been Danites in Missouri integrated their previous oaths with

Masonic principles from their newly formed lodges. On January 3, 1844,

William Law came before the council with a complaint that he was in

danger from the Nauvoo police. A lodge brother, Eli Norton, had warned

him under “Masonic degradation” that he was suspected of being a

traitor, largely because of his opposition to polygamy.119 In true Danite

style, it appears some of the policemen had taken secret oaths to terrorize

the dissenter. When Norton was brought before the Council for an

explanation, he equivocated, first denying that he knew anything about a

private oath, and then blaming it on Daniel Carn, a Missouri Danite.

Norton answered, “Cairns told me several times Daniteism was not

down.” Carn also “said it was a good system.”120

Two Mormon exposés from 1842 and 1843 are significant regarding

the existence of Danites in Illinois and their relationship to Freemasonry.

The first is from Oliver Olney, a member of the Church who was

coincidentally excommunicated on the very day the Mormon Masonic

Lodge in Nauvoo was incorporated. Olney was familiar with the Danite

262

band in Missouri, and in his idiosyncratic style, he wrote about the oaths

in which they were bound “and a penalty annex’d.” Their duty, he said,

was “to take life” and “to defend each other at law.” They were known

by different names, “but mostly as the daughter of Zion.”121 With

evident knowledge of their inner workings, Olney wrote about the

Danites’ later connection with the recently established Nauvoo Lodge

U.D.:122

Much has been said of this company in Missouri and in Illinois. But they have within the past year joined the Freemasons. Their name is changed. They unite with the Lodge free of expense. They now claim the name of Masons; but are a band bound to the Danite principles as before. In connection with the addition of Free Masonry, their oaths are to be true to one another; also to the Authorities of the church; suffer no one to speak reproachfully of them; to be as minute men to fulfil their word; not to let their left hand know what their right hand does. . . . [A] part of this band stands as a life-guard to the leaders of the church of L[atter] D[ay] Saints. . . . They[,] to strengthen themselves in faith and doings, quote the prophecies of the prophet Daniel 2:44, that speaks of the stone cut from the mountain without hand, that was to move until it filled the whole earth. They say to be this branch a’raising, as is spoken of in

Isaiah 11:1.123

The second exposé, John C. Bennett’s History of the Saints, was a

publication intended to stir up fear of and opposition to the Mormons.

The information contained in its pages is often exaggerated; however,

Bennett’s description of Joseph Smith’s “Order Lodge,” also known as

the Quorum of the Anointed, is relevant:

This is a secret lodge or society, established by Joe Smith, in consequence of a special revelation from Heaven, which he pretended to have received respecting it. It was intended to enable him more effectually to execute his clandestine purposes. None but the very elite of the Mormons are admitted into this lodge, as the mysteries of the Holy Priesthood are there, more fully than elsewhere, explained to the members, who are initiated only after they have bound themselves, by a most solemn oath, to profound and inviolate secrecy.

“Order is Heaven’s first law; and, that confessed,

Some are, and must be, greater than the rest.”124

It is significant that when Bennett used fear of secrecy, elitism, and oath-

taking to denounce the Quorum of the Anointed and Smith’s proto-

temple ceremonies, he linked these so closely with Masonic concepts.

The similarity of covenants taken in the Mormon endowment ritual to

Freemasons’ oaths has been covered at length by many authors. But one

early Mormon temple vow called “Oath of Vengeance” has particular

relevance to Danite and Masonic connections. This oath has passed from

general knowledge among most Latter-day Saints, as it was removed

from the temple ceremony by 1927.125 As discussed, Danites obligated

themselves to support and defend their brothers even to the shedding of

blood. After the death of one of their key leaders, David W. Patten, at the

Battle of Crooked River, and the slaughter of other members of the

263

Church at Haun’s Mill, both in the fall of 1838, the survivors began to

pledge themselves to avenge those who had been so cruelly slain. On

April 10, 1839, Danite Alanson Ripley wrote a letter to Joseph Smith and

other Church leaders in jail in Missouri. Passionately proclaiming his

Danite legacy in biblical language, he wrote he was ready to act: “I will

be an Adder in the path.”126 With a spirit like “fire in [his] bones,” he

declared that he could never be satisfied while one of the enemy

remained “to piss against a wall, or draw a sword or spring a trigger.”

Ripley vowed: “I from this day declare myself the Avenger of the blood

of those innocent men, and the innocent cause of Zion.”127

According to Wilford Woodruff, this Danite-inspired sentiment

became the basis for the Oath of Vengeance in the endowment ceremony

“long before the death of Joseph and Hyrum.”128 Woodruff’s early

attribution links the oath with murders that had taken place in Missouri,

which remained very much upon the minds of the Nauvoo Saints.129

Heber C. Kimball’s journal reveals that by the end of 1845 the Oath of

Vengeance was considered a vow to avenge the deaths of Joseph and

Hyrum Smith. Kimball said the Twelve had placed temple patrons under

oath “to avenge the blood of the anointed ones. . . . I have covenanted,

and never will rest nor my posterity after me until those men who killed

Joseph and Hyrum have been wiped out of the earth.”130 In 1912, David

H. Cannon detailed how the oath, which he named “the law of

retribution,” migrated from an obligation given in the Endowment House

into the script of the endowment:

The law of retribution is: To pray the Father to avenge the blood of the prophets and righteous men that has been shed, etc. In the endowment house this was given [as a personal responsibility] but as persons went there only once, it was not so strongly impressed upon their minds; but in setting in order the [script for] endowments for the dead it was given as it is written in [the] 9[th] Chapter of Revelations[,] and in that language we importune our Father, not that we may, but that He, our Father, will avenge the blood of martyrs shed for the

testimony of Jesus.131

At Senate hearings held from 1904 to 1907 regarding the controversial

seating of Apostle Reed Smoot, a witness disclosed the Oath of

Vengeance as follows:

You and each of you do covenant and promise that you will pray, and never cease to pray, Almighty God to avenge the blood of the prophets upon this nation, and that you will teach the

same to your children and your children’s children unto the third and fourth generations.132

A preponderance of evidence from contemporaneous journal entries and

exposés corroborates the content of this vow, though the placing within

the ceremony varies.

264

With LDS temple patrons covenanting that they would petition God to

avenge the blood of Joseph Smith, it is possible that this oath contributed

to instances of violence perpetrated by Mormons in the Utah territory,

not the least of which is the 1857 episode at Mountain Meadows where

Mormons slaughtered close to 140 men, women, and children in the

Baker-Fancher party, some of whom were accused of violence against

Mormons. This horrific event provided further evidence to the greater

community that their fears regarding Mormonism, oath-taking, and

vengeance were reasonable concerns. Of the tragedy, Brigham Young is

alleged to have said, “Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord, and I have

taken a little.”133 Such reports did little to allay public fears.

Danites, Freemasonry, and Joseph’s Theocratic Design

Historian Michael Quinn has observed that the Danite band “forecast a

path the LDS church would increasingly take in Illinois and later Utah:

creating its own alternative civil and political institutions as the basis of

theocracy.”134 Recent scholarship on the 1838 Missouri War

demonstrates that the Danites—far from being a rogue group distant

from the aims and objectives of Mormon leadership—were an accepted

and important part of mainstream Mormonism in Missouri. Historians of

this period have demonstrated that Joseph Smith and his presidency

approved of Danite activities, and that its undergirding “theocratic

ethics” were widely accepted by increasing numbers of Saints in Ohio,

Missouri, Illinois, and Utah.

Moreover, the Danite organization is one example of Masonic ritual

ideology being actualized in early Mormonism. A close examination of

the group’s teachings, oaths, and rituals, together with its known

practices and activities, displays more than coincidental similarities to

Freemasonry. Details such as the specific formulation of the language of

Danite oaths, and the public promotion of the group as fearsome and

vengeful, point to the image of the Avenging Mason—common in the

popular press—as an influential model in its conception. This has far-

reaching implications both for our understanding of the nature of

Daniteism and our appreciation of the extent of Masonic influence on the

formation of early Latter-day Saint organizations. Furthermore, the

connection between Daniteism and Freemasonry demonstrates that the

relationship between Mormonism and Freemasonry was embedded at a

much earlier time in Smith’s teachings than has been heretofore

recognized.

265

Smith laid the foundations for the Danites with religious teachings in

Kirtland, such as the importance of consecration and how to deal with

covenant-breakers. He organized military operations beginning with

Zion’s Camp and extending through the Armies of Israel in Missouri.

Along with Sidney Rigdon, he spoke at public gatherings, inciting action

from the “Big Fan.” The prophet blessed and prophesied over the

Danites, declaring they should be the means of bringing forth Christ’s

millennial kingdom.

The Masonic ideal of divine brotherly union formed a vehicle to bring

about a theocratic kingdom and establish a utopian society. Like their

Mormon counterparts, Freemasons were millennially minded: longing

for peace but convinced that war and destruction would come first.

Through both vigilante action and kingdom-building exercises, the

Mormon Danites hoped to launch Joseph Smith’s vision of a religiously

grounded radical new social order. Oaths, signs of recognition, and

private meetings gave men who were religious revolutionaries a means

to stand together in defense of their rights. Holding sacred secrets

inviolate within their hearts, they cultivated an image of energetic

righteousness. Like the Freemasons, Danites promoted a connection with

the ancient past and with scriptural figures in stirring allegorical tellings.

To them, these stories served as justification for their acts defending their

beliefs and standing against oppression. By their symbolical “fanning,”

“treading,” “threshing,” and “grinding,” these latter-day brothers of the

biblical Gideon cleansed their ranks and laid waste to the nations—that

the stone “cut from the mountain without hands” would roll forth and the

political kingdom of God would be established in its fullness.

When the Danite movement was exposed and publicly renounced at

the close of 1838, the principles underlying this revolutionary impulse

were not abandoned. The Masonic trappings in which it had been clothed

would soon find other, increasingly sophisticated uses. Tellingly, the

language associated with Danite oaths would find its way into Nauvoo

Temple covenants. In this and other ways, Daniteism served as a vehicle

for Masonic ritual forms within Mormonism.

Notes

266

267

268

269

270

271

could be interesting to compare with Smith’s possible understanding of true Masons and spurious Masons.

272

had already been serving as ‘commander of my [Smith’s] life guards.’ The Prophet’s bodyguards included such well-known Danites as John L. Butler, Reynolds Cahoon, Elias Higbee, Vinson Knight, Orrin Porter Rockwell, and Samuel H. Smith.” Quinn, “The Culture of Violence in Joseph Smith’s Mormonism,” 25.

273
