THE GRAND DESIGN: JOSEPH’S MASONIC

KINGDOM ON THE MISSISSIPPI

Z. Most excellent Haggai, from whence came you?

H. From Babylon.

Z. Most excellent Jeshua, where are you going?

J. To Jerusalem.

Z. Most excellent chiefs, why leave you Babylon to go to

Jerusalem?

H. To assist in rebuilding the second temple, and to endeavor to

obtain the sacred word.

Z. Let us celebrate this grand design.

—Richard Carlile, Manual of Freemasonry

In the inspiring ritual of Royal Arch Masonry, Freemasons enact the biblical story of the rebuilding of the city of God and the House of the Lord in Jerusalem after returning from Babylonian exile. The establishment of the city of Nauvoo is equally magnificent and

corresponds with the degree to a remarkable extent. On October 27,

1838, Governor Lilburn Boggs issued an order to exile the Latter-day

Saints from the state of Missouri. Soon after, Joseph Smith and several

church leaders were incarcerated in Liberty Jail from December 1, 1838,

to April 16, 1839, as the Mormons scattered into Illinois. During this

time, Sidney Rigdon learned of a large parcel of swampland for sale on

both sides of the Mississippi River in western Illinois and Iowa

surrounding the city of Commerce. Smith authorized the purchase of the

land and, after his escape from prison, began to encourage the Saints to

gather there. Informed by his years of both successes and failures in

social experiments in New York, Ohio, and Missouri, Smith deftly

stitched together various elements of contemporary society to compose

his own vision for rebuilding and restoration. He would now begin what

Masons might call his “master’s piece” in a spot beautifully situated for

such a vision of revolutionary theocratic social order. Smith renamed the

city Nauvoo, a Hebrew word suggesting “that which is beautiful.”

During the years to follow, he would bend his efforts to the realization of

a Christian utopian society that was, in fact, beautiful—socially,

spiritually, economically, and politically. It would be a society in which

274

each person would be of one heart and of one mind; in which they would

be made one temporally so that they could be made one spiritually. In

this way, they would be prepared by degrees to enter the presence of the

Divine; perhaps they would even be translated to meet their coming Lord

in the air—like Enoch’s fabled city in their new scriptural tradition.

The construction of the city itself was an exciting enterprise for those

familiar with the Royal Arch degree who felt they were returning to a

“New Jerusalem” and building on the foundations of ancient religion.

Nehemiah’s call, “Come and let us build up the wall of Jerusalem, that

we be no more a reproach” (Neh. 2:17), was echoed by nineteenth-

century Freemasons who lamented, “Oh, the world in ruins! Oh, the

wrecks of humanity, lying about us on every hand, and crying aloud for

the Master Builder, who alone can reconstruct the edifices so fearfully

cast down.”1 Modeling the behavior of Jesus—the 2 tekton , or architect

—Smith, too, called upon this new Zion to “put on her beautiful

garments” (D&C 82:14). She was to become the proof of his prophetic

calling and showcase his political and theocratic vision.

Hermann J. Meyer engraving, “Bird’s-eye view from hill, across water to Nauvoo,” ca. 1855.

The Royal Arch tradition specifies that the only ones who can

participate in the rebuilding of the Temple are those of the proper

pedigree, the descendants of the original builders. In Smith’s theology,

those who carried the royal blood of Ephraim or Manasseh were called to

275

gather the people and initiate this work of restoration. In Kirtland, they

had been told,

Therefore, thus saith the Lord unto you, with whom the priesthood hath continued through the lineage of your fathers—

For ye are lawful heirs, according to the flesh, and have been hid from the world with

Christ in God—

Therefore your life and the priesthood have remained, and must needs remain through you

and your lineage until the restoration of all things spoken by the mouths of all the holy prophets since the world began.

Therefore, blessed are ye if ye continue in my goodness, a light unto the Gentiles, and

through this priesthood, a savior unto my people Israel. (D&C 86:8–11)

Mormons who left their homes and possessions to move to Nauvoo

believed that they were literal descendants of the ancient Israelites,

enacting the restoration of the Holy City of God and its sacred temple.

Further, they were taught that Joseph Smith and others who had been

gathered as members of the Church were direct descendants of Jesus

Christ. Through 3 translatio imperi , the kingdom of God was extended

from Christ through his literal blood line to Smith and his followers,

giving them the divine right to rule.4

Early Mormons believed it was no mistake that the kingdom of God

was to be planted on American soil. Smith wrote that the land of

America was a promised land to “all the tribes of Israel . . . with as many

of the gentiles as shall comply with the requesitions [sic] of the new

co[v]enant.” The city of Zion, he pronounced, would be “built upon the

Land of America.”5 When the Saints were expelled from Missouri, this

dream did not fade.

Social experimentation was possible on a larger scale in North

America than could be found elsewhere. Political, municipal, and

religious freedom such as that found in the United States made possible

the unique amalgamation of these elements characterizing the city of

Nauvoo. Draftsmen of this kingdom on the Mississippi were new convert

John C. Bennett, who became the primary architect of political and

community workings in Nauvoo, and Joseph Smith, whose expertise lay

in the theological and social development of the new religion. Both

devised Masonic-like institutions to achieve civic and religious purposes.

Experienced Freemasons, many of whom belonged to the Prophet’s inner

circle, understood what Smith and Bennett hoped to accomplish and

participated in making their vision a reality.

Four areas of interest apparent in the founding of the city of Nauvoo

are: politics, economics, education, and sociality. Each of these vibrates

with Masonic resonance.

276
