Ever since Benjamin Franklin submitted a plan for a grand council of

the American colonies based upon an identical plan of organization of

American Provincial Masonic Grand Lodges, Freemasonry has been

involved in politics in the United States.6 During the founding of the

nation, many of the leaders in the development of a federal union were

Masons, which resulted in numerous Masonic concepts being introduced

into American government. According to Masonic author James D.

Carter, “the basic principles of government employed in Anderson’s

Constitutions are: popular sovereignty by majority rule; government

limited by constitution; local lodges self-governing; Grand Lodge

supreme in federal system; a type of judicial review by the Grand Lodge;

[and] implied powers exist in constitutional provisions.” These

principles, he believes, “had been discovered and were being practiced,

after 1734, in the area that became the United States.” Carter concedes

that “any serious student of American history and government can

identify other institutions practicing some of these same concepts,” but

“no other institution was so widely distributed in the colonies as

Freemasonry.” He continues,

Differences in religion, government, and economy, difficulties in transportation and communication, and a spirit of localism and individualism existed from north to south from east to west in varying degrees, but the basic principles of Freemasonry were identical in the approximately one hundred colonial lodges established by 1775. . . . This general acceptance by a large segment of the leaders of the people of fundamental concepts is significant in the formation of a federal union type of government and becomes doubly so when those leaders

are bound to one another by fraternal ties which engender trust and confidence. 7

Political involvement by Freemasons was common in the United

States until the advent of the anti-Masonic movement when many

Americans began to fear the power and influence exerted by the

Fraternity. Midwesterners recognized a similar threat from the gathering

of Mormons into their communities, yet political figures coveted the

benefits such a large bloc of voters might provide.

In his introduction to Volume 4 of the History of the Church, B. H.

Roberts noted that as the Saints began to stream into Illinois upon their

exile from Missouri, their hearty welcome was due in part to the desire

of the competing Democrats and Whigs for political advantage. It was

this “rivalry for their support that doubtless made it possible for the

Saints to obtain larger grants of power for their city government, and

greater political privileges and influence in the State than otherwise

could have been obtained.” Roberts believed that the political parties’

277

competitiveness made the Mormons “alternately fulsomely flattered and

heartily disliked; fawningly courted, and viciously betrayed.”8

John C. Bennett, Freemason and Quarter Master General of the Illinois

State Militia before joining the Church, took advantage of this

atmosphere as he developed a city charter for Nauvoo under the direction

of Joseph Smith.9 Bennett’s “detailed knowledge of other [Illinois]

charters” facilitated the formulation of a charter for Nauvoo drawing

upon the most liberal policies then in existence.10 The policies adopted

in the document also gave the city a number of unique powers, including

the absence of requirements for political office and the ability of city

council members to remove city officers at will. Other distinctive

functions dealt with city government, municipal justice, education, and

an extraordinarily independent militia unit. Nauvoo’s City Charter gave

the Mormons the political independence necessary to establish an

autonomous political kingdom within the bounds of the United States.

The political agenda of the Mormons aligned with their religious

aspirations:

The government of the Almighty, has always been very dissimilar to the government of men; whether we refer to his religious government, or to the government of nations. The government of God has always tended to promote peace, unity, harmony, strength and happiness; while that of man has been productive of confusion, disorder, weakness and misery. . . .

It has been the design of Jehovah, from the commencement of the world, and is his purpose

now, to regulate the affairs of the world in his own time; to stand as head of the universe, and take the reigns [sic] of government into his own hand. When that is done judgment will be administered in righteousness; anarchy and confusion will be destroyed, and “nations will

learn war no more.”11

In Nauvoo, the Latter-day Saints increasingly moved to consolidate

political power in order to establish “the government of the Almighty.”

This would be administered by his mouthpiece, Joseph Smith, and the

Council of Fifty, “the ultimate governing body for all mankind.”12

Education

An early emphasis on education and universities came into

Mormonism by way of John C. Bennett. Before coming to Nauvoo,

Bennett had established a university and medical college in Virginia and

a Christian college in Indiana, the latter from which he sold bogus

degrees.13 Despite indiscretions for which he was censured at both

places, his interest in higher education continued. Building on the

foundation laid in the School of the Prophets and the School of the

278

Apostles initiated in Kirtland, he established the University of Nauvoo

and a form of the popular Lyceum movement.14 These were frequented

with great enthusiasm by the Mormon population. Education may have

been a principal concern throughout the less-than-a-century-old United

States, but for Freemasons all forms of learning merged with spiritual

matters. The figurative chariot of ascent that bears the Mason to heaven

is constructed of the “seven liberal arts and sciences.”15 The lesson

taken from this figure is that a person who gains knowledge is better able

to ascend to higher glory. Education in Nauvoo was a literalization of

this allegorical Masonic principle. The Doctrine and Covenants

proclaims: “the glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and

truth” (D&C 93:36), and “whatever principle of intelligence we attain

unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection” (D&C 130:18).

Oliver Cowdery similarly preached,

Intelligence is religion, and religion is intelligence. . . . The object of our religion, is to make us more intelligent, than we could be without it. . . . It is designed to evolve the faculties, to enlighten the understanding, and through this medium, purify the heart. It is calculated to

make men better. 16

In his autobiography, Master Mason Wandle Mace provided an

interesting glimpse into how lyceums were organized in Nauvoo.17

Mace had moved his family from Augusta, Iowa, across the river to

Nauvoo in accordance with instructions from the First Presidency of the

Church “to the Saints abroad.” Members “who reside out of this

[Hancock] county” were told “to make preparations to come in without

delay.”18 Mace bought two lots of property during the summer of 1842,

built a comfortable home, and started an iron foundry. During the winter,

he spent the long, cold evenings improving his public speaking and

religious knowledge at the lyceum, or “lecturing school.”19 He

described it as follows:

Our lyceum was composed of eighteen members, each presided over the meeting in turn, one of the principles of the gospel was chosen as a subject, and each member spoke an half hour upon it, three evenings was taken up with the one principle, before another was touched, six members occupied the first evening, the second evening six other members spoke upon the same subject, and the remaining six occupied the third evening; so that each one of the

eighteen had equal time and opportunity to talk upon the subject.20

Mace remarked how curious it was that the same subject would be

handled so differently by the members of the lyceum. Though their

presentation was peculiar to themselves, they would all come “to the

same conclusion, by the evidence adduced from the scriptures; there was

no jarring, no contention nor discord, and all were entertained, instructed

279

and edified.” The prophet Joseph visited their lyceum whenever possible,

encouraging the brethren by his presence, and giving them instructions

and assistance. He charged them to “get into your lyceums, and

investigate doctrine, and if you run against a snag, I am here, I will help

you off.” Mace recalled,

There were days and nights of pleasure and profit,—to listen to a prophets voice and receive instruction from one who communed with angels and received his instruction from on high when or wherever I met him, whether in the lyceum, on the street, or at home, he spoke forth

words of light and intelligence for the salvation of mankind.21

As in Freemasonry, education in the Nauvoo lyceums was markedly

connected with religion. The McIntire Minute Book describes some of

the first lyceum meetings in Nauvoo, commencing on January 5, 1841.

Various gospel subjects were addressed, such as the creation of the earth,

vice, resurrection and eternal judgment, true friendship, the Godhead, the

law of consecration, the Second Comforter, and so forth. These were

presented by speakers including Don Carlos Smith, Josiah Ells, Hosea

Stout, Alexander Badlam Sr., Leonard Soby, Austin Cowles (“Father

Cole”), Ebenezer Robinson, and others, with Joseph Smith often

commenting and adding illumination upon the subject after the speaker

concluded. In several of these 1841 lyceum meetings it appears that the

Prophet was the only one to lecture.22

Economics

Masons believe in the development of the mind, intellect, and talents

through education and learning—not only for individual benefit but for

the benefit of society in general. All humankind enters the world helpless

and dependent upon others. The retrospect of the third degree of

Masonry reminds each new Master Mason that “your admission into

Freemasonry in a state of helpless indigence, was an emblematical

representation of the entrance of all men on this, their mortal existence.”

Because of this common mortality and dependence upon each other,

Masonry teaches the need of “the active principles of universal

beneficence and charity” and encourages each brother to extend “relief

and consolation to your fellow-creatures in the hour of their

affliction.”23 In the eighteenth century, the lodge room often served as a

forum to discuss how Masonry could advance the temporal and spiritual

well-being of its members. Economic experimentation was encouraged.

As historian Mark Carnes observes,

The [Masonic] rituals repeatedly contravened basic tenets of capitalism. The Improved Order of Red Men, for example, advised initiates to emulate the children of the forest, who held all

280

wealth and property in common. Rather than reinforcing the forms and ideologies of capitalist

social organization, the rituals often subverted them.24

During World War II, when Communism was being derided by

members of the Craft as un-Masonic, it was nevertheless acknowledged

that the “over 400 experiments in communal living” in the United States

over the preceding two centuries had been beneficial:

Many of these have been Christian communal colonies. No doubt in their day of founding or organization they were referred to as socialistic or communistic enterprises. Many of these have developed to a satisfactory conclusion and are now absorbed within the boundaries of these United States. These groups known to you have definitely been an influence for good,

and are in no way to be confused with the subject at hand.25

Joseph Smith’s economic model was Christian communitarianism, a

part of these utopian experiments mentioned above. After encountering

the ideas through Campbellites Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge,

Smith began to initiate some of these efforts in Ohio and Missouri. In the

chill of February 1831, he established the office of bishop in his

fledgling church and appointed Edward Partridge to the position (D&C

41:9; cf. 1 Tim. 3:1–7). Days later, Smith dictated a revelation that

required the Saints to “consecrate” their property for the support of the

poor. Each family would receive a portion of their holdings, over which

they were to be “stewards” (D&C 42:29–32). The Saints viewed this

“law of consecration” in Masonic terms: more than simply a temporal

welfare program, it was designed to improve a man’s character.

According to Orson F. Whitney,

[T]he redemption of Zion is more than the purchase or recovery of lands, the building of cities, or even the founding of nations. It is the conquest of the heart, the subjugation of the soul, the

sanctifying of the flesh, the purifying and ennobling of the passions.26

In his new role, Partridge was made responsible for operating a

storehouse to help the poor and for administering property transactions

connected with the law of consecration (D&C 42:30–39; 58:17). In

December 1831, Newel K. Whitney was also called as a bishop (72:1–8).

The two served as regional or traveling bishops: Whitney for Ohio and

the eastern states, and Partridge for Missouri.27 Kirtland feasts, under

the direction of Whitney, were a way for the Church to distribute items

from the bishop’s storehouse. Later they became associated with the

giving of patriarchal blessings by Joseph Smith Sr.28 As historian Mark

Staker notes, these feasts were reminiscent of “the annual ‘sumptuous

dinners’ that the Masons hosted for the widows, fatherless, and the poor

in the area” that Whitney, as a Freemason, had likely participated in.29

281

In the same vicinity, on a large homestead near Kirtland, Ohio, Isaac

Morley lived a communitarian lifestyle with Lyman Wight and several

other families who had been influenced by the religious teachings of

Alexander Campbell and Sidney Rigdon. After joining the Church in

November 1831, Morley became devoted to Joseph Smith and meekly

accepted his corrections on points of living the law of consecration.

When called to sell his farm and move to Missouri, Morley promptly

obeyed. He returned to Kirtland in time for the temple dedication and to

receive initiatory ordinances there. The Morley family went back to

Missouri in 1836, helped establish the town of Far West, and lived there

until forced to leave in 1838. When the Saints began to settle in Nauvoo,

the Morleys founded a nearby settlement in southern Hancock County

that was cryptically named “Yelrome.” Here and at the neighboring town

of Lima, at least one hundred fifty-nine Latter-day Saint families lived in

cooperation. About 76 percent of the over 880 individuals who lived in

the area from 1839 to 1846 were linked by kinship relationships,

prompting researcher Danny Jorgensen to identify them as a “tribe.”30

The Saints at the Morley Settlement “tithed, made special offerings for

the poor and other specific projects, . . . contributed money, goods and

labor for the construction of the Nauvoo temple,” and “volunteered for

service on periodic missions.” Altogether, they “interacted with each

other as a large extended family.”31

Though the Morley settlement did not institute a common-stock

economy, there was an instance of such an arrangement in the Nauvoo

period. From 1841 to 1845, Latter-day Saints were sent to harvest lumber

from the Wisconsin pineries for use in building the Nauvoo Temple and

the Nauvoo House. Six logging camps were established on the Black

River north of La Crosse. Workers in the pineries drew provisions,

supplies, equipment, and occasionally cash from their accounts. When

they finished their stint, they settled their accounts and were paid the

balance in tithing credit, temple credit, and Nauvoo House stock

certificates. Logging was a difficult chore and not profitable, but most of

the workers participated as part of their service to build the city of God

and the House of the Lord. The beauty of the country was spectacular, as

Freemason George Miller expressed in his journal on a wintry day in late

November, describing it as possessing an “imposing grandeur so

peculiarly calculated to captivate and lead the mind of the beholder to the

author of our existence and Great Architect of the universe.”32

282

The loggers, many of whom brought their families with them, worked

together to build shelter, hunt and fish, plant crops, and gather fruits,

nuts, berries, and maple syrup. Miller constructed a shoe factory to make

sturdy shoes for the men who had not come prepared for the cold

temperatures and heavy snow. Allen Stout, also a Freemason, built

cabins for many of the company. He described the arrangement in a letter

to his brother Hosea: “We hav[e] gon[e] in to the whole law of God on

Black river.” Every man, after giving an accounting of his property to the

bishop, had “all things common according to the law in the book of

covenants.” Stout seemed pleased that all were “on an equality”: every

man “far[e]s alike labourse alike eats drinks wares alike” but also had his

own small stewardship to do with what he pleased.33 In another letter,

Stout invited friends to join the company if they “thinks they can go the

caper of concecration and equality.” Said Stout, “[W]e wish you to come

by all means and bring all the tools you can the law of black river is he

that will not work shal[l] not eat.”34

Sociality

In his 1775 classic, The Spirit of Masonry, author William Hutchinson

articulated a commonly held vision of the coming ideal Masonic society

in the late eighteenth century: “In the forming of this society, which is at

once RELIGIOUS AND CIVIL, great regard has been given to the first

knowledge of the GOD OF NATURE, and that acceptable service

wherewith he is well pleased.”35 In this utopian vision, Hutchinson

conceived of the future blending of the civil and the religious as

necessary to a harmonious productive society. As Margaret Jacob has

noted, this anticipated social harmony was intimately connected to

notions of individual and social perfectibility:36

The experience of this new fraternity occasionally set men to thinking about the larger society as they sought to perfect their own private sociability. They would wax, often eloquently, about the joys of order and harmony, about the sociable virtues prescribed now for all men. Much of eighteenth-century British masonic literature officially published by the lodges has a

decidedly utopian cast about it.37

Joseph Smith went so far as to suggest that the order and harmony of

such social utopianism reflects a heavenly verity:

When the Savior shall appear we shall see him as he is. We shall see that he is a man like ourselves. And that same sociality which exists among us here will exist among us there, only it will be coupled with eternal glory, which glory we do not now enjoy. (D&C 130:1–2)

Here, God is depicted as a man, and as such is a social being living in a

perfect and divine society in which mankind may share. To do so, a man

283

must first demonstrate a willingness to live in that society by choosing to

be subject to its various divine laws and sufficiently working to perfect

his own personality. By attempting on the microcosmic level to

approximate heavenly society, a human being may at length qualify for

association with the Divine. In this way, he may as a grace subsequently

be clothed upon with that “eternal glory” that Joseph Smith indicates is

characteristic of the heavenly society to which the Saints aspired.

Jacob, however, notes how these utopian ideals may conflict with the

rest of society:

Continental reformers and visionaries could also find in their lodges a particular kind of social experience which, in certain circumstances, could create a dissonance between their personal

experience in constitutionalism and the larger civil polity.38

Mormons likewise encountered dissonance in their own personal

experience of “constitutionalism and the larger civil polity” as opposed

to their own understanding of the nature of the coming decreed Mormon

theocracy. Over time, this theocratic ideal was envisioned by Joseph

Smith as a kind of heavenly compromise—it became a political body

with a “Living Constitution” comprised of fifty men.39 This theocratic

body was an interesting twist on the notion of the philosopher kings that

are described in eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century political

philosophy and share similarities with the prophet kings of the Book of

Mormon. The realization of a utopian society modeled upon the order of

heaven and guided by the divinely appointed prophet-king was joined

with a uniquely Mormon vision of divinely inspired constitutional

monarchy.

Nauvoo Mormonism was a late but particularly vigorous flowering of

American Masonic religious idealism, sharing a belief in the

perfectibility of humanity and in its logical extension: the perfection of

human society. This Masonic Millennialism had been part of the

American fraternity in the early nineteenth century. David G. Hackett

writes:

Compared to colonial Freemasonry, in which men of good breeding and upright character attained the honor of membership as a means of entry into “polite” society, the early nineteenth-century version was a private world of warmth and intimacy, separated from an increasingly cold, competitive, and uncertain public sphere, with rituals that spoke to the

struggles and anxieties of young men living amid widespread social change.40

This thriving brotherhood had largely died with the William Morgan

fiasco.

In the caricature of Freemasonry found in the anti-Masonic press, the

fraternity seemed alienated from its own basic ideals and was presented

284

as undemocratic, non-egalitarian, elitist, silly, pernicious, and morally

dangerous. To some, Freemasonry appeared to have lost its way,

becoming “drifted and diffused,” having a “form” but lacking in any

“power” (2 Tim. 3:5).41 At best, in the estimation of many Americans—

including many of its former members—Masonry had become irrelevant

to the new order. Yet, in Nauvoo, Smith moved to export and transform

Freemasonry and its powerful ideals.

In its heyday, Nauvoo was a thriving city of an estimated fifteen

thousand. Thirty-two percent of the population were converts from

England.42 One of these, George D. Watt, was an example of the

gentrification of these mostly lower-class converts.43 Watt, a cobbler

and weaver, and his wife Molly, a factory worker, were part of the urban

poor of Preston, England. They emigrated to the United States and lived

in Nauvoo from 1842 to 1846. Watt’s enthusiasm for Mormonism and

willingness to sacrifice for the cause provided him opportunities as a

missionary preacher and a Church leader. He was self-educated and used

his skills in shorthand to teach students and take notes of important

speeches of the day. His services were highly appreciated and eventually

lucrative. The ability of Watt and other working-class men like Brigham

Young and Heber C. Kimball to undergo this type of transformation was

part of the fundamentally egalitarian atmosphere of Nauvoo. They

poured their creative energies into Mormonism, lifting themselves and

others.

The Masonic ideal of equality puts men “upon the level,” regardless of

money or family connections. The Master of the lodge may be but a

farmhand but is given an opportunity to participate in leadership directly.

By participating in the lodge, he learns ritual manners, social niceties,

and the shape of the gentlemanly life. In addition, he also draws close to

God. Men were encouraged and moved by Masonic principle to rise to

the level of their betters and to lift and exhibit charitable impulses toward

the less fortunate. A popular poem by Masonic writer Rob Morris

detailed the fundamental egalitarian nature of the Fraternity:

We meet upon the Level, though from every station come — The King from out his palace and the poor man from his home; For the one must leave his diadem without the Mason’s door, And the other finds his true respect upon the checkered floor. . . .

There’s a World where all are equal,—we are hurrying towards it fast,— We shall meet upon the level there when the gates of death are past; . . .

O what words of precious meaning those words Masonic are,

We meet upon the level, and we part upon the Square.44

285

Such values were exported into the New World by the vast influx of

British converts to Mormonism. They were then transformed by Joseph

Smith and his contemporaries in a manner agreeable with the Mormon

theocratic vision. Brought into alignment with their ideal of a new

worldwide social order, this new Masonic culture and ideology was

made agreeable to a pattern God had revealed to them. Co-opted and

sanctified in the context of the Mormon kingdom-building enterprise, it

was made congruent with the revolutionary concepts of liberty, equality,

and fraternity.

Through the prophetic voice, Smith received his ability to populate a

literal revolution. Mormons definitely had an upper echelon of leaders

who were admitted to the School of the Prophets and the Quorum of the

Anointed, but there was also an impulse toward bringing the gospel to

the downtrodden. For example, Smith’s political campaign advocated the

emancipation of African slaves. Most Mormons espoused this idea, as

well as the assimilation of Native Americans into society. From the

earliest days of the Church, Native Americans were considered part of

God’s chosen people, and missionaries were sent to gather them,

contrary to the then-current national policy of Indian removal.45

It was an irony that on one hand, people feared that Masonry was

allowing too much influence by the upper classes while, on the other

hand, they feared the working class uniting to cause social and economic

change. For the brothers associated with the fraternity, Masonic

affiliation crystallized what it was about the old social order that they

didn’t like and reflected their view of what American society ought to be.

True Religion and the New Society

There was a strong religious component in nineteenth-century

Masonry. The divine attributes of God were imitated through ritual. No

individual could be exalted on his own—restored Freemasonry was

about the transformation of society. Attempts to construct a harmonious

society “put the freemason on the side of virtue, as opponent of

corruption.”46 In its New World incarnation, the coming Masonic utopia

was at once Christian and benevolent, paradoxically both progressive

and ancient, and socially stratified and egalitarian. It anticipated

architectural feats like the design and construction of splendid

monuments as “harbingers of cultural revival,” and it championed

various social improvements.47 Furthermore, Masonry emphasized the

liberal arts and sciences and encouraged individual education and

286

charitable action as important means to bringing about a specific social

end: the establishment of True Religion. This in turn would lead to a

revolution of the entire social order preparatory to the coming of the Son

of Man and the establishment of his millennial kingdom. Masonic author

David G. Hackett observes: “In its efforts to cross political and religious

boundaries, Freemasonry rivaled Protestantism in influencing the

creation of the new American society.”48

The growing movement of American Evangelical Christianity was at

odds with the type of religion embodied by Freemasonry. This rational

Christian mysticism guided by human reason was at once too magical

and too humanistic for mainstream Protestantism. But there were still

folk steeped in Christian primitivism who yearned to restore the church’s

ancient foundations. These formed the foundation of the Masonic

brotherhood. Masons believed that each individual had a responsibility to

discover and live by the truth, whether scientific, moral, historical, or

religious. Their social order encouraged each brother to be responsible to

themselves and to God alone for the development of their innate divine

qualities.

The manifesto of this social revolution was couched within the ritual

and tradition of the Holy Royal Arch—the capstone and completion of

Masonry as a Christian mystical tradition. “We have been liberated,”

Royal Arch Masons recited in their degree work, “and have come up to

help, aid and assist in the noble and glorious work of rebuilding our city

—and the House of the Lord—without hope of fee or reward.”49 This

tendency towards radicalism and the yearning for primeval and even pre-

Christian truth was part of the appeal of Freemasonry among Mormons.

Nauvoo was a utopian experiment upon Masonic lines, wherein the

Latter-day Saints, according to Mormon historian Marvin S. Hill, “did

not separate society, economics, politics, and culture from religion.”50

By bringing a Masonic temple and city of God from the figurative to

the literal, Joseph Smith expanded ideas that he found first in

Freemasonry, particularly the Royal Arch story—the compelling ritual

portrayal of a group of God’s people endeavoring to build an ideal

community. The success of a utopian society requires that it be populated

by ideal men and women. Like Freemasonry, nineteenth-century

Mormonism sought to promote those ideals by recognizing that while

mankind was fallible, they were also perfectible by virtue of being the

offspring of a perfect deity. There is something divine and noble within

287

each person, and given the proper opportunity, they could attain

godhood.

Smith taught that one of the fundamental roles of his new social order

was to help restore the individual to their own lost nature and to

heavenly society. The teaching that heavenly directed social

transformation and change would aid in the perfection of the individual,

who was being prepared for the association of God and other perfected

beings in God’s own holy and heavenly society, was a powerful notion.

Borrowing a page from the Rosicrucian Enlightenment, the grand

design of Freemasonry was to revolutionize the entire world. So, too,

with Mormonism. By the early 1840s, Smith had a much clearer concept

of what his utopian society would entail and had sufficiently developed

the theological framework to begin implementing his plan. In Nauvoo,

Smith began to move from a covert to a more overt Masonic model.

Mormonism was a theocratic kingdom with a Davidic prophet-king at its

head. It likewise was patriarchal, with its citizens joined by bonds of

affection, kinship, and marriage. Through the temple and its theocratic

laws, these bonds were made literal. This was Joseph Smith’s “grand

design” by which he aimed to revolutionize the world.

Notes

288

habeas corpus. Lastly, there was a remarkable resemblance between the Nauvoo Legion and the Fairfield “Invincible Dragoons,” an independent militia company that Bennett was instrumental in incorporating in 1837. Kimball suggests that the bulk of the Nauvoo City Charter was “based solidly on precedents” that were “not unheard-of.”

289

pattern and agreeably to the Prophet Joseph’s and our own ideas of true charity and disinterested benevolence, we determined to make a Feast for the Poor, such as we knew could not return the same to us; the lame, the halt, the deaf, the blind, the aged and infirm.” Elizabeth Ann Whitney, “A Leaf from an Autobiography: My husband traveled,” 71.

290
