Joseph Smith did not leave a detailed account of his reasons for

establishing a Masonic lodge in Nauvoo, but his followers left several

statements that illuminate their understanding of his intentions.

According to this evidence, Smith not only embraced the Masonic

worldview, but he believed his life to be the latter-day point and purpose

for which that worldview existed.

In Masonic legend, priesthood had its beginning in the ancient past and

antedated the Jewish priesthood. As Smith began to introduce the

endowment, he connected his conception of priesthood with Masonry,

closely following the Masonic legend of priesthood’s ancient past and

adding the idea that over the centuries it had become degenerated.

Smith’s colleague Heber C. Kimball seemed thrilled by these concepts

and mentioned them in a letter to fellow apostle Parley P. Pratt:

[W]e have recieved some pressious things through the Prophet on the preast hood that could caus[e] your Soul to rejoice[.] I can not give them to you on paper fore they are not to be [w]rit[t]en. So you must come and get them fore your Self . . . thare is a similarity of preast Hood in masonary. Bro Joseph Ses Masonary was taken from preasthood but has become

degen[e]rated. but menny things are perfect.4

This letter, written in 1842, can be compared with Kimball’s more

dogmatic statement on November 13, 1858: “We have the true Masonry.

The Masonry of today is received from apostasy, which took place in the

days of Solomon and David. They have now and then a thing that is

correct, but we have the real thing.”5

According to Joseph Fielding, the Masonic degrees were “a Stepping

Stone or Preparation for something else, the true Origin of Masonry,”

meaning the Nauvoo endowment.6 “This I have also seen and rejoice in

it,” he exulted. “I have evidence enough that Joseph is not fallen. I have

seen him after giving, as I before said, the origin of Masonry, organize

the kingdom of God on the earth and am myself a member of it.”7

Benjamin F. Johnson apparently had a similar understanding of

Smith’s teaching:

[April of 1843] In lighting him [Joseph Smith] to bed one night he showed me his garments and explained that they were such as the Lord made for Adam from skins, and gave me such ideas pertaining to endowments as he thought proper. He told me Freemasonry, as at present,

was the apostate endowments, as sectarian religion was the apostate religion.8

Johnson’s statement reinforces Kimball’s and Fielding’s understandings,

as it considers Freemasonry apostate and in need of restoration. Johnson

also implies that the endowments Smith developed were the ancient,

pristine, restored Freemasonry. Smith was taking a legendary tradition

292

and making it literal, bringing the allegorical Masonic priesthood into

reality.

Edward Tullidge further explained:

[Smith] understood that the chain of Masonry is the endless chain of brotherhood and priesthood, linking all the worlds,—the heavens and the earths,—but he believed that this earth had lost much of its purpose, its light, its keys, and its spirit,—its chief loss being the key of revelation. For instance, his conception might be expressed in the statement that the Masonic Church on earth ought to be in constant communion with the Masonic Church in the

heavens, thus constituting a universal brotherhood indeed. 9

This description clarifies Smith’s views of a Masonic apostasy. The Craft

had lost the keys of revelation; its communion with heaven had been

broken. With this idea, part of the reasoning behind the Mormons joining

the Masonic institution becomes evident. In order to revive the

connection with the “Masonic Church” in the heavens and restore the

“universal brotherhood,” Mormons needed to become part of Masonry

on earth.

The legendary view of ancient Freemasonry holds that it once had the

power to impart the Lost Word: the name of Deity, representing a true

knowledge of God’s character and communion with the Divine. Nauvoo

Freemasons recognized this as one of Smith’s main objectives.

According to Jesse C. Little,

The angel of the Lord brought to Mr. Joseph Smith the lost key-words of several degrees, which caused him, when he appeared among the brotherhood of Illinois, to “work right ahead” of the highest, and to show them their ignorance of the greatest truth and benefits of

masonry.10

Likewise, Charles Charvatt is reported to have said that “there were

some signs and tokens with their meanings and significance which we

[Freemasons] did not have. Joseph restored them and explained them to

us.”11

The belief that Masonry was of ancient vintage continued in the

Church for some time. On January 1, 1877, in a talk given at the nearly

completed St. George Temple, Brigham Young created sacred history by

blending Masonic myth with biblical tradition, suggesting that Masonry

is a remnant of the priesthood:

It is true that Solomon built a Temple for the purpose of giving endowments, but from what we can learn of the history of that time they gave very few if any endowments, and one of the high priests was murdered by wicked and corrupt men, who had already begun to apostatize, because he would not reveal those things appertaining to the Priesthood that were forbidden him to reveal until he came to the proper place. I will not say but what Enoch had Temples and

officiated therein, but we have no account of it.12

This view continued into the early twentieth century. Speaking at a

conference on January 8, 1902, Apostle Matthias F. Cowley “spoke of

293

Freemasonry as being a counterfeit of the true masonry of the Latter-day

Saints.”13 In 1919, Apostle Melvin J. Ballard asserted that “modern

Masonry is a fragmentary presentation of the ancient order established

by King Solomon. From whom it is said to have been handed down

through the centuries.” Ballard claimed he was “not sorry there was such

a similarity, because of the fact that the ordinances and rites revealed to

Joseph Smith constituted a reintroduction upon the earth of the divine

plan inaugurated in the Temple of Solomon in ancient days.”14

Smith gave tangible, material shape to legendary concepts that were

encountered in the Craft—the restoration of Christianity built on Biblical

history as understood by the Masons. Masonry contributed the model

that something vital had been lost, and he stepped in to restore the

missing knowledge.

The Reorganization of the Grand Lodge of Illinois

The establishment of Freemasonry in Nauvoo relied first on the re-

establishment of a grand lodge in the state. While a Grand Lodge of

Illinois had operated from 1822 to 1827, it ceased to function after the

Morgan affair. When the Saints arrived in Nauvoo in 1839, those

Mormons who were already Freemasons had no serious opportunity to

form a lodge. Only a handful of lodges existed in the state, and most

were in the west-central part of Illinois, all operating under dispensations

or charters from the grand lodges of other states. Of those states with

organized grand lodges, only Kentucky and Missouri were nearby, the

latter having begun to warrant Illinois-situated lodges only one year

earlier. With the disastrous experience of the Mormons in Missouri,

however, a petition to that grand lodge would have been fruitless. Grand

Master Stephen W. B. Carnegy of nearby Missouri had gladly given

dispensations to Illinois-based lodges, but his close associate and newly

elected successor, Grand Master Priestly H. McBride, was no friend to

the Mormons. Destined to become the longest-serving Grand Master in

Missouri history, McBride was appointed a circuit court judge by

Governor Lilburn W. Boggs in 1836.15

The reorganization of the Grand Lodge of Illinois owed a great debt to

James Adams, Master Mason raised on June 1, 1813, in Washington

Lodge No. 220 at Blooming Grove, New York.16 Later that year, Adams

moved his family to Lysander, in Onondaga County, New York, where he

served as a justice of the peace without the benefit of a law license.17

294

Adams’s career in New York came to a halt after he was indicted in 1818

for forgery of a deed record.18 Making plans to meet up with his family

at some future time, Adams fled the state before trial. By 1820, he

appeared in Springfield, Illinois, where he became one of the first

landowners and the town’s first lawyer. His reunited family thrived in

Springfield, and Adams became a prosperous member of Springfield

society, serving as a judge and running for a variety of public offices,

including governor of Illinois.

In Springfield, Adams soon resumed his interest in Freemasonry. In

December 1824, he attended the annual communication of the first

Grand Lodge of Illinois as a visitor hailing from Skaneateles Lodge of

New York. This gave Adams the distinction of being the only Mason

attending meetings of the original Illinois Grand Lodge who would also

be associated with the succeeding Grand Lodge. In 1839, he became the

first Worshipful Master of Springfield Lodge No. 26 under the authority

of the Grand Lodge of Missouri.19

Despite rumors that he had earlier secretly been a Mormon, it is

generally believed that Adams converted to Mormonism in 1839 or

Young mentions the baptism of Adams as news. Since Young had been

absent on a mission to Great Britain since September 14, 1839, Adams’s

baptism must have occurred after that date.20 In October 1839, Heber C.

Kimball lodged with Adams and opined that Adams would “come into

the Church soon.”21 In addition, between November 4 and November 8,

1839, Joseph Smith records that he became the guest of Adams, who

“sought me out, and took me home with him, and treated me like a

Father.”22 While not conclusive, these events seem to date Adams’s

baptism between October and November of 1839.

The timing of this baptism coincides with Adams’s Masonic activities.

He and his Masonic brethren signed a petition to the Grand Lodge of

Missouri seeking a dispensation to form a lodge at Springfield on

January 27, 1839.23 Shortly after Smith’s arrival at Adams’s home on

December 27, 1839, Adams met with representatives of the various

Masonic lodges in Illinois at Jacksonville to consider the formation of a

grand lodge. The delegates chose April 6, 1840—the tenth anniversary of

the founding of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—as the

date upon which the grand lodge would be established.24 The fact that

the proposed reestablishment of Illinois Masonry was to take place on

295

the same date as the Mormons’ restoration of “true Christianity” suggests

a connection of the two events in Adams’s mind.

On the day appointed, officers were elected, with Past Grand Master of

the Grand Lodge of Kentucky Abraham Jonas chosen in his absence as

Grand Master.25 Adams was elected Deputy Grand Master.26 Another

meeting was held on April 28, 1840, with Jonas still not in attendance.

Not to be discouraged, the assembled delegates installed Jonas as Grand

Master by proxy.27

On October 20, 1840, Grand Master Jonas finally attended, presiding

over the annual convocation of the Grand Lodge of Illinois. Both Jonas

and Deputy Grand Master Adams were reelected for the coming year.28

At some time prior to 1842, Adams loaned the Grand Lodge $109,

facilitating its success.29 There is no record of Adams having attended

Grand Lodge again.30

A Masonic Lodge in Nauvoo

With the Grand Lodge of Illinois in place, the time was ripe for

Freemasons in Nauvoo to organize. As the city took shape, an abundance

of resources existed from which to draw in this endeavor. Heber C.

Kimball owned a copy of William Morgan’s exposure, Illustrations of

Masonry 31 ; Newel K. Whitney owned Webb’s 32 Monitor ; Oliver B.

Huntington had access to Bernard’s Light on Masonry; Lucinda Morgan

Harris also owned Bernard’s 33 ; and Brigham Young Light on Masonry

owned Bradley’s Some of the Beauties of Free-masonry 34 . The large

group of experienced Freemasons who became residents of the city made

it possible to petition for a Nauvoo Lodge.

As a first step in this process, John C. Bennett and “others of the City

of Nauvoo” wrote to nearby Bodley Lodge No. 1, located in Quincy,

Illinois, asking them for a recommendation to the Grand Lodge.35 This

communication was discussed at Bodley Lodge’s regular monthly

meeting on June 23, 1841. The brothers of Bodley Lodge decided that

“as those persons were unknown to this Lodge as masons it was thought

prudent not to do so.”36 A careful examination of the minute books of

Bodley Lodge indicates that none of the Masons living in Nauvoo had

ever visited there. Therefore, the brethren of Bodley Lodge were quite

correct in stating that the petitioners were unknown to be Masons. Short

of the Nauvoo Masons visiting Bodley Lodge and being duly examined

296

before admission, the brethren at Quincy were unable to legitimately

grant the requested recommendation.37 In all probability, the brethren of

Bodley Lodge expected the Nauvoo Masons to begin to visit Quincy and

take the opportunity to form associations and demonstrate their good

standing. Instead, the Mormons bypassed Bodley Lodge and turned to

another for their recommendation. Columbus, Illinois, located a short

distance east of Quincy, was home to Columbus Lodge No. 6, of which

the founding master was Grand Master Abraham Jonas. Before the 1841

Grand Lodge communication ended on October 5, one of Jonas’s last

actions as master of Columbus Lodge was to issue the requested

endorsement. Then, based upon his own recommendation, Jonas acted as

Grand Master to issue a dispensation to Nauvoo Lodge while Grand

Lodge was out of session.38

In the October 15, 1841, dispensation, Jonas made it appear that the

Nauvoo Masons had been recommended “by the Master[,] Warden[,] and

Brethren of Columbus Lodge, No. 6.” However, the minutes of

Columbus Lodge contain no discussion of such an approval. Masonic

historian Robin L. Carr concludes that “Jonas must have issued the

recommendation from himself to himself.”39 Having the

recommendation from Columbus Lodge in hand, Jonas did not provide

the dispensation until ten days after the annual meeting of the Grand

Lodge of Illinois had concluded and the Grand Lodge was in recess.

Brady Winslow has called this a “strategic maneuver” brought on,

perhaps, by fear “that a proposal to grant a dispensation to Mormon

Masons would have been rejected by the attendees at the meetings of the

grand lodge.”40

A number of writers have speculated on the motives of Grand Master

Abraham Jonas in issuing the above dispensation. In most cases, authors

have pointed to Jonas’s political ambitions as a reason to court Mormon

favor.41 This explanation is weak, however, as Jonas was running for the

state legislature from Adams County, not Hancock County (which

elected William Smith, the Prophet’s brother).42 Further investigation

reveals a more likely explanation: Jonas sought a prominent national role

in the Masonic institution. He already had favorable connections with

Mormonism and had a vision of how this untapped resource could

strengthen Freemasonry both in Illinois and nationally.

Jonas’s association with Latter-day Saints began in January 1836,

when certain elders in Kirtland sought an education in biblical Hebrew.

297

Joshua Seixas, son of the first American-born rabbi, was hired as

instructor. The Jewish population in the United States at the time was

small, and the Seixas family was prominent in Masonic as well as

religious circles.43 Abraham Jonas and his brother Joseph, who helped

form the first Jewish congregation west of the Allegheny Mountains, had

married Sexias’s sisters, Lucy and Rachel, in 1823.

While living in Cincinnati, Ohio, Abraham Jonas encountered anti-

Semitism. However, among the group of men “whose bond was

Freemasonry,” he was welcomed as a friend and quickly showed an

intense involvement in the Fraternity.44 Jonas joined Miami Lodge No.

46 in Cincinnati, where he was initiated on August 12, passed on

September 2, and raised on October 7, 1823.45 A couple years later,

tragedy struck when Jonas’s wife, Lucy, and their newborn son died

unexpectedly. Jonas moved forty miles south to Williamstown,

Kentucky, where he maintained his ties with Masonry, opened a store,

and began a new family. There, he united with a group of fellow

Freemasons in opening Grant Lodge No. 85, where he served as the first

master in 1827. For years Jonas led Freemasonry in Kentucky, serving in

various positions in the Grand Lodge of Kentucky from 1830 to 1834.46

He then moved to Columbus, Illinois, in 1836—the year Joshua Seixas

taught the Mormon schools. When Joseph Smith and his followers came

to Illinois in 1839, Jonas may already have known a great deal about

them through their association with his brother-in-law.

Jonas was instrumental in reviving Freemasonry following the Morgan

affair. In 1841, he was in his eighth term as Grand Master in a second

state Grand Lodge and was invested in increasing the membership of the

Illinois lodges and expanding their work. The Latter-day Saints provided

a likely means for accomplishing this task. With their dispensation firmly

in hand from a sympathetic Grand Master, the Nauvoo Masons set about

forming their new lodge.

On December 29, 1841, eighteen men met at Hyrum Smith’s recently

built brick office along the bank of the Mississippi River. Located across

from Hyrum’s residence on Water Street, it was built as an office

wherein he could perform patriarchal blessings as Patriarch of the

Church.47 It subsequently served as a short-term Masonic hall, a high

council room, and chambers for the Nauvoo City Council.

The dispensation from Grand Master Jonas was accepted, 48 and

although the lodge “was not opened in due form,” a slate of officers was

298

nonetheless assembled. George Miller took his place as Worshipful

Master, and Lucius Scovil as Junior Warden. Hyrum Smith was elected

Senior Warden 49 pro tem . Additional officers were John C. Bennett,

Secretary; Newel K. Whitney, Treasurer; Charles Allen, Senior Deacon;

Heber C. Kimball, Junior Deacon; Hiram Clark and William Felshaw,

Stewards; and Samuel Rolfe, Tyler. Eight other men also participated.

The following day, the brethren adopted bylaws and scheduled regular

meetings for the first and third Thursdays of each month. Before ending

their meeting, the Lodge voted to request Grand Master Jonas to attend

the official installation of Nauvoo Lodge on March 15, 1842.50

During the next few meetings, administrative details were tended to,

including determining where each of the new lodge members hailed

from. Prior to installation, the members of Nauvoo Lodge included the

men listed in the accompanying table. By the first regular meeting,

Nauvoo Lodge already had more members than any of the other five

lodges under the jurisdiction of the Grand Lodge of Illinois.51

(Left) The Old Masonic Hall at Springfield, IL. The building was made of brick. The Masonic

Hall occupied the upper story, and the only entrance was through the storeroom on the first floor.

(Right) Joseph Smith’s Red Brick Store. Meetings of the Nauvoo Lodge were held on the upper

story.

About the time the petition for a Lodge had been made, Joseph Smith’s

“Red Brick Store” was under construction with a structure and function

very similar to that of the nearby Springfield Masonic Hall where James

Adams had been Master. It opened on January 5, 1842, and served as the

first regular meeting place for the newly constituted Lodge.

299
