In their great enthusiasm to establish the Nauvoo Masonic Lodge and

restore apostate Freemasonry, the Mormons skated close to the

established “landmarks” of the Craft, a code of ethics held to be ancient

and sacrosanct. Violation of these landmarks made a lodge “irregular”

and subject to sanction by the Grand Lodge. Grand Master Abraham

Jonas gave the Latter-day Saints great leeway, even bypassing some of

the accepted standards himself. However, to his dismay, Joseph Smith

and the Mormons soon began to break through ice that caused even

Jonas to shiver.

While Smith never held an office in Nauvoo Lodge, his directing hand

was evident from the very start when he officiated as Grand Chaplain at

its installation without having first been initiated as a Mason. The

Masonic Trestleboard, a guidebook coauthored by Stephen W. B.

Carnegy and published the following year to regulate Masonic ritual

throughout the United States, indicated that the Grand Chaplain was to

precede the formal ceremony of installation with an “oration, or sermon,

upon the design and principles of the [Masonic] Institution,”52 to recite

prayers of blessing, and to formally dedicate the lodge.53 At the

installation ceremony on March 15, 1842, Grand Master Jonas opened a

Grand Lodge and constituted the new Nauvoo Lodge and installed its

officers, with Joseph giving the Grand Chaplain’s customary

benediction. As the Grand Chaplain is an elected officer of the Grand

Lodge, this apparent temporary appointment of a non-Mason was

unusual.

Another odd feature of the installation was that the Master of the

Lodge, George Miller, was not present; he was instead represented by

Asahel Perry, who was acting as Master “pro tempore.” The Nauvoo

Lodge minutes are silent as to whether Perry was invested with the jewel

300

of the Master’s office and given a vicarious charge in behalf of Miller, as

was the customary practice when installing the Master of a lodge.

Jonas continued to privilege Smith and his first counselor Sidney

Rigdon by authorizing their immediate reception of the three degrees of

Masonry.54 Smith and Rigdon were initiated as Entered Apprentices that

evening, March 15, 1842. The next day, they were passed as Fellowcrafts

in the morning and raised as Master Masons separately in the afternoon

and evening with no Master or acting Master of the Lodge present.55

Miller was absent as before, and so was Perry. The minutes do not show

that anyone was chosen to act as Master pro tempore. Jonas may have

felt that his presence precluded the need for a Worshipful Master, but

since this was a lodge meeting and a Grand Lodge had not been opened

on this day, there should have been an acting Master at hand.56

Smith and Rigdon were forwarded through the three degrees of

Masonry in the space of two days without passing the usual time of

about a month between degrees to develop the necessary proficiency.

Many writers have considered this the first example of making Masons

“at sight” in the state of Illinois.57 However, the Masonic protocol for

making a Mason at sight does not technically accord with the actions

taken by Jonas in the initiation, passing, and raising of Smith and

Rigdon.58 Although in both cases the degrees are awarded by the

authority of the Grand Master and the normal space between degrees is

forgone, there are specific differences between the two. Both Smith and

Rigdon submitted petitions and were balloted for, which is not necessary

when being made a Mason at sight. Additionally, Jonas did not convene

an “occasional lodge,” another requirement when making Masons at

sight.59 Jonas’s actions caused Bodley Lodge to call for an investigation.

During a special meeting held on July 15, 1842, to consider charges

against Nauvoo Lodge, they resolved:

That Bodley Lodge No. 1, of Quincy, request of the Grand Lodge of the State of Illinois, that a

committee be appointed at the next meeting of said Lodge, to make inquiry into the manner

301

the officers of Nauvoo Lodge U.D., were installed by the Grand Master of this State, and by

what authority the Grand Master initiated, passed and raised Messers Smith and Rigdon to the

degree of Entered Apprentice, Fellow Craft and Master Mason, at one and the same time.60

Despite receiving the degrees so quickly, the Nauvoo Lodge minutes

indicate that after their initiation, Smith’s and Rigdon’s “proficiency in

the preceding degree was vouched for after which they were balloted for,

the ballot found clear, and they duly received and passed to the degree of

a Fellow Craft Mason.”61 Horace Cummings, the grandson of one of the

founding members of Nauvoo Lodge, James Cummings, verified this

while recounting his grandfather’s personal stories of the Prophet. He

writes that the elder Cummings was “quite intimate with the Prophet

Joseph” and “being a Master Mason, officiated in conducting the Prophet

thru all the degrees of Masonry,” and that “the Prophet explained many

things about the rites that even Masons do not pretend to understand but

which he made most clear and beautiful.”62 In another account, he

writes that Smith seemed “to under stand some of the features of the

ceremonies better than any Mason and that he made explanations that

rendered the rites more beautiful and full of meaning.”63

After becoming a Master Mason, Smith quickly became involved in

the lodge rituals. On April 13, 1842, less than one month after his formal

initiation, his daily history indicates that he “introduced Mssrs. [Jacob]

Backenstos, [George M.] Stiles, and [Chauncey] Robinson into the

Lodge Room in the morning, and Samuel H. Smith, William Smith, and

Vinson Knight in the evening.”64

Comparison of this information with the Nauvoo Lodge record

demonstrates that Smith was present that same day for conferral of all

three degrees of Ancient York Masonry, the first three men being

initiated Entered Apprentices and the last three being raised as Master

Masons.65 For Smith to say he “introduced” these men into the lodge

room was Masonic parlance indicating he performed the ritually

intensive role of Senior Deacon.66 Playing a significant part in the new

lodge, Smith was present at seventeen meetings of Nauvoo Lodge U.D.

during its first three months of existence and a total of twenty-two

meetings in 1842.

Acting as secretary of Bodley Lodge No. 1 in Quincy, Horace Cooley

read an interesting letter to the nine brethren present at their May 2,

1842, meeting. The Masons at the recently constituted Lodge in Nauvoo

302

had invited Bodley Lodge to join them in celebrating St. John’s Day on

June 24. Their letter, however, also contained distressing irregularities.

The invitation was under the auspices of the LDS First Presidency, a

religious organization not affiliated with Freemasonry. Attached to the

letter were “sundry hieroglyphics,” words that in Masonry signified

material in a Royal Arch cipher. To the Bodley Lodge brethren, it must

have seemed presumptuous for a Blue Lodge Mason to use a such a code

when neither he nor the group of brethren he was addressing had attained

the Royal Arch degree.

The brother secretary was instructed to respond coolly to the Nauvoo

Lodge while “declining to accept of the invitation, on account of the

great distance, and of our present pecuniary exigencies.” Nauvoo Lodge

was primly reprimanded and warned that the prestigious Bodley Lodge

No. 1 “regrets that anything extraneous from pure masonry should be

coupled with this communication, it having been, throughout all ages,

the peculiar characteristic of Masonry, that she has sent forth her pure

flame of living light, before the world, uncontaminated by Political

dogmas, and untinged by Religious distinctions.”67 Bodley Lodge

brothers bristled that this exchange from one lodge to another was

tainted by Mormon as well as Royal Arch embellishments.

In addition to this communication to Bodley Lodge, Nauvoo Lodge

committed several other indiscretions during its first few months of

operation. When Abraham Jonas attended the installation of Nauvoo

Lodge, he noticed several glaring irregularities in the record book, kept

in the legible hand of John C. Bennett. On December 30, 1841, and

February 3 and 17, 1842—all dates that occurred before the official

installation—Nauvoo Lodge had accepted petitions for membership into

the Masonic order. The petition was, and remains, a specific process that

Freemasons undertake to become members. Petitioners submit a written

application to the Lodge along with recommendations of current

members of the Lodge in good standing. Next, an investigative

303

committee conducts a background check and issues a report. Finally,

Lodge members vote for each individual by secret ballot.68 Not only had

Nauvoo Lodge accepted a total of fifty-seven petitions, they had also

accepted members who were already Masons and collected dues. They

also balloted for forty-one men, likely en masse rather than on individual

ballots, on February 3 and one additional applicant on February 17,

was officially constituted and bylaws accepted, but United States

Freemasonry required balloting to be unanimous—one vote against a

petitioner would disqualify him for membership.69 By balloting en

masse, the Nauvoo Lodge circumvented this requirement but was later

censured by the Grand Lodge of Illinois for balloting on more than one

applicant at a time. Additionally, the Lodge had received an individual of

doubtful character on a promise of reformation and restitution, “with the

view of holding his future conduct in check and making him a worthier

and better man.”70

Mervin Hogan has conjectured that at the time of dispensation, Jonas

encouraged prospective officers of the lodge “to set to work directly and

receive petitions for the degrees of Masonry from all the men in the

vicinity who had an interest in becoming Masons.”71 Then, realizing the

founding minute book could become a source of trouble for the new

lodge, Jonas “directed Nauvoo Lodge to immediately secure a new

minute book and rewrite the Minutes to show that no petition was

received by the Lodge prior to the March 17 meeting.”72

John C. Bennett’s minutes have been designated by Hogan as the

“Founding Minutes” and by other historians as “Minute Book 1.” The

forty-four pages consist of a copy of the dispensation given by Jonas, the

Nauvoo Lodge bylaws, and minutes of meetings held from December 29,

1841, to May 6, 1842, all written in Bennett’s hand.73 One double-sided

page of signatures to the bylaws is also included. The signers were

Masons who were joining the new lodge as well as those who were made

Masons there.

A second minute book was begun sometime before May 6, 1842,

possibly at the suggestion of Jonas. These minutes, called the “Official

304

Minutes” or “Minute Book 2,” were written mostly by William Clayton,

one of Joseph Smith’s clerks.74 They contain a copy of the dispensation,

bylaws, and Bennett’s minutes to May 6, 1842. The minutes are then

continued in more than five hundred additional pages covering the dates

of December 29, 1841, to September 15, 1845. This record includes

sixteen pages of signatures of members of the Lodge.

After Bennett was expelled from the Lodge for egregious behavior,

Minute Book 1 was retained by Nauvoo Lodge. Its pages were removed

from their binding, along with the double-sided page of signatures. The

signature page, which appears to come from the same book as the

minutes, is currently placed after the entry for April 16, 1842. However,

the tear does not match with its neighboring pages, indicating that the

signatures were originally in a different place in the book. This signature

page seems to have been replicated from an earlier one. One hundred

twenty-three of the signatures are original holographs, but the remaining

thirty-two signatures were written in the hand of one scribe, ending with

Parley P. Pratt’s name placed vertically between the two columns with

the notation “and about 250 others not written down on this list.”75 It is

assumed that the two hundred and fifty remaining signatures appeared on

the original register. The pages of Minute Book 1 were folded in half and

placed in the cornerstone of the Nauvoo Masonic Hall during the

cornerstone ceremony of June 24, 1843. The contents of the cornerstone

were unpublished and became lost to common knowledge. In 1954,

Wilford Wood obtained the title to the old Masonic hall and the

cornerstone was excavated. The minutes were found within, along with

an extract from Joseph Smith’s history, proceedings of the 1842

communication of the Grand Lodge of Illinois, and facsimiles from the

Book of Abraham and the Kinderhook Plates. The pages from Minute

Book 1 are now located in the LDS Church Archives with a copy held by

the Grand Lodge of Illinois.

305

Front and back of loose signature page in Nauvoo Lodge Minute Book 1. Courtesy of the Church

History Library, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Not two months after the installation of the Lodge, persistent rumors

and suspicion toward Bennett necessitated immediate action. Allegations

of his misbehaviors before arriving in Nauvoo, and his indiscretions

while in the city, were numerous. The Lodge met before dawn on

Saturday, May 7, 1842, by special notice from the Worshipful Master,

George Miller. Every officer was present, and Willard Richards served as

secretary pro tempore. It was the first time since December 29, 1841, that

Bennett did not keep the minutes, having reliably attended each and

every one of the sixty-two meetings that heretofore had been held. A

communication dated May 4 from Grand Master Jonas was read with a

report that complaints had been made that Bennett had been expelled

from a former lodge. 76 Bennett, known in Nauvoo as a bachelor, was

also alleged to have deserted a wife in Ohio. These accusations set off a

furor in Nauvoo that resulted in Bennett’s appearance before the High

Council and being disfellowshipped from the Church.77 Formal charges

306

were filed in Nauvoo Lodge by Thomas Grover on May 19, which the

brothers set about to investigate. 78 Because Bennett presented glowing

letters of recommendation from his previous lodge, Nauvoo Lodge

waited for a response from Pickaway Lodge, from which Bennett was

said to have been expelled. Though Bennett was a rogue in many ways,

he had indeed been honorably demitted from Pickaway Lodge.79 Before

word could be received, however, the uproar proved too much. Bennett

was excommunicated from the Church on June 18 and publicly

denounced by Joseph Smith for his miscreant behavior. Soon after, on

July 7, 1842, Nauvoo Lodge resolved to strike Bennett’s name from its

rolls, the purported expulsion from Pickaway serving as justification.80

Doubtless the men of Nauvoo Lodge felt that they had given Bennett

every chance to prove his innocence. Concerning such difficult matters

among Freemasons, Masonic scholar William Preston wrote in his

textbook Illustrations of Masonry:

But if some do transgress, no wise man will thence argue against the institution, or condemn

the whole fraternity for the errors of a few individuals. . . . Those who violate the laws, or

infringe on good order, are kindly admonished by secret monitors; and when these have not

the intended effect, public reprehension becomes necessary; at last, when every mild

endeavour to effect a reformation is of no avail, they are expelled the Lodge, as unfit members

of the society.81

It seemed that such a procedure was followed, but Jonas was not

satisfied. He instructed the Lodge that whether or not Bennett had

previously been expelled it was their “duty to expel him for his conduct

here [in Illinois].”82 On August 8, another resolution was passed to

expel Bennett from the Lodge for the charges of seduction, adultery,

lying, perjury, embezzlement, and illicit intercourse with a Master

Mason’s wife.83

Throughout this process, Bennett was inflamed with fury over what he

saw as unfair treatment by the Church, the city government, and the

Lodge. Determined to settle the score, he penned a series of letters to the

Sangamo Journal, several of which included accusations against the

Masonic fraternity at Nauvoo. These attacks were specifically intended

to “expose [Joseph Smith’s] actings and doings in Nauvoo Lodge, U.

D.,” since Bennett claimed that the actions taken in Nauvoo Lodge were

307

done “under the Supervision of Joe and his servile priest, George Miller

—the little creature that does Joe’s dirty work.”84 Bennett reported that

in Nauvoo Lodge:

Smith and five others were initiated, passed, and raised through the

three Masonic degrees prior to its official installation by Abraham

Jonas on March 15, 1842. After the Lodge was installed, Smith and

four of those five were again advanced through the various

degrees.85

The Lodge’s original minute book had been “sealed up, and a new

one commenced,—the second was sealed up, and a third

commenced,—and then a new record book procured” into which

only the parts that they were willing to report to the Grand Lodge

were copied. 86

The suspension of a Mr. Stoddard “for blackballing Mr. Sessions”

never appeared upon record.87

A complaint from Henry G. Sherwood and Samuel H. Smith against

Robert D. Foster never appeared upon record.88

The Old Record was ante-dated and interlined to conceal

irregularities. 89

Sixty-three men were balloted for in one ballot.90

Three candidates were entered, three passed, and four raised, in one

day, and the records made to appear as though only three were

raised by antedating one.91

A Mr. Hollister of Hannibal presented a petition and was entered,

passed, and raised at Nauvoo, after visiting there only six or seven

days. 92

Joseph Smith was making his own degrees. 93

Nauvoo Lodge did not deliver their minutes as required in the

bylaws of the Grand Lodge. 94

Bennett’s claims in the Sangamo Journal have been thoroughly

examined by researcher Brady Winslow, building on the work done by

Andrew Smith in his biography of Bennett 95 . The available minute

308

books demonstrate many of Bennett’s accusations concerning

Freemasonry were either completely justified or true but mildly

exaggerated. Two exceptions are notable: his accusation that Joseph

Smith and others were made Masons before the installation of the Lodge

and his description of four separate copies of the Nauvoo Lodge minutes.

Because many of Bennett’s other allegations in the Sangamo Journal

(and his later book-length treatment of Mormonism, History of the

Saints, or, An Expose of Joe Smith and Mormonism) were dramatic and

overblown, those pertaining to Freemasonry have tended to be dismissed

as well. But there is some evidence to show that they may indeed be

accurate. Bennett’s letter suggests that three copies of the minutes had

been made in the original book, each containing his handwriting. A

“new” book was procured in which William Clayton and others wrote

the official, altered version. Bennett boldly insisted that “the original

book be produced” to support his claims. The new book, he explained,

had only his signature in it, but if a record could be produced that “has

any of my hand writing in it,” he could “show all the facts, unless the

leaves have been torn out.”96 The leaves were in fact torn or cut out of

the book.97

As most nineteenth-century Masons considered Freemasonry an

ancient institution, they held their landmarks sacred and worthy of

preservation.98 Their leaders attempted to keep these landmarks

inviolate and regarded the slightest change with suspicion. Writer Cecil

McGavin captured the dynamics of Latter-day Saint Masonry in Illinois:

The Mormons were careless in some respects, failing to realize the sanctity of the “ancient

landmarks” and feeling free to make small innovations without consulting the Grand Lodge.

Such a step, though not intended to trample underfoot the honored customs of the past, was

perfectly natural for them. Their religion was a revolutionary one. They never attempted to

follow the religious pattern of the world, being free to introduce many teachings and

institutions that were not practiced in any other church. This spirit of freedom and newness of

growth with no attempt to follow the theological path of the past, may have influenced them to

deviate from the ancient landmarks of Masonry.99

McGavin’s remarks throw a charitable cloak over his nineteenth-

century religious forebears. It could equally be said of Latter-day Saints

309

that they were insensitive to the feelings of their “Gentile” neighbors,

emboldened by their belief that their religion was led by a prophetic

voice. In doing so, they made radical departures in both ritual and

practice of the Craft that were important to their Masonic brethren.

A Restored Lodge in the Ancient Order

Masonry has long been recognized as part of the secular social

transformation in America. Joseph Smith, however, employed its

tradition for the purpose of religious transformation. The dissident John

Bennett on the one hand and the austere members of Bodley Lodge on

the other saw Smith as irresponsibly creating his own ritual, while he and

his followers rejoiced in the restoration of a priesthood that had gone

astray. As seen from a Masonic legendary standpoint, Smith was

bringing back the perfect vision of an ancient order of things for the first

time in modern days. To his followers, the heavenly order was being

reflected on earth through the institutions he was restoring. Even Bennett

recognized Smith’s intent to bring together celestial and terrestrial power

into a utopian society when he accused the Mormon Prophet of founding

an “Order Lodge.”100

Notes

310

311

Mar Whitney, “Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo. The Next Important Event,” 26.

312

was elected “Junior Warden pro tem,” but this is likely an error, since he served as Senior Warden pro tempore, and Scovil served as Junior Warden thereafter.

313

314

[John Snider], Brigham Young, Peter Haws, Willard Richards, and Adara [Amasa] Lyman. Bennett, “General Bennett’s Third Letter,” 2.

315

bylaws for the members to sign. But in this version, the record continues with a list of people who petitioned the lodge for membership that day. The list of members signing the bylaws that is included later contains the same orphan line at the top, only using a different ink. This indicates that the signature page may have been torn from another copy of the minutes.

316
