KEEPING A SECRET: THE ORGANIZATION

OF THE FEMALE RELIEF SOCIETY

Let them therefore revive the lodges for women which undoubtedly

existed in the most ancient times with their appropriate ritual and

ceremonial, which women themselves must re-discover or devise.

Such appropriate ritual and ceremonial, if these are to be parallel

and complementary to Freemasonry, must be based upon the highest

principles, the noblest moral teachings and be applicable to

woman’s true development as those of Freemasonry are to man’s.

Let them prove their organization, as Freemasonry has been proved,

to be a beneficent power in the life of the world.

—Bro. Joseph H. Fussel, in The Builder, August 1921

Beyond fostering a Masonic renaissance in Nauvoo, Joseph Smith 1 Sarah M. Kimball, also designed Mormon counterparts of Masonic institutions. At the same time that Freemasonry was coalescing in Nauvoo, plans were being made for a Ladies’ Society.

Margaret Cook, and some neighbors first devised a plan to form a

Ladies’ Society in 1842. They enlisted the talented writer Eliza R. Snow

to write a constitution and bylaws for a society of women desiring to

combine means and labor to assist in the building of the temple and other

charitable works. After completing the document, Snow reportedly read

it to Smith, who praised her efforts but had a different order in mind for

the women of the Church. He directed Snow to invite the sisters to “meet

me and a few of the brethren in the Masonic Hall over my store next

Thursday afternoon, and I will organize the sisters under the priesthood

after the pattern of the priesthood.”2 He thus adopted the impulse of the

sisters to assist with the building of the temple and gave them

“something better,”3 expanding it to include the concerns of

Freemasonry.

Masonic Origins and Forms in the New Society

On Thursday, March 17, 1842, twenty women and three men convened

in the same makeshift “Masonic Hall” where Joseph had been raised a

Master Mason the previous day.4 Evidence of the proceedings of that

317

Masonic meeting lay in plain sight—an opened Bible with a scrap of

paper upon which was penned a Masonic prayer.5 No explanation has

been given as to why the Bible lay open at the start of the sisters’

meeting; however, such a thing would be expected in a Masonic event.

Part of the “furniture” of a Masonic Lodge,6 a copy of the Bible sits in

an opened position upon the altar at each meeting and is called the Great

Light of Masonry or the Volume of Sacred Law. No lodge in any regular

Masonic jurisdiction may perform work or labor unless the Bible is open

and the Square and Compasses are resting upon it. Likewise, the Bible is

always closed when the Lodge is closed.

The Masonic prayer on that scrap of paper was deemed relevant to the

aims of the proposed women’s society. It was copied as a frontispiece in

a blank book that Willard Richards presented to the ladies to use for the

purpose of keeping minutes:

O, Lord! help our widows, and fatherless

children! So mote it be. Amen. With

the sword, and the word of truth, defend

thou them. So mote it be. Amen. 7

As noted in Chapter 7, “So mote it be” was a signal Masonic phrase

derived from the Masonic gothic constitutions.8 No other organization at

the time of Joseph Smith is known to have used the words. Similarly,

“the widows and the fatherless” refers to a specific responsibility of

Freemasons.9 The sword and the word of truth were also common in

Masonic usage.

As with many of the other early auxiliaries of the Church, Joseph

Smith experimented with Masonic forms in several aspects of this new

Society. The March 17 women’s meeting was an installation with three

men in charge: Smith appointed John Taylor as chair and Willard

Richards as secretary.10 This organizational form echoed the Masonic

type, followed since Lodge meetings in the 1700s, of being held under a

presidency of three.11 This three-fold leadership was employed

throughout Mormonism’s organizational structure and would be used in

the Relief Society with the ordinations of Emma Smith as President,

Sarah M. Cleveland as First Counselor, and Elizabeth Ann Whitney as

Second Counselor.12

After an opening song, the first order of business was to take a vote “to

know if all are satisfied with each female present: and are willing to

acknowledge them in full fellowship, and admit them to the privileges of

318

the Institution about to be formed.”13 Throughout 1842 and 1843,

Mormon women of the community were recommended for membership

and then investigated to see if they were of good moral character.14

Next, a vote was taken to assure that all were in agreement that the

proposed members of the Society were respectable, virtuous, and

trustworthy. In essence, the Relief Society was petitioning and balloting

for membership.

In order to distinguish the new group from other women’s

organizations of the day, Emma rejected the proposed name “Female

Benevolent Society” and instead chose “Relief” Society, which

connected it further with Freemasonry. The three principal tenets of

Masonry are Brotherly Love, Relief, and Truth. Here she used “Relief”

in the title to show the emphasis of the Society.

In the early meetings of the Relief Society, Joseph Smith taught the

sisters how to build up their organization in an acceptable manner and

observe its rules. Each candidate should be closely examined, and they

should not go too fast in adding members. The Society should “grow up

by degrees,”15 he said, echoing the language used to instruct a

Fellowcraft that Masonry is a progressive system of morality taught by

degrees.16 Likewise, Smith used Masonic language when he directed

that the should “move according to the ancient Priesthood” and

explained that he was going to “make of this Society a kingdom of

priests, as in Enoch’s day.”17

By the eleventh meeting of the Relief Society, three months after its

founding, Joseph Smith was still instructing the women that no person

should be admitted to their ranks without “presenting regular petitions

signed by two or three members in good standing.”18 But since the

Nauvoo Masonic Lodge was initiating, passing, and raising Masons at a

prodigious rate, he was no longer concerned about how fast the Society

increased, as long as they were virtuous and not using the Society as a

shelter for their iniquity.19 In the Relief Society as well as in the Nauvoo

Lodge, balloting procedure was not always strictly observed, but the

Prophet often came before the Society to intervene.20

Precedents for Women in Freemasonry

Contrary to claims otherwise, Joseph Smith’s organization of a

women’s society founded upon principles of priesthood and Freemasonry

319

was not completely original.21 In the 1790s, Hannah Mather Crocker,

daughter of the well-known ministerial Mather family of Massachusetts,

formed “a regular lodge” that claimed to be “founded on the original

principles of true ancient masonry, so far as was consistent for the female

character.” Developed from a nucleus of several women studying ancient

languages, the women’s lodge received encouragement by a few Masons

in good standing but “gave umbrage” to many others. Crocker’s

pamphlets on Freemasonry and women’s intellectual capacity were

published in the 1810s.22 Shortly thereafter, “adoptive rites” of Masonry,

sponsored by regular Masonic bodies, became well established in the

United States.23 By 1826, adoptive orders associated with the Royal

Arch Degree had been inaugurated in Batavia, New York.24 Royal Arch

Masonry also came to embrace an appendant body, the Heroines of

Jericho, which involved women.25 Candidates in both groups

participated in prayer circles, ritually experienced a “heavenly ascent”

into the presence of a Grand Court or Council, and symbolically

achieved exaltation.26 Because of the importance of maintaining familial

links, which Freemasons believed would last beyond death, there was an

impulse to recognize and involve women in legitimate Masonic

activities. This might explain why, in all their objections to the

proceedings of the Nauvoo Masonic Lodge, the other Illinois Masons

never mentioned bringing women into the Lodge as a point of

contention.

Involving women in Masonry was however frowned upon by the

greater society. Many felt secret societies would lead to the corruption of

women.27 Especially feared was the possibility that Masons might

covertly accept women into their nighttime meetings.28 Spurious

Masonic lodges that indulged libertine sexual practices were rumored to

exist, inducting women into Masonic degrees based on sexual favors. For

example, Cagliostro’s Egyptian rite was androgynous and was said to

include female Masonic consorts known as “doves.”29

The Relief Society and Polygamy

In his exposés, John C. Bennett claimed that the women of Nauvoo

were involved in the kinds of ritual orders mentioned above.30 While

Joseph Smith was secretly practicing plural marriage, and members of

the Relief Society were sealed to Smith, Bennett’s claims were

320

exaggerated, and Emma Smith did all she could to combat this

perception. One of the stated goals of the Relief Society was “correcting

the morals and strengthening the virtues of the female community,”

though Emma and Joseph differed on how this was to be done.31 For

instance, tensions surrounding the investigation and balloting process in

the Relief Society can best be seen in light of disagreement between the

two concerning Joseph’s practice of plural marriage, with each seeming

determined to promulgate their views using Nauvoo’s fledgling women’s

organization. From the beginning, Emma seems to have had a desire to

use the organization to promote opposition to her husband’s teachings

about plural marriage.32 But in the two years between June 1842 and

July 1844, the key officers and founding members of the group were

taught and began to practice “celestial marriage,” many becoming

Joseph’s plural wives. These women were informed as to Joseph’s quite

different aims for the Relief Society, and they kept the secret from

Emma. Meanwhile, reports in local newspapers cited Bennett’s

accusation of the Mormon prophet “introducing a new order or degree of

masonry.” Bennett claimed that in Smith’s “Order Lodge,” Smith revised

a Masonic oath of chastity to read: “I furthermore promise and swear,

that I will never touch a daughter of Adam unless she is given me of the

Lord. 33 ”

One of the many plural wives and members of the Relief Society who

“was given . . . by the Lord” was Agnes Coolbrith Smith, the widow of

his late brother, Don Carlos. The marriage took place several months

before the founding of the Relief Society. Brigham Young wrote about

this event in his journal in Masonic code. Deciphered, it read: “I was

taken in to the lodge J Smith 34 was Agness.” The abbreviation “was”

has been interpreted to mean “wedded and sealed.”35 Though Emma

might have known about Joseph’s predilections, she probably did not

realize just how far things had gone. As she investigated the rumors

surrounding her husband and Agnes Coolbrith, a power struggle

developed between Emma and Joseph.

According to Masonic writer Joshua Bradley, “Whoever would be a

Mason, should know how to practice all the private virtues. . . . [T]he

virtue indispensably requisite in a Mason, is secrecy. This is the guard of

their confidence, and the security of their trust.”36 Likewise, Joseph

understood and taught that “the secret of Masonry is to keep a secret,”37

and he exhorted the sisters of the Relief Society to uphold this principle.

321

In an epistle signed by Joseph as President of the Church, Brigham

Young as President of the Twelve, and four other men, which Emma was

asked to read to the sisters,38 the Prophet ostensibly warned those in the

Relief Society to beware of “unprincipled men” who were teaching

precepts “contrary to the old established morals and virtues” without his

sanction. The names of these “iniquitous characters” were not

mentioned, “not knowing but what there may be some among you who

are not sufficiently skill’d in Masonry as to keep a secret.”39 This phrase

reveals some of Joseph’s chief designs for the women’s Relief Society:

to instruct the sisters in his version of Masonry, to maintain a semi-

autonomous female lodge, and to retain a loyal following supportive of

his teachings. Not mentioning the names of the accused allowed him to

appease Emma’s concerns about church leaders who were teaching a

sanctioned form of plural marriage while plausibly condemning John C.

Bennett’s more profligate “spiritual wifery.”40 “Let this Epistle be had as

a private matter in your Society,” Joseph concluded, “and we shall learn

whether you are good Masons.”41

With this epistle, Joseph Smith employed a method of communicating

that allowed him to denounce adultery and other moral transgressions

while at the same time promulgating the principle of plural marriage to

those who were part of the inner circle. He did this by using signal

phrases such as “the commandments of God in all things,” “every word

that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord,” and “the responsibilities

that we conferred upon you.”42 Later, he would employ such code words

as “true and divine order,” “new and everlasting covenant,” or even

simply “blessings” which those in the know understood to mean plural

marriage.43

Without an awareness of the secret practice of polygamy that underlay

many of Smith’s discourses to the Relief Society sisters and a conception

of the Masonic structure used to protect this secret, it is difficult to arrive

at a correct understanding of his teachings. For example, on April 28,

1842, Smith spoke of delivering “keys” both to the Society and to the

elders. The Relief Society Minute Book reports, “[T]he keys of the

kingdom are about to be given to them, that they may be able to detect

every thing false.”44 A few days later, on May 1, 1842, he said to the

Nauvoo populace that the keys were “certain signs and words by which

false spirits and personages may be detected from true, which cannot be

revealed to the Elders till the Temple is completed. . . . There are signs . .

322

. Elders must know . . . to be endowed with power, to finish their work,

and prevent imposition.”45 In Freemasonry, keys alluded to the secrets

of the Craft, and keys of detection were grips of the hand by which one

could “tell another in the dark as well as in the light.”46 Willard

Richards reported further instruction from Smith expanding on this

Masonic practice: “A [drawing of a key] Key to detect Satan. As there

are many Keys to the Kingdom of God the following one will detect

Satan when he transforms himself nigh unto an Angel of Light. When

Satan appears in the form of a personage unto man &—reaches out his

hand unto him & the man takes hold of his hand & feels no substance he

may know it is satan.”47

“I now turn the key to you in the name of God,” Smith told the sisters,

“and this Society shall rejoice and knowledge and intelligence shall flow

down from this time.”48 According to previous revelation, he had

described keys as being connected with the mysteries of the kingdom,

the knowledge of God, and the ordinances of the priesthood (D&C

84:19–21). The keys to the spiritual blessings of the Church, he wrote,

gave the bearers “the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom

of heaven, to have the heavens opened unto them, to commune with the

general assembly and church of the Firstborn, and to enjoy the

communion and presence of God” (D&C 107:19). Masonic secrets that

were hidden in the heart both concealed and revealed; they were keys of

power that could bring a candidate into the presence of God. Turning the

key to the Relief Society was equivalent to giving the women

independent power to open the heavens and associate with the Divine.

From indications in Joseph’s diary, Emma became aware of the extent

of her husband’s involvement in plural marriage on April 29, 1842.49 It

has been speculated that this may be the reason why no Relief Society

meeting was held the following week and why Emma was absent at the

next.50 But the wrestle for control continued as Joseph continued

cautioning the sisters against intolerance while Emma continued

denouncing plural marriage. “There is another error which opens a door

for the adversary to enter,” Joseph chided. “As females possess refin’d

feelings and sensitivenes[s], they are also subject to an overmuch zeal

which must ever prove dangerous, and cause them to be rigid in a

religious capacity—[they] should be arm’d with mercy notwithstanding

the iniquity among us.” Then, addressing Emma directly, he requested

that the president should hold her tongue.51 In Masonic tradition, keys

323

of silence are associated with the tongue. They are kept “in a box of

coral which opens and shuts only with ivory keys.” The tongue is to be

obedient to reason and to speak well of others in their absence as well as

in their presence.52 Joseph was not just telling Emma to silence herself,

but in the Masonic sense to be circumspect about things that she might

know. “At this time the truth on the guilty should not be told openly—

Strange as this may seem, yet this is policy.” Emma responded by

observing that sin should not be covered, the guilty should reform, and

that no one should be in the Society who had violated the law of

virtue.53

Through public exchanges such as this, it is apparent that Emma

rejected the doctrine of celestial plural marriage. So much wrangling was

occurring over the “immoral character” of some of the sisters who were

being considered for membership that the Relief Society began to

founder. Joseph attempted to buoy their spirits with a speech

prophesying the blessings of the endowment. When they saw this work

rolling on, he promised, “The kingdom increasing and spreading from

sea to sea; we will rejoice that we were not overcome by these foolish

things.”54 Such a prophecy indicates that he may have initially intended

the Relief Society to be the vehicle through which they would receive or

be prepared to receive the temple rites. According to Elder Reynolds

Cahoon, there was no doubt “but this Society is raisd [sic] by the Lord to

prepare us for the great blessings which are for us in the House of the

Lord in the Temple.”55

The Relief Society minutes for September 28, 1842, showed that the

meeting was adjourned “sine die” (for an indefinite period of time).56

The women would not meet again in this capacity until nine months

later. When they resumed in 1843, Emma was no longer attending and

was not present at any of the meetings held that year, although she

remained its “presidentess” in name.

The Relief Society went from a vibrant, growing organization to one

that quickly diminished in membership. At the end of July 1843,

Elizabeth Ann Whitney said that so few attended that she hoped the

meetings would not be discontinued.57 Following the twelfth 1843

meeting, which concluded with a proposal that they meet the next

Thursday, all future meetings were indeed suspended. By that time,

Emma had become the first woman Latter-day Saint to receive her own

endowments and be admitted into the Quorum of the Anointed.58

324

Though she never attended Relief Society that year, Emma became

active in administering the washing, anointing, and sealing ordinances to

her fellow sisters through the rest of 1843 and the beginning of 1844. It

appears Joseph transferred his hopes for an androgynous ritual to the

Quorum of the Anointed. Susa Young Gates, a daughter of Brigham

Young, later wrote: “The privileges and powers outlined by the Prophet

in those first meetings [of the Relief Society] have never been granted to

women in full even yet.”59

In 1844, on two successive Saturdays in March, Emma staged a

dramatic repossession of the Relief Society. Rumors of John C. Bennett’s

“spiritual wife system”60 and accusations of adultery against Hyrum

Smith by a Mr. Bostwick excited the indignation of the majority of the

Saints who were unaware that polygamy was being practiced and

promoted by the prophet.61 In response, W. W. Phelps composed a

twelve-hundred-word statement titled “The Voice of Innocence,” which

was read and approved on March 7 at a general meeting of priesthood

leaders and “about eight thousand” members of the Church. Emma

appropriated this statement and called for the female Relief Society to

“resume its meetings.”62 On the morning and afternoon of March 9, and

again on the morning and afternoon of March 16, Emma read the

document and called for a vote of those “willing to receive the principles

of virtue, keep the commandments of God, and uphold the Presidentess

in putting [down] iniquity.”63 It was ratified by unanimous vote.64

Though Emma was making a strong public stand against polygamy,

she did it in a way that she may have believed was supportive of her

husband. Her exhortation to the sisters was that they follow the teachings

of Joseph as he spoke against vice from the stand. At the final Saturday

session, Emma announced her intention to examine the conduct of the

leaders of the Relief Society and present officers when a place could be

found that was large enough for all the sisters to gather together; for, she

said, “if their [sic] ever was any authourity on the Earth she had it—and

had [it] yet.”65

The Relief Society never met again in Nauvoo. John Taylor later

explained, “The reason why the Relief Society did not continue . . . was

that Emma Smith . . . taught the Sisters that the principles of Celestial

Marriage as taught and practiced was not of God.”66

Mormon Women and Masonic Orders

325

The Mormons’ secrets were becoming widely known in the

community and throughout the world. Four months later, Joseph Smith

and his brother Hyrum were killed at Carthage, Illinois. Small groups of

women continued to meet in private homes where they encouraged and

blessed each other, often exercising spiritual gifts such as speaking in

tongues. An excerpt from Zina Diantha Huntington Jacobs’s journal less

than three months after the final approved Relief Society meeting

provides a glimpse into a possible direction the sisterly impulse for

communion took:

June 1844

5, 6, 7, 8 , 9. Went with Henres [Henry’s] uncles family uppon the hill. From this day I

understand the Kinsmans degree of freemasonry. (3) My husband, being a Master Mason, attended meeting. Hiram Smith spoke exceeding well also re[a]d a revelation. . . .

As previously discussed, the Heroines of Jericho was a Masonic

women’s rite associated with the Royal Arch Degree.68 This order had

three rites or degrees: The Master Mason’s Daughter, the True Kinsman’s

Degree, and The Heroine of Jericho Degree.69 The statement “from this

day I understand the Kinsmans degree” indicates Zina had received this

Masonic degree offered to the close female relatives of Master Masons—

that adoptive rites for women were operating in Nauvoo. Zina’s husband

Henry Jacobs was a Master Mason,70 and she had been sealed to Joseph

Smith, another Master Mason. Her father and brothers had also been

raised Master Masons in the Nauvoo Lodge.71 Years later, in 1878, Zina

spoke in protest of anti-polygamy campaigns at a mass meeting where

she declared her personal connection with Masonry:

I am the daughter of a Master Mason! I am the widow of a Master Mason, who, when leaping from the windows of Carthage jail, pierced with bullets, made the Masonic sign of distress. . . . I wish my voice could be heard by the whole brotherhood of Masons throughout our proud land. That institution I honor. If its principles were practiced and strictly adhered to, would there be a trespass upon virtue? No indeed. Would the honorable wife or daughter be intruded

on with impunity? Nay verily.72

When Zina proudly announced that she was the daughter of a Master

Mason she could have been hinting at her participation in the first degree

of adoptive Masonry: “The Master Mason’s Daughter.” As such, she

would have been entitled to respect and relief from “the whole

brotherhood of Masons throughout [the] land.”

Another possible member of an adoptive rite in Nauvoo was Sarah

Rich, wife of Charles C. Rich. A cryptic handwritten note in the CC Rich

manuscript collection with a date of April 24, 1906, states: “The

326

Masonic Temple in the City of Nauvoo was Dedicated April 6th 1844.73

CC Rich was a member of the Lodge. his wife took Degree allowed to

Women.”74

Unlike his Masonic predecessors, Joseph Smith’s revolutionary

perspective did not discriminate based on gender. If one operates from

the assumption that Smith was encouraging Freemasonry for men as a

“stepping stone to something greater,” then it is not insignificant that

Mormon women were involved in the female equivalent of Masonic

bodies.

As the Saints moved west, connections with Freemasonry were

severed. Typically, the brothers remained loyal to their fraternal ties, but

Mormon Masons felt betrayed by the involvement of Illinois Freemasons

in the deaths of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Likewise, sisters felt

conflicted about their Relief Society connections. They would continue

to meet in relief groups, but the organization was not officially

recognized again until 1866.

Notes

327

would ordain them to preside over the Society— and let them preside just as the Presidency preside over the church.” See “Nauvoo Relief Society Minute Book,” 7–8 (March 17, 1842).

328

329

330
