GREATER THAN SOLOMON: JOSEPH

SMITH’S “GRAND” ASPIRATIONS

The straight path of Masonic rectitude positively requires that every

rough corner of every stone should be beaten off so completely that

the square of virtue will set easy.

—James E. Seaver, letter to Mr. William Seaver

In ancient times, operative masons removed coarse stones from a quarry in the shape of a rectangular solid. These rough “ashlars” were intended for use in the construction of a building. But before any such stone could be placed in a building, it required smoothing and

shaping by tools in the hands of a stonemason.

Every lodge room holds both a rough ashlar and a smooth ashlar. The

rough ashlar is placed in the northeast corner of the lodge to signify the

rough human personality in its natural state. The smooth ashlar is in the

southwest corner and represents the refinement of character to which

Freemasons aspire. Together, these stones symbolize their journey from

natural crudeness to spiritual sophistication and excellence. Initiates are

charged to engage continually in self-improvement, to allow life to

smooth their rough edges, and to become better men and Freemasons.

This allegory was applied by Joseph Smith to himself on May 21, 1843,

when he stated:

I am like a huge rough stone rolling down from a high mountain, and the only polishing I get, is when some corner gets rubbed off by coming in contact with something else . . . all hell knocking off a corner here and a corner there; thus, I will become a smooth and polished shaft in the quiver of the Almighty . . . while these smooth polished stones with which I come in

contact, become marred.1

Heber C. Kimball, by then a Freemason for about fifteen years, repeated

this metaphor at a church conference in Boston a few months later:

Joseph Smith never professed to be a dressed, smooth, polished stone, but to have kicked himself rough out of the mountain; and he has been rolling among the rocks and trees, yet it has not hurt him at all; but he will be as smooth and polished in the end as any other stone, while many who were so very polished and smooth in the beginning get badly defaced and

spoiled while they are rolling about. 2

The Mormon prophet easily fit himself into the legendary Masonic

worldview. Not only did he apply Masonic parables to himself, he

seemed to stride into the mythical history of the Craft. His keen

331

perception of the ancient myths allowed him to penetrate their mysteries,

gather them about him, and cloak himself in the legend.

Freemasons familiar with these stories will notice that Smith was

playing the part of King Solomon, stepping into the monarch’s Masonic

shoes. In the narrative told by George Oliver, Solomon erected the

Temple at Jerusalem assisted by two groups of builders. He began by

calling together skillful architects from the city of Tyre who were

disciples of spurious Masonry. When they arrived, they united with

“Jewish workmen who practiced the pure system,” and Solomon was

said to have “reorganized the system of Masonry,” providing the ritual

and structure that would guide Masons through future generations.3

Masonic author Albert Mackey explained: “Temple Masonry . . . was

formed by a union of the Primitive, or Pure, and the Spurious systems.”4

“King Solomon and the Iron Worker,” steel mezzotint engraving by John Sartain of the 1863

painting by Christian Schussele.

Similarly, Smith associated with what he saw as spurious Freemasonry

as he prepared to restore the Temple of God, hoping to unite the apostate

Illinois Masons with the Mormon workmen who “practiced the pure

system.” He did this by placing himself into the Royal Arch Masonic

archetype of Millennialism, an eschatological restoration of “that which

had been lost.” Additionally, he reorganized Masonry into a new form

332

and provided the endowment as a purified ritual to govern revivified

Freemasonry in preparation for the coming of the Son of God.

Freemasonry was thus not merely incidental in the emergence of

Mormonism; it was centrally important to the Restoration.

From 1842 to 1844, Nauvoo Lodge and several other Mormon

Masonic lodges in the immediate vicinity enabled the two systems of

Mormonism and Freemasonry to converge in a major way. Wilford

Woodruff demonstrated his understanding that the Mormon lodges were

restoring existing Freemasonry in his diary. Often, he would illustrate his

entries with miniature symbolic figures. According to historian Laurel

Thatcher Ulrich, “To mark a day spent performing baptisms for the dead,

he drew a crowned figure. . . . Above an entry reporting his own work in

performing baptisms, he inserted a tiny key.” In like manner, “above a

reference to the Masonic lodge, he sketched a tiny bird emerging from

fire like a phoenix.”5

Irregularities in Illinois

Joseph Smith and other Mormon Masons perceived contemporary

Freemasonry as spurious, but brothers in the Illinois lodges were in turn

quick to point out the irregularities they noticed coming from Nauvoo. In

1842 and 1843, the lodge at Nauvoo and other Mormon lodges were

found to be in violation of Masonic procedure. They were not the only

lodges in violation, but Illinois Freemasons were not as amenable to

granting the Mormons the generosity and flexibility allowed to other

local lodges.

As irregularities in new lodges became evident, Masonic Grand

Officers endeavored to correct the mistakes and formulate policies to

regulate the lodges under their jurisdiction. For example, at the annual

Grand Communication on October 5, 1841, both Springfield Lodge and

Macon Lodge were found to have “in several instances, received the

petition and initiated the candidate on the same evening; and also have

passed and raised candidates at the same sitting of the lodge.”6 These

practices did not allow enough time to thoroughly investigate a brother

or allow him to become fully proficient in one degree before proceeding

to the next. The committee recommended that the subordinate lodges

“not act on any petition unless the same has laid over at least one month,

or from one stated meeting until the next regular stated meeting of the

lodge.”7 Irregularities notwithstanding, Springfield Lodge retained its

standing and Macon Lodge was granted a charter. The same practices

333

were evident as the Mormon lodges grew. However, the procedure for

dealing with these were harsh, perhaps because irregularities were

introduced in innovative ways and on a grander scale in the Mormon

lodges than in any other.

On August 5, 1842, five months after Nauvoo Lodge was constituted

and its officers installed, the Rising Sun Lodge in Iowa was constituted

under the Grand Lodge of Illinois, with its officers installed by James

Adams.8 These officers included Stephen H. Burtis, Worshipful Master;9

D.C. Davis, Senior Warden;10 Christopher Williams, Junior Warden;11

William Vanansdall, Senior Deacon; and David A. Pettigrew, Junior

Deacon. Three days later, Nauvoo Lodge held two meetings, the first at

eight in the morning and the other at four in the afternoon. Startlingly, at

the afternoon meeting, twelve brethren from Rising Sun Lodge, Iowa,

petitioned and were granted a demission from Nauvoo Lodge.12

Included in this list were the five principal officers named above, none of

whom had demitted from the Nauvoo Lodge. Joining a lodge while still

belonging to another in that same jurisdiction was a Masonic 13 faux pas ,

and the Grand Lodge of Illinois would soon officially prohibit dual

memberships.14

A few weeks earlier on July 21, 1842, thirty men demitted from

Nauvoo Lodge in a similar manner to the brethren of Rising Sun

Lodge.15 The reason for the demission is undetermined. It seems

possible that these brothers also planned to “hive off,” though no known

lodge was proposed at that time.16 Many of the men continued to attend

Nauvoo Lodge. Some, like Albern Allen and John Hatfield, were

counted as members, and others, like Eliphas Marsh and Duncan

McArthur, were included in subsequent minutes as “visiting brethren.”17

On January 5, 1843, four of the thirty men made application for

membership in Nauvoo Lodge, the same lodge they had demitted from

five months earlier.18 They were readmitted on January 19.19 It appears

that all the brethren who demitted either reapplied for membership or

were eventually reincluded in the minute book as members of Nauvoo

Lodge.

Between August 8 and 11, 1842, in the heat of the Midwest summer,

the Nauvoo Lodge met as usual to perform Masonic work. During the

week, thirty-four brothers received degrees. At the close of the August

11 meeting, the minute book shows a copy of an injunction to suspend

334

work in Nauvoo Lodge pending further investigation. The injunction,

dated July 30, 1842, was signed by Abraham Jonas in response to

accusations put forth by Bodley Lodge. The message had taken almost

two weeks to arrive in Nauvoo.20

Worshipful Master George Miller was incensed that the work of

Nauvoo Lodge had been suspended. He believed that the Lodge had been

unfairly judged by those who were prejudiced against Mormons. Miller

had been a Freemason since 1819, and after twenty-five years of what he

described as “respectable standing as a member of the fraternity,” he had

never seen a Masonic lodge disqualified on religious grounds.21 The

suspension, however, may have been provoked by issues more complex

than Bodley Lodge’s complaints.

Looking back in the Nauvoo Lodge Minute Book to the date of July 30

reveals a significant occurrence. At seven o’clock that Saturday morning,

the Lodge was visited by Priestly H. McBride, Grand Master of the

Grand Lodge of Missouri and political appointee of Lilburn W. Boggs.

The lodge at Nauvoo was no stranger to visitors, often admitting two to

five visiting brethren from lodges all over the States, Canada, and even

France and Scotland as a matter of course. Under normal conditions, a

visit from the Grand Master of a nearby jurisdiction would have elicited

treatment as a guest of honor. But in McBride’s case, he was left to cool

his heels outside the lodge while the meeting was opened and the

minutes read. A committee was then selected to “examine” McBride and

another brother who accompanied him. A Masonic examination is a test

of knowledge given to someone who is visiting a lodge to make sure

they are worthy to participate. It was rarely done at Nauvoo. To

investigate Missouri’s Grand Master in this way was an intentional

slight. Perhaps it was not coincidental that later that day, Nauvoo

Lodge’s dispensation was suspended.22

Rising Sun Lodge No. 12, Montrose, IA

In accordance with Jonas’s injunction, Nauvoo Freemasons ceased

their work throughout the Fall. Meanwhile, directly across the

Mississippi River at Montrose, Iowa, Rising Sun Lodge became the

focus of Masonic activity for the Mormons. Montrose was an ideal

location to launch the second Mormon Masonic Lodge. As the Church

was being established on the Illinois side of the Mississippi River, many

members settled on the Iowa side as well. Referred to as the “Greater

Nauvoo” by historian Stanley Kimball, the eastern part of Lee County

335

had abandoned military barracks that provided temporary shelter for

destitute Mormons arriving from Missouri. These included the families

of Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Orson Pratt, and

others.23 In October 1839 the Iowa Stake of the Church was formed

with its center in Montrose. The west part of Montrose, where the Saints

lived, was named Zarahemla after a land in the Book of Mormon. At the

stake conference of 1841, there were 326 members in the Zarahemla

Branch, and in August that year the name of the Iowa Stake was changed

to the Zarahemla Stake.24

In January 1842, the Zarahemla Stake was discontinued, and members

were encouraged to move across the river to strengthen Nauvoo.

However, many prominent Latter-day Saints remained in Montrose,

including the Prophet’s uncle, John Smith, who had been president of the

stake. John was one of the men who demitted from Nauvoo Lodge on

August 8, 1842, to form Rising Sun Lodge in Montrose two days earlier.

Joseph Smith crossed the river to participate in the installation of

Rising Sun Lodge on August 6, 1842. Following the installation, Deputy

Grand Master James Adams took Stephen Burtis aside to instruct him in

his responsibilities as Master of the new lodge, while Joseph Smith and a

few of the other brothers stood in the shade of a building to cool

themselves from the hot summer sun. An addition to Smith’s history

depicts the Prophet at the same time foretelling that “the Saints would

continue to suffer much affliction and would be driven to the Rocky

Mountains.” He prophesied to some of the Masonic brothers that they

would “live to go, and assist in making settlements and build cities and

see the Saints become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky

Mountains.”25

Lodge members at Rising Sun were prodigious in establishing

Freemasonry in the Montrose and Zarahemla area. Without delay, they

“built a new hall . . . had completely furnished the same and had

procured suitable jewels and Masonic clothing.”26 At the 1842 Grand

Lodge Communication in October, a scant two months after their

installation, the delegate from Rising Sun Lodge presented a complete

and thorough report of their work and paid their dues.27 The Grand

Lodge Committee on Returns and Work of Lodges was impressed

enough to recommend they receive their charter, a process that usually

took at least a year under dispensation. Rising Sun Lodge became “No.

336

12,” indicating that they were the twelfth lodge to be chartered under the

new Grand Lodge of Illinois.

Nauvoo Lodge Returns to Work, Proposes New Lodges

On the other hand, Nauvoo Lodge, represented at the Grand

Communication by Henry Sherwood and Lucius Scovil, was

reprimanded by the Grand Lodge Committee on Returns and Work of

Lodges. Their return had been submitted, and the work “appear[ed] to

conform to the requirements of the Grand Lodge.” However, Nauvoo

Lodge had not sent up “the original records” of the work of their lodge,

as requested by the Grand Master in his suspension order.28 These

records would have included the minutes and proceedings of the Lodge

as well as the return.29 The wording of this report is interesting, as it

may reflect the Grand Lodge’s knowledge of John C. Bennett’s

accusation that the original minute book had been altered.

Sherwood wrote a passionate account of the Grand Lodge proceedings,

defending Nauvoo Lodge. In the report, he shows himself as a bit of a

hothead, refusing a request to pay the lodge dues before being granted a

seat at the proceedings. The more refined Lucius Scovil urged him to

consent. Sherwood, like George Miller, felt the sting of religious

persecution from the time Bodley Lodge refused to recommend Nauvoo

Lodge’s charter to the present suspension. Nauvoo’s lodge reports, which

had been kept by Sherwood as acting secretary since June, were

examined. He proudly recounted:

Then G[rand] M[aster] Jonas made a flaming speech in behalf of the N[auvoo] Lodge saying they were the fairest books and papers that had been brought from any Lodge to the Grand Lodge, and . . . he verily believed that if they were not Mormons, the Lodge would stand the

highest of any Lodge, that had come to that Grand Lodge.30

Although no great discrepancy had been discovered in Nauvoo

Lodge’s return, the committee had a niggling concern that there might be

“some reason to fear that the intention and ancient landmarks of our

institution have been departed from.”31 The Mormon lodge had initiated

256 candidates, almost all going on to become Master Masons. Such a

large number of new members was unheard of in any other Masonic

lodge in any country or time period, and it was not understood exactly

how it had been accomplished. In fact, Nauvoo Lodge had been holding

daily meetings, often two or three times a day. As allowed by the Grand

Lodge of Illinois, up to three men were receiving degrees at each

meeting.32 This effort required such a large time commitment from the

337

officers of Nauvoo Lodge that Hyrum Smith, acting as Master of the

Lodge on April 8, 1842, had ordered that “officers be entitled to a

reasonable compensation for their services.”33 Paying members of the

Lodge for their work in this way was highly unusual, even dodgy.

Remuneration to the officers of the Lodge likely continued until at least

September 1845. The final pages of the minute book contain an

attendance roster of the officers and acting officers that was almost

certainly used for that purpose.

Allen Stout was one of those who benefitted from this practice. As a

member of the “Old Police” in Nauvoo, he “drew one dollar per day for

services in city scrip” until after the assassinations of Joseph and Hyrum

Smith. Thereafter, Brigham Young asked the Old Police to continue to

guard the city though there was no available means of pay. Young told

them “the Lord would open some way for there [sic] support,” and Stout

kept on guard, though many others quit their service. “Soon after I got a

birth [sic] in the Nauvoo Lodge,” Stout wrote, “where I got $1.50 per

day and only had to act [in the rituals] about 3 hours each day.”34

Non-Mormon Freemasons of the day were leery of too-rapid growth in

their lodges. In 1839, when Abraham Jonas and several compatriots had

petitioned the Grand Lodge of Missouri for a new lodge in Columbus,

Illinois, Grand Master Stephen W. B. Carnegy had cautioned them:

[S]o long as we are but few in number, and consist of the true, the moral, and temperate, we are safe, and may be happy. The best evidence of speedy ruin to any Lodge, is that they

increase very fast that they are very numerous.35

Having been thus cautioned, it is surprising that Jonas accepted and

actually seemed to facilitate such rapid growth at Nauvoo. His

successors were less accommodating. Accordingly, members of the

Grand Lodge of Illinois decided that a special committee should be

appointed to travel to Nauvoo, observe their work and examine their

minutes, and then make a recommendation whether their dispensation

should be continued.36 Additionally, as a safeguard, the Grand Lodge

decided:

1st. Resolved, That no lodge under the jurisdiction of this Grand Lodge shall be allowed to ballot for a candidate for initiation except at a stated meeting, nor in a shorter time than one lunar month from the reception of the petition, except by dispensation from the M. W. G.

Master.37

2nd. Resolved, That a lodge ought not to confer more than one degree on a candidate in a shorter time than from one regular [monthly] meeting to another, except in cases of

emergency.38

338

By his authority as Grand Master, Meredith Helm appointed Brothers

Jonathan Nye, Grand Secretary W. B. Warren, and Hiram Rogers of

Quincy to form the committee of investigation.39 Nye had been Master

of the Grand Lodge of Vermont from 1815 to 1817, where he may have

been acquainted with Joseph Smith Sr., was involved in Royal Arch

Masonry at the national level as Grand King, and served as second

Grand Master of the Grand Encampment of the Knights Templar. He was

also the first Grand Master of the Grand Council, Royal and Select

Masters of New Hampshire.40 After he moved to Illinois, he was a

highly respected organizing lecturer, helping the newly formed lodges

learn ritual work. On November 1, 1842, a month after the assignment

was made, Nye reported to Illinois’s Grand Master Meredith Helm that

the charges against Nauvoo Lodge appeared to be without substance,

while acknowledging that some irregularities were present.41 The

committee issued a resolution that the dispensation of Nauvoo Lodge be

continued until the following annual meeting and suggested that a

brother be appointed to attend Nauvoo Lodge meetings to admonish the

Mormon Masons “in the most friendly manner” not to continue their

breaking of the bylaws. Helm then lifted the injunction and authorized

Nauvoo Lodge to continue their work. This order was signed by Grand

Master Helm on November 2 and was attached to the October 1842

Grand Lodge minutes and to the Nauvoo Lodge minutes on the date of

November 10, 1842. On that day, they returned to work after a three-

month hiatus.42

One week later, on November 17, Jonathan Nye arrived in Nauvoo.

For three months he attended numerous meetings of the Lodge, allowing

him to keep his finger upon the pulse of the daily work of Freemasonry

in the city until he left on February 10, 1843.

At the 1842 Grand Lodge meeting, Lucius Scovil had spoken to Grand

Master Helm about the difficulties that Nauvoo Lodge was having

because of the “unavoidable but protracted absence of its first two

officers.” George Miller, the Master of Nauvoo Lodge, served a mission

to Kentucky in 1842 and thereafter was sent to the Wisconsin pineries to

obtain lumber for the Nauvoo Temple and other building projects, and

John D. Parker, who had been appointed Senior Warden on Nauvoo

Lodge’s dispensation, had never acted in the position, having been on a

mission in Louisiana. Beginning in January 1842, Hyrum Smith

generally acted from day to day as Worshipful Master pro tempore in

Miller’s stead. Whenever Miller was in town, he would either “assist”

339

Hyrum,43 or he would simply attend as a member of the Lodge,44

deferring to Hyrum who outranked him in the Church hierarchy. Notable

exceptions were at three of the twice-monthly regular communications,

which included the trial and expulsion of John C. Bennett45 and the

celebration of St. John’s Day,46 at which occasions George Miller took

his place as Master of the Lodge. Additionally, Nauvoo Lodge was in

need of a permanent secretary, having expelled John C. Bennett. Several

men had acted as Secretary pro tem, most often William Clayton and

Henry G. Sherwood.

In response to Scovil’s concerns, Meredith Helm authorized the Lodge

to “proceed to fill the offices of said Lodge anew by election,”

empowering Jonathan Nye and Stephen Burtis, the master of Rising Sun

Lodge, to install the new officers. Accordingly, in the presence of Joseph

Smith, an election was held on November 10, 1842. The installation took

place the following week by Nye, assisted by Newel K. Whitney. The

new slate of officers, reported in the minute book in a decorative motif,

was as follows:

Hyrum Smith, Worshipful Master

Lucius Scovil, Senior Warden

Noah Rogers, Junior Warden

James Sloan, Treasurer

William Clayton, Secretary47

Joshua Smith, Senior Deacon

Shadrach Roundy, Junior Deacon

Albert P. Rockwood and Joseph K. Allen, Stewards

Asahel Perry, Tyler48

Samuel Rolfe had actually been elected Junior Warden by a majority of

sixty-nine votes, and William Felshaw captured the vote for Treasurer

with fifty-two of the total votes. But at the installation on November 17,

Hyrum Smith announced that these two brothers “declined serving in the

offices they were elected to fill.”49 This seemed surprising, since Rolfe

and Felshaw were founding officers of the Lodge, appointed as Steward

and Tyler respectively. Furthermore, they both had attended the great

majority of near-daily meetings, each serving in many pro tem capacities.

It would, however, soon become clear why the two had demurred.

The evening after the election, Saturday, November 11, Jonathan Nye

presided over sixty-two Nauvoo Lodge brothers, assisted by Hyrum

Smith. Nye gave an eloquent address mentioned in the minutes, followed

by Hyrum stating that “there had been some conversation upon the

340

subject of dividing the Lodge.”50 Three hundred and eight members had

now signed the bylaws, and the Lodge was growing so large that it was

impossible to involve all the members in the work. Hyrum suggested

appointing a committee to consider “the expediency of dividing this

Lodge,” and the following men were nominated: Hyrum Smith himself,

Lucius Scovil, Noah Rogers, Henry G. Sherwood, and Samuel Rolfe.

The committee’s report was given at the regular bi-monthly meeting

on November 23, with Past Grand Master Nye in attendance. Their

opinion voiced the necessity that Nauvoo Lodge be divided into three

bodies as soon as possible “for the better accommodation of the Brethren

and to enable them more correctly and promptly to discharge various

duties incumbent on them as true and faithful Masons, and to enable

them also to become more correctly acquainted with the labour, work,

discipline and Lectures of the several degrees.”51 They resolved to

obtain the consent of the Grand Master of Illinois, Meredith Helm, and

apply for a dispensation for two new lodges, to be named “Nye Lodge,”

a nod to the venerable Jonathan Nye who was sitting in their midst, and

“Hiram Lodge,” a common enough Masonic name for a lodge but also a

possible reference to their own Worshipful Master, Hyrum Smith. Names

for officers were also drawn up with committee members Henry

Sherwood and Samuel Rolfe as the respective Masters. William Felshaw

was proposed as Senior Warden for Hiram Lodge.52 The committee

ended their report with an unusual and heartfelt pledge that if this

division of the Lodge was granted, they would remain unified:

Resolved that if our request should be granted we do most Solemnly and Sincerely pledge ourselves to the M. W. Grand Master and through him to the Grand Lodge as in the presence of the great Ruler of the universe, that we will indulge no jealousies, or unkind feelings toward these respective bodies or any individual thereof in consequence of this seperation, but will exert ourselves in every consistent and rational manner to promote and advance peace & harmony throughout the whole.—and by a prudent discreet and truly masonic conduct towards ^render^ these Lodges useful faithful and honorable Branches of the W. Grand Lodge of this

State.53

The members present at this meeting of November 23 decided to wait

for “some future expedient time” to make their request to the Grand

Master. Little information is available about when the application for

these two lodges was received or when the dispensations were given. In

a speech at the proceedings of the next Grand Lodge meeting on October

2, 1843, Grand Master Meredith Helm commented that “since your last

annual meeting” (in October 1842) he had granted dispensations for the

formation of new lodges at Nauvoo.54 These were Nye Lodge U.D. and

341

Helm Lodge U.D., both of which were represented by J. S. Myers.

Presumably, the dispensations had been granted in early 1843. However,

these two new lodges at Nauvoo were not the lodges envisioned by

Nauvoo Lodge in their November meetings.

Nauvoo Masons Install Warsaw Lodge Officers

The early days of January 1843 found Meredith Helm and Jonathan

Nye up to their elbows in intrigue. In fellowship with Mormon

Freemasons, they began to work outside procedures accepted and

normative throughout the Masonic system. A lodge located in Warsaw,

Illinois, was given a dispensation by Meredith Helm acting as the

installing officer. On January 9, Helm gathered a group consisting largely

of Nauvoo Masons who traveled together to Warsaw to assist in

organizing the lodge. Each man was given a pro tempore Grand Lodge

office, and under these they installed the new officers of the Warsaw

Lodge under dispensation.55 Mormon Masons may have been quite

earnest in their support, but given the political environment, such a large

group of Mormon Masons may have been threatening to the new lodge

members. Some of the men in the Warsaw Lodge, such as Mark Aldrich

and the Chittenden brothers, became staunchly anti-Mormon and

participated in the mob action culminating in the murders of Joseph and

Hyrum Smith in 1844 (see Chapter 17).

The day after the Warsaw Lodge installation on January 10, 1843, Nye

presided as two new candidates for Warsaw Lodge were initiated,

passed, and raised to Master Mason all in the same day. Joseph Smith

and Sidney Rigdon had been made Masons in a similar procedure, which

had drawn great criticism from other Illinois lodges. Not two weeks later,

one of these new Warsaw Masons made a motion that Nye be sent as

delegate to the National Masonic Convention in Baltimore, Maryland, to

be held May 8–17, 1843.56

The Baltimore Convention

The Baltimore Convention’s professed purpose was “to produce

uniformity of Masonic work and to recommend such measures as should

tend to the elevation of the Order.”57 For nine days, delegates from

Masonic Grand Lodges in fourteen states attempted to perfect the ritual

and eliminate discrepancies among lodges in the United States.58

Additionally, they adopted a report endorsing “the establishment of a

342

Grand National Convention possessing limited powers . . . and to act as

referee between Grand Lodges at variance.”59

The possibility of a National Grand Lodge generated great excitement

and speculation among the lodges located across the United States.

Jonathan Nye had been actively campaigning for a General Grand Lodge

since 1822.60 The Mormons were well aware of the power and

opportunities such an organization could present—it was mentioned in

the Nauvoo Lodge minutes twice—in both 1843 and 1844.61 The

Illinois Grand Lodge came out strongly in favor of a National Grand

Lodge in 1845,62 with Abraham Jonas, Jonathan Nye, and even

Meredith Helm all being well placed to play a role in the anticipated

body. It is even likely that Joseph Smith with his brother Hyrum, then

Worshipful Master of Nauvoo Lodge, entertained the same ambition. The

growth of the Illinois lodges had been astonishing due to Smith’s

encouragement of the Fraternity among church members and the zeal of

Jonas, Nye, and Helm in supporting the growth of Freemasonry under

the reestablished Grand Lodge of Illinois. In 1842, Nauvoo Lodge

membership topped 256, and there were forty-five known members of

Rising Sun Lodge at Montrose, Iowa Territory. (Unfortunately, records

for the other Mormon lodges are unavailable.) Comparatively, Masonic

membership in the rest of the state totaled 230.63 Explosive growth of

Mormon Freemasonry in Nauvoo continued until early 1846,

culminating in about 1,300 members of the Nauvoo Lodge alone and

hundreds more in the other lodges. Masonic historian John C. Reynolds

expressed the fear of many of the Illinois Masons when he speculated,

“[I]f the Lodge had been suffered to work two years longer, every

Mormon in Hancock County would have been initiated.”64

The first two Grand Masters of the Grand Lodge of Illinois were

initially pleased to see so many new Masons. They were flexible and

forgiving, wishing to build the Fraternity after the decline following

William Morgan’s disappearance. However, Bodley Lodge vehemently

opposed granting a charter to Nauvoo Lodge. Other lodges expressed the

same misgivings because a preponderance of Mormon Masons

threatened the power dynamics in the Illinois Grand Lodge and

potentially at the national level. If Helm, Jonas, or Nye planned to play a

role in the projected National Grand Lodge, huge numbers of Mormon

Masons under the control of a powerful leader now seemed incompatible

with these designs.

343

The vision of a National Grand Lodge in the United States was never

achieved. Following a recommendation of the 1843 Convention to meet

in three years’ time, representatives from eight Grand Lodges met at

Winchester, Virginia, on May 11, 1846. Due to the minority attendance,

the Convention adjourned without doing any business. Another Masonic

Convention was held at Baltimore on September 23, 1847, to consider

the propriety of forming a national General Grand Lodge. This time only

seven accredited delegates were in attendance. Nonetheless, they drafted

a Constitution that was sent to all the US Grand Lodges. It was resolved

that if sixteen of them approved the measure before January 1, 1849, it

would go into effect. The Constitution, however, failed to receive

approval from any of the Grand Lodges. Other attempts to form a

National Grand Lodge in 1853, 1855, and 1859 were similarly

fruitless.65

Regardless of the National Grand Lodge’s eventual fate, Mormon

lodges continued to flourish on the Illinois frontier.

Keokuk Lodge U.D., Keokuk Iowa

Across the Mississippi River and twelve miles southwest of Nauvoo

lay the township of Keokuk, Iowa. It was named in honor of Chief

Keokuk, a Sac and Fox Indian who visited Joseph Smith in August of

1841 with approximately one hundred other Native Americans. Smith

addressed the group upon the topic of the promises contained in the

Book of Mormon respecting “themselves, the despised remnants of a

once splendid race.”66 At that time, the population of Keokuk was

estimated at 150. Smith owned land in Keokuk, which he obtained from

Isaac Galland when he bought the Commerce town site that became

Nauvoo. Displaced Mormons from Missouri and elsewhere trickled into

town in the first years of the 1840s, adding to the sparsely scattered

inhabitants. The Zarahemla Stake Conference of August 8, 1841,

reported thirteen members attending from Keokuk.67 By December 28,

1842, several of the Mormon settlers had obtained a dispensation from

the Grand Lodge of Illinois to start a Masonic Lodge in their Iowa

township.

The year of 1843 began with an installation ceremony at Keokuk,

presided over by Jonathan Nye. This experienced Freemason constituted

the Lodge and installed the officers on January 17, 1843, with Henry

King as the founding Master. King had been made a Mason at Sylvan

Lodge No. 229 in New York and had been present at the installation of

344

Nauvoo Lodge on March 15, 1842, and at several other occasions.

Keokuk Branch President Abraham O. Smoot was initiated and passed in

Keokuk Lodge.68

At the end of the year, the Grand Lodge deemed the work of Keokuk

Lodge “very irregular and highly censurable” because there had been

several instances when the ballot was taken in less than one full lunar

month after the petition. “In every other respect,” however, the

committee admitted that “the work appears to have been correct.”69

Nonetheless, at this Grand Lodge Communication of October 1843 the

dispensation of Keokuk Lodge was revoked, as were the dispensations of

Nauvoo, Nye, and Helm Lodges, while the charter of Rising Sun Lodge

was suspended. In his history of the Grand Lodge of Iowa, Joseph

Morcombe gave as his opinion:

The matters criticized are not in themselves sufficient to justify the action recommended and taken—they were used only to veil or hide the social, political and religious difficulties, which

were rightfully regarded as dangerous subjects to bring before the Grand Lodge. 70

During the period of time that Rising Sun and Keokuk Lodges were in

operation, they became part of a movement to form a Grand Lodge in the

state of Iowa. In October 1842 Jonathan Nye visited Burlington Lodge

U.D. The minutes record that, when asked to give his opinion as to

forming a Grand Lodge of Iowa, Nye was found in favor and a

committee was appointed for that purpose. Finally, on January 2, 1844,

four Iowa Lodges met to organize a Grand Lodge in their state. Although

Rising Sun and Keokuk Lodges had not been invited to the meeting,

representatives from both of these lodges appeared and insisted they be

recognized. Ansel Humphreys, the prime contender for Grand Master of

the new Grand Lodge, asserted that the Mormon representatives were

“without a Masonic home by virtue of the withdrawal of charter and

dispensation of these lodges by the Grand Lodge of Illinois.” Though

Des Moines Lodge was in favor of seating the Mormon delegates, the

other three lodges “upheld its chairman in his ruling. . . . This decision

provoked a breach among the delegates which ultimately prevented

election of Ansel Humphreys as the first Grand Master of Masons in

Iowa.”71 The difficulties with Mormon lodges clearly extended beyond

Illinois.

Nye Lodge U.D., Nauvoo, Illinois

Jonathan Nye’s involvement in the formation of Nye Lodge was

unconventional and intriguing. Nye was present at the November 23,

345

1842, Nauvoo Lodge meeting where the brothers decided upon a slate of

officers for a lodge to be called Nye Lodge. In order to avoid confusion,

we will refer to this proposed lodge as “Nye Lodge (1).” By February

1843, Jonathan Nye organized a lodge in Nauvoo in opposition to the

one proposed in November with a different slate of officers. This was

also named “Nye Lodge.” We will refer to this lodge as “Nye Lodge

(2).” Of this rival lodge, Joseph Smith opined, “they will do us all the

injury they can, but let them go ahead, altho’ it will result in a division of

the [Nauvoo] lodge.”72

The little evidence available presents a possible reason for Nye’s

opposition. An insertion in Smith’s journal for February 9, 1843, reads:

“conversation with Master Nye & W.W. Phelps[.] went to Keokuk.”

Notes for the same day discuss Smith’s explanation to “Parley Pratt and

othe[r]s” about classes of angels and devils. Freemasonry contains the

idea that a certain grip might provide information about the one giving

the handshake, and Smith had spiritualized the concept and retooled it

for Mormonism.73 He thus gave three keys by which one could identify

angelic messengers by asking them to shake hands: the “spirit of a just

man made perfect” (a resurrected being) would have tangible flesh and

bones, one could not feel the handshake of a devil, and a “true spirit”

would not offer his hand to be tested at all.74

It is not clear whether Nye was present for Smith’s remarks on the

classes of spirits, but if Nye, a notable ritualist himself, was in

attendance, he may well have been stunned to see a Masonic tradition

expressed in Mormonism, likely viewing Smith’s borrowing as an

arrogant overreach. He might have even viewed it as a corruption of

Freemasonry or a betrayal of Smith’s oath not to share Freemasonry’s

esoteric wisdom with the uninitiated. Innovation and exploration have

always been crucial to the spiritual and intellectual vitality of

Freemasonry, but there are limits on what sort of innovation is

acceptable; it is certainly not permissible to mine Freemasonry’s secret

knowledge for wisdom to enrich other organizations. As a man more

than twenty years Smith’s senior, and as a far more experienced Mason,

Nye may well have felt entitled to chastise Smith for his

misappropriation of Masonry’s hermetic lore.

On the other end, Smith seemed to see as spurious any form of

Masonry that did not let him adapt it as he pleased. He certainly felt that

Nye was “trying to pull me by the nose and trample on me” and

“enquired of the Lord if I was to be led by the nose and cuffed about by

346

such a man.” The answer he received from the Lord was “Wait a

minute.”75 Smith accused Nye of violating his oath as a Master Mason

by committing adultery, and Nye “speedily fled from Nauvoo,” fearing

the penalty of the city ordinances. On April 1, 1843, he traveled to Fort

Madison, Iowa, to make a Masonic speech. While there, Nye died

suddenly under suspicious circumstances. Smith learned the news on

April 25 from Lucius Scovil and other Masons who had come to speak

with him “concerning H[enry] G. Sherwood,” who had originally been

proposed as Master of Nye Lodge (1). Smith told the brethren: “Nye is

dead, and any man or mason who attempts to ride me down, and oppress

me, will run against the boss of Jehovah’s buckler, and will be quickly

moved out of the way.”76 Such language is reminiscent of similar

biblically based code utilized by the Danites. Adding to the mystery,

despite an exhaustive search through cemeteries, burial records, and

newspapers on both sides of the Mississippi River, no evidence has been

found regarding the location of Nye’s final resting place.

Two days later, on Thursday, April 27, 1843, Nye Lodge (2) “was

installed on the hill.”77 Henry G. Sherwood never served as the Master

of Nye’s rival lodge. Instead, he and the rest of the slate of officers for

the earlier proposed Nye Lodge (1) continued to attend Nauvoo Lodge,

some reapplying for membership or filling in as 78 pro tem officers. Nye

Lodge (2) is discussed in the minutes of the Grand Lodge of Illinois. It

was granted a dispensation to begin Masonic work, but the Lodge never

submitted a yearly return.79 Therefore, it is difficult to discover who the

officers or members were.80

The argument that Nye Lodge (2) was an opposition lodge distinct

from the Nye Lodge (1) proposed in 1842 is strengthened by events

recorded in the Nauvoo Lodge minutes for August 10, 1843. In that

meeting it was decided that “the time had arrived for dividing the

Lodge.” Sidney Rigdon, who was not an officer and had only attended

the Lodge a mere six times since being raised—but still had great

influence because of his position in the Church—motioned “that Nauvoo

Lodge be divided into 3 branches” and that Nye and “Hyram” Lodges

should “have their proportion of the funds of Nauvoo Lodge” and share

the use of the new Masonic Hall. A slate of officers was chosen for the

“New Lodge”—Nye Lodge (1). The officers were enjoined to rename

their lodge “in consequence of another Lodge in this County be[ing]

called Nye Lodge.”81 It was resolved that “the Brethren nominated for

347

officers be recommended to the M. W. G. Master of the M. W. G. Lodge

of Illinois.” It is not known if this ever took place since all the Mormon

Lodges’ charters and dispensations were revoked by the Grand Lodge

communication in October.

La Harpe Lodge, La Harpe, Illinois

La Harpe, Illinois, is located about twenty-five miles east of Nauvoo.

First settled in 1830, it was renamed, platted, and developed by 1836.

Latter-day Saint Erastus Bingham arrived in the town around 1839 as a

missionary, and his work was successful enough that before long a

branch of the Church was established. According to historian Donald Q.

Cannon, on March 15, 1841, Elder Zenas Gurley “reported that he had

labored for a few weeks at La Harpe, where, in six days he had baptized

52 persons.” Some of the leading citizens of La Harpe were eventually

converted, including Dr. George Coulson and merchant and postmaster

Lewis R. Chaffin.82 By 1845, there were 250 members of the Church in

La Harpe.83

On February 1, 1843, several Mormon brethren in La Harpe brought a

petition before the Nauvoo Lodge. It was directed to the Most

Worshipful Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Illinois asking “for a

Letter of dispensation empowering them to open a Lodge in said Town

of Laharpe.” In order to send such a petition to the Grand Lodge, they

needed the endorsement of a regularly constituted lodge. According to

their minutes, the brothers of Nauvoo Lodge duly approved the petition

and recommended the new lodge.84

It appears that La Harpe did form a lodge, although no record of

dispensation from the Grand Lodge is available. On June 15, 1843,

Nauvoo Lodge members resolved to invite local lodges to participate

with them in their annual celebration of the Feast of St. John the Baptist

and cornerstone laying of the new Masonic Hall. Six lodges were

mentioned: Warsaw, Carthage, Keokuk, Rising Sun, Helm, and La

Harpe.85 At least one of the members of La Harpe Lodge, Rufus Beech,

joined the celebration on June 24 and appears in the roster of

attendees.86

If La Harpe had received a dispensation during 1843, it should have

been mentioned in the Grand Lodge proceedings in October of that year.

It was not. In his opening speech, Grand Master Meredith Helm stated

that he had granted dispensations “for the formation of new Lodges at

348

Warsaw, Carthage, Macomb, Chicago, Nauvoo, and Pekin . . . at

Keokuk, Iowa; and at Milwaukee, Wisconsin Territory.”87 It is possible

that La Harpe Lodge did not send a representative to Grand Lodge, so

Helm—who was already under censure for granting dispensations to so

many Mormon lodges—did not mention it. It is also possible that La

Harpe was already meeting despite not having yet received a

dispensation.

Helm Lodge and the Proposed Hiram Lodge, Nauvoo, Illinois

Like the proposed Nye Lodge, Hiram Lodge was planned with a

complete slate of officers as one of the divisions of Nauvoo Lodge on

November 23, 1842.88 As mentioned above, it was again discussed on

August 10, 1843, but no petition has been found, and it was never

constituted. Instead, its proposed officers remained active members of

Nauvoo Lodge. While it is commonly assumed that this proposed Hiram

Lodge later became Helm Lodge,89 the evidence shows that these were

two separate groups.

On March 27, 1843, a petition was brought before Nauvoo Lodge by

several brethren seeking a recommendation for a dispensation from the

Grand Master to open a new lodge in the city of Nauvoo. These brothers

were not the ones mentioned as officers for the proposed Hiram or Nye

Lodges the previous November. The petition was discussed with several

men remarking “on the impropriety of granting the request.”90 The

matter was deferred until the next regular meeting on April 6, 1843. That

meeting was attended by fifty-seven men, including Joseph Smith,

Worshipful Master Hyrum Smith, Senior Warden Lucius Scovil, and

Master of the proposed Nye Lodge Henry G. Sherwood, all of whom

spoke in opposition to the recommendation. A motion was made “not

deeming it wisdom to divide” and resolving to “write a letter to the

G[rand] Master informing of our reasons for not recommending those

Brethren.”91 Nauvoo Lodge seemingly had their own plans for the

division of the Lodge and were not amenable to other proposals.

However, this group of brothers must have speedily gone ahead with

their plans to form a lodge, obtain a dispensation, and seek installation,

as Helm Lodge was mentioned for the first time in the Nauvoo Lodge

minutes at the end of the month.92 Later, at the Nauvoo Lodge

cornerstone ceremony on June 24, 1843, several of these brothers were

included on a list of visitors from Helm Lodge.

349
