In nineteenth-century Illinois lodges, it was common that the

Fraternity meet once monthly to conduct business as well as to receive

petitions and perform ritual work. Officers of a lodge who were present

at every meeting would have a yearly attendance at twelve meetings plus

a couple of extra for funerals or Masonic events. At Nauvoo, regular (or

“stated”) meetings were held twice a month while ritual work was at

times carried out almost daily—two and sometimes three times a day.

Although Joseph Smith was not present at each day-to-day meeting of

the Nauvoo Lodge, at which ever-increasing numbers of men were being

made Masons, he held a governing influence upon its major operations.

Smith attended many of the stated meetings of the Lodge. He was also

actively involved when important business was conducted. In 1842

Smith’s total recorded attendance at lodge meetings was twenty-seven

meetings on nineteen different days.93 He attended more than twice as

many Masonic meetings than any other member or officer of a non-

Mormon Illinois lodge in that year, and he continued to attend, though

less often, in the years 1843 and 1844.94

Even though the Mormon lodges were raising members very quickly,

there is evidence that the new Freemasons took the work seriously. Allen

Stout, third lieutenant in a company of the Nauvoo Legion, was initiated,

passed, and raised in Nauvoo Lodge in June 1842. Stout says that he

“took great delight in this order of things insomuch that [he] improved

every opportunity to learn the lectures and all the principles pertaining to

that ancient and honorable order.”95 He immersed himself in

Freemasonry so much that in the winter of 1844 through the spring of

1845, he taught an evening class on Masonry, tutoring those who had

been through the degrees to learn the lectures.96

No doubt Jonathan Nye, who spent a great deal of time in Nauvoo

Lodge from November 1842 to February 1843, also assisted the Lodge

members in learning the degrees. Nye’s appointment from the Grand

Lodge of Kentucky had been “Grand Visitor,” with the assignment of

visiting all the area lodges and during several days’ time “teach[ing] the

Lectures, and inculcat[ing] the moral precepts of the Institution.”97 He

held the same role as “Organizing Lecturer” in Illinois. Nye was well

suited to this responsibility as he was well acquainted with Thomas

Smith Webb and Jeremy Ladd Cross, both of whom had been

350

instrumental in the development of Craft Masonry and York Rite

Masonry in the United States.

Joseph Smith’s particular talent lay in ritual-making, and he had an

interest in making the Mormon degrees unique: pure, restored, and

hearkening back to antiquity. This interest was likely shared by many

Nauvoo Freemasons. In August and September 1843, Nauvoo Lodge

hosted an entertaining visitor: Royal Arch Mason Edwin Cruben, who

was known for “travelling from place to place, assuming a right to confer

[the Royal and Select Master Mason] degrees upon individuals when and

where it may best suit his pleasure or convenience.”98 While at Nauvoo,

Cruben demonstrated “the mode of lectures as given in the French

Lodges in New Orleans” to the Mormon Masons.99 It seems possible

that the Mormons may have been interested in receiving the degrees that

Cruben was peddling. In any event, Nauvoo Lodge adopted a resolution

that a letter of thanks be written to Brother Cruben “for services rendered

during his late visit at Nauvoo,” and the secretary was instructed to write

a letter telling him what a privilege it was for Nauvoo Lodge to receive

his visits.100

Charters Revoked

By late June 1843, 382 men had been raised in Nauvoo Lodge. The

cornerstone had been laid for the Masonic Hall, and Freemasonry was a

respected institution in the city. The day after the cornerstone ceremony,

on June 25, 1843, Wilford Woodruff was attending a Sunday afternoon

meeting. In the middle of one of the talks, Hyrum Smith “came onto the

Stand & requested the Masonic fraternity to meet him at the Lodge

Room in 30 minutes.” Immediately, the men followed his directions, but

a quarter of the men could not get into the room. They went outside onto

the green and “formed a hollow square.” Hyrum Smith then informed the

men that his brother Joseph had been captured and taken to Missouri.

About two hundred men volunteered to form a company to bring him

back.101 This incident illustrates the close relationship between

Masonic, military, and ecclesiastical affairs in Nauvoo.

The Grand Lodge of Illinois finally revoked all charters and suspended

all dispensations for the so-called “Mormon Lodges” in October of

1843.102 Within days, the Grand Lodge of Missouri applauded this

action, declaring that the Grand Lodge of Illinois had “resolved, in the

strength of her truly Masonic principles, to separate from herself the

351

unskillful and unworthy who have for a short time taken shelter under

her good name.”103 Nauvoo Lodge, however, paid little attention to the

action of the Grand Lodge of Illinois. In a business meeting on

November 2, 1843, Worshipful Master Hyrum Smith urged the members

to entirely ignore the withdrawal of their dispensation and continue work

upon their own authority. The vote in favor of his proposal was

unanimous: Nauvoo Lodge continued its labors, including its

construction of the three-story Masonic Hall begun in June 1843 and

dedicated on April 5, 1844.104

The Nauvoo Masonic Hall, said to have been the largest building in

Nauvoo at the time of Joseph Smith’s death in 1844, was a physical

testament of the importance of Freemasonry in establishing the kingdom

of God. The building committee consisted of Samuel Rolfe, Aaron

Johnson, and chairman Lucius Scovil, whose home and bakery were

located on the lot next door. William Weeks, designer of the Nauvoo

Temple and many other public buildings in Nauvoo, was the principal

architect. The Hall was built of fine red brick, set on a full basement with

walls three feet thick. The front face of the building was overlaid with

stucco crafted to give the appearance of marble from a short distance.105

A large foundation stone, about three feet wide and tall, was engraved

with the date 1843 and the name of the Grand Master of Illinois, A.

Helm. The gable end of the building was set to the east. On this end was

painted a representation of the All-Seeing Eye.106 Three symmetrical

front doorways offered access to the building. The second-story

windows, with six-inch blocks of limestone on the top and bottom, were

placed above the doors. Graceful, arched third-story windows completed

the picture. Their limestone arches were held in place by keystones in

true Masonic fashion.

The basement rooms, well-lit by three large chandeliers, had several

functions. At times they served as schoolrooms, and later they were used

to store ammunition or build wagons for the trek West. A large main

floor was suitable for plays, dances, and community activities. It likely

included a stage similar to the one constructed in the building’s

restoration.

352

Preliminary plans for the Nauvoo Masonic Hall from William Weeks’s Nauvoo Architectural

Drawings collection. Shows dome and all-seeing eye, both of which were not part of the 1967

reconstruction.

353

The Masonic Hall was sold when the Latter-day Saints left Nauvoo in

1846 and became a private residence. The third floor, where lodge

meetings were held, was removed in 1884 but reconstructed after the

LDS Church acquired the building in 1967. Both the original lodge room

and the reconstruction were painted sky blue, and a white ornamental

molding extended eight inches from the walls to separate them from the

elevated arched ceiling. The west end of the room contained a two-story

set of preparation rooms—an unusual feature that was called for by the

volume of Masonic work being carried out daily.107 The original yellow

pine floor, which was left intact when the third story was removed,

shows wear marks from the impact of hundreds of Mormon Masons

circumambulating the central altar.

The focal point of the majestic lodge room was without doubt the dais

in the East, where the Master’s chair was strategically placed in front of

the arched windows. Two twelve-foot pillars flanked three steps leading

to the platform that was placed under an impressive dome. The white

pillars were marbled with blue paint that matched the walls. An elegant

bronze “G,” the Masonic symbol for Deity, was suspended above the

chair. Given the investments of time, money, energy, and devotion the

men of the Nauvoo Lodge made in their Temple, it’s easy to understand

why they were unwilling to give up using it in ways that seemed right to

them.108

Learning of Nauvoo Lodge’s refusal to cease work, a new Grand

Master of Illinois deputized the Master of Bodley Lodge to demand

Nauvoo’s officers’ jewels and records. Rather than comply, the officers

of Nauvoo Lodge gave notice that they intended to appeal the Grand

Lodge’s decision to the next “Triennial Convention” of American

Masons—a meeting not scheduled until late March of 1846.109 The

Nauvoo Masons had placed themselves irrevocably in opposition to the

Grand Lodge of Illinois.

The members of Bodley Lodge, meanwhile, were obsessed with the

actions of the Mormon lodges. In an April 1, 1844, meeting of Bodley

Lodge, Worshipful Master J. B. Conyers took up the subject:

The W. Master remarked that the Nauvoo Lodges still were working & finishing their Hall, notwithstanding their dispensation had been withdrawn by the Grand Lodge.

Bro. Truman was called upon, & stated that he had learned that the Nauvoo Lodges were

still at work, receiving passing & raising masons, and that the Brethren of Warsaw Lodge had notified the Grand officer on the Subject.

On motion of Bro. Stehls, Resolved, that the Secy be instructed to inform the G. Master of

this State that the Nauvoo & Keokuk, the Lodges in & about Nauvoo continue to work, & that they have given notice in a public paper of their intention, to consecrate their Masonic Hall on

354

the 5th inst. & that the said Masons pretend not to be in possession of official notice, that they

were deprived of their Charter & dispensation.110

While the minutes of Bodley Lodge No. 1 are not explicit, the chief

concerns may have been the status of Illinois Masonry among the other

US Grand Lodges if they did not respond to the Mormon lodges’

violations.

Hiram Lodge No. 7, Augusta, Iowa

The community of Augusta was located a few miles upriver from

Nauvoo on the Western bank of the Mississippi in Iowa Territory. It had

been established in 1835, when Frederick Kesler surveyed the town site

and Levi Moffitt built a water-powered flour mill, bringing customers

from a distance of up to one hundred miles. Both men soon converted to

Mormonism, joining several Mormon families who fled Missouri in

1838–39. A few years later, on April 1, 1843, James Brown was made

president of the Augusta branch, consisting of eighty-four members.111

On April 1, 1844 (the same day that Bodley Lodge discussed the

renegade behavior of the lodges), six men “all of Nauvoo Lodge”

appeared in Des Moines, Iowa, Lodge No. 1 and presented a proposal for

a lodge to be established in Augusta.112 A recommendation was

granted, and a petition was made that day to the Grand Lodge of Iowa by

William A. Weston,113 114 115

Jacob F. Hutchinson, Clark L. Whitney,

David Kneeland, Jacob F. Abbott,116 117 Grand

and Alvin C. Graves.

Master Oliver Cock granted a dispensation for this lodge by April 16,

by the Grand Lodge of Illinois, another was constituted before the death

of Joseph Smith in 1844. This lodge, Hiram Lodge No. 7, would receive

its charter on January 7, 1845, from the Grand Lodge of Iowa.

Hiram Lodge No. 7 was constituted predominantly of Mormons for

some years. As in Nauvoo Lodge, petitions were received in large

numbers, candidates were rushed through in blocs, and the lodge was

consistently short of funds, indicating a system of rebates or remission of

fees.118

A Mormon Grand Lodge

In April 1844, the six Mormon lodges included Nauvoo, Rising Sun

No. 12, Keokuk, Helm, Nye, and Hiram No. 7. There were possibly three

other unofficial lodges at La Harpe and in Nauvoo (the original proposed

355

Nye and Hiram Lodges). Because the other Mormon lodges were

accused of some of the same irregularities as Nauvoo Lodge, including

rushing candidates through the degrees, it can be assumed that they had

many more than an average amount of members for a lodge.119 Even

though the records of these lodges are not extant, we are able to discover

the identities of fifty-eight members of Rising Sun Lodge No. 12, nine at

Keokuk, seven at Nye Lodge, twenty at Helm Lodge, and thirteen at

Hiram Lodge No. 7.

According to the Illinois Grand Lodge proceedings, the reason for

making new lodges at Nauvoo was that the number of members was “too

large for convenience in working.”120 But it is also likely that the

Mormons were establishing numerous lodges so they would have enough

for their own independent Grand Lodge. With at least six and perhaps as

many as nine lodges functioning outside the control of the Grand Lodge

of Illinois, sufficient bodies existed to form a Mormon Grand Lodge—as

five lodges had formed the Illinois Grand Lodge in 1840, and four lodges

were enough to form the Iowa Grand Lodge in 1844.

It would have been as easy as mortaring a brick for the Mormon

lodges to come together and form a Grand Lodge. They simply needed

one Grand Lodge to sponsor them. The problem they would have faced

was that other United States Grand Lodges may not have wished to

recognize them as legitimate (or “regular”). This was the case when, in

356

1808, Freemasons of color had formed the African Grand Lodge (later

renamed “Prince Hall”) under the sponsorship of the United Grand

Lodge of England. It was many years before Grand Lodges in the United

States would officially recognize these lodges.

While the formation of a Mormon Grand Lodge never occurred in

Joseph Smith’s lifetime, the idea persisted. On December 19, 1844, the

Nauvoo Lodge record indicates that:

The subject of the Grand Lodge [of Illinois] towards us was then taken up, when it was strongly urged by some, that the oppressive and tyrannical treatment which not only this Lodge, but also four other Lodges in this vicinity have received from the Grand Lodge of the State of Illinois in withholding from us our masonic rights and privileges, and that is they continually sought to tyrannize over and oppress us, it was not only our right and privilege but also our duty to fall back on our reserved rights, and call a convention of the several Lodges

thus oppressed and form a Grand Lodge.121

The proposition failed when, after consideration, the Worshipful

Master Lucius N. Scovil “said that he thought it was bad policy under

existing circumstances to form a grand lodge at this time.”122 Not until

1860, when the Mormons were confronted with the formation of a non-

Mormon or “gentile” lodge at Camp Floyd, Utah, would George A.

Smith and Lucius N. Scovil propose a similar plan. Brigham Young,

acting in the role he inherited from Joseph Smith, vetoed the idea,

predicting that such an action would “bring down all hell upon us as far

as they (gentile Masons) had the power.”123

What King Solomon Could Not Do

Having learned through Masonic lore that ancient prophets functioned

as Grand Masters of Freemasons, Joseph Smith appears to have

appropriated that role. Even without a Grand Lodge to preside over,

Smith looked to the past to provide his blueprint. Grand Masters King

Solomon and the two Hirams each represented an aspect of human

potential and were often on the Mormon Prophet’s mind.

On Thursday, February 8, 1844, Smith spoke at a political meeting

with Elders Orson Hyde and John Taylor.124 William W. Phelps publicly

announced for the first time Smith’s intention to run for president and

read aloud the candidate’s “Views on the Powers and Policy of the

Government of the United States.”125 The Nauvoo Neighbor called the

essay “an able document, big with meaning and interest, clearly pointing

out the way for the temporal salvation of this union.”126 It must have

been a stirring occasion for the former farm boy.

357

Later that evening, several of the Masonic brethren were gathered

together in the upper room of Smith’s Red Brick Store following their 6

p.m. meeting. Smith arrived and gave the proper entrance signal to

Asahel Perry who was acting as Tyler at the door. “Let him enter,”

responded George A. Smith, who had taken the place of Worshipful

Master that day. The Prophet burst in the room, “strode up and down the

lodge,” and, according to the report of Dimick B. Huntington, exclaimed,

“Hallelujah, hallelujah, hallelujah!” Joseph Smith continued, “I have

done what king Solomun[,] King Hiram[,] & Hiram Abif could not do[:]

I have set up the kingdom no more to be thrown down forever nor never

to be given to another people.”127

Such a bold statement implicitly placed Smith in the company of the

men Freemasons called their “Ancient Grand Masters,” even portraying

him in a superior role. Smith had found the Word that they had lost. It

was the culmination of all his literal and figurative treasure seeking and

the playing out of the Royal Arch degree. The event demonstrates that

Freemasonry was integral to Smith’s restoration project and his efforts to

establish the theocratic kingdom of God. On June 15, 1844, William

Clayton wrote in his journal,

[Joseph Smith] spoke concerning key words. The g[rand] key word was the first word Adam spoke and is a word of supplication. He found the word by the Urim and Thummim. It is that

key word to which the heavens is opened.128

Masonic author Manly Hall’s description of the coveted attainment of

a Freemason entirely captures Smith’s accomplishment:

The true Word of the three Grand Masters has never been concealed from those who have the right to know it nor has it ever been revealed to those who have not prepared a worthy shrine to contain it. The Master knows, for he is a Temple Builder. . . . The Word is found when the Master himself is ordained by the living hand of God, cleansed by living water, baptized by

living fire, a Priest-King after the Order of Melchizedek, who is above the law.129

On April 5, 1844, the Mormons carried out plans to dedicate their new

Masonic Hall. Attending the dedication were over five hundred Masons,

including twenty-two members of Helm Lodge, twelve members of

Rising Sun Lodge, five members of Nye Lodge, one member of

LaHarpe, and two members of what would soon become Hiram Lodge of

Augusta, Iowa.130 Once again, the ceremonies followed the outline of

The Masonic Trestleboard, but with Worshipful Master Hyrum Smith

performing the duties ordinarily assigned to a Grand Master.131 It is

notable that Joseph Smith was ill, preventing him from delivering the

lengthy King Follett funeral discourse—a sermon filled with familiar

358

Masonic images and themes (see Chapter 16).132 Joseph’s participation

was limited to a closing oration, whereas he had originally planned to

take a greater role.

With the Masonic Hall completed, work continued apace on the

Church’s own temple six city blocks away. On a visit to Nauvoo, United

States political figure Josiah Quincy wrote his impressions of the “odd

and striking” Mormon temple. He considered it a “grotesque structure on

the hill, with all its queer carvings of moons and suns,” and quoted

Joseph Smith’s opinion of the edifice as follows:

In a tone half-way between jest and earnest, and which might have been taken for either at the option of the hearer, the prophet put this inquiry: “Is not here one greater than Solomon, who built a Temple with the treasures of his father David and with the assistance of Huram, King of

Tyre? Joseph Smith has built his temple with no one to aid him in the work.”133

Joseph Smith’s prophetic charisma and magnetic personality allowed

him to use many different avenues to animate Mormonism. Freemasonry

was not the only ingredient that went into the mix, but it was a vital one.

His interpretation of Masonic ritual deepened its value for Latter-day

Saint participants, and once he had given his followers an idea of the

possibilities inherent in Masonry, they united to draw friends and

associates to their prophet’s vision of Freemasonry restored. Smith was

not a daily participant in the Lodge, but he was a regular and an

influential one. The Mormon lodges came close to dominating

Freemasonry in Illinois and were well on their way to becoming a

presence on the national Masonic stage. With a few minor tweaks in the

historical record, the Mormons, with Smith as their leader, could have

played a leading role in a national governing body. There, the Prophet’s

ritual proclivities might well have re-envisioned the Craft. As it was,

these natural talents, strengthened by a divine calling and powerful

Masonic patterns, found their way into a uniquely Mormon ritual that

would inspire millions.

Notes

359

once decay and die, or at best remain only as some fossilized bone, imperfectly to show the nature of the living body to which it once belonged” (p. 86).

360

361

362

363

364

en route from Iowa to Utah. He married Cynthia Shurtliff on May 9, 1850, in Pottawattamie, Iowa.

365
