THE GLORY OF THIS LATTER HOUSE

And since sin has destroyed within us the first temple of purity and

innocence, may thy heavenly grace guide and assist us in rebuilding

a second temple of reformation, and may the glory of this latter

house be greater than the glory of the former! Amen, so mote it be.

—Malcolm C. Duncan, Duncan’s Masonic Ritual and Monitor

Through the poetic and vibrant enactment of the Royal Arch Degree, nineteenth-century American Freemasons sought to preserve a spiritual connection to King Solomon and his temple, and Mormon understanding of the literal and allegorical significance of

temples appears to derive from this Holy Royal Arch tradition. After

their relocation out of Kirtland, site of their first temple, and exile from

their garden spot in Missouri, Latter-day Saints began building a second

temple to God in Nauvoo. In doing so, Joseph Smith worked to recover

the mystery and ritual of ancient temple work and to teach his followers

the true path to God.

The Latter-day Saint temple in Nauvoo had numerous parallels with

the Masonic conception of Solomon’s Temple, and the rites revealed by

Smith for that edifice shared common perspectives and symbolism with

contemporaneous Masonic ritual. Similarities extended from the outer

and inner architecture and appointments of the temple to the use of ritual

space, clothing, signs, tokens, obligations, and penalties. Furthermore,

the two traditions shared biblical references and even ritual framing and

precise ritual phrasing. Because of this, the many Latter-day Saints who

had previously become Freemasons by 1844 would have been keenly

aware of these resemblances, and they understood them to be part of the

continual efforts of the Prophet to restore ancient authority, knowledge,

and sacraments. They envisioned the Mormon temple with its

prophetically revealed ordinances as something that had been lost both to

ancient Israel and to Masonry through apostasy but restored to its

original pristine form by Smith for the salvation of the Saints in the

Dispensation of the Fullness of Times.1 Continuing to the present day,

many modern Latter-day Saints believe that both Mormonism and

Freemasonry draw from common ancient sources and that this explains

ritual similarities. This view is, however, untenable for several reasons,

the foremost being that the further one goes back in time, the more

366

dissimilar Mormon and Masonic rituals become. Moreover, the Masonic

ritual source (i.e., the Entered Apprentice, Fellowcraft, and Master

Mason degrees, including the Royal Arch) cannot reliably be traced

beyond the early eighteenth century.

Whether or not one believes in divine inspiration for Mormon temple

ritual, nineteenth-century Freemasonry was certainly one of its shaping

factors. Freemasonry’s influence on the shape and content of the

Mormon restoration movement has been demonstrated throughout the

Church’s history. It was especially evident in the temple-building

impulse that began in Ohio and Missouri and reached its culmination in

Nauvoo. The idea that ancient knowledge and authority was to be

recovered in the Mormon temple was foreshadowed in the Book of

Moses and expressly claimed in the Book of Abraham (see Chapters 6

and 7). By the Nauvoo period, the temple was envisioned as a way to

ritualize LDS textual traditions, making use of a Mormon midrash with

significant Masonic elements.

At the crest of Nauvoo Mormonism in the 1840s, Masonic ritual was

rich with symbolism and allegory. Masons were taught how to interpret

symbolism and were given lectures along with the ritual that explained

some of these symbols while encouraging participants to uncover further

meanings of their own. Because many of the men receiving LDS

ordinances were familiar with this system, they were able to understand

the meanings behind the Masonic allegories employed in the Mormon

endowment and appreciate the innovative use to which they were put.

Freemasons both early and late have described their own institution as

divine, its ritual as sacred, and its doctrine as holy.2 Freemasonry’s early

connection with the Christian mystical tradition means that for Masons

in the early nineteenth century, the innermost confidential instruction

provided by the Fraternity was considered a divine secret, and the Lodge

in which such divine secrets were imparted was the adytum of God—the

symbolic sanctum sanctorum of God’s holy temple. Such divine secrets

included the Sacred Word—for example, the Name of God so holy that

no single individual could speak it and thus required a covering word to

veil it. They also included mysteries and legends meant only for the

initiated, intended to lead the receptive mind of the properly prepared to

authentic spiritual illumination. Masonry was never intended to be mere

mummery or a humbug for the credulous. To receive its symbolic

instruction, candidates for Masonic degrees have always been advised to

prepare carefully, and Masons have been cautioned not to allow the

unworthy or improperly prepared to enter the Lodge.

367

In the early nineteenth century, there was little doubt among

Freemasons that God’s glory would rest upon their Lodge and that God

himself would direct their proceedings. Latter-day Saints today often fail

to appreciate the spiritual nature of Freemasonry’s temples and the

Mason’s sacred obligations to God. Seeking to segregate themselves

from Masonic temple tradition, Mormons will sometimes characterize

differences between the two ritual systems in language that reveals this

misunderstanding and prejudice. For example, Latter-day Saint author

Matthew B. Brown claimed:

It is apparent that the temples of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are genuine houses of the Lord, while the Masonic lodges do not attempt to take upon themselves such a lofty and holy status. The “temple” of the Freemasons is just an allegorical instructional

device, whereas the Mormon temple is a replica of the hallowed sanctuaries of biblical times.3

Given this is a commonly held view among contemporary Mormons, it

seems worthwhile to emphasize that every Masonic temple “is a replica

of the hallowed sanctuaries of biblical times.” Masonry’s main allegory

is unarguably centered upon King Solomon’s Temple, and every lodge of

Ancient Craft Masonry is modeled thereon.4 It is certainly true that

Masonic lodges or temples serve as allegorical and instructional devices

intended to convey instruction devised by their Christian originators;5

however, this can likewise describe every LDS temple, including the

instructional rooms used in Newel K. Whitney’s store in Kirtland and

Joseph Smith’s Red Brick Store in Nauvoo. These structures were

similar to contemporary nineteenth-century lodges, which frequently

occupied an upper room in an existing building, and in which both

important civil events and holy rituals took place.

In a related line of reasoning, Latter-day Saints often stress that

Masonic ritual is “horizontally oriented” and primarily intended to

connect men fraternally “for their personal advancement within the

Masonic organization,” while LDS ritual is “vertically oriented” and

intended to point us toward and connect us with God.6 At first glance

this might seem to be a reasonable distinction; after all, Freemasonry is a

fraternal organization and not a religion. Yet, such explanations overlook

the context in which speculative Masonry arose. As early as 1775,

Freemasons associated themselves with revolutionary notions regarding

religion and proudly published in their own works references to what

others of more staid religious views would find problematic. The point

and purpose of Masonic ritual as it existed in its earliest years was to

connect men with God.

368

It should be readily apparent why Freemasonry held great appeal for

Joseph Smith. Its central allegory of the search for a connection with the

Divine spoke to the inner desires he had felt since his youth. Its esoteric

qualities captivated his proclivities for secrets and mysteries. Its ritual

helped him bring his thoughts and longings into physical form. Smith’s

passion for learning, his interest in lost scripture and ancient mysteries,

and his yearning for a deep bond with his friends and family were all fed

by the legend and structure of the Fraternity. The Mormon prophet began

introducing secret, oath-bound associations from the Kirtland period,

throughout Missouri, and into Illinois. With the Nauvoo temple

endowment, he would finally use his considerable talents as a ritualist to

put together a restored ritual, Masonic in character, but imbued with his

prophetic authority.

The Nauvoo Temple and its Ritual

Joseph Smith was not alone in creating new Masonic ritual in the

nineteenth-century United States. Two American exposés from the post-

Morgan period, David Bernard’s 1829 Light on Masonry and Avery

Allyn’s 1853 A Ritual of Freemasonry, contain several examples of such

“side degrees.” These were Masonically inspired rituals based on

scriptural or legendary themes. Out of this tradition sprang up degrees

such as the “Knight of the Holy Sepulchre,” the “Secret Monitor,”

“Aaron’s Band,” and others.7 They were written by Masonic ritualists

with little formal authority and often conferred by itinerant lecturers. As

mentioned in Chapter 13, Nauvoo Lodge engaged one such traveler,

Edwin Cruben, who was known for giving degrees “irregularly.”8

The same impulse to create a ritual that would be uniquely suited to

his people can be seen in Smith’s development of LDS temple ritual.

Nonetheless, the magnificent accomplishment the Nauvoo temple

ceremony represented for the Latter-day Saint community cannot be

overstated. It seems clear that Smith felt divinely led to restore an

ordinance that would be salvific and represent pure truth.

Sixty-five people received at least a portion of the anointing,

endowment, and sealing ordinances before the death of their Prophet on

June 27, 1844. In 1845 and 1846, over five thousand men and women

experienced temple rites in the newly completed Nauvoo Temple. It

remains difficult to discover exactly which details of the temple

ceremony were initiated by Smith himself and which were added or

adjusted by Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and others who worked

369

on refining the ritual following the Prophet’s death. According to Young,

the Prophet apologized for the arrangement of the improvised quarters

where he first offered the endowment, and Young noted his own effort to

stay true to what Smith had shown them:

“[W]e have done the best we could under the circumstances in which we are placed, and I wish you all to take this matter in hand . . . organize and systematize all these ceremonies with the signs, tokens, penalties and key words.” I [Young] did so and each time I got something more; so that when we went through the Temple at Nauvoo, I understood and knew how to

place them there. We had our ceremonies pretty correct.9

It is apparent that some modification to the ceremony did take place

before it was presented to the majority of the Saints in the Nauvoo

Temple; however, the closer the evidence places these elements to June

1844, the more certain we can be that Smith himself had a hand in their

construction. The conception of the ritual was his, and it had already

been presented to dozens of the most influential people in Nauvoo.

Young, whose succession was in question for some years, would not

likely have been able to make too many unchallenged alterations.

There are few contemporary exposures authored by eyewitnesses of

the Nauvoo temple ritual. Brief details were noted by William Clayton,

Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, George A. Smith, Amasa Lyman,

Newel K. Whitney, Wilford Woodruff, and in Joseph Smith’s diary kept

by Willard Richards. The earliest complete exposé of the endowment is

the article “Mormon Endowments” by a woman calling herself

“Emeline.” This was published in the Warsaw Signal on April 15,

1846.10 In 1847, Increase McGee Van Dusen published his and his

wife’s experience of the Nauvoo endowment.11 Nauvoo temple records,

including the “Book of Anointings,” contain short descriptions and are

available in the Nauvoo Temple Records Collection in LDS Church

History Archives in Salt Lake City. Later recollections important in

reconstructing Smith’s incipient ritual ceremonies come from Lucius

Scovil,12 Dimick B. Huntington,13 Heber C. Kimball, Brigham

Young,14 and Bathsheba W. Smith.15 These sources can be compared

with Masonic exposures of that period such as David Bernard’s Light on

Masonry and William Morgan’s Illustrations of Masonry.

Features identical in Masonry and the endowment have become less

obvious as a result of drastic revisions to the endowment in the 1920s,

1990s, 2019, and 2020. Alterations to Masonic ritual have been made as

well over the years. Nonetheless, the philosophical context of the temple

370

as well as the ritual similarities between Mormonism and Freemasonry in

the 1840s remain striking.

Many authors have written about the relationship between the Mormon

endowment and Masonic ritual. However, without understanding the

historical and philosophical context of Masonic ceremony, it is difficult

to fully grasp the relationship between these two systems—that is,

precisely where they converge and diverge. For Latter-day Saints

investigating this subject, no meaningful discussion can occur unless one

is first willing to examine Masonic ritual without the natural tendency to

distort,16 17 18 or censure.

trivialize,

Parallels between Masonry and the endowment become problematic

when contemporary Saints see them as opposing a belief that Joseph

Smith received the temple ceremony by revelation from God. Likewise,

accusations that Smith cobbled together ritual from items found in his

environment miss his intentions as well as his genius in developing a

meaningful religious ceremony for nineteenth-century seekers. The

Mormon Prophet’s usage of Masonic ritual was informed and brilliant,

and his positioning and development of elements of the different degrees

can certainly be viewed as inspired.

As noted by Paul Toscano, Latter-day Saints need not assume that their

temple endowment’s construction “from elements of Masonry disqualify

it as either a revelation or as a . . . sacrament”:

Transformation of the profane into the sacred is the heart of Christ’s teachings. Jesus’ first miracle was the turning of water into wine. It should not be an impediment to faith that a Masonic ceremony was transformed to serve a Messianic purpose or that a rite that served such a purpose for Masons was borrowed and restructured as a sacrament of the Mormon

Restoration.19

Three chief concepts found in early Masonic ritual relate more closely

to Mormon temple ordinances than has been previously understood.

These are the ideas of endowment, the mysteries of godliness, and

celestial ascent.

Masonic “Enduement”

Beginning in Kirtland, early Latter-day Saints referred to blessings

received in LDS temples as an “enduement” and its candidates as being

“endued.” As in Freemasonry, the word was similar in meaning and often

used interchangeably with “endow.” In Nauvoo, the idea was further

developed and came to be associated with the ritual ceremony itself.20

The sense of endue, meaning “to put on” or “to be clothed,” was evident

in several aspects of the temple endowment, from the putting on of

371

special clothing to participate in the ritual to the bestowal of divine

blessings. A deeper look into the Masonic use of “endue” or “endow”

can illuminate how some of the practices early Mormons adopted related

to the concept of endowment.

As early as 1769, a Masonic candidate was “duly and truly prepared”

for his first entrance into the lodge by being ritually “clothed.” In

William Morgan’s exposure of the Entered Apprentice degree, the

candidate “is divested of all his apparel (shirt excepted) and furnished

with a pair of drawers kept in the lodge for the use of Candidates. The

Candidate is then blindfolded, his left foot bare, his right in a slipper, his

left breast and arm naked, and a rope called a Cable-Tow round his neck

and left arm.”21 In the Entered Apprentice degree, the candidate is

taught that the “wearing of special garments furnished by the Lodge”

emphasizes the Mason’s “concern with man’s internal qualifications,

rather than his worldly wealth and honors. By wearing these garments,

the candidate signifies the sincerity of his intentions.”22 Further, this

ritual of being “clothed upon” symbolizes that the candidate is being

furnished with esoteric knowledge and heavenly power. Finally, it

suggests the future state of the new initiate:

Even the ceremonies of gaining admission within these walls are emblematical of events which all mankind must sooner or later experience. They are emblematical at least in some small degree to your great and last change; of your exit from this world to the world to come. You are undoubtedly aware that whatever man may acquire on earth, whether wealth, honor, titles or even his own merits, can never serve him as a passport to the Grand Lodge above, but previous to his gaining admission there he must find himself poor and penniless, blind and naked, dependent upon the will and pleasure of the Supreme Grand Master. He must be

divested of the rags of his own righteousness, and clothed in a garment from on high.23

The endowment of a candidate with ceremonial clothing has several

allegorical meanings: humility, purity of intention, interior qualification,

equality or “meeting on the level,” man’s transition to his immortal

future life with God, and God’s grace in his redemptive and purifying

work in man. Esoteric Freemason Arthur Edward Waite illustrated this

symbolism in his poem, “Misfits”:

‘Tis scarcely true that souls come naked down

To take abode up in this earthly town,

Or naked pass, of all they wear denied.

We enter slipshod and with clothes awry,

And we take with us much that by-and-by

May prove no easy task to put aside.

Cleanse, therefore, that which round about us clings,

We pray Thee, Master, ere Thy sacred halls

We enter. Strip us of redundant things,

And meetly clothe us in pontificals.24

372

In the washing and anointing ceremony that Joseph Smith introduced,

initiates were also divested of their street apparel and clothed with a

garment, an item of attire to be worn routinely underneath one’s regular

clothing. To the signification described above, which would have been

understood by those who had already been made Masons, was added the

concept of protection imparted to those who wore the garment faithfully.

Smith designed the garment to include Masonic markings corresponding

to certain actions in the ritual, bringing the symbolic into the literal.

Immediately prior to the prayer of enduement in the Entered Apprentice

degree, a petitioner is given permission to come into the lodge and,

according to William Morgan,

The Candidate then enters, the Junior Deacon at the same time pressing his naked left breast with the point of the compass, and asks the candidate, “Did you feel anything?” Ans. “I Did.” Junior Deacon to Candidate, “what was it?” Ans. “A torture.”

The Junior Deacon then says, “as this is a torture to your flesh, so may it ever be to your

mind and conscience if ever you should attempt to reveal the secrets of masonry unlawfully.

[”] 25

Later, in the Fellowcraft degree, the initiate is again brought to the

door of the lodge. This time, “the angle of the square is pressed hard

against his naked right breast,” and the Junior Deacon says,

Brother, when you entered this Lodge the first time, you entered on the point of the compass pressing your naked left breast, which was then explained to you. You now enter it on the angle of the square pressing your naked right breast, which is to teach you to act upon the

square with all mankind, but more especially with the brethren.26

In the early Mormon initiatory ordinance, the left breast of the garment

was cut in the shape of a compass and the right breast in the shape of the

Mason’s square while the garment was being worn by the individual.27

Later in the endowment ceremony, Masonic penalties as well as further

admonitions were associated with these marks. In an 1886 meeting, John

Taylor remarked on “the correct understanding of the pattern and

meaning of the [garment] marks”:

The Collar: “My yoke is easy and my burden is light.”

The strings: 3 strings on each side, had a double meaning. The strings being long enough to

tie in a neat double bow-knots, representing the Godhead. The double bow-knots meaning the marriage tie, man and wives.

The compass: a guide to the wearer as the North Star is a guide in the night to those who do

not know the way they should go.

The Square: Representing the justice and fairness of our Heavenly Father, that we will

receive all the good that is coming to us or that we earn, on a square deal.

The Navel Mark: Meaning strength in the navel and marrow in the bones. The Knee Mark: Representing that every knee shall bow and every tongue confess that

Jesus is the Christ.

Adam and Eve, he told us, were without clothing and the garment was also given to cover

their nakedness and for the protection from the enemy. The sleeves reaching to the wrist and

373

the legs to the ankles; not fitting tight but flowing. This pattern was given to the prophet

Joseph Smith by two heavenly beings. 28

Mormon temple garment circa 1879, in Salt Lake Tribune, September 28, 1879.

Masons are also clothed with an apron of white leather or lambskin

that represents purity and innocence and calls to mind the sacrifice of

Jesus Christ. The Master Mason’s apron is fourteen by sixteen inches

large and embroidered with Masonic symbols in blue thread. The apron

is presented to the newly made Master Mason with an explanation of its

important emblematic character. In legend, the apron is associated with

Melchizedek, “the Most High Priest and the first to wear the apron as the

badge of religious authority.”29

The apron is also an important part of the Mormon endowment

ceremony. In the nineteenth century, Latter-day Saints wore white aprons

embroidered with leaves, emblematic of the fig leaves with which Adam

and Eve covered themselves in the Garden of Eden. During the

ceremony, however, the apron is also recognized as a symbol of power

and priesthood. As Masons fold their aprons down in a different way for

each degree, early LDS temple patrons adjusted their clothing as they

advanced through the levels of priesthood in the temple. On the occasion

of the death of a Mason, the apron is “placed upon the coffin which

contains your earthly remains, and with them laid beneath the silent

clods of the valley.”30 Mormons are similarly buried with the apron, as

374

well as being dressed in all their temple clothing, when they are laid in

the coffin.

In addition to clothing, a Mason was endowed with virtues that would

assist him in his earthly mission. Unsurprisingly, a Masonic

“endowment” was threefold in nature, corresponding to each of the three

degrees of Ancient Craft Masonry:

May he be endowed with wisdom 31 to direct him in all his ways, strength, to support him in all his difficulties, and beauty, to adorn his moral conduct; and may we jointly and individually walk within compass, and square our actions by the dictates of virtue and conscience, and the

example of the wise and the good. 32 Amen .

In Mormonism, endowment also carried a great weight of spiritual

meaning. Early members were urged to study the implications of their

ritual but were not always diligent in this effort. By 1853, Brigham

Young admonished: “Be assured, brethren, there are but few, very few of

the Elders of Israel, now on earth, who know the meaning of the word

endowment.”33

The Mysteries of Godliness

The Masonic phrase “mysteries of godliness” is drawn from 1 Timothy

3:16: “And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness: God

was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached

unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory.” The

revealing of these mysteries is central to the fundamental purposes of

Masonic initiation, as explained in the various iterations of its initiatory

prayer. For example, “The Ancient Prayer at Making, or Opening a

Lodge” asks:

And we beseech thee, O Lord God, to . . . grant that this our new made brother, may prove true and faithful. [1] Endue him with a competency of thy divine wisdom, that [2] he may, with the secrets of free-masonry, be able to unfold the mysteries of godliness; and [3] may he and we walk in the light of they countenance, and [4] when all the trials of our probationary state shall

be over, be admitted into the temple not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. 34 Amen .

This final hope was described in Wellin Calcott’s 1769 Candid

Disquisition:

Let GOD’s holy word be the guide of our faith; and, justice, charity, love and mercy, our characteristicks, then we may reasonably hope to attain the celestial pass-word, and gain

admittance into the lodge of our Supreme grand-master, where pleasures flow for evermore 35 .

The Masonic endowment with a knowledge of the Divine Name seems

similar to what Joseph Smith was claiming for the Latter-day Saints who

received his revelation of the Mormon endowment. For decades, temple

patrons were expressly taught that the LDS endowment represented

375

“what are termed the mysteries of godliness—that which will enable you

to understand the expression of the Savior, made just prior to his

betrayal: ‘This is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true

God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou has sent [John 17:3].’”36 This

language was removed from LDS ritual in 1990, although it continues to

be popularly associated with the temple experience. In fact, the reception

of the confidential Name of God is the ostensible purpose for the LDS

temple-goer when “approaching the Lord” in the Ceremony at the Veil.

This Name also serves as a password, the reception of which precedes

the Mormon temple patron’s passing into the room representing the

Celestial Kingdom.

It is noteworthy that while the precise phrase “mysteries of godliness”

(in the plural) is not found in the Bible nor LDS scripture, it is common

to both the Masonic prayer at the initiation of a candidate and to the LDS

Temple’s “Lecture at the Veil” (deleted in toto in 1990), as well as in

public discussions of the respective rituals by both Mormons and

Freemasons.

Let Us Go Up: Masonic Ascent to the Heavenly Temple

The prayers associated with the initiation of the candidate demonstrate

the belief that a Mason’s enduement is received in the context of a

spiritual ascent in which he passes into the presence of God and those

who have been sanctified. He then enters the sublime glory of a heavenly

temple,37 emblematically prefigured by the “all-perfect Lodge in

Heaven.”38

Historian Michael Quinn asserted that the “Mormon endowment or

Holy Order had the specific purpose of preparing the initiate for ‘an

ascent into heaven,’ whereas Freemasonry did not.”39 Modern Latter-

day Saint scholars have generally accepted this as true,40 and Quinn’s

initial assessment has come to be used by writers both friendly and

unfriendly to Mormonism’s claims.41 While Quinn’s original argument

was that Freemasonry did not have this heavenly ascent as its primary

objective, others have suggested that Freemasonry simply has no

celestial ascent in it—that it neither contains the elements of heavenly

ascent nor claims to be such. Yet, to make this argument is to ignore both

the language and the symbolic instruction implicit in Masonic ritual.

Ascent—social, moral, and spiritual—is a significant theme, expanded

376

and developed in each successive degree, and culminating in the Royal

Arch.

The symbols of ascent appearing in Craft Masonry are Jacob’s

Theological Ladder in the First Degree,42 the Winding Stair upon which

one ascends to obtain a reward in the Second Degree,43 and the

“raising” of the candidate in mystical embrace in the Third Degree. From

very early on, both Freemasons and their critics interpreted these

symbols as references to a heavenly ascent. For example, as early as

1720, Masons understood the Lodge itself as symbolically “reach[ing] . .

. to heaven.”44

The culminating event of the celestial ascent is the “exaltation” of the

recipient of the heavenly vision. In such accounts heaven is depicted as a

temple; the seer—or Masonic candidate—enters into the Holy of Holies

and experiences the visio dei or beatific vision of God. In so doing he is

transformed, reflecting the image of the Divine; he is clothed in divine

glory and crowned, and having received the secret knowledge of God

and mysteries of the heavens, he is seated on a throne beside God.

The theme of heavenly ascent is even more express in the Royal Arch

Degree. There is a “going up” to the Holy City from captivity in

Babylon, an entering into the Sacred Tabernacle, a passing through of

veils and challenges and tests of knowledge, a deliverance from a

subterranean cavern by which one recovers “That Which Was Lost,” and

finally an entry into the Holy of Holies and into the presence of a Grand

Council where the Mason is crowned for his labors and obtains secrets,

including the Secret of the Divine Name. Significantly, this is known by

Royal Arch Masons as “The Rite of Exaltation,” and Royal Arch

Companions are said to be “exalted.”

The Quorum of the Anointed

In May 1842 Joseph Smith created the Quorum of the Anointed, a

select secret society, also Masonic in conception, to whom he taught the

concept of heavenly ascent. Smith had been using the term “Quorum,” a

word also found in Masonic parlance, to indicate a group possessing a

certain level of priesthood. Since the 1700s, Masonic ritual had

determined the requisite number of men needed to open a lodge and

proceed to work or business. This number, known as a quorum, was

seven in an Entered Apprentice’s Lodge, five in a Fellow Craft’s, three in

a Master Mason’s, nine in a Chapter of Royal Arch Masons, and eleven

in a Commandery of Knights Templar.45

377

Smith first introduced the full endowment ceremony on May 4, 1842,

to a group of nine Mormon Freemasons (significantly, enough to make a

quorum in a Royal Arch Chapter).46 The morning before, a Tuesday,

Smith called together Lucius Scovil and a small group of men to assist

him in preparing the entire upper story of his brick store for a ritual

enactment of the biblical story of the Creation. From then until just

before noon on Wednesday, the men industriously arranged everything

“representing the interior of a temple as much as the circumstances

would permit, he [Smith] being with us dictating everything.”47 The

furnishings resembled those found in a Masonic temple, including the

mural of a pastoral scene,48 a carefully constructed altar, and canvas

fabric to section the room. Boxed and potted bushes and trees were set

up to adorn the “garden room.”49

Brigham Young remembered that the men were washed and anointed

in “a little side room” and given a new name and a specially marked

undergarment, as well as other ceremonial clothing. The next part of the

ceremony took place in the larger room, where candidates were given

instructions and tests “as we passed along from one department to

another.” During this portion of the ritual, they received “signs, tokens,

[and] penalties with the Key words.” These enabled them to gain their

eternal exaltation as well as to participate in the “true order of prayer.”50

From reminiscences and other documents, Thomas Bullock and

Willard Richards wrote the following description of the event for the

Manuscript History of the Church, compiled in 1845. In Masonic

terminology they described Smith instructing the Council

in the principles and order of the Priesthood, attending to washings, anointings, endowments and the communication of Keys pertaining to the Aaronic Priesthood, and so on to the highest order of Melchisedec Priesthood, setting forth the order pertaining to the ancient of Days, and all those plans and principles, by which any one is enabled to secure the fulness of those blessings, which have been prepared for the Church of the first born, and come up and abide in the presence of the Eloheim in the Eternal worlds. In this Council was instituted the Ancient

order of things for the first time in these last days.51

Andrew F. Ehat wrote that by this time in his ministry, Smith had

“developed and solidified his conceptions of the ordinances that were

essential to the restoration of ‘the ancient order of things.’” By

introducing temple ordinances, he institutionalized the Mormon theology

of God and man and “ceremonialized the process by which such powers,

blessings, and authority could be conferred on the ‘true and faithful.’”52

Over the next two years, the endowment ceremonies would be refined

378

and expanded and bestowed upon thirty-six men and twenty-nine women

before the death of the Prophet.53

At the April 28, 1842, meeting of the Relief Society, Smith promised

that women could eventually “come in possession of the privileges,

blessings, and gifts of the Priesthood” and would be given “the keys of

the kingdom” if they were virtuous and diligent.54 However, females

were not admitted into the Anointed Quorum until over a year later.

After a few gatherings that year for prayer and discussion of church

affairs, the Anointed Quorum met again (minus William Marks and

George Miller, who were absent) on May 26, 1843, to receive

“inst[r]uction on the prie[s]thood, the new and everlasting covena[n]t,

&c.” A later insertion has them being given “their endowments” again at

this time.55 This was perhaps in preparation for several sealings in

celestial marriage, which took place among some of the men and their

wives days later on May 28 and 29. The sealings included Joseph and

Emma Smith, James and Harriet Adams, Brigham and Mary Ann Angell

Young, Hyrum and Mary Fielding Smith, and Willard and Jenetta

Richards. Yet, later that summer on August 6, 1843, Brigham Young

stated that the fullness of the Melchisedek Priesthood had not yet been

given, “for any person to have the fulness of that pri[e]sthood must be a

king & a priest.”56 This understanding follows the ritual in the Royal

Arch Degree, when men receive priesthood and are crowned kings. That

this teaching was initiated by Joseph Smith is evident by his remarks on

August 27, 1843, that no man could be a joint heir with Christ “with out

bein[g] administered to by one having the same power & Authority of

Melchisede[c].” This authority came only from a “King or Priest to

God.”57

On September 28, 1843, women began to receive their endowments

and were admitted into the Quorum. In addition, Smith’s history for that

day reports: “by the common consent and unanimous voice of the

Council, Baurak Ale ^I^ was chosen President of the Quorum, and

anointed and ordained to the highe[s]t and holiest order of the

Priesthood. (with his companion [Emma]).”58 This “Second Anointing”

ordinance was a realization of the promise given in the endowment that

men would become kings and priests and women queens and priestesses.

By the end of the year, Emma had washed and anointed several of the

women in the Mansion House preparatory to their receiving the

endowment in the Red Brick Store, and Brigham and Mary Ann Young

379

had received the Second Anointing ordinance—the fullness of the

priesthood. The Prophet then directed Brigham Young to anoint the

Twelve “kings and priests to God.”59 By the end of January 1844, that

goal had been accomplished.

Finally, in December 1845, members of the Anointed Quorum who

had not died or apostatized were administered to in the Nauvoo Temple

at the first endowment ceremony given there. This allowed them to

receive the ordinance in a more complete fashion.

In describing her early endowment, Lucy M. Smith, married to Joseph

Smith’s cousin, George A. Smith, intermingled the Mormon ceremony

with contemporary women’s Freemasonry:

The party who anointed me in Emma’s bedroom . . . poured oil on my head and blessed me. . . . I had different clothing on from what I wore when I went to the house first. This anointing was for the purpose of initiating me in the . . . endowments. The Order of Rebecca is a side degree of Masonry, for I think I had one or two degrees of it in that lodge. . . . [T]here was no curtain separating the ladies from the gentlemen. . . . Afterwards we promised not to reveal our

endowments, or tell what it was.60

Masonic similarities are apparent in several unique features of the

Nauvoo Temple and its ritual. However, they seem to have been

transformed under the Prophet’s hand to adapt their symbolic meaning to

a fresh and innovative purpose. In these adaptations, Joseph Smith’s

particular ritual genius can be appreciated.

Nauvoo Temple Architecture and Furnishings

Nineteenth-century American Freemasons did not generally use

symbols to adorn their buildings. An exception to this rule might be the

square and compasses with a letter “G” that could be seen on the front of

some of the buildings. This custom was followed in the architecture of

the Nauvoo Masonic Hall, which was, like others of its time, a boxy

structure free of outer ornamentation. The Mormon temple in Nauvoo,

however, was decorated with exterior symbolic embellishment. Virtually

every symbol used in the temple’s outer architecture could be found on a

Masonic apron or tracing board. It was as if the temple was being used as

a giant tracing board upon the hill.

Joseph Smith had a pronounced influence in the placing of these

symbols. As in almost all aspects of Nauvoo’s government, scarcely

anything could be done without the influence and approval of the

Prophet. A revelation concerning the temple given on January 19, 1841,

has the Lord Jesus Christ stating: “I will show unto my servant Joseph all

things pertaining to this house” (D&C 124:42). To William Weeks, the

temple’s chief architect, Smith elaborated, “I have seen in vision the

380

splendid appearance of that building.” The Prophet directed the

draftsmen and workers to assemble it in the “pattern” that he had been

shown.61 A personal experience told by Josiah Quincy, visitor to

Nauvoo at the time the temple was being built, illustrates the direct

control Smith held over every detail of its ornamentation:

Near the entrance to the Temple we passed a workman who was laboring upon a huge sun, which he had chiselled from the solid rock. . . .

“General Smith,” said the man, looking up from his task, “is this like the face you saw in

vision?”

“Very near it,” answered the prophet, . . . “except that the nose is just a thought too

broad.”62

In a late description of the “order of architecture” on the Nauvoo

Temple, Wandle Mace, a foreman over its framework, gave the symbols

a biblical interpretation. Mace stated that the temple was “a

representation of the Church, the Bride, the Lamb’s wife.” He quoted the

book of Revelation 12:1: “And there appeared a great wonder in heaven;

a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon

her head a crown of twelve stars.” Mace said that this verse was

“portrayed in the beautifully cut stone of this grand temple.”63 When

taken together, however, the many Masonic elements occurring

collectively on the temple demonstrate not merely a biblical presence but

a Christian Masonic one.

As well as sun, moon, and star stones, the temple featured pillar and

arch motifs and inverted five-pointed stars that were carved in stone and

incorporated into stained glass windows. The edifice was crowned with a

Masonic angel as a weathervane; it wore a Royal Arch style turban. In

William Weeks’ blueprint drawings, the angel was pictured with the

Book of the Law, square, compasses, and flaming heart.

William Clayton, the Nauvoo Temple Recorder, described the attic

story of the Nauvoo Temple in a journal entry for December 11, 1845. Its

sectioning into parts is reminiscent of that done in the Royal Arch

Degree:

I will now give a description of the way the attic Story is finished. The main room is 88 feet 2 inches long and 28 feet 8 inches wide. It is arched over, and the arch is divided into six spaces by crop beams to support the roof. There are 6 Small rooms on each side [of] the main room

about 14 feet square each. The last one on the West end on each side is a little smaller. 64

381

Nauvoo Temple Sunstone.

Small rooms were assigned to Apostles, Seventies, Elders, High

Priests, and the High Council, with two rooms reserved as “preparation

rooms” for male and female members respectively. Here they were

washed and anointed, and received a “new name.” The main room was

“divided into apartments for the ceremonies of the endowment.”

Beginning from the door at the West end is an all[e]y about 5 feet wide extending in about 3 feet beyond the first Beam of the arch. On each side of the alley is a small room partitioned of[f] where they saints receive the first part of the ceremony or where the man is created and a help mate given to him. From these rooms to the third partition in the arch is planted the garden, which is nicely decorated and set off with shrubs and Trees in pots & Boxes to represent the Garden of Eden. In this apartment is also an alter. Here the man and woman are placed & commandments given to them in addition to what is given in the creation. Here also after the man & women has eaten the forbidden fruit is given to them a charge at the alter. And

the first and second tokens of the Aaronic Priesthood.65

Upon eating the forbidden fruit, initiates were thrust into a dark room

under the arch representing the “telestial kingdom or the world.” They

progressed through this and the terrestrial kingdom, receiving further

signs, tokens, and charges. After reaching the altar, they were given “the

key word on the five points of fellowship.” After every member of the

company received the tokens, words, and signs of the Melchizedek

382

Priesthood, they were led to the veil, where “they give each to Eloheem

[sic] through the vail and are then admitted into the Celestial Room.”66

The Celestial room of the Nauvoo Temple was a main area located “in

the space between the two divisions of the arch.” Its appearance was

comparable to many Masonic Lodge rooms and Celestial rooms in

modern LDS temples, adorned with ornate mirrors, paintings, portraits,

and maps. The room was comfortably carpeted and furnished with

handsome chairs, tables, and four splendid sofas. Upon a small table

opposite the large window on the East end of the room were placed “the

Celestial and terrestrial globes,” two paired globes usually found on

tripod stands or pillars in Masonic lodges.67

Mormon and Masonic Ritual Similarities

The Tyler

Both Masonic and Mormon rituals were restricted and confidential. In

order to hold their meetings inviolate, Freemasons employed an officer

of the lodge to guard the entrance. The Tyler’s responsibility was to

prepare the room for meetings and to check the eligibility of those

wishing to enter. He would inform latecomers upon what degree the

lodge was opened so that they could give the proper sign of recognition.

A Masonic Tyler carried a sword that represented the biblical flaming

sword carried by the cherubim who guarded the way to the Tree of Life

in the Garden of Eden. Often the sword was crafted with a wavy shape to

represent the flame.

Joseph Smith seemed to place a great deal of importance upon the

detecting of imposition such as was done by a Masonic Tyler. In a letter

to the Church dated September 6, 1842, which later became part of the

Doctrine and Covenants, Smith writes of “the voice of [the archangel]

Michael on the banks of the Susquehanna, detecting the devil when he

appeared as an angel of light!” (D&C 128:20).

Smith preached both publicly and privately on keys that would allow

one to distinguish between angels of light and of darkness. As early as

June 27, 1839, in a meeting with the Twelve, he presented to them one

key “among the vast number of the Keys of the Kingdom of God.” By

means of sensing corporeality with a handshake, he told them, they could

tell if a personage was an angel, a devil, or a deceased person who had

not yet been resurrected. On May 1, 1842, in the Grove, Smith preached

that the keys of the kingdom consisted of “certain signs & words by

which false spirits & personages may be detected from true.— which

383

cannot be revealed to the Elders till the Temple is completed.” He further

stated that the elders must know all the signs in heaven, earth, and hell

“to be endued with power to finish their work & prevent imposition.”68

Two incidents suggest that a Masonic-style Tyler was utilized at the

introduction of the endowment, one at Smith’s Red Brick Store and the

other in the Nauvoo Temple. The first comes from Ebenezer Robinson,

former editor and publisher of the Times and Seasons, the Church’s

official newspaper. The journalist walked one day with the Prophet to his

store. As they parted company, Smith climbed the back stairs to the

upper floor to attend to the administration of the ordinances. Moments

later, Robinson remembered that he had something else to say to the

Prophet. When he ascended the stairs, he instead found John Taylor “in a

long white garment, with a drawn sword in his hand, evidently

representing the ‘cheribims and flaming sword which was placed at the

east of the garden of Eden, to guard the tree of life.’” Taylor informed

Robinson that Smith was already inside and could not be summoned.69

A more explicit mention of a Tyler comes from John D. Lee’s

description of his duties as a worker in the Nauvoo Temple. The Masonic

language he employs in this account, as well as terms which correspond

with aspects of Solomon’s Temple, are unmistakable:

Tuesday Dec 16th 1845 about 4 oclock in the morning I entered the Poarch in lower court where I met the Porter who admitted me through the door which led to the foot or nea[r]ly so of a great flight of Stairs which by ascending led me to the door of outer court, which I found tyled within by an officer. I having the proper implements of that degree gained admittance through the outer and inner courts which opened and led to the sacred departments, the Titles of these apartments are not lawful for me to give at present. having entered I found myself alone with the Tyler that kept the inner courts or rather the door of the inner court, set about & soon got fires up in the different rooms and setting things in order—for the day—at about 9

oclock in the morning the washing and anointing commenced.70

Lee’s deliberate use of Masonic terminology associated with the

temple demonstrates his reverence for even the menial work he was

performing. Lee firmly linked Smith’s teachings about Freemasonry with

the restored ordinances in which he was now dutifully engaged. Like the

Tylers guarding the work of a lodge, Latter-day Saints involved in

detecting imposition participated with Smith in protecting divine secrets

and keeping them sacred.

The Creation Drama

Joseph Smith’s endowment ritual drew upon Masonic motifs, biblical

stories, and esoteric legends passed down from ancient pseudepigrapha.

Of the thirty-six men who received the endowment when Smith was

384

alive, thirty-three were documented Freemasons. To these men, the new

ritual was still familiar and often identified with Freemasonry. After

washing and anointing in a small side room, the ritual drama began with

a review of the creation of the earth—a theme that had been in use in

eighteenth-century Masonic rituals. While the current American working

is abbreviated, earlier versions of Masonic ritual traditionally included as

its backdrop an unfolding of the periods of divine creation from

unorganized matter to the present orderly state:

[F]or before he was pleased to command this vast W into Perfection, the Elements and the Materials of the Creation lay blended without Form or Distinction. Darkness was upon the Face of the Deep, and the Spirit of G moved upon the Face of the Waters; when the Great J , as an example to M , that things of Moment ought to be done with Deliberation,

was pleased to be S D in periodically bringing it from 71 to Perfection . Chaos

Hearing the words “Let there be light” in the Mormon endowment

Creation narrative, Nauvoo Freemasons would doubtless be reminded of

the Rite of Illumination in which they had participated in the Entered

Apprentice Degree. In this ritual context, Man is created and by degrees

is brought to philosophical and spiritual light. In Masonry, this bringing

to light is still associated with the potent allegory of God’s work of

creation.72 Just as the Entered Apprentice’s degree is calculated to bring

a man to light when his hoodwink is removed, the endowment was

Smith’s “response to skepticism”73 that utilized early Masonic themes to

reveal the Divine hand in the creation of all things.

The Number Three

Number mysticism plays an important part in Freemasonry. One

example of this is the frequent purposeful use of the number three. In the

Craft Lodges there are three degrees, three perambulations around an

altar, and three ruffians who assault Hiram Abiff. The Royal Arch sign is

the “Triple Tau,” consisting of three T’s united. Also present in the Royal

Arch are three stones of the arch, three Principals, three Sojourners, and

three words that form the Grand Omnific Royal Arch Word, with three

parts to each word.

The appearance of trios in Freemasonry calls to mind the Christian

Trinity and has deep allegorical significance. The three officers who lead

the ceremonies include the Worshipful Master, Senior Warden, and

Junior Warden. In the Mormon endowment, the allegory is expressly

revealed by the presence of Elohim, Jehovah, and Michael, with a later

appearance of Peter, James, and John. As part of the pre-1990 LDS

temple ceremony, patrons recited three syllables in a sacred language,

385

said to be Adamic. The word is analogous to several tri-syllabic code

words that are given to Masonic seekers in the Royal Arch Degree.

In another example of the use of three in Masonic ritual, the words of

the Master of the Lodge are repeated verbatim by the Senior Warden and

then the Junior Warden in a three-fold composition. This emphasizes the

line of authority. The Master’s words are communicated in a chain

through his representatives. Again, the Mormon iteration of this practice

highlights the Masonic inference. In the pre-2019 endowment, Elohim

gives his instructions to Jehovah, who repeats them to Michael, who puts

them into action. The sequence is then repeated in a series of reports

back to Elohim. Through this ritual, Mormons are meant to understand

that the chain of authority they observe in their ecclesiastical experience

literally connects heaven and earth.

Freemasonry includes four obligations: one for each of the three Blue

Lodge degrees, and one associated with the Royal Arch. Similarly, there

are four covenants made in the nineteenth-century Mormon temple

ceremony, each associated with a sacred sign, token (handclasp), and

penalty. In his book The Mysteries of Godliness, David Buerger has

made a side-by-side comparison of the signs, tokens, and penalties in

William Morgan’s 1826 exposé of his local Craft degrees and former

Mormon Catherine Lewis’s 1848 description of the LDS temple

ceremony, which demonstrates that the two ceremonies are almost

identical.74 Additional near-contemporary Masonic exposures, such as

Giddins’s Anti Masonic Almanac for the year 1831, make these

correspondences evident by means of simple line drawings.75 This

portion of the LDS temple ceremony is perhaps the most distinct

evidence for direct assimilation of Masonry into Mormonism.

Signs, Tokens, and Penalties

Hearkening back to operative Masonry, signs, tokens, and penalties

were observed as a means of recognizing a member’s position in the

craft. As Freemasonry gradually became more speculative, this system

was expanded. Particularly in the Master Mason degree, the tokens

acquired the allusion of divine power, the power by which mortals are

raised into immortality. In The Spirit of Masonry, William Hutchinson

explains that “the MASTER MASON represents a man under the

christian doctrine, saved from the grave of iniquity, and raised to the

faith of salvation.”76

386

The Mormon ritual used the same or similar tokens, signs, and

penalties, but they were given more overt religious significance. In the

early Mormon endowment ceremony, not only the final token but all four

alluded to some aspect of divine grace. Each one was itself a vehicle of

God’s mercy and also a point of entrance by which one could receive

divine knowledge. Each was revelatory of the character or nature of God.

Placing these together in the endowment ceremony emphasized their

significance.

The sign and grip for a Fellow Craft degree, from Edward Giddins, Anti Masonic Almanac, no.

IV (1831).

In a discourse given in the Nauvoo Temple, December 28, 1845,

Brigham Young explained the peculiarly Mormon application of the

signs in prayer:

There are 4 Penal Signs & 4 Penal Tokens and should I want to address the Thorone (the Throne) to enquire after Ancient things which transpired on Plannets that rol[l]ed away befofore this Plannet came into existence—I should use my New Name which is Ancient & refers to Anci[e]nt things. Should I wish to enquire for [crossed out word] ^present^ things I should use my own Name which refers to presant things & should I want to enquire for

[crossed out word] ^Future^ things= I would use the 3rd Name which refers to the first token

of the Melchizadich Priesthood. 77

Early Mormons thus associated the signs and tokens with keys of asking

and receiving.

Three Distinct Knocks

The earliest known Masonic legends of the death of the Master and

loss of divine truth and power are associated with “three great knocks.”

In Pritchard’s 1737 exposure of the Master Mason degree, the candidate

is asked:

387

Ex. What was that which was lost and is now found?

R. The Master-Mason’s Word.

Ex. How was it lost?

R. By Three Great Knocks, or the Death of our Master 78 Hiram .

This refers to the murder of Hiram Abiff, killed by three blows of his

assassins. Echoing this point, “three distinct knocks” are given at the

entrance door of the lodge. Going through the door of the lodge

represents moving to a new phase of existence where the initiate’s very

being is about to be transformed. His former understanding must pass

away before he can receive the further light that his initiation offers him.

As Wilmshurst expresses it: “‘Mors janua vitae’; death to self is the

portal to true life. There is no other way.”79

Mormonism utilizes this symbol as part of the temple endowment,

significantly placing the three knocks towards the end of the ceremony in

connection with a ritual embrace (originally “The Five Points of

Fellowship”) and passing through the veil. Taken together, these symbols

are a vivid and powerful allusion to the patrons’ death, transformation,

and resurrection, and what Freemasons would know as the entrance into

the “Celestial Lodge above.”

Both rituals represent the sojourn of life. The initiates are tested based

upon what they have learned. Smith’s transposition of the knocks

demonstrates his understanding of Masonic symbolism and his facility

with ritual itself. He recognizes the purpose of the symbol at the door of

the lodge but gives it a more prominent place at the climax of the

Mormon ceremony.

Five Points of Fellowship

The ceremony at the veil, beginning with the three knocks of death and

concluding with a sacred embrace with an officiator representing God, is

the culmination of the temple endowment. Contact with the officiator

upon “Five Points of Fellowship” was a part of Latter-day Saint temple

liturgy until 1990. It was an important emblematic ritual that had its

origins in Nauvoo-era Freemasonry.

The Masonic “Five Points of Fellowship” served several purposes. The

brief ritual embrace instructed the Mason in fraternal duties, emphasizing

the need for brotherly love, co-operation, and unity; it provided a mode

of recognition; and, significantly, it stood as a symbol of the Mason’s

hope of a resurrection, in which he would be raised “from a dead level . .

. on the five points of fellowship, to a living perpendicular.”80 William

Morgan’s Illustrations of Masonry explains the Masonic significance of

388

each of the points of fellowship. “Foot to foot” represents a Mason

stepping out of his way to extend mercy and benevolence to his brother.

“Knee to knee” describes the bent knee during intercessory prayer and in

asking forgiveness for his own sins. “Breast to breast” cautions the

Freemason to guard the secrets he learns within his breast. “Hand to

back” recalls the Mason’s duty to support and lift up his brother. This

may also hold some symbolism of being “raised up” in other ways.

Finally, “mouth to ear” instructs the Mason to whisper good counsel into

his brother’s ear and to warn him of coming danger.81 The Mormon

version of the Five Points of Fellowship was similarly described as: (1)

inside of right foot by the side of right foot, (2) knee to knee, (3) breast

to breast, (4) hand to back, and (5) mouth to ear.82 Freemasons found

additional meaning in this ritual—it came to symbolize human

perfection. In the words of Paul to the Ephesians, the Church exists for

the “perfecting of the Saints”—that perfect man coming “unto the

measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ” (Eph. 4:12–13). In other

words, the participant in this temple rite would stand foot to foot, knee to

knee, breast to breast—matching the Divine, feature to feature and face

to face.

In the now-obsolete Mormon ceremony, the petitioner was not allowed

into the symbolic presence of the Lord until he or she had conversed

with Him upon the Five Points of Fellowship “through the veil.” Since

one cannot enter into the Celestial sphere without first having died and

then been raised, this typology is an important part of the ritual.

Freemasons associate each of the five points of fellowship with

scriptures in the Bible, and Mormon apologists have claimed that these

Bible verses are the point of origin for both traditions. However, a

comparison demonstrates that the Masonic points and the Mormon

points of fellowship are much more similar to each other than either is to

the biblical passages. For example, one biblical source for the Five

Points recounts the story of the prophet Elisha raising a child from death:

“And he (Elisha) went up, and lay upon the child, and put his mouth

upon his mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his

hands, and he stretched himself upon the child; and the flesh of the child

waxed warm” (2 Kgs. 4:34). Clearly, the Mormon ritual owes more of a

debt to the Masonic rite than to the biblical passage.

Similarly, resemblances to other ancient traditions are less pronounced

than those of the nineteenth-century Masonic ritual. Brent Metcalfe has

remarked that Hugh Nibley’s comparisons of Egyptian embraces “pale in

389

comparison to the identical congruity between the Masonic and LDS

embrace. Nibley’s ritual verisimilitude also suffers from the lack of a

coherent theory of ritual interdependence.” Metcalfe concludes that

“Smith’s Points clearly owe their genealogy to 19th-century Masonry,

not some antediluvian tradition.”83

The Five Points of Fellowship, in William Morgan, Illustrations of Masonry, 1827 ed.

Gerald B. Gardner, a Freemason, was responsible for much of the

modern revival of Wicca. He brought some of his personal idiosyncrasies

as well as borrowings from Freemasonry into this occultist group. Thus,

in Wicca we see the ritual of the “Fivefold Kiss,” a form of the Five

Points of Fellowship. The Fivefold Kiss is a ceremony involving kissing

five parts of the body. Each kiss given is accompanied by a blessing that

is reminiscent of the early LDS initiatory work:

Blessed be thy feet, that have brought thee in these ways

Blessed be thy knees, that shall kneel at the sacred altar

Blessed be thy womb, without which we would not be

Blessed be thy breasts, formed in beauty and in strength

Blessed be thy lips, that shall utter the sacred names.84

It is intriguing that the Wiccan ceremony preserves the symbolic

nature of the elements, while the Mormon ritual did not. This is perhaps

the reason the ritual did not survive in the LDS Church. As the

390

significance, symbolism, and historical background of certain Mormon

rituals were lost, they became less vital to temple worship.

Recovery of the Lost Word

The loss and recovery of something magical or sacred has always been

a powerful myth for humanity, as seen in ancient legends such as

Shangri-La, Atlantis, the Fountain of Youth, the Ark of the Covenant,

Excalibur, or the Holy Grail. This same idea can be observed throughout

early Masonic ritual in Enoch’s pillars of knowledge, the body of Hiram

Abiff, and in a golden delta inscribed with a message to mankind.

In Freemasonry, the Lost Word represents the lost Name of God—

something that Masons are tasked to search for and recover. As with

many other Masonic concepts, Joseph Smith worked to bring the idea of

the Lost Mason’s Word into literal reality. The ability to use the Lost

Word was the ability to use God’s creative power. The idea of building a

temple was to create a space where Latter-day Saints would have an

opportunity to obtain and be taught to use the Word. William Clayton

explained, “[the man and the woman] are admitted into the terrestrial

kingdom, where at the alter [sic] they receive an additional charge and

the second token of the Melchizedek Priesthood and also the key word

on the five points of fellowship.”85

Here, the Word is identified as a “key word,” as it is in the Book of

Abraham. One of the figures in this book of scripture represents “God . .

. clothed with power and authority; with a crown of eternal light upon his

head; representing also the grand Key-words of the Holy Priesthood, as

revealed to Adam in the Garden of Eden, as also to Seth, Noah,

Melchizedek, Abraham, and all to whom the Priesthood was revealed”

(Abr., facsim. 2, fig. 3). Another figure “represents God . . . revealing

through the heavens the grand Key-words of the Priesthood” (Abr.,

facsim. 2, fig. 7).

In the Mormon endowment, just as in Freemasonry, the restoration of

the Divine Name occurs in a five-point embrace. According to William

Morgan’s Illustrations of Masonry¸ after being whispered a tri-syllabic

code word in the embrace,

[T]he candidate [is told] to repeat it, telling him at the same time that he must never give it in any manner other than that which he receives it.—He is also told that [the code word] signifies

marrow in the bone.86

By virtue of having experienced the Masonic ritual, Mormon

Freemasons were prepared to know that the name given at the ceremony

at the veil is not the name of God, but only a substitute. The purpose of

391

the endowment was to teach initiates how to part the veil and obtain

knowledge. The quest for the true name of God was to continue

throughout mortality.

Passing the Veils

In the United States, the dramatic ceremony of Passing the Veils

appears in the Royal Arch Degree.87 It is based on a description of King

Solomon’s Temple in Josephus’s Antiquities of the Jews. The first-

century historian wrote that Solomon “also had veils of blue, and purple,

and scarlet, and the brightest and softest linen, with the most curious

flowers wrought upon them, which were to be drawn before those

doors.”88

According to Masonic tradition, those who had been liberated from

Babylonian captivity and desired to participate in rebuilding the holy city

and its temple had to pass through these three sections of the tabernacle,

ostensibly built by the exiles on their return from Babylon. Royal Arch

ritual depicts the traversing of these sections, which are divided by

colored veils. At each partition, there are readings of the Book of Exodus

and passwords recalling Old Testament characters or phrases. 89 The

ceremony of the Passing of the Veils signifies—among other things—the

process of discovery and enlightenment that comes with Masonic

progression. After a threefold test, the candidates pass through a fourth

and final white veil and symbolically enter the presence of the Prophet,

Priest, and Scribe in the Holy of Holies, also designated as the “Supreme

Grand Master” or God.90

Royal Arch Freemasons have understood their ritual as an allegory of

our future life after passing through the barrier of death. In both Mormon

and Masonic ritual, the veil represents that which separates humans from

divine knowledge (i.e., mortality). God is depicted as being on the other

side of a veil, and the passing of mortals across that veil suggests their

enlightenment. The LDS endowment ritual presents yet another example

of Masonic allegory made literal. Brigham Young described the purpose

of the ceremony in language that recalls the Masonic Rite of Exaltation,

with the associated Passing of the Veils:

Your endowment is, to receive all those ordinances in the House of the Lord, which are necessary for you, after you have departed this life, to enable you to walk back to the presence of the Father, passing the angels who stand as sentinels, being enabled to give them the key words, the signs and tokens, pertaining to the Holy Priesthood, and gain your eternal

exaltation in spite of earth and hell.91

392

Like the Mormon endowment, the Royal Arch Degree includes a

symbolic ascent, a knocking, a passing through veils with tests of

knowledge, a recovery of “That Which Was Lost,” and an entering into a

Grand Council (which Masons are told represented a Grand Council in

Heaven) in the presence of which the person is crowned a Companion.

According to Masonic symbolist W. L. Wilmshurst,

The Royal Arch is the natural conclusion and fulfillment of the Third Degree. The latter inculcates the necessity of mystical death and dramatizes the process of such death and revival therefrom into newness of life. The Royal Arch carries the process a stage farther, by showing its fulfilment in the “exaltation” or apotheosis of him who has undergone it. The Master Mason’s Degree might be said to be represented in the terms of Christian theology by the formula “He suffered and was buried and rose again”, whilst the equivalent of the exaltation

ceremony is “He ascended into heaven.” 92

At the end of each Masonic Degree and following the presentation of

the pre-1990 temple endowment ceremony, the initiate was given a

lecture that reviewed the elements of the ritual presented thus far. For

example, a portion of the LDS Lecture at the Veil stated:

You were first washed and anointed, a garment was placed upon you, and a new name was given you. This name you should always remember; but you must never reveal it to any person, except at the veil. . . .

You then entered [the Creation Room]. [There] you heard the voices of persons

representing a council of the Gods.93

In the Royal Arch lecture, a similar review takes place:

You have been conducted around the outer courts of the Temple-viewed its beautiful proportions. . . . You have been introduced into the Middle Chamber—and you learned—by the example of our ancient brethren—to reverence the sacred name of Deity. . . .

You have wrought in the quarries-and exhibited specimens of your skill—and have been

taught how to receive—in a proper manner—your Masonic wages.94

Freemasons are then told that they can “only justly claim the noble name

of free mason” if they have entered into the spirit of the ceremonies, tried

to understand the full import of the symbols, and had the great and

fundamental principles of the institution deeply impressed upon their

minds.95 Likewise, Latter-day Saints were told to “give prayerful and

earnest thought to the holy endowment” in order to “obtain the

understanding and spirit of the work done in the temples of the Lord.”

They were charged to “strive to comprehend the glorious things

presented to you this day. . . . [T]hese are what are termed the mysteries

of godliness,” which enable patrons to understand the Savior’s words in

John 17:3: “This is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true

God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.”96

The Power of Ritual

393

One of the most sublime uses of scripture is to ritualize it, thereby

making it experientially available. Masonic ritual serves this purpose. By

the enactment of its myths, it brings candidates into sacred time and

space so that participants share together in divine mystery and

experience divine power. Masonry’s mysteries forge men together into a

brotherhood, bound by voluntary oaths, ethical standards, and common

moral and spiritual values.97 Using symbolism, allegory, and scriptural

reenactment, Masons learn how to achieve union with the Divine: they

not only read the sacred myths, but actually enter into them, thereby

becoming “partakers of the divine nature” (1 Pet. 1:4).

The story of the collapse of Solomon’s Temple and its rebuilding is a

powerful and meaningful symbol to Freemasons. It is a metaphor for

fallen human nature restored by God to something greater than it was.

By their very nature, all humans fall, deteriorate, and crumble. It is a

great comfort to be able to rely on a power that lifts, strengthens, and

rebuilds. To Masons, the allegorical telling is as important as any literal

rebuilding of the temple. They can relate the inspiring tale to themselves

and their quest for improvement.

The context of Masonic ritual includes the unfolding of the periods of

creation and a description of our mortal sojourn. By degrees, man is

brought to light. Joseph Smith followed a similar pattern, using the same

structure and formalities as Masonic rites. He ritualized the story of

Adam and Eve and placed participants in mythic time, which patrons

could experience as past, present, or future events. The Adam and Eve

story simultaneously teaches truths about the creation of humankind,

figurative events in their present state of being, or the future creation of

worlds as a god. In this way, Smith was not slavishly borrowing from

Masonry, nor harking back to an earlier tradition, but creatively adapting

Masonic rites.

Hundreds of Nauvoo Freemasons, as well as countless more who had

lived through the disclosure of Masonry resulting from the Morgan

affair, would have noticed similarities between Mormon and Masonic

ritual. These included oaths with the use of a Bible, vows not to reveal

ceremonial secrets, and prayer offered while kneeling at an altar. Both

ceremonies contained identical phrases, such as “Has it a name?” “three

distinct knocks,” and “Let him enter.” Mormon and Masonic rituals used

dialogues or catechisms to test initiates or to solicit passwords. They

gave initiates a new name. Both ceremonies comprised acting out a ritual

drama in which the initiate represents a biblical figure: Adam or Eve in

the endowment, and Hiram Abiff in Masonry. As in the Royal Arch

394

degree, initiates wore priestly robes of an Old Testament pattern and

passed through a veil. Mormons were not ashamed to claim the

connection between the two systems. Eliza Young wrote: “It is claimed

that the mysterious rites were taken from Masonry, and that the

Endowments are a direct outgrowth of the secret society. Brigham Young

delights, I know, to speak of it as ‘Celestial Masonry.’”98

Joseph Smith believed in an ancient, authentic Masonry. As he began

the work of literally building an Old Testament-style temple and

restoring ancient religion, he came up with something magnificent that

inspired both him and his followers. He was comfortable and skilled with

the Masonic ritual style and populated the temple with a ceremony

supporting his views on priesthood. In doing so, he tapped into the

emotion of the legend and began to recover real truths about the human

soul. To understand this point is to see in some small measure what it

was about Masonry that captured the imaginations of men for

generations. It deepens one’s understanding and appreciation of the

Masonic degrees and unveils the profound ritual power in Masonry—

something that cannot be passed over as mere pageantry. The Mormon

temple endowment oftentimes makes explicit the concealed Masonic

meaning in a shared ritual element. At other times, portions of the LDS

ritual yield increased meaning when understood in their original Masonic

context.

Mormon temple ritual sacralized Masonic concepts such as the Five

Points of Fellowship. While retaining the fundamental symbolic

significance of these ideas, Smith made them explicit and literal. The

Mormon prophet sought to transform and elevate Masonic ritual into

ordinances holding divine, salvific power reflecting his own vision of the

heavenly pattern. Thus, the endowment recognizes the concealed

meaning in Masonry and makes it more overt. Mormon temple rites

claim to be a fulfillment, adding divine power to Masonic forms. These

rituals respond to Freemasonry rather than imitate it. Masonic in style

and structure, and redolent with scriptural themes, the endowment brings

the initiate into fellowship with Deity. For this reason, Smith was

anxious to bestow this endowment upon every member of the Church as

part of his divine mission.

Nauvoo Saints were tutored to embrace the principles of Smith’s

radical social and spiritual vision by oath or covenant. Obedience to

these vows overturned contemporary economic, social, spiritual, and

moral conventions in favor of a society more closely aligned to the

Prophet’s revealed ideal. The pattern for a renewed society was revealed

395

in the temple through its ordinances and instruction. The Mormon temple

endowment not only speaks to Latter-day Saints’ relationship to God but

also to their relationships with family and neighbors. Chains of virtuous

social action are forged in the temple. According to Smith, Zion—the

order of heaven—is the society of exalted beings. It is the grand leveling

principle of Masonry applied socially where there will be “no poor

among them” (Moses 7:18) and where they will be one in spiritual

blessing and temporal reward.

Notes

396

397

principle is also consistent with what may be found in Royal Arch Masonry and—together with the content of the Book of Mormon itself—argues powerfully for Smith’s early contact with the Masonic tradition. It is perhaps best to say that Mormonism shares with Masonry themes consistent with heavenly ascent in the ancient world.

398

399

400
