LOOK TO THE WEST: THE POLITICAL

KINGDOM OF GOD

Go, Brothers! Thus enjoined, farewell!

Spread o’er the darkened West;

Illume each clime

With ART sublime,

The noblest truths attest.

—Rob Morris, Masonic Odes and Poems

Following early Christian practice, Masonic lodges are symbolically oriented due east and west. The Master’s station in a lodge is in the east, reminding Freemasons that “as the sun rises in

the East to open and govern the day,”1 the Master’s duty is to open and

govern his lodge. Similarly, the Senior Warden stands in the west to

assist the Master in this work. While the Master represents wisdom, or

the power to conceive, the Senior Warden symbolizes the strength

needed to bring about the Master’s plan; he is therefore charged to

remember this duty with the words: “Look well to the West.”2

For early American Freemasons, the phrase “Look well to the West”

was a positive admonition from a fraternity that was fundamentally

Christian in character, rational in perspective, tolerant to religion,

enlightened in philosophy, and, in this sense, revolutionary. In the first

fifty years of the history of the United States, Freemasonry had profound

influence on society, with Masonic political influence in the states being

apparent from its very beginnings. Freemasonry was imported from

England to the large seaport cities of the colonies: Boston, Philadelphia,

Savannah, Charleston, and Portsmouth were sites of the first official

lodges. Their influence was seen during the Revolution—Benjamin

Franklin served as Grand Master in Philadelphia, and George

Washington and most of his generals were Freemasons. Nearly one in

twenty-five eligible adult males were Masons in the 1820s, a number

which does not include those women and children affiliated with

adoptive rites and orders.3 The Lodge was perceived as a social good,

which spread liberty and encouraged public virtue. Many leading

religious and political figures chose to join as part of the traditional

401

course for entering public life, as a place to learn and practice genteel

behavior, and as a way of encouraging the love that held society together.

Yet, by the early 1800s the tide of fraternal fortunes shifted on the

waters of American social and political change. The William Morgan

affair of 1826 was a watershed event. Manipulated and skillfully guided

by the politically savvy, it stirred the passions of Americans, resulting in

the establishment of the Anti-Masonic Movement that launched the first

political third party in United States history.4 What had once been seen

as a social good was increasingly viewed as a social evil, and even

positive aspects of the Lodge were cast in an unholy light.

As the nascent anti-Masonic political movement aspired to become a

major party, it attracted men of real political acumen, such as Thurlow

Weed and Thaddeus Stevens. Political anti-Masons argued that a free

society could not thrive in the presence of secret organizations, that

secret rituals concealed immoral practices, and that secret combinations

colluded outside the boundaries of the political process. Most troubling

to these thinkers, Freemasonry seemed to blur the line between the

religious and the secular. In one of his speeches before the Legislature,

Stevens laid out a concise summary of the position and platform of the

Anti-Masonic Party. He charged that Masonry gave an unmerited

advantage to Masons over honest American citizens in ordinary business

as well as politics and that it prevented the just administration of the

legal system.5 He further contended that it contained oaths inconsistent

with law, was anti-republican, promoted political and social favoritism,

and violated the Constitution by encouraging aristocratic power. In 1834,

Stevens asserted that Freemasonry had formed “a regularly organized

kingdom within the limits of this [American] republic.”6

In retrospect, many of these concerns seem to have been unfounded—

largely an expression of much broader social and political tensions of the

day. Yet, Stevens’s fears reflected the negative perception of

Freemasonry held by a growing segment of American society. While

there is not and never was a Masonic conspiracy to gain control of the

national political life of Americans, nor has there ever been a literal

“Masonic Political Empire” with its seat in New York, American anti-

Masonic suspicions seemed confirmed in the apparent abduction and

murder of William Morgan by conspiring Masons.

In 1842, John C. Bennett, former confidante of Joseph Smith and

disaffected member of the Church’s governing First Presidency, wrote a

widely read exposé, The History of the Saints, or, An Exposé of Joe Smith

402

and Mormonism. Here, he pointed to Jackson County, Missouri, as the

prospective seat of Mormon power in Joseph Smith’s aspirations to

establish a vast religious empire. Bennett warned that while recent

providence had scattered the Mormons and foiled their immediate plans

for a world government, the nation should be vigilant regarding future

Mormon plans:

As the GREAT PLOT AND LEAGUE is now fully before the nation . . . the public weal

requires the vigilant eye of the body politic to LOOK WELL TO THE WEST!7

Bennett may have hoped language so reminiscent of Masonic ritual

discourse would rouse fears against the Latter-day Saints amongst

Americans who had shuddered at the hobgoblin of Masonic political

subversion and had successfully dismantled the entire Masonic order.

Bennett’s use of a Masonic phrase such as “look well to the West” when

speaking of the political designs of the Church leadership and the

Mormon theocratic kingdom was bound to raise troubling questions for

his contemporaries.

Smith’s Mormonism was one of the last great flowerings inspired by

pre-Morgan style American Freemasonry. Key Latter-day Saint rituals

were performed in what Bennett called “Order Lodge,” and sermons,

new scripture, and doctrine all bore the marks of Masonic influence.

Largely incorporating the Masonic worldview, Mormonism was seen by

some as a fulfillment of millenarian Masonic hopes. Yet for others, it

may have seemed that the very literal Mormon political kingdom had

grown to embody everything Stevens had feared about Masonry. From

the School of the Prophets in Kirtland and the Danites in Missouri to the

Nauvoo Legion, the Mormon Masonic lodges, the Anointed Quorum,

and even the Relief Society, the Mormons participated in exclusivist,

ritualized, covenant-bound associations. These, in addition to the

cohesive, economically self-sufficient, and largely self-governing

communities they had established, isolated them from their neighbors

and set them up not simply as a group of worshippers but as a people

apart. This emerging theocratic kingdom struck fear in the hearts of

many, both inside and outside the Church. Concerns expressed regarding

Smith and his Mormon kingdom sound remarkably like Thaddeus

Stevens’s fears of the Masonic Institution.

403

When William Morgan disappeared, it was not the allegations that he

was kidnapped to prevent him from revealing Masonic secrets that set off

such bitter anti-Masonic sentiment throughout New York and the

Northeast. It was not even the idea that Freemasons may have murdered

him for threatening to reveal the innermost secrets of the Royal Arch.

These claims alone could never have generated the first organized third-

party movement in American political history. This occurred only when

it began to seem that Freemasonry was fully removed and isolated from

the superintending power of the law. Police cooperated with Masons

from many different lodges. Fellow Freemasons were allowed to sit on

the jury. Evidence was covered up, and the investigation was stalled over

and over. Although “the event implicated Masons all the way from the

Finger Lakes to the Niagara frontier,”8 the only convictions were Eli

Bruce, the deputy sheriff of Niagara County (sentenced to two years and

404

four months), and carriage driver John Whitney (sentenced to one year

and three months).9 It was only then that people all over the nation

responded with growing indignation. They “began to organize politically,

to form new counter-associations, to publish newspapers and magazines,

and to doubt whether Masonic morality and the rule of law could ever

coexist in the American republic.”10 By the late 1820s there was

widespread disapproval and fear of any political influence that could be

gained by way of membership in a lodge. Even Masons themselves were

largely horrified by the Morgan case, which led to a mass exodus from

lodges throughout the United States.

In the heyday of the Anti-Masonic Party, Freemasonry was in a steep

decline. In New York over four hundred lodges became defunct, and in

Illinois the Grand Lodge itself went under. In round numbers, it is

estimated that of the 50,000 Masons in America at the time, 45,000

withdrew their membership and renounced their oaths, forcing the

closure of two thousand lodges.11 There no longer remained a large

enough body of Masonic brothers to wield much political influence, even

were they so inclined. Gradually, as Masonic historian Stephen C.

Bullock describes, anti-Masonic fervor began to cool. The few remaining

brothers in shrunken lodges “could not provide the plausible demon that

opponents required.”12

A decade later, the Mormons were in the public eye, saying and doing

things that raised the old fears about Masonry. In quotations, newspaper

articles, exposés, and journals, the Latter-day Saints passionately

identified with the kingdom of God prophesied by Daniel to come forth

in the Last Times. In their zeal to build this kingdom, they began

relinquishing an identity as United States citizens, freeing themselves

from the country’s laws and alienating their neighbors in the process.

Danite leader George W. Robinson stated that “when God spoke he must

be obeyed, whether his word came in contact with the laws of the land or

not; and that, as the kingdom spoken of by Daniel has been set up, its

laws must be obeyed.”13 Later in Nauvoo, while still in the First

Presidency, Sidney Rigdon recalled that a principal reason for

harassment in Missouri was because the Saints “would not have any

thing to do with the laws[. W]e did not break any[;] we lived above

them[,] so they sent a mob upon us.”14 In 1857, William Smith looked

back at groups of men under the control of Brigham Young in Nauvoo

before moving west, labelling them “secret Danite banditti, or

405

‘destroying angels,’ as they are called by the Mormons.”15 William

exposed the “sixth degree” charge he said was given to this company as

follows:

Mormon, though you have eaten of the bread of life, you are still liable not only to the natural but to an eternal death. But such can only befall you through faithlessness to your oath of initiation, for otherwise you are superior to all mortal sin. BETRAY THAT OATH and you hang for all time and burn for all eternity. . . . Against a Mormon you must never fight; against a Mormon you must never swear. Your words must comfort them—your money must succor them. As judges you must deliver them—as jurors, acquit them—as brothers and sisters, live and die for them. You must exalt them into all offices which they covet; you must abandon clan, kin and country for their sake; and in fine, you must make Mormonism and everything that effects its interests the great aim and object of your life. And now go forth upon your mission and be this your motto:

An oath I have given

Let me honor it well;

For to keep it is heaven,

And to break it is hell.16

After 1840, Mormonism grew in size and influence and became a

concern to local caucuses. Thomas C. Sharp, editor of the Warsaw Signal

and a former lawyer, first expressed his apprehensions about Mormon

political influence after being invited to the Nauvoo Temple cornerstone-

laying ceremony on April 6, 1841. With growing alarm, he watched a

parade of fourteen companies of the Nauvoo Legion, accompanied by

two companies of volunteers from Ohio and a brass band. The ceremony

began with hymns and prayers, and it continued with speeches by Joseph

Smith and other Church leaders speaking “about the prospects for the

growth of Nauvoo and the kingdom of God.” That day, Sharp fathomed

the potential Mormonism had acquired to become a powerful political

influence in Illinois, and he viewed the religion as a dangerous threat to

the balance of church and state. Galvanized by his fears, Sharp went

back to his Warsaw newspaper and immediately fired up a spirited

crusade to break the influence of the Church and their autonomous

Nauvoo Charter.

Just months later, in June 1841, using the model of political anti-

Masonry, Sharp helped form the Anti-Mormon Party in Hancock County

that held conventions in Warsaw and Carthage, as well as public

meetings in other smaller communities. Individuals from both national

political parties united to oppose political Mormonism. In county

elections in July, an anti-Mormon slate was elected, which thwarted the

political influence of the Saints, even when they voted as a bloc. But as

Latter-day Saints continued to stream into Hancock County, including

many British converts who quickly became United States citizens, the

political power of the Saints grew and further alienated their new

406

enemies in Hancock County. For many who were socially and politically

dispossessed, it was precisely the idea of a political kingdom of God that

drew them to Mormonism.

Joseph Smith experimented with Mormon voting strength to promote

their interests. The Saints had voted Democrat in Missouri, but in 1840

and 1841 they voted solidly Whig in Illinois. The first example of

possible “vote trading” by Latter-day Saints was the legislative vote in

favor of the Nauvoo charter in December 1840 promoted by Democrats

but also voted for by the Whig Abraham Lincoln. The resulting Nauvoo

Municipal Court, Nauvoo Legion, and Agricultural and Manufacturing

Association formed the backbone of a self-governing theocracy—

something that did not sit well with most non-Mormon Illinois citizens.

One telling incident shows the importance of the Mormon voting bloc.

Cyrus H. Walker, a Whig congressional candidate in 1843, helped the

Mormon prophet obtain release after Smith’s arrest on June 23. In return,

Smith promised Walker nine out of every ten Mormon votes in Illinois’s

Sixth District. Before a vast audience of Saints, Smith explained that

Walker supported the Nauvoo Municipal Court’s power to issue writs of

habeas corpus, so they should vote for him. “Will you all help me? If so,

make it manifest by raising the right hand,” Smith asked. The response

by the thousands there gathered was unanimous, “a perfect sea of hands

being elevated.” Then, on July 7, an article appeared in the Illinois State

Register charging that Smith’s arrest, which enabled Cyrus Walker to

offer him assistance and solicit a quid pro quo, was a “Whig conspiracy”

to get the Mormon vote. Latter-day Saints were disillusioned by this

information. Just before the election of August 7, Hyrum Smith spoke at

a political rally at the Grove, advising the people to now vote for

Walker’s opponent, Joseph Hoge. William Law objected, “Bro. Hyrum

does not say he had a revelation.” In response,

Hyrum rose and took the stand a second time. He told the people he knew with a certainty how they were to vote the coming Monday, for “he had sought to know, and knew from knowledge that would not be doubted, from evidences that never fail, that Mr. Hoge was the man, and it was for the interest of this place and people to support him.” He raised both arms and held up an election ticket (“printed on yellow post office wrapping paper”). “Thus saith the Lord,” Hyrum proclaimed, giving his words the stamp of heavenly approval, “those that vote this ticket, this flesh colored ticket, this Democratic ticket, shall be blessed; those who do not, shall

be accursed.”17

Joseph Smith kept his word and cast his personal vote for Walker, but

he supported Hyrum’s revelation. Thus, the bulk of the Mormon vote

went to Hoge, and he won the election.18

407
