One of the greatest misgivings expressed by anti-Masons was that

secret combinations would gain control of the United States, supplanting

its constitutional government with its own privileged monarchy, led by a

hand-picked Masonic king. When Freemason Andrew Jackson won the

1828 election after a particularly vicious campaign of mudslinging and

name-calling, anti-Masons must have felt their darkest fears had been

realized. Nonetheless, Jackson proved to be a popular president, easily

winning reelection in 1832. In 1835, he paid off the entire national debt

—the only time in U.S. history that this has ever happened. In 1837,

Martin Van Buren—who had been Jackson’s vice president—won the

election and served a single term as president. Clearly, the anti-Masons

were wrong about Masonic empire-building. Yet, in 1842, events in

Nauvoo raised the specter of imperium in imperio again.

In January of 1842, Joseph Smith’s journal depicts the Saints looking

forward to the completion of the temple “of the Most High God” as a

first step in the restoration of the theocratic kingdom. Smith wrote in his

journal:

Truly this is a day long to be remembered by the saints of the Last Days; A day in which the God of heaven has begun to restore the ancient ^order^ of his Kingdom . . . to prepare the earth for the return of his glory, even a celestial glory; and a kingdom of Priests & Kings to

God & the Lamb forever.19

Just as Masons saw their temple as the vessel of the heavenly plan as it

applies to both individuals and societies, so the Mormons pictured the

Nauvoo Temple. Temple building was framed in Masonic terms,

referring to an “ancient order” and “a kingdom of priests and kings.” The

temple and its rites were the spiritual vehicle for the recovery of That

Which Was Lost—what Freemasons know as the Grand Omnific Word

—by which the worlds subsist, and by which initiates are personally

transformed.

In Masonic thought, the heavenly pattern recovered in the sacred

context of the House of the Lord is implemented in the theocratic

kingdom. This kingdom is also the Strength of God, the power to execute

what the Master of All has conceived. It is also associated with the great

leveling power of the West. Together with the East, Masons see the

Power of God to both build up true forms (symbolized by the rising sun)

and to break down the false (symbolized by the setting sun).

Mormon Theodemocracy and the United States Presidency

408

With Joseph Smith’s enthusiastic approval, and his brother Hyrum’s

quiet, competent leadership, Freemasonry grew rapidly in Nauvoo,

surpassing pre-Morgan numbers. In his final year, Smith focused his

energy on the political kingdom of God. On January 29, 1844, he met

with Hyrum Smith, John P. Greene, and the Twelve to discuss which

candidate they would support in that year’s United States presidential

election. Willard Richards moved that the Mormons form an independent

electoral ticket and nominated Joseph Smith for president. A campaign

strategy was discussed, and in the coming weeks W. W. Phelps would

assist in writing up a platform statement: General Smith’s Views of the

Powers and Policy of the Government of the United States 20 . With

undeniable hubris, Smith drew up a plan dated February 6, 1844, eight

days after the nomination, listing his choices for members of the Cabinet,

House of Representatives, and thirteen members of the Senate (sixteen

spots being available for election in 1844). The list bore the title

“Proposed plan for a Moot Organization & Congress” (moot defined in

its sense of “open for discussion” or “not finalized”), and it demonstrates

the dependence Smith placed upon these proposed officials being

Freemasons. Of the proposed men, 91.6% of them are known to have

been Masons, all were Mormons, and many had ties to the States to

which he assigned them Representatives.21

In March 1844 the candidacy was publicly announced with Smith

running on his coined term of “theodemocracy.” He described this

principle as a system “where God and the people hold the power to

conduct the affairs of men in righteousness.”22

Smith’s unique form of theocracy provided for the rule of God over the

population yet left room for Jacksonian democracy and individual

freedom of choice. It addressed the sense of betrayal the Mormons felt

by the failure of government to redress the loss of their homes and

property in Missouri. Smith longed to set up a foundation for the coming

millennial kingdom, which would “revolutionize the whole world” and

put all nations “under the necessity of obeying the gospel.”23 As

conceived by Smith, theodemocracy had several unique features. Like

Freemasonry, it would be based on religious principles, yet it would not

be subject to any particular creed or denomination. God would be the

ultimate power but would not impose His will on the unwilling, allowing

all people complete moral agency to choose to be governed in this

manner. The system pointed out what an expanded role of government

might look like. Smith’s presidential run had a somewhat naïve

409

theocratic design, yet he was prepared to back it up with a framework to

support such a system.

March 6 Feby 1844

Proposed plan for a Moot congress Organization & Congress

Proposed role Name Master Member Mason of 50

?Prest.

B[righam] Young 4/9/1842 Y

Vice President

John Taylor

4/30/1842 Y

Secretary of State W[illard] Richards 4/9/1842 Y

Sec[r]etary war Treasury O[rson] Pratt

4/11/1843 Y

War

Geo[rge] A Smith 5/21/1842 Y

Navy

W Woodruff ^O Hyde^ 1/18/1843 Y

Post master-Gen W[ilford] Woodruff 4/29/1842 Y

Attorney General WW Phelps

renounced bef 1826, Y

Members of the House

Maine

Stod[d]ard Johnathan Hales & Sylvester B. 4/20/1842 N

N[ew] Hampsh[i]re Jonathan H. Hale 8/10/1842 N

V[ermon]t

Erastus Snow 12/22/1843 Y

Mass[achusetts] Franklin Richards 4/29/1843 a

Rhode isl[an]d Truman Angel

3/9/1843 N

C[onnecticu]t.

Quartus S. Sparks 2/2/1844 N

N[ew] York

Phinehas Young 2/16/1844 a

N[ew] Jersey

B[enjamin] Winchester N

Pennsylvania

D[avid] D. Yearsly 5/30/1842 Y

Delaware

E[dwin] D Wooly 4/20/1842 N

410

Proposed role Name Master Member Mason of 50

Maryland

Jesse P. Nichols Helm Lodge N

North Virginia

Josiah Flemming 6/29/1842 N

N[orth] Carolina A[braham] O. Smoot 1/5/1844 a

S[outh] Carolina Benjamin Clapp – Alexander 6/7/1842 N

Randolf

Georgia

John D. Lee

8/9/1842 Y

Alabama

David Fulmer

7/11/1842 a

Mississippi

John Fulmer

6/22/1842 a

Louisiana

Edmund El[l]sworth 3/14/1845 N

Tennesse[e]

Alphonso? Young N

Kentucky

Charly C. Rich 4/28/1842 Y

Ohio

William Snow 12/22/1843 a

Indiana

Truman Gillet

2/28/1844 N

Michigan

Samuel C. Bent 5/20/1842 Y

Illinois

Demit

/

Missouri

Rule

/

Arkansas

Hosea Stout

6/15/1842 a

Florida

Wandall Mace

6/7/1843 N

Iowa

Elias Smith

3/22/1844 Y

Wisconsin

Lucius Scovil

[bef 1840] N

Geo. D. Watt. Reporter 7/27/1842 N

Senate [16 members requiring

reelection in 1844]

S[idney] Rigdon 3/16/1842 Y

O[rson] Spencer

Y

411

Proposed role Name Master Member Mason of 50

J[ohn] P. Green[e] 5/10/1842 Y

John Pack

5/2/1842 a

Winslow Farr 11/15/1843 a

A[a]ron Johnson 4/18/1842 N

E[benezer] Robinson 5/12/1842 N

Levi Richards

1/3/1844 Y

Phinehas Richards

a

R[obert] D. Foster 5/11/1842 N

Morris Phelps

7/9/1842 N

Alexander McRay 6/28/1842 N

Theodore Turl[e]y 4/19/1842 a

The Council of Fifty

Beginning on March 10, 1844, Joseph Smith instituted an organization

that embodied his political objectives and named it “The Kingdom of

God and His Laws with the Keys and Power thereof, and Judgment in

the Hands of His Servants,” also known as the Council of Fifty.24 The

conception of this body began by revelation in 1842, and in the interim

two-year period, Smith prepared for its institution by introducing

“Second Anointing” ordinances by which men became kings and priests.

As described by historian Andrew Ehat, “the Prophet taught that only

through such ordination would men have the ultimate, legitimate power

of government.” Between September 28, 1843, and February 26, 1844,

Joseph Smith conferred such ordinations on the twenty men who received these blessings during his life. With only one exception all of these men became members of the “Kingdom” during the Prophet’s lifetime. Moreover, of the nine other men in the Quorum who had thus far

received the endowment ordinances, seven also became members of the “Kingdom.” 25

Smith’s Masonically inspired associations were designed to foster

loyalty to the Prophet and to the Mormon institution. At least twenty

percent of the members of the Council of Fifty held a four-fold bond

with Smith, each sealed by a blood oath of allegiance.26 Virtually every

member of the Council of Fifty was a Freemason and thus obligated to

412

keep each other’s secrets and to “obey all regular signs, summonses, or

tokens given, handed, sent, or thrown to me from the hand of a brother

Master Mason.”27 Many members of the Fifty had been Danites in

Missouri, making a covenant “to sustain the Heads of the Church

whether right or wrong—the penalty of refusing to do so being death,

‘the throat cut.’”28 Smith himself initiated members of the Anointed

Quorum with key words, signs, and tokens, along with penalties for

revealing these secrets.29 Finally, the Council of Fifty took a similar

oath with a penalty.30

The potency of these oaths and obligations is clear, as Smith’s

colleagues were willing to protect him to the point of lying in a legal

document. At a hearing on January 4, 1843, a federal court investigated

accusations that Smith was an accessory in orchestrating an assassination

attempt on former Missouri governor Lilburn Boggs. Several affidavits

were provided to support Smith’s alibi that he had been in Nauvoo

during the assassination attempt.31 One affidavit has deponents Hyrum

Smith, Willard Richards, Henry G. Sherwood, John Taylor, and William

Clayton stating they “were with the said Smith, at Nauvoo aforesaid

during the evening of the sixth day of May last & sat with said Joseph

Smith in Nauvoo Lodge from Six until nine oclock. of said evening.”32

Comparison with the Nauvoo Lodge minutes for the evening of May 6,

however, demonstrates that neither Joseph Smith nor many of the above

testators were present at the meeting on that date.33 Even assuming

Smith was innocent of any role in the assassination attempt, using an

association with Freemasonry to provide an alibi is disturbing. Though

this action calls into question the integrity of Nauvoo Masons, it also

demonstrates that their loyalty to the Prophet superseded all other

considerations.

Members of the Fifty were charged with establishing the political and

theocratic kingdom of God. The group was to include token non-

Mormons since doing so, as Klaus Hansen observed, “allowed Mormons

to insist that at least theoretically they observed the American doctrine of

separation of church and state.”34 Nonetheless, Thomas Sharp’s

apprehensions about the Church’s political ambitions were prescient.

Following a call in the April 1844 general conference, a group of about

340 political missionaries volunteered to electioneer throughout the

country.35 On May 17, 1844, Latter-day Saints organized their own

413

“state political convention” held in the upper room of Smith’s Red Brick

Store to formally nominate the Prophet as candidate for United States

president. Representatives of the Council were sent to different states to

publicize his campaign, as well as to the nations of the world to gain

recognition.

Much of the media of the day did not take Smith’s candidacy seriously

—a representative headline in the Niles National Register read, “A New

Candidate in the Field! Stand out of the way—all small fry.”36 Yet,

others warned, “[L]et no man sneer at these people or deem them of little

consequence, either for good or evil. They are becoming a potent

influence to the people of the State of Illinois. It is a serious question:

What will be the end of things?”37 After nearly four hundred political

missionaries made their views known throughout the states, concerns

about the Mormons’ potential influence became more prominent.

Thousands of copies of General Smith’s Views were printed and

distributed and “took like wild fire.”38 Methodist frontier preacher Peter

Cartwright wrote that when Smith was announced as a presidential

candidate, “almost every infidel association in the Union declared in his

favor.” In his extensive travels through both eastern and western cities,

Cartwright personally verified that “this was literally true, as far as I

conversed with, or obtained reliable information of those infidel

associations or individuals.”39

414

Handbill for Joseph Smith’s presidential campaign.

Smith had matured in his leadership abilities since the days of Kirtland

and Missouri. Though he fully committed his resources to the campaign,

he worked through the Fifty to arrange two additional backup plans.

Three members of the Council were sent to negotiate with Sam Houston,

president of the Republic of Texas, where Smith had envisioned the

establishment of a Mormon state located between the Nueces and Rio

Grande rivers. There, the settlers would serve as a buffer between

territory claimed by the United States and the hostile Mexican army. The

location was sufficiently remote that a theocratic body could be

established without interference from United States citizens. Members of

the Fifty were also assigned exploring expeditions in the trans-

Mississippi area while a committee drafted missives to petition the

government for funds and authority to organize patrols of the West.40

415

With the Council of Fifty engaged in so many different efforts—

managing Smith’s presidential campaign and the political missionaries,

negotiating in Texas, forming surveying parties in the West, appealing to

the Federal government for redress of grievances and other concerns, and

traveling throughout the United States and other countries—the body

was more significant than has been apparent.

Structure and Characteristics of the Council of Fifty

Several aspects of the structure of the Council were apparently

modeled upon Masonic practices. For example, the group used a revised

form of parliamentary procedure to conduct its meetings. Modifications

made by the Fifty are similar in form and purpose to those made by

Freemasons in their meetings. One of these Masonic adaptations is

described as follows:

In a secular body, the presiding officer is subject to the dictates of the organization and may be removed by it. . . . The Master of a Lodge is not controlled by the Lodge and can only be removed by the Grand Master. In a secular body the presiding officer’s decision can be overturned by the body itself. . . . The Master’s Decision in a Masonic Lodge can only be appealed to the Grand Master or the Grand Lodge. The Presiding officer of a secular body is supposed to conduct its meetings according to the “Rules of Order.” . . . The Master of a Masonic Lodge is totally responsible to the Grand Lodge, The Grand Master and the fraternity in general for all that his Lodge does and, as such, is clothed with all the authority needed to

exercise full control.41

Similarly, Joseph Smith retained full control of Council of Fifty

meetings. The council was to be “convened and organized by the

president of the church” who was “elected standing chairman upon

convening of the council.” The chairman voted first upon all motions.

Although each member was obliged to make his objections known, his

vote needed to be unanimous with the chairman or else his membership

in the Fifty would have to be withdrawn.42

At each meeting of the Council of Fifty, members took a Masonic-like

oath of secrecy under the penalty of death. Knowledge of this procedure

first became publicly available from a diary entry made by Joseph F.

Smith describing an October 12, 1880, meeting of the reconstituted

Council of Fifty in Utah. At ten that morning, two new members—John

Van Cott and Lorin Farr—were unanimously voted into what Smith

artfully termed the “Council of L.” After “affirming that they were in

fellowship with every other person in the room,” they were given a

“Charge,” a “Name,” a “Key word,” the “Constitution,” and a

“Penalty.”43

416

At this point, Joseph Young objected to the “penalty,” an oath that

members of the council would not disclose its proceedings under penalty

of death by certain means. Young believed it was “first suggested by the

‘Pagan Prophet’” (Lucien Woodworth), and not sanctioned by Joseph

Smith himself.44 After a lively discussion by Young, Franklin D.

Richards, C. C. Rich, and Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon read

aloud the original Nauvoo Council of Fifty minutes, and all agreed that

the first organization had sanctioned a penalty.45

After publication of the Council of Fifty minutes in 2016 it was

possible to verify Joseph Smith’s involvement. At 4:30 p.m. on the day

of the organization of the Council, March 10, 1844, Smith insisted upon

perfect secrecy, asking, “Can this council keep what I say, not mak[ing]

it Public[?]” The minutes record “all held up th[e]ir hands.”46 In a

reconvening of the meeting at seven that evening in the assembly room

above his store, the men met in council and Smith “enjoined perfect

secrecy of them.”47 The following day, Lucien Woodworth supported

Smith’s directive, calling for “every member of it [the Council] to be

bound to eternal secrecy as to what passed here.” The men were not even

to tell their own wives, “and the man who broke the rule ‘should lose his

cursed head.’” Woodworth’s resolution passed unanimously, including

the vote of Smith, and “became a law of the council.”48

Secrecy was necessary, since the public would easily view the concept

of political power enforced by God through the medium of a human

municipality as highly dangerous and even treasonous. For example, one

of the reasons for Oliver Cowdery’s early disaffection was his considered

opinion on the combination of civil and religious authority. In 1834 he

wrote:

[T]he moment any one religious sect . . . gains the ascendancy sufficient to hold the administration of our government, the human heart is so easily corrupted that a spirit of intolerance would immediately transcend that of justice and equality that we should be

compelled to immediately bid an everlasting adieu to our hard bought liberty.49

By March 15, 1844, an anonymously written letter by “A Friend to the

Mormons,” first published in the Quincy Herald and reprinted in the

Times and Seasons, criticized the very separation of church and state and

concluded, “Church must not triumph over State, but actually swallow it

up.”50 These sentiments were approved and expanded in Council

meetings.

417

Notwithstanding the vow of secrecy, some members did make records

of events relating to the Council, albeit at a later date, regarding an event

that reportedly took place on March 23, 1844. In what came to be known

as “the Last Charge,” they claimed that Smith transferred “all the

ordinances, keys, covenants, endowments, and sealing ordinances of the

priesthood” onto the Twelve in connection with the Council of Fifty.

Furthermore, Smith was said to have conferred upon Brigham Young the

“keys of the sealing power, as conferred in the last days by the spirit and

power of Elijah,” or “this last key of the priesthood . . . most sacred of

all.”51 As part of this ceremonial bestowal of authority, Smith was

recognized as the Council’s grand key-holder. William Clayton, the

scribe of the Council, recorded: “[April 11, 1844. Thursday] . . .

Afterwards in the Council. We had a glorious interview. President Joseph

was voted our P[rophet] P[riest] and K[ing] with loud Hosannas.”52

With his leadership of the Church, his ordination to the Anointed

Quorum, and his bid for the presidency of the United States, Smith was

now in the position to be a prophet, priest and king and bring to pass the

theocratic kingdom of God in true Masonic fashion.

The Grand Council and Translatio Imperii

The Royal Arch has a tradition of a Grand Council as the center of the

earthly Government of God. Ruled by a prophet or scribe, a priest, and a

king, this Grand Council is a reflection or earthly type of a Grand

Council in the Heavens. This is expressly mentioned by one of the

prayers that have been part of the Royal Arch since at least the early

1800s:

O merciful Father, when we shall have passed through the outward veils of these earthly courts, when the earthly house of this tabernacle shall be dissolved, may we be admitted into the Holy of Holies above, into the presence of the Grand Council of Heaven, where the

Supreme High Priest for ever presides, for ever reigns.53

The earthly high priest, represented by Joshua, presides with his two

counselors, the king and the prophet, to govern the work of restoration as

a type and shadow of the heavenly council: “[The High Priest] is

stationed in the sanctum sanctorum. His duty, with the King and Scribe,

[is] to sit in the Grand Council, to form plans and give directions to the

workmen.”54

The tradition of a Grand Council in heaven found its way into

Mormonism by at least 1839. In an epistle to the Church while in Liberty

Jail, Joseph Smith wrote that in the dispensation of the fulness of times,

418

all would be revealed “according to that which was ordain[e]d in the

midst of the councyl [sic] of the eternal God of all other Gods before this

world was.”55 Four years later, in a discourse reported by Franklin D.

Richards on June 11, 1843, Smith pointed to this divine council again

when he preached, “The Order & Ordinances of the Kingdom were

instituted by the Priesthood in the council of Heaven before the world

was.”56

It is apparent that the Council of Fifty was an earthly representation of

the heavenly council. While writing up the fair copy of the “records of

the Kingdom” on March 10, 1845, William Clayton wrote that “[t]he

Council of the Kingdom of God now organized upon this earth” was

making laws that would govern the Saints after the resurrection. He

added, “And is there not a similarity between this grand council and the

council which sat previous to the organization of this world[?]”57

One form of the Mormon Grand Council is described by Parley P. Pratt

in his work The Angel of the Prairies; A Dream of the Future, composed

between 1843 and 1844 and read in the presence of the Prophet in the

Council of Fifty. Pratt’s story offers an insight into the expansionist

hopes of the early Church. His dream begins with an angel showing him

the United States, the “spot which is destined for the seat of empire,”

which, according to the angel, “began in the eastern Eden, but its

progress has always been westward.”58 Ernest Lee Tuveson, author of

Redeemer Nation: The Idea of America’s Millennial Role, writes of the

early Mormons’ drive for Manifest Destiny exemplified by Pratt’s tale.

“The capital not alone of the United States but of the world,” Tuveson

notes, would be “in the middle of the North American continent. . . .

Pratt’s divine romance represents perhaps the most complete assimilation

of the millenarian doctrine of the Latter-Day Saints with the American

millennial dream.”59 In a second vision, Pratt’s angel displayed “[t]he

Grand Presiding Council organized in wisdom, and holding the keys of

power to bear rule over all the earth in righteousness. And of the increase

and glory of their kingdoms their [ 60

sic] shall be no end.”

In connection with Mormonism’s theocratic kingdom and its concept

of successive westward movements, Tuveson mentions the Latin phrase

translatio imperii, meaning “transfer of rule.” The concept was invented

in the Middle Ages and describes history as a succession of transfers of

imperium or supreme governing authority. The authority often began

with a scriptural or mythical character and was passed down through

419

carefully constructed genealogies to bolster a particular kingdom’s right

to reign. Latter-day Saints conceived of the right to rule originating East

in Jerusalem and ever moving toward the West, finally to rest in Zion,

located in the very center of the American continent.

Tuveson’s description is fitting not only because of Pratt’s description

of Westward-moving imperium, but also because Latter-day Saint leaders

believed they had a right to the priesthood—the right to sacred rule—by

lineage and birth. An 1832 revelation by Joseph Smith declared:

Thus saith the Lord unto you, with whom the priesthood hath continued through the lineage of your fathers—For ye are lawful heirs, according to the flesh, and have been hid from the world with Christ in God—Therefore your life and the priesthood have remained, and must needs remain through you and your lineage until the restoration of all things spoken by the mouths of all the holy prophets since the world began. Therefore, blessed are ye if ye continue . . . a light unto the Gentiles, and through this priesthood, a savior unto my people. (D&C 86: 8–11)

The tradition of the gathering of the noble-born to restore the Holy

City and its sacred temple is a significant element in the central legend in

Royal Arch Masonry. In that tradition, three masters from the

Babylonian captivity “heard that the Temple of the Lord God was about

to be rebuilt at Jerusalem” and so came up to offer their services “to

assist in the completion of that great and glorious undertaking.” When

questioned by the Grand Council as to their lineal descent, they replied

that they were nobly born and that “they were descended from the

Princes and Rulers of the House of Judah.”61 Because of their

appropriate blood line, the masters were admitted into the city to work

on the temple.

Possibly adapting this concept from Royal Arch Masonry, Latter-day

Saint leaders believed they were noblemen in literal fact. Heber C.

Kimball explained:

Now, I will refer to brother Brigham, brother Heber, brother Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Bishop N. K. Whitney, and lots of other men. Brother Joseph actually saw those men in vision; he saw us in a day when we were all together. We have been separated by marriage and thrown apart; but he saw the day when we all came out of one stock, and that was out of the aristocracy. Yes, we came directly down through the Prophets, and not only us, but . . . the

whole Smith race.62

Kimball further voiced the right of dominion that this lineage possessed:

Did you actually know Joseph Smith? No. Do you know brother Brigham? No. Do you know brother Heber? No, you do not. Do you know the Twelve? You do not, if you did, you would begin to know God, and learn that those men who are chosen to direct and counsel you are near kindred to God and to Jesus Christ, for the keys, power, and authority of the kingdom of

God are in that lineage.63

This suggests why the early Latter-day Saint belief that Jesus was

married was not idle doctrinal speculation; rather, it was intimately

420

connected with the idea that there were Latter-day Saints, the Prophet

Joseph Smith in particular, who held by birth the prophetic, kingly, and

priestly authority needed to restore the city of God and its holy temple as

well as to establish the theocratic kingdom of God on earth.

As Michael Quinn has pointed out, those who had received Smith’s

“last charge” understood their role as rulers in the kingdom of God “in

literal terms and did not perceive or accept the essentially symbolic

nature of everything connected with the Council of Fifty.” Men like

“Alpheus Cutler, James Emmett, Peter Haws, George Miller, Lyman

Wight, and Lucien Woodworth” all felt they had received “personal

missions” from Smith. “They did not agree that the Council of Fifty

derived its authority from the Church and was subject to Church

leadership,” and they later “dissented from the Church in order to

preserve what they felt were their missions in the Kingdom of God.”64

A Foundation to Revolutionize the World

In 1826, Freemasonry was broken upon the wheel of American social

change. Local communities enlisted the government as their agent to

destroy the Lodge. Later, these communities would similarly ask for this

kind of assistance from the state to aid in the destruction of the Mormon

empire.

Joseph Smith’s fraternal and sororal organizations—including the

School of the Prophets, the Danite band, the Relief Society, the Quorum

of the Anointed, and the Council of Fifty—were all revolutionary

experiments based upon Masonic form, ideals, and structure. To these he

added expressions of his own personality as well as his authority as a

prophet of God. It was his prophetic authority that lent these auxiliaries

and their parent denomination religious authenticity in the eyes of his

followers. “God will always protect me until my mission is fulfilled,”

declared Smith, and further said,

I calculate to be one of the instruments of setting up the Kingdom of Daniel by the word of the Lord, and I intend to lay a foundation that will revolutionize the whole world. . . . The power of truth is such that all nations will be under the necessity of obeying the Gospel. . . . It may be that the Saints will have to beat their plows into swords, for it will not do for men to sit down

patiently and see their children destroyed.65

The prophet’s revolutionary and even treasonous plans were seen by

the Latter-day Saints to be “the design of Jehovah, from the

commencement of the world.” God’s purpose was “to regulate the affairs

of the world in his own time; to stand as head of the universe, and take

the reins of government into his own hand.”66

421

Days before his final arrest, Joseph Smith crossed the Mississippi

River into Iowa, intending to flee to the West. The writers of the History

of the Church describe his brother Hyrum as saying, “A company of men

are seeking to kill my brother Joseph, and the Lord has warned him to

flee to the Rocky Mountains to save his life. Goodbye, Brother

[Reynolds] Cahoon, we shall see you again.”67 Fearing destruction of

life and property, a number of brethren urged the Prophet to return and

give himself up. Emma Smith sent a message as well, saying “unless

they returned and went to Carthage, Nauvoo would be burnt up and the

people massacred.”68

In later years, Brigham Young expressed his opinion that “if Bro.

Joseph Smith had been led by the Spirit he had, he would never [have]

given himself up and gone to Carthage but he would have gone right to

these mountains and would have been alive today to lead this people.”69

However, at the time of the occurrence, Vilate Kimball wrote, “Joseph

went over the river out of the United States, and there stop[p]ed and

composed his mind, and got the will of the Lord concerning him, and

that was, that he should return and give himself up for trial.”70 In 1844,

Smith’s gaze had turned to the West. Whether the Lord’s will or not,

turning back cost him his life.

Notes

422

423

424

425
