TREASURES HIDDEN IN THE GRAVE

By the yearning to retrieve

treasures hidden in the grave…

hark unto the earnest cry,

notes celestial, make reply!

Christian, unto thee ‘tis given:

Death’s a passage unto heaven!

—Rob Morris, The Poetry of Freemasonry

Masonic legend addresses loss on a cosmological scale. It is a theme with universal relevance as all humanity feels the pain of physical loss. On the individual level, Masonic restoration involves a reversal of the powerful blow suffered through the discovery

of one’s very real mortality. This is symbolically represented by the

Master’s Word—lost at the death of Hiram Abiff. When Hiram was

buried, he had a jewel on his body representing the lost key of revelation

that all Masons are charged to search for throughout their mortal lives.

The Royal Arch degree ends with the symbolic restoration of the lost

Master’s Word and the subsequent exaltation of the candidates. Recovery

of this treasure makes possible a reversal of the three great knocks of

death, which not only sets right the lives of individuals but also

transforms, empowers, and revives human society.1

As Joseph Smith experienced premonitions of his own impending

death, he began to declare that he had found this Masonic “Lost Word.”

That is, he had recovered what was needed to complete the temple

endowment and make it available to the entire body of the Saints. In a

revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 124, these Saints had

been commanded to build a temple, and concordantly they were

promised keys that would allow them to pierce the veil, receive

revelations, and achieve apotheosis. Through recontextualizing Masonry

as a religious ordinance, Smith provided the Saints a way to approach

God ritually and experience divine power. The restoration of the temple

was the restoration of a pure form of Masonry, and, for Joseph Smith as

prophet, the end was now in sight.

On April 7, 1844, during the second session of the general conference

of the Church, in front of an estimated fifteen thousand Latter-day Saints,

Smith preached a powerful discourse in honor of a deceased Mormon

426

elder and Masonic brother, King (his first name) Follett.2 Five weeks

earlier, on February 27, Follett was digging a well for the use of his

family when a rope holding a large tub of rocks broke. The falling rocks

and dirt crushed him, and he was carried to his house where he lived for

eleven more days, in great pain, before finally expiring on Saturday,

March 9, 1844. That evening, his death was announced during a meeting

of the Nauvoo Lodge where he had been a Master Mason. There,

William S. Hathaway reported that “Brother King” had indicated his

desire to receive a Masonic burial.3

The next day, Sunday, March 10, one hundred and nineteen members

of the Masonic lodge met at the newly built but still undedicated

Masonic Hall in Nauvoo. The Lodge was “called from adjournment” to

labor on the third degree, and Worshipful Master Hyrum Smith stated

that the object of the meeting was “to carry to the grave a worthy brother,

King Follet[t] who has for some time been a worthy member of our

Lodge and continued in good standing while he lived on the earth.”4

Brief remarks were made by Hyrum Smith, during which he presumably

opened a Lodge of Sorrow in memory of their deceased Brother. Then a

procession was assembled in due Masonic form.5 Accompanied by the

Nauvoo Brass Band, Lodge members proceeded to the Follett home to

dress and prepare his body for burial and place it in his coffin.6 By all

accounts, the procession from the Follett home to the grave site was a

stunning spectacle. The band played somberly with their drums “muffled

and trim[m]ed with black lace.”7 Led by Nauvoo Lodge Marshal John P.

Green, the Masons were dressed in dark suits. Around their waists were

tied aprons of white lambskin, that Masonic emblem of innocence that

represented the Mason’s lifelong commitment to purity of life and

rectitude of conduct. Wearing white gloves, the lodge officers were

decked in the glittering regalia of their respective offices; the deacons

and stewards additionally carried staffs. It was likely that the procession

accompanying Follett’s coffin followed the Masonic tradition of the day,

forming two columns roughly five feet apart, with the members of the

Nauvoo Lodge in the front and those from visiting Lodges behind.

Friends and family followed in carriages, on horseback, and on foot in a

procession described as being a mile in length.8 Follett’s funeral service

adhered to the Masonic convention that “a masonic Lodge should not

take part in funeral services when conducted by any other

organization.”9 Thus, the Nauvoo Lodge, not the Church, was in charge

427

of the body of the deceased and all of the funerary ceremonies and

procedures.

That evening, Joseph Smith preached at the regular Sunday evening

meeting in the Grove. Although Follet’s friends and family specifically

requested Smith to speak at the funeral, the Prophet did not take the

opportunity to present a eulogy at that time. Instead, his address was a

sermon on Elias and the priesthood, and it contained no reference to

Follett or to death in general. However, some weeks later, apparently

having been profoundly affected by Follett’s death, the Prophet delivered

a stirring address which has come to be known as the “King Follett

Discourse.”

On April 7, 1844, an audience gathered in a grove located on a bluff

near the unfinished Nauvoo Temple. Notwithstanding a stiff wind, the

spring weather accentuated the beauty of the Mississippi River, and trees

could be seen blossoming on the Iowa side. “Inasmuch as there are a

great many in this congregation who live in this city, as well as

elsewhere, and who have lost friends,” Smith explained, “I feel disposed

to speak on the subject in general, and offer you my ideas so far as I have

ability, and so far as I shall be inspired by the Holy Spirit to dwell on this

subject.”10

The speech is often referred to as a eulogy or funerary discourse11 for

the deceased, though it was given almost a month after Follet’s funeral. It

has also been seen as a conference address wherein the Prophet used the

circumstances of the tragic death of a prominent member of the Church

and Fraternity to speak on the eternities and the status of the dead.

However, its Masonic connections should not be overlooked. It was

originally intended that Smith speak a few days earlier on Friday, April

5, 1844, the day of the dedication of the Nauvoo Masonic Hall.12 This

speech would have taken place in front of an audience that included

Mormon and non-Mormon Illinois Freemasons who had gathered for the

ceremonies. Being somewhat ill that day, Smith opted to postpone his

speech and presented it at Sunday’s Conference, bringing Masonic

elements to a sympathetic and specifically Latter-day Saint congregation.

In this, one of the best attested of all of the Prophet’s sermons, Smith

engaged the central Masonic theme of human mortality and perfectibility

in his own unique way, utilizing language that would have been familiar

to the hundreds of Mormon Freemasons in his audience.

Official notes of the speech were taken by three men. Thomas Bullock

was formally trained in England as a law clerk and filled many clerical

428

positions in Nauvoo, beginning in October 1843 as Joseph’s personal

clerk. His journal indicates that he had been assigned to take minutes of

the meeting.13 Bullock would not become a Freemason until months

later, and his account demonstrates that he missed some of the Masonic

references the other scribes were able to pick up.14 William Clayton had

joined the Nauvoo Masonic Lodge in 1842 in the first month of its

existence.15 He served as secretary to Smith and has been described as

“a clear writer” with “a love for order.”16 Willard Richards also joined

the Lodge in April of 1842.17 As Church historian, Richards was

responsible for making an official account of the proceedings. He was

also the Prophet’s private secretary and historian, keeping Smith’s daily

journal from 1842 through 1844, and he recorded his summary of the

discourse into Smith’s journal.18 An unofficial account of the discourse

was taken by Wilford Woodruff, another early Nauvoo Freemason and

one of the most prodigious journal keepers of the day.19 While standing

in the congregation, Woodruff removed his hat and used the crown as a

surface upon which to place his paper while taking notes.20 The

following August, four months after the sermon was given, and nearly

two months after the death of Smith, a version of the discourse was put

together from an amalgamation of these four accounts and published in

the 21

Times and Seasons.

Even had the speech been given at the dedication of the Masonic Hall

as planned, it would have been a public address. Attending the

dedication of the Hall were 334 Masons from Nauvoo Lodge, along with

brethren from Mormon lodges Helm, Nye, Hiram (Augusta, IA), and

Rising Sun (Montrose, IA). Other lodges in the area had been invited as

well, though only eight non-Mormon Masons were marked in

attendance. One of these was Brother William G. Goforth from St. Clair

Lodge No. 24 in Belleville, who was daring enough not only to appear at

the dedication of a lodge that had been declared clandestine but also to

give a speech. He was later reprimanded for this action by his lodge.22

Numerous additional spectators from many miles around who were not

Masons also gathered to witness the ceremonies. These lingered in town

and joined the thousands of Latter-day Saints who made up the

conference audience of April 7.

The public nature of the event presented Smith with a predicament. As

part of his Masonic obligation, he had promised at the altar of the lodge

429

that he would always “conceal, and never reveal any part, or parts, art, or

arts, point, or points of the secret arts and mysteries of ancient

freemasonry.” Knowing that his address would likely be reproduced in

the Times and Seasons, he also needed to keep in mind his obligation not

to “write, print, stamp, stain, hugh [hew], cut, carve, indent, paint, or

engrave” the secrets of Masonry “on any thing moveable or immoveable,

under the whole canopy of Heaven, whereby, or whereon the least letter,

figure, character, mark, stain, shadow, or resemblance of the same may

become legible or intelligible . . . to any other person in the known

world.”23

In order to include Masonic elements, Smith would have to give his

discourse in the manner that other Masons had utilized to give public

addresses. These speakers alluded to Masonic themes in such a way that

Freemasons would catch the references but common listeners would not.

An example of this technique is seen in a speech by Salem Town:

On the apostacy of our first common parent, not a gleam of light was left to irradiate and cheer his desponding mind. To his surprise and amazement, he found himself in total obscurity, as to those future and interesting scenes, on which he was entering. Soon, however, to his inexpressible joy, the first kind promise was made. This promise, though but a single ray, afforded much consolation. Although the true light now began to shine, yet how faint were its beams compared with that bright and meridian splendor, afterwards to illuminate the moral

world. 24

A non-Mason might catch the symbolism that “our first parent”—Adam

—was in the darkness of ignorance and found himself brought to the

light of knowledge concerning his future. However, a Mason listening to

the talk would immediately see that Salem Town was suggesting that

Adam was a Freemason. In the first degree, a Mason enters the darkened

lodge in which “not a gleam of light” is seen. He is led to the altar where

“the first kind promise” is made. To a Freemason, Town’s wording

brings to mind all of the details of the ceremony of the first, or Entered

Apprentice, degree.

Wilford Woodruff would later report Brigham Young’s understanding

of this method of discourse: “I Could preach all about the Endowments

in Public and the world know Nothing about it. I Could preach all about

Masonry & None but a mason know any thing about it.”25 Similarly,

members of the congregation listening to the Smith’s discourse who were

not Freemasons might not have noticed his Masonic allusions. However,

Smith was moving these ideas directly into Mormonism in a way that he

had rarely done before outside of the temple endowment.

The Character of God

430

After introducing his topic, Joseph Smith set the scene with ideas that

accorded well with Masonic interests. The Prophet first expounded upon

the character of God, and he expressed the importance of understanding

God’s nature, asking the congregation, “What kind of being is God?” He

asked if any had seen him, heard him, or communed with him. “Here [is]

a subject that will peradventure occupy you[r] attenti[o]n while you live.

. . . There can be eternal life on no other principle.”26 In The Symbolism

of Freemasonry, Albert Mackey explains that Freemasonry is “a science

which speculates on the character of God and man, and is engaged in

philosophical investigations of the soul and a future existence, for which

purpose it uses the terms of an operative art.”27 Reflecting upon the

character of God is thus a principal pursuit of Masons.

In his presidential platform, Smith’s principle of theocratic democracy

included the provision that humans have a right to believe as they chose

about God. This was the evolving wisdom of the age. Enlightenment

thinking had taken hold of the developed world, with America being the

ground of experimentation. Freemasonry’s position on religious freedom

developed in harmony with this thinking. In the eighteenth century, it

was one of the first organizations to practice the concept of separation of

church and state and acted accordingly as a powerful force for religious

freedom. The Masonic Service Association of North America’s

“Statement on Religion” specifies that “Masons believe that there is one

God and that people employ many different ways to seek, and to express

what they know of God.” Non-sectarian titles for Deity such as “Grand

Architect of the Universe” are used so that “persons of different faiths

may join together in prayer, concentrating on God, rather than

differences among themselves. Masonry believes in religious freedom

and that the relationship between the individual and God is personal,

private, and sacred.” Furthermore, although “Freemasonry lacks the

basic elements of religion, . . . Freemasonry is far from indifferent

toward religion. Without interfering in religious practice, it expects each

member to follow his own faith and to place his Duty to God above all

other duties.”28 Mirroring this sentiment, Smith emphasized the

privilege of religious freedom: “But meddle not with any man for his

religion, ev[e]ry gover[n]ment ought to permit ev[e]ry man to enjoy his

religion.”29

After establishing this principle, Smith revealed a “great secret”30

about Deity in a statement that was to shock many in the audience:

431

God himself who sits enthroned in yonder Heavens is a man like unto one of yourselves who holds this world in its orbit & upholds all things by his power[.] if you were to see him to day

you wo[ul]d see him a man for Adam was an man like in fashion & image like unto him.31

Smith further taught that God had not been God for all eternity; rather,

“he once was man like us, and the Father was once on an earth like

us.”32 Using John 10:17 as a reference, the prophet taught that as the

Father had power in himself, “so hath the son power in himself to do

what the father did even to lay down my body and take it up again.” He

reasoned that the Father must have also once had a body of flesh and

bones that was resurrected. Understanding this principle was necessary

for his followers to be able to understand the character and being of God.

Having taught that God had once been mortal, Smith explained the

corollary that men could become deities in their own right:

You have got to learn how to be a god yourself in order to save you[r]self— to be priests & Kings as all Gods has done—by going from a small degree to another[,] from exaltation to ex[altation]—till they are able to sit in glory as doth those who sit enthroned . . . how consoling to the mourner when call[e]d to part with husband father wife [and] child to know that those being[s] shall rise in immortal glory to sorrow die nor suffer anymore. & not only that[,] to contemplate the saying they shall be heirs of God &c[.] What is it[?]—to inherit the

same glory[,] power & exal[ta]tion with those who are gone before.33

Three accounts of this portion of the discourse use the terminology of

going from a small to a great “capacity.” William Clayton, however,

instead used the Masonic term “degree,” indicating that he likely

recognized this teaching as a Masonic principle. Wilford Woodruff’s

account also uses the Masonic locution “arrive at the station of a

God,”34 an allusion to the progression of the officers of a Lodge,

wherein Brothers move from station to station, each one taking the place

of the Brother who has sat in that station previously, advancing by

degrees, until arriving at the station of the Worshipful Master in the East

and “ascending the [Master’s] throne.”35 Such language appears in

Thomas Bullock’s account, which was incorporated into the official

report of the discourse in the Times and Seasons: “What is [to be a joint

heir with Christ]? to inherit the same glory, the same power and the same

exaltation, until you ascend the throne of eternal power the same as those

who are gone before.”36

Two years later, Orson Hyde would use similar Masonic terminology

in a discourse at the dedication of the Nauvoo Temple on May 3, 1846:

[T]here are different stations in the next world and men will be de[a]lt with here according to the deeds done in the body. A man ought to be good Here as he grows older. A man that does his duty and obtains the Priesthood and honors it will have his reward, His exhaltation, thrones, & dominions according to his faithfulness. We like our Master have des[c]ended

432

below all things so shall we arise above all things. I have seen this by vision. We shall be connected with the kingdom of Jesus Christ To the very place and station will a man arise in

the resurrection to which He Has been sealed & anointed on earth.37

In Freemasonry, the Master of the Lodge symbolizes Deity. Smith’s

explanation that if his audience were to see God today, they would see

him like a man in form, would have naturally brought to Freemasons’

minds the image of the Worshipful Master of the Lodge standing in for

God. His comments regarding the goal to “ascend the throne of eternal

power” invoke an image of the Master of the Lodge, sitting upon his

elaborate dais in the East. He represents God, just as the Lodge itself is

symbolic of the created universe. Furthermore, his description of Saints

inheriting the same glory, power, and exaltation with “those who are

gone before” uses the same wording as a three-fold repetition in the

Entered Apprentice degree where a candidate petitions to receive the

rights and benefits of the lodge “as all true fellows and brothers have

done, who have gone this way before him.”38

This process of exaltation described by Smith points to it being a

theological expansion of the concept of “progression up the line of

officers” in a lodge. In this instance, Smith specifically applied the idea

to God the Father and the Son. Additionally, he employed the use of

figures such as that of a ladder, featured in the Entered Apprentice

degree, to teach heavenly ascent and exaltation:

what J[esus] did I do the things I saw my Fa[the]r do before worlds came roll[e]d into existence I saw my Fa[the]r work out his K[ingdom] with fear & trembling & I must do the same when I shall give my K[ingdom] to the Fa[the]r so that he obt[ai]ns K[ingdom] roll[in]g upon K[ingdom] so that J[esus] treads in his tracks as he had gone before[.] it is plain beyond comprehens[io]n & you thus learn the first prin[ciple] of the Gospel when you climb a ladder you must begin at the bottom run[g] until you learn the last prin[ciple] of the Gospel for it is a great thing to learn Sal[vatio]n. beyond the grave & it is not all to be com[prehended] in this

world. 39

In Freemasonry, the symbol of a ladder is taken from Jacob’s dream of

a ladder ascending to heaven (Gen. 28). For Entered Apprentice Masons

“[e]ither resting upon the floor-cloth or upon the Bible: the compasses

and the square should lead the thoughts of the brethren to heaven.”40

The ritual describes the ascension of a brother up the “Theological

Ladder” through the steps of Faith and Hope and then leading to the

summit of Charity. He who attains this virtue “may justly be deemed to

have attained the summit of his profession, figuratively speaking, an

ethereal mansion veiled from mortal eye by the starry firmament.”41

Perfection of Human Personality

433

The perfection of human personality is a doctrine that Joseph Smith

had been developing since at least 1834. The fifth Lecture on Faith

discusses becoming partakers of the divine nature, or “partaking of the

fulness of the Father and Son, through the spirit.”42 The Masonic

variation on this biblical doctrine is that not only can humans develop

God-like qualities by perfecting themselves, but they have the innate

potential to actually become gods. Masonic philosopher Manly Hall

wrote that

Man is a god in the making, and on the potter’s wheel he is being molded, as in the mystic myths of Egypt. When his light shines out to lift and preserve all things, he accepts the triple

crown of godhood, and joins that throng of Master Masons . . . in their garments of glory.43

F. V. Mataraly expounded upon this idea, speaking of a “hidden

Master” inside each person who could be revealed through the

purification of an individual:

By the exercise of the three Working Tools, a straight-edge, a chisel (also represented by a line), and a gavel (represented by two lines at right angles), the rough material is wrought into due form and the perfection of the whole brought into manifestation. So in the individual, the material is rough, albeit sound, stone; else he would not have been accepted as a candidate, but by the exercise of the Working Tools of the personality, purified thought, action, and desire,

the individual is wrought into due form and the hidden Master brought to light.44

Mormon teachings encompass this distinctive Masonic belief. As

noted in the King Follett discourse, Smith taught that God had once been

a man and that humans could learn to become gods themselves, and this

idea of humans being gods in the making has continued in The Church of

Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. After arriving in Utah, apostle and

future president John Taylor taught, “[W]e look at him [man] as

emanating from the Gods—as a God in embryo—as an eternal being

who had an existence before he came here.”45 This teaching by Taylor

was selected for the very first entry in the Church’s 2001 Teachings of

Presidents of the Church: John Taylor manual for adult weekly study.46

Likewise, in his still-popular 1901 Articles of Faith, Elder James E.

Talmage declared, “[I]n his mortal condition man is God in embryo.

However . . . any individual now a mortal being may attain the rank and

sanctity of godship.”47 And more recently, the Church clarified its

teaching that

[A]ll people [are] children of God in a full and complete sense. . . . Each possesses seeds of divinity. . . . Just as a child can develop the attributes of his or her parents over time, the divine

nature that humans inherit can be developed to become like their Heavenly Father’s.48

Joseph Smith and Kabbalah

434

While preaching these principles, Joseph Smith exhibited a connection

with what some authors have identified as Kabbalistic thought. This

ought to be expected, since the earliest Masonic legends are based in

Christian mysticism, which itself is rooted in Jewish mystical teaching

(Kabbalah). In the nineteenth century, these interests came to most

Americans through the cultural saturation of Freemasonry throughout

society.

The concept of the perfection of human personality is a Masonic

teaching that comes through Christian Kabbalah. In turn, this idea was

the core confidential teaching in Jewish Kabbalah. Critic and scholar

Harold Bloom recognized the use of Kabbalah in Smith’s teachings. He

postulated: “Either there was a more direct Kabbalistic influence upon

Smith than we know, or, far more likely, his genius reinvented Kabbalah

in the effort necessary to restore archaic Judaism.”49 Even more likely,

the direct Kabbalistic influence upon Smith came through Freemasonry.

Author Lance Owens posits that Smith was influenced by Kabbalah in

several distinct ways: “through contact with ceremonial magic in his

youth”; through personal inclination during his Kabbalistic hermeneutic

method while translating the Book of Mormon; through initiation into

Masonry in 1842; through his friendship with Alexander Neibaur, a

Jewish Kabbalist; and through the possible possession of a collection of

Kabbalistic books and manuscripts.50 Owens points out that in the King

Follett discourse, Smith “quotes almost word for word from the first

section of the 51 Zohar ,” a fundamental text of the Jewish Kabbalah that

begins with remarks on the first sentence in the Hebrew scriptures,

Bereshith bara Elohim. In William Clayton’s transcription of the

discourse, Smith remarks, “Rosheit signifies to bring forth the Eloheim.”

This is comparable with the analysis in the Zohar:52

This “beginning” [Reshith] then extended, and made for itself a palace for its honour and glory. . . . This palace is called Elohim, and this doctrine is contained in the words, “By means

of a beginning [Reshith, 53

it,] created Elohim.”

According to Owens, the objection that Smith exhibited “audacious

independence” in interpreting Bereshith as Rosh, the “head” or “head

God,” is explained by the use of Kabbalah. He writes, “A basis for this

reading is actually found in the next verse of the Zohar. . . . [T]he Zohar

explains that the word Reshith ‘is anagrammatically Rosh (head), the

beginning which issues from Reshith.”54

Owens additionally shows that Smith followed the Zohar in translating

Elohim in the plural rather than the orthodox singular he was taught in

435

his Kirtland Hebrew class. In the same passage quoted by Owens is

found “both the concept of plurality and the hierarchy of Gods acting

‘with the permission and direction of the one above it, while the one

above did nothing without consulting its colleague.’” He concludes that

these themes from the Zohar were echoed in the King Follett discourse

and again two months later (June 16, 1844) in Smith’s last public

doctrinal address. Thus, Kabbalistic ideas “became a foundation for all

subsequent Mormon theosophy.”55

The Jewish mystical tradition held that Kabbalah consisted of the

original knowledge Adam received from God. Not only was Kabbalah

considered to be the guardian of this original knowledge, but “its

function was to hand down to its disciples the secret of God’s revelation

to Adam.”56 This idea comes through clearly in Freemasonry, as

expressed by George Oliver:

The principles of speculative Masonry, which had been communicated to Adam in Paradise, were never by him forsaken after having tasted the bitter fruit of the forbidden tree; and as his progeny increased, he communicated to them the divine precepts and injunctions which were

enfolded in that pure and sublime science.57

Albert Pike describes how many of the symbols found in speculative

Masonry came from alchemy: “By this and many other proofs we know

that the symbols of Freemasonry were introduced into it by the Hermetic

philosophers of England.”58 Manly P. Hall states that Hermes “was the

author of the Masonic initiatory rituals” and that “nearly all of the

Masonic symbols are Hermetic in character.”59

Medieval alchemists experimented with turning lead to gold, but their

more immediate preoccupation was in changing the base human

materials into the divine. They employed symbols of metals, elements,

the planets, and chemical processes to describe and understand the

spiritual process of personal improvement. To Renaissance thinkers who

followed in these footsteps, the natural world was a reflection of the

divine. Through certain magical practices in this world a person could

achieve true salvation in the next. This form of alchemy is comparable

with that of treasure diggers in early New England who sought lost

valuables. While these folks did actually dig for treasure, to many the

allegory represented by treasure-seeking was the spiritual point of the

exercise. Their activity “had more to do with obtaining experiential

knowledge of God and the celestial hierarchies” than “digging for vulgar

gold.”60 Smith’s early involvement with treasure-seeking, as well as his

436

later preoccupation with Kabbalistic and Masonic thought, seems to

follow this type of motivation.

The Grand Council

In speaking of the “head one of the Gods,” 61 Joseph Smith also

described a “Head Council” composed of these divine beings. In Willard

Richards’s account, Smith preached, “The head one called the Gods

together in grand coun[c]il” where they “concoct[e]d a scheme to create

this world.”62 This idea builds upon that found in the Book of Abraham,

which depicts a divine Grand Council. Here, God, in the midst of an

assembly of other divine beings, presided over the creation of the earth

(Abr. 3:22–26). This conception resembles the Masonic idea of a Grand

Council in Heaven, overseen by the Grand Master of the Universe. In

particular, the Royal Arch Degree in Freemasonry contains a ritual

celestial ascent into the presence of a Grand Council situated in the Holy

of Holies, while passing veils and receiving tests of knowledge regarding

the various names, signs, and tokens associated therewith. They recover

“That Which Was Lost” and in the presence of the Grand Council are

rewarded for their labors by being crowned and made Companions in

what Royal Arch Masons call “The Rite of Exaltation.” The prayer

associated with this degree specifically states that the Grand Council

represents that Grand Council in Heaven.

Masonic governing bodies are similarly known as Grand Councils and

are patterned after the heavenly Grand Council. Moreover, Masons

expect to be gathered into this august body after their mortal death:

As the morning dew ascends to heaven, rich with the fragrance of the flowers it has refreshed and beautified, so may our good deeds, as Council Masons, continue to ascend to heaven, laden with the blessings of those upon whom they have shed a ray of warm and genial sunshine. And when the last sound of the Gavel shall be heard, . . . and the secret vault forever closed, may we be permitted to enter the Grand Council above, and with God and angels ever

dwell. 63

Creation from Disorder

In the King Follett discourse, Joseph Smith noted that theologians of

the day—“doctors”—taught that God “created the earth out of

nothing.”64 He, however, took a more Kabbalistic (and therefore

Masonic) view. Barau, Smith explained, meant to “organize the world

out of chaotic matter.”65 In his view, elements were principles that could

not be dissolved, although they could be organized and reorganized.

Though traditional Christianity counted it blasphemy to say that

437

elements had always existed, the idea went along with the motto of the

thirty-third degree of the Scottish rite of Freemasonry: “Ordo ab Chao,”

or “order from disorder.”

Dermott’s Ahiman Rezon, a mid-eighteenth-century composition,

contained a poem illustrating this Masonic conception of Creation:

Progress of Masonry

As all in confusion the chaos yet lay,

E’re evening and morning had made the first day;

The unform’d materials lay tumbling together,

Like so many Dutchmen in thick foggy weather.

When to this confusion no end there appear’d,

The sovereign mason’s word sudden was heard;

Then teem’d mother chaos with maternal throes,

By which this great lodge of the world then arose.

Then earth and the heavens with Jubile[e] rung,

And all the creation of Masonry sung;

When lo! to compleat and adorn the gay ball,

Old Adam was made the grand-master of all.66

As discussed in Chapter 6, Smith had previously presented these ideas

in the Doctrine and Covenants and in the Pearl of Great Price, a record

he presented as containing the writings of Abraham. These books of

scripture do not portray creation ex nihilo (out of nothing) but ex materia

(from existing materials). In his discourse, Smith reiterated concepts he

explained had been given to the Egyptians in antiquity and preserved by

the Masons—albeit in a corrupted form and in need of restoration.

At the climax of the sermon, Smith combined two Masonic principles,

Ordo ab Chao and the divine nature of man, to bring forth the idea of the

immutability of the human spirit: “I might be bold to say that God never

did have power to create the spirit of man at all. He could not create

himself—Intelligence exists upon a selfexistent principle—is a spirit

from age to age & no creation about it.”67 As God is a self-existing

being, so is man. Neither the spirit nor the mind have a beginning or end.

For Smith, these realities were calculated to exalt the human race.

A spirit model very similar to the one advocated by Smith was

described in William Hutchinson’s 1775 The Spirit of Masonry: “[T]he

Supreme Being . . . was not the creator of the universe, nor the alone

independent Being: for, according to them [the maintainers of the

Egyptian philosophy], matter too was eternal.”68 Hutchinson’s book was

well known throughout America and continuously published for over a

century. Smith thus likely was well acquainted with these concepts.

The Bright Fraternal Chain: Purpose of Masonic Ritual

438

One of the fundamental purposes of Masonic ritual is to link together

both heaven and earth, the quick and the dead, into what Freemasons

identify as “the bright fraternal chain”69 that links every Masonic

Brother and related family member together by virtuous action.70 The

eternal nature of this bond is signified by the Masonic motto “virtus

junxit mors non separabit,” or “what virtue unites, death cannot

separate”—a phrase that was printed in public newspapers in upstate

New York as early as the late 1820s.71 This motto was inscribed upon a

plain gold band that was presented to each brother who had received the

fourteenth degree of the Rite of Perfection Associated with Masonry

since at least 1783; this ring ceremony was well known by Masons in the

days of Joseph Smith.72 During the ceremony of reception, the candidate

was instructed:

Receive this ring as a token of Alliance, and to shew that you have made a Contract with Virtue and with the Virtuous: Do promise me dear Brother never to part with this Ring, untill death, and that you never will give it to any, but your wife, your Eldest son, or your nearest

friend. 73

To Masons, this ring was a token of the understanding that death could

not break certain familial and fraternal ties, because those near and dear

were united to them by virtue. It demonstrates a Masonic faith—related

to their belief in the immortality of the soul—that the tenderest ties of

kinship and fraternity extend beyond the grave. The golden band of the

fourteenth degree was a reminder to the friends and loved ones of the

departed that not even death had the power to divide those relationships

that Virtue (which may be read as a metaphor for God) had joined. It is

an indissoluble chain, forged by the hand of God, with each link bright

and virtuous.

Smith deployed this understanding in the King Follett discourse, where

he illustrated the principle using his very own ring. He preached that

God was a self-existing being and that man exists upon the same

principle:

[Y]ou who mourn the loss of friends are ownly seperated for a moment. . . .[I]s it logic to say the spirit of man had a begin[n]ing & yet had no end[?] it does not have a begin[n]ing or end, my ring is like the exhistanc[e] of man it has no begin[n]ing or end, if cut into their would be a

begin[n]ing & end, so with man if it had a beginning it will have an end.74

He continued,

[I]f I am right, I mi[gh]t with boldness proclaim from the house top that God never had power to create the Sp[irit] of man at all. . . . God himself co[ul]d not create himself[.] [I]ntelligence

is self existent it is a Sp[irit] from age to end & there is no creat[io]n ab[ou]t it.75

439
