William Law, former counselor in the First Presidency of the Church,

wrote his impressions of the April 1844 general conference in his diary:

“Conference is over, and some of the most blasphemous doctrines have

been taught by J. Smith & others.” Law summarized what Joseph Smith

had taught: “a plurality of Gods, other gods as far above our God as he is

above us. That he wrought out his salvation in the flesh with fear and

trembling, the same as we do.” Law continued with additional teachings

given in the 1844 conference that applied to both Masonry and the newly

formed Council of Fifty: “that secret meetings are all legal and right and

that the Kingdom [of God] must be set up after the manner of a Kingdom

(and of course have a King).”76

There is little doubt that Smith’s King Follett Discourse is Masonic in

character. It was given on behalf of a Masonic Brother, intended for a

Masonic audience, and contains numerous Masonic allusions. While its

content is purely Mormon, the framing—the staging—is undeniably

Masonic in character. As he was encouraged to do as a Freemason, Smith

demonstrated his facility for applying Masonic language to his own

beliefs. In the King Follett Discourse, he elucidated for his followers the

aim and purpose of human existence, using both analogies and language

borrowed from Masonic ritual and discourse.

Freemasonry was an important influence in shaping Smith’s theology

of the “chain of belonging” and the conquest of death.77 What

Freemasons express in the Latin phrase “Virtus junxit mors non

separabit” (“What virtue unites death cannot separate”), Smith reworded

into the uniquely Mormon doctrine of eternal companionship. The

“bright fraternal chain” of Masonry78 became the endless priesthood

chain of Mormonism.79 Smith unveiled the relationship between the

living and the dead, describing how death changes and transforms us. He

spoke on the meaning of human perfectibility and connection with the

gods. These concepts all appear to have come from his meditation on

Masonic ideas and the fruit of his own revelations on these subjects.

They were evidence of his claim to have recovered the Lost Master’s

Word. Presented just over two months before his death, the King Follett

Discourse represented the apex of Masonic experience and the summum

bonum of Joseph Smith’s own work.

Notes

440

441

442

443

444
