DEATH OF A BUILDER

“Do you meet an enemy in battle array? The token of a Mason

instantly converts him into a guardian angel. . . . Is your life in

jeopardy from any casualty of time, place or circumstance? a

brother’s arm is nerved for your assistance, and his own life

jeopardized for your safety.”

—Salem Town, A System of Speculative Masonry

It is written of Jesus of Nazareth that he both acted and was “acted 1 upon” to fulfill prophecy. He, like other would-be messiahs, intentionally emulated scripture, such as when he rode a white donkey through the gate of Jerusalem, fulfilling a recognized prophecy.

Much later, his followers and biographers found additional instances in

his ministry which they deemed to be the realization of Old Testament

prophecies.2 Similarly, Joseph Smith sought to fulfill prophecy and

recover authentic Freemasonry as part of the restoration of true

Christianity. On occasion, he consciously replicated Masonic stories and

legends in his own life and ministry. At other times, unintentional

parallels with the Masonic allegory of Hiram Abiff became evident.

Never was this more startling than in the events surrounding his death.

The Work on the Trestleboard

In the allegorical play performed during the third degree of

Freemasonry, Hiram Abiff, the chief architect of Solomon’s Temple,

safeguards the secrets of the Craft. Each day, he lays out on the

trestleboard tasks for the workmen to complete. Once the temple is

completed, they are to be given the secrets and earn the wages of a

Master Mason. In a similar fashion, while overseeing the construction of

the Nauvoo Temple, Joseph Smith sought to safeguard the secrets of the

political and religious theocratic kingdom he was organizing, particularly

through the Council of Fifty. During this time, the Mormon inner circle

was conspiring to bring about a kingdom within the borders of the

United States, sending ambassadors to other nations in an attempt to gain

recognition. Though the Book of Mormon warned against a kingship

(Mosiah 29:5–10), it also promoted the establishment of “just men to be .

. . kings, who would establish the laws of God, and judge . . . according

445

to his [God’s] commandments” (v. 13). It is with this latter view that

Smith sought to restore a purified Masonry and the divinely anointed

throne of David.

Additional associations in Nauvoo labored to support the scheme of

the Fifty, including the Anointed Quorum and the Masonic Lodge. After

the successful dedication of their Hall on April 5, 1844, the Nauvoo

Masons doggedly continued the work of making enough Masons for an

independent Mormon Grand Lodge. Where other Masonic Lodges

throughout the world met once a month, Nauvoo Lodge held “regular

communications” twice a month, taking petitions and balloting for

members. They also convened on almost a daily basis to initiate, pass,

and raise Latter-day Saint men to the Masonic degrees. Visitors were

welcomed from lodges such as Genessee Lodge in New York, St. John’s

Lodge in Boston, and Lodge No. 14 in Western Canada. Despite the

scrutiny of visitors, Nauvoo Lodge ignored Masonic convention that no

more than three men could be put through a particular degree at a time.

Sometimes as many as five Masons were passed or raised at a single

meeting,3 and occasionally men would receive two degrees at the same

meeting.4

Joseph Smith attended Nauvoo Lodge in 1844, as he had in previous

years; however, April 12, two and a half months before his death, was

the last time his attendance was recorded in the minutes. Smith seemed

content that trusted officiators were going forward with the work of

making many Masons. His brother Hyrum, Master of the Lodge, was

often absent in the early months of 1844, but Lucius Scovil took up the

reins of the Masonic work as Master 5 pro tempore , with William Clayton

and occasionally Thomas Bullock writing the minutes as secretary and

treasurer. Their minutes were terse, but they did mention that charges

were preferred against Brothers Wilson Law and Robert D. Foster “for

gross unmasonic conduct” on May 2, 1844.6 This action against men

who were endeavoring to expose what they saw as flaws in the Church

points to the brewing discontent in Nauvoo and demonstrates conflation

of the work of the Lodge with Mormonism.

In Masonic legend, Hiram Abiff is sequentially accosted at the East,

South, and West gates of Solomon’s Temple by three ruffians who have

conspired to wrest from him the secrets of a Master Mason. The architect

refuses to divulge what he knows, explaining that the Grand Omnific

Word can only be revealed in the presence of three: King Solomon,

Hiram the King of Tyre, and himself. As each ruffian fails to get what he

446

wants, he strikes Abiff with one of the working tools. The third ruffian

strikes him on the head with a setting maul, killing him.

Like Hiram Abiff, Joseph Smith was killed prior to the completion of

the Temple. Three distinct groups were complicit in the final attack at

Carthage Jail where Smith was held prisoner: Mormon apostates,7 high-

ranking Masonic leaders, and combined military8 9 and vigilante forces.

All three groups included Smith’s Masonic brethren.

First Blow: Apostates

On New Year’s Day 1877, Brigham Young spoke of King Solomon’s

Temple, saying, “It is true that Solomon built a Temple for the purpose of

giving endowments, but . . . one of the high priests was murdered by

wicked and corrupt men, who had already begun to apostatize, because

he would not reveal those things appertaining to the Priesthood that were

forbidden him to reveal until he came to the proper place.”10 This

statement is clearly Masonic, rather than biblical, as it references both

endowments and a high priest (Abiff) who was murdered because he

would not disclose priesthood secrets. More importantly, Young was

referencing the parallel that the Hiram Abiff story had to apostate

members of the Church who were involved in Joseph Smith’s death.

Several Mormon apostates who were also Freemasons began stirring

things up in Nauvoo in the early spring of 1844. John C. Bennett, for

example, was an intimate associate of Smith and was well acquainted

with the framework the Prophet established to arrogate authority from

the established state. This enabled him to expose Smith’s plans, which

constituted treason in the eyes of many of his countrymen. Having been

instrumental in establishing the Lodge in Nauvoo, Bennett also accused

the Mormons of clandestine Masonic activities.

William Law, previously a loyal and faithful member of the Church,

became agitated over Smith’s teaching of plural marriage. Together,

William and Wilson Law, Robert and Charles Foster, Francis and

Chauncey Higbee, and Charles Ivins published a newspaper, the Nauvoo

Expositor, which accused Smith of adultery, teaching false doctrine, and

establishing himself as a theocratic king.11 This group of Mormon

renegades struck the first blow against their former leader.

Because it threatened to disrupt the order in the growing city, the

Nauvoo City Council ruled the Expositor a public nuisance, and Smith,

as mayor, directed the city marshal to destroy the press. Once the press

was demolished on June 10, Smith and his brother Hyrum were in return

447

charged with inciting riot and treason. After they were acquitted twice by

sympathetic Nauvoo justices of the peace, protesters throughout Illinois,

Iowa, and Missouri threatened violence. Illinois Governor Thomas Ford

demanded that the Smiths come to Carthage and submit themselves to

what he hoped would be a more impartial trial. Though few of the

publishers of the Expositor were present at Carthage Jail when the

Prophet was shot, they were all considered by early Church members to

be complicit in his murder. 12

A Lamb to the Slaughter

Fearing further turmoil, Joseph Smith instructed his closest followers

to destroy the evidence of his politically subversive intentions, telling

them to bury or burn their temple clothes and the Council of Fifty

records. Then Smith, his brother Hyrum, and a small party of men left

for Carthage on June 24, the day Freemasons traditionally commemorate

the feast of the New Testament’s first martyr, St. John the Baptist.

Perhaps Hyrum had this in mind as he carried with him the Worshipful

Master’s Jewel of Nauvoo Lodge.13

The party left the city at 6:30 a.m., riding southeast for three and a half

hours—and then returned to Nauvoo to fulfill an order by Governor

Ford, who demanded that the Nauvoo Legion surrender all state arms in

its possession.14 The arms were kept in the lower floor of the Nauvoo

Masonic Hall. From this place, Smith is reported to have stated, “Boys, if

I don’t come back, take care of yourselves; I am going like a lamb to the

slaughter.”15

In recapturing the image of Smith’s exodus, Nauvoo Freemasons

clearly attributed Masonic symbolism to the event. The official account

of the Prophet’s parting words states, “I am going like a lamb to the

slaughter; but I am calm as a summer’s morning; I have a conscience

void of offense towards God, and towards all men” (D&C 135:4). As

much as it refers to Isaiah 53:7, this quotation also replicates the

teachings of the Masonic Lodge. When Freemasons are first received

into the Lodge, they receive a lambskin apron that has significance in

both color and material. The apron must be made of unspotted white

lambskin, an emblem of purity by which the Freemason is reminded of

the cleanliness of life that is necessary to his gaining admission to the

Celestial Lodge above. Freemasons of Smith’s day, steeped in the

Christian symbolism of the Lodge, were also reminded of Jesus Christ,

the Lamb of God. Using language identical to Smith’s reported concerns

448

as he left Nauvoo, Masons are instructed that the “Masonic Apron is

exhibited as a continual memento, both to himself and those around him,

that he is under peculiar engagements to keep his conscience void of

offense, both to God and man.”16

Second Blow: High-Ranking Masonic Leaders

A celebration of St. John’s Day had not been planned by Nauvoo

Lodge, but Bodley Lodge No. 1, in nearby Quincy, kept the tradition in

style. In Bodley’s official minutes, a secretary preserved the names of the

members and visitors who were celebrating that evening while Joseph

and Hyrum Smith were riding to Carthage to surrender themselves.

Among the many visitors from Illinois and Missouri, three men were

particularly noteworthy: Stephen W. B. Carnegy, Priestly H. McBride,

and Abraham Jonas.17

Carnegy was nationally prominent in Masonic circles, having served

as a delegate at the 1843 Baltimore Convention, where he was lauded for

his service as co-author of a standardized ritual for the proposed Grand

Lodge of the United States.18 Carnegy had served as Grand Master of

Missouri from 1836 to 1838, during the height of anti-Mormon

hostilities in that state. Priestly H. McBride was the sitting Grand Master

of Missouri and a judge appointed to his current position on the Missouri

Fourth Circuit Court by Governor Lilburn Boggs.19 Residual tensions

from the Mormons’ sojourn in Missouri had already caused discord

between the Nauvoo Lodge and these high-ranking Missouri Masonic

officials.20 Their decision to neglect their own jurisdiction and instead

observe one of the most important Masonic celebrations of the year in

nearby Quincy would have likely aroused suspicion among the Nauvoo

Masons had it been known at such a critical juncture. Meanwhile, Past

Grand Master Abraham Jonas of Illinois, who had earlier helped the

Mormons establish their lodge in Nauvoo (see Chapter 11), had turned

against the Mormons and recently sold his printing press to the men who

would publish the Nauvoo Expositor.

Upon reaching Carthage near midnight, Joseph and Hyrum Smith

rented their usual upstairs south room at the hotel of Artois Hamilton.

The larger upstairs room on the north side of the hotel was used for

various functions, including the meetings of Carthage’s Hancock Lodge

No. 20 and Warsaw Lodge No. 21.21 Hancock Lodge’s meetings were

held “on the Monday preceding the full moon of each month.”22 With

449

the full moon of June 1844 falling on Sunday, the thirtieth of the month,

Hancock Lodge would have met just hours before the arrival of the

Smiths, in the same hotel, on Monday, June 24.

On Tuesday morning, June 25, the Smith brothers were paraded before

the gathered troops. The rest of the day found the brothers and their

retinue in and out of court. A hearing was held at which the Smiths and

thirteen other Latter-day Saints “entered into recognizances in the sum of

five hundred dollars each.”23 Hours later, they were served with new

writs that had been prepared the previous day in front of Justice Robert

F. Smith. The writs charged Joseph and Hyrum with treason and served

as justification to send the accused to Carthage Jail without bail to await

an examination scheduled the next day.24

These legal manipulations could hardly have escaped the notice of

those familiar with the William Morgan debacle. Accused of larceny for

his failure to return a borrowed shirt and tie, Masonic exposer Morgan

had been brought before the justice of the peace in Canandaigua, New

York. After being released from this charge, he was immediately

rearrested for an uncollected debt of $2.68 and thrown into the county

jail. From there he was seized by Masonic activists and presumably

murdered. Well aware of how Morgan had suffered, the Smiths spent the

night of June 25 in the lower room of Carthage jail, guarded by Stephen

Markham and other trusted friends while potential assailants peered

through the windows.

The next day, before Joseph and Hyrum would face examination by

Justice Smith, a secretive meeting convened in the upper lodge room of

the Hamilton Hotel. Dr. Wall Southwick, who had spent the night in the

jail with the Smiths, managed to infiltrate the meeting and abscond with

the secretary’s minutes. While those minutes have evidently not

survived, they were summarized in a letter written by Stephen Markham,

who obtained them from Southwick the same day.25

Later commentators have often misinterpreted Markham’s letter,

assuming it to be a somewhat garbled description of a later militia

meeting.26 Markham, however, was writing to fellow Nauvoo Mason

Wilford Woodruff, who would have immediately recognized the

explicitly Masonic nature of the meeting described. Markham described

the meeting as a “council,” made up of “delegates,” with a “sentinel.”

These seemingly ordinary structural terms signal the type of gathering

that took place. Both “council” and “sentinel” are terms specifically used

in higher degrees of Freemasonry, such as the Cryptic Rite. Markham’s

450

intentional use of “sentinel” to reference the person assigned to prevent

unauthorized entry is highlighted by his frequent reference to guards

throughout the rest of the letter. Further, Markham noted that along with

Governor Ford and Captain Robert Smith of the Carthage Greys (the

local militia charged with presiding over the Smith’s court case and

providing them with protection), there were delegates from every state in

the union except three—coincidentally the number of states with

organized grand lodges in 1844. Markham’s reference to “delegates” is

further important as a common reference to appointed representatives at

large Masonic convocations, such as the 1843 Baltimore Convention,

where Stephen W. B. Carnegy was the delegate from Missouri.27

The “purport of said meeting,” wrote Markham,

was to take into consideration the best way to stop Joseph & Hyrum Smith’s career as his Views on Government was widely circulated & took like wild fire. He said that if he did not get in the Presidential chair this election he would be sure to next, & if Illinois & Missouri

would join together to kill them they would not be brought to justice for them.28

Some authors, lacking an understanding of the Masonic context, have

assumed that the unidentified speaker’s reference to the “presidential

chair” referred to Joseph Smith’s quixotic political campaign.29 This

interpretation, however, is complicated by the inclusion of Hyrum Smith,

who was not on any political ballot. In all probability, the delegates

sought to ward off a very different concern. The phrase “presidential

chair” was a common Masonic reference to the place of honor held by

the Worshipful Master of a lodge or the Grand Master of a grand

lodge.30 The same phrase was used in reference to Emma Smith taking

her place at the head of the Masonry-inspired Nauvoo Female Relief

Society at its organizational meeting two years earlier.31

The presidential chair referred to in this council was that of the

proposed National Grand Lodge of the United States, which would have

made Joseph Smith the most powerful Freemason in the country if he

were elected to that position. Action on the proposal for a National

Grand Lodge had been set for 1846 at a triennial grand convocation.

With the number of Mormon Freemasons already approaching a national

majority and a public relations campaign driven by Smith’s political

pamphleteering, prominent Masons could foresee the very real

possibility that Joseph Smith could soon become Grand Master of the

United States. Hyrum Smith, as Worshipful Master of the premier

Mormon Lodge at Nauvoo and likely Grand Master of a contemplated

Mormon Grand Lodge, would himself gain significant power and

451

influence. At a time when Freemasonry was finally recovering from the

destruction of the Morgan affair, Masonic leaders were unwilling to

countenance such a scenario.

Given their timely proximity to Carthage just two days earlier, it is

likely that Priestly H. McBride, Stephen W. B. Carnegy, and Abraham

Jonas attended this council. These Masonic officials would have been

aware of both the irregularities in the Mormon lodges and Smith’s

doctrine of Masonic restoration. Had these transgressions been reported

to the others, it would have caused further consternation and justification

for the council’s final decision to assassinate the Mormon prophet and

his brother.

The words and actions of some Mormons at the time suggest that they

were aware of active Masonic involvement in the murder of the Smiths.

Dr. B. W. Richmond, a non-Mormon, arrived in Nauvoo on June 24, just

before Joseph and Hyrum left for Carthage. Sometime between then and

the murder of the Smiths, he visited with Lucinda Pendleton Morgan

Harris, knowing of her history as the widow of William Morgan. He later

wrote that she had a copy of An Inquiry into the Nature and Tendency of

Speculative Free-Masonry by John G. Stearns laying out. Richmond’s

detailed description of the book, however, specifically noting its fine

frontispiece engraving of William Morgan, indicates that he

misidentified the book. In all likelihood, Lucinda was displaying the

equally popular Light on Masonry: A Collection of All the Most

Important Documents on the Subject of Speculative Free Masonry by

Elder David Bernard. “She had taken it out,” Richmond wrote, “and

thought if the mob did come, and she was obliged to flee, or jump into

the Mississippi, she would take it with her.”32 One might imagine her

treasuring this volume in the days before photography with its rare image

of her first husband, the father of her children. Now, as one of Joseph

Smith’s many wives, Lucinda seems to have drawn a direct parallel

between the murder of her first husband and the feared impending

murder of her prophetic husband.

Several Mormons would comment in the aftermath of the murders on

the involvement of Freemasons in the mob storming the jail. Years later,

Brigham Young made a seemingly direct accusation regarding the

Masonic council of June 26, 1844, stating that “the people of the United

States had sought our destruction and they had used every exertion to

perfect it they have worked through the Masonic institution to perfect it.”

Young continued,

452

Joseph & Hyrum Smith were Master Masons and they were put to death by masons or through their instigation and he gave the sign of distress & he was shot by masons while in the act and

there were delegates from the various lodges in the union to see that he was put to death.33

Third Blow: Military and Vigilante Forces

When Governor Thomas Ford arrived in Carthage on June 21, he

discovered a force of more than one thousand militia men had gathered

and were threatening to attack Nauvoo.34 Hundreds more were

assembled at Warsaw. Joseph and Hyrum Smith planned to escape and

left Nauvoo, crossing the river into Iowa on the evening of June 22,

1844.35 The next morning a posse arrived in Nauvoo and word was sent

to the Prophet that the governor intended to station troops in the city

until he and Hyrum submitted to arrest. The Smith brothers decided to

return to Nauvoo and then acquiesce to the governor’s orders to stand

trial in Carthage.

Emotions in Carthage, and indeed throughout Illinois and Missouri,

had reached the boiling point. For many months, newspaper editor

Thomas Sharp of the Warsaw Signal had stirred up political anti-

Mormonism in the style of political anti-Masonry. “[W]e hold ourselves

at all times in readiness to co-operate with our fellow citizens . . . to

exterminate, utterly exterminate, the wicked and abominable Mormon

leaders,” he reported.36 Sharp’s comments on the destruction of the

Expositor appeared in a June 12, 1844, Signal extra:

War and extermination is inevitable! CITIZENS ARISE, ONE AND ALL!! Can you stand by, and suffer such INFERNAL DEVILS! to ROB men of their property rights, without avenging them. We have no time for comment! Every man will make his own. LET IT BE WITH

POWDER AND BALL!37

This threatening invective infected the minds of both common citizens

and military troops.

The Carthage Greys’ lieutenant, Samuel Williams, wrote of the

spectacle on the morning of June 25 when Joseph and Hyrum Smith

were paraded before the militia, describing the loud “hissing groaning

and all kinds of discordant sounds” that the Greys made when the Smiths

walked past. “I all the time tried my utmost to preserve silence but had

no more command over them than I would have had over a pack of wild

Indians. At this demonstration of feeling on the part of the Greys Jo

actually fainted,” Williams reported.38

Governor Ford, who encouraged the Smiths to surrender, was also

disturbed by the behavior of the militia. He originally planned to march

them all into Nauvoo in a show of force, but he soon decided to dismiss

453

the majority of troops and retain a single company. Thus, hundreds of

enraged and thwarted men were released to return to their homes or, in

many cases, throng the countryside as swarms of buzzing vigilantes.

On the evening of June 26, sometime after the Masonic council

meeting, a number of the “old citizens” of Hancock and surrounding

counties had formed a secret tribunal known as “the Vigilance

Committee of Safety” in the upstairs lodge room of Hamilton’s Hotel.

They were “joined by Illinois Whig Central Committee member George

T. M. Davis.” According to Davis, the committee, enraged with the

Mormons’ actions in Illinois, considered an organized attack to destroy

the city of Nauvoo entirely. Ultimately, however, the committee

determined to see that Joseph and Hyrum Smith were both put to death,

with the remainder of the Mormons spared to leave the state.39

In Ford’s January 1845 analysis of events, he spoke of “secret

machinations” that were afoot, but he claimed that pains were taken to

conceal the plot from him and the Brigadier General in command.40

When asked about the conspiracy, Davis exonerated Ford but would not

reveal “facts within my personal knowledge” because “under the strictest

injunctions of confidence,” he was “precluded from disclosing” them.

The same evening that the Carthage Vigilance Committee of Safety

held their council meeting, another group gathered in nearby Warsaw. On

this occasion, three military leaders, Jacob C. Davis (captain of the

Warsaw Rifle Company),41 William N. Grover (captain of the Warsaw

Cadets), and Major Mark Aldrich (commander of the Warsaw

Independent Battalion), 42 reportedly chose twenty men from among

their troops “to go and kill Joseph and Hiram Smith in the jail at

Carthage.”43

A scant group of eight men from the Carthage Greys were assigned to

guard the prison where Smith and his company were kept. The rest of

their troop was camped on the public square a quarter mile away.

Another company of the Greys, under Levi Williams, patrolled the area

about eight miles from Carthage.44 Of these, several of the commanding

officers were Freemasons, including Mark Aldrich and Robert F. Smith,

Captain of the Greys.

It appears that the Mormons expected Joseph Smith’s Masonic status

to count for something among these men, as Dan Jones, who

accompanied the brothers to Carthage Jail, was sent to Governor Ford to

inform him that Frank Worrell, the officer of the guard of the Carthage

454

Greys, had vowed that “old Joe” would never leave the jail alive and that

another troop of men had threatened to “kill those men if we have to tear

the jail down.” When Jones reported this to Ford, he shrugged it off,

saying that alarm was unnecessary and that “the people are not that

cruel.” Jones indignantly replied that the Smiths were American citizens

and “they are also Master Masons, and as such I demand of you the

protection of their lives.” Ford’s visage reportedly “turned pale” at these

words.45

A Master Mason’s Last Words

The conspirators converged upon the jail in the early evening of June

27, 1844. The Greys made a token attempt to halt the pack, then allowed

them to surge through.46 An intense scuffle then ensued, during which

Hyrum Smith was shot and killed, and John Taylor was severely

wounded and rolled under a bed. Finally, the prophet Joseph Smith was

shot as he jumped from the second-story window. According to a list of

participants in the mob compiled by Jacob B. Backenstos, clerk of

Hancock County Circuit Court, some of the leading men in the fraternity

of Freemasons were among those who murdered the Smith brothers in

Carthage Jail.47 Seven of these were members of Hancock Lodge No. 20

in Carthage. Five belonged to Warsaw Lodge No. 21. An additional three

hailed from other lodges in the state.48 Thus, at least a third of the

members of the two lodges were directly involved in the murders.

According to observers, just prior to plummeting from the window of the

jail, the Prophet gave the Masonic signal of distress. Instead of receiving

the aid and protection that the signal called for, the answer “was ‘the roar

of his murderers’ muskets and the deadly balls that pierced his heart.”49

A report of the Smiths’ deaths published in the Times and Seasons, July

15, 1844, and attributed to John Taylor states that the men were

shot to death, while, with uplifted hands they gave such signs of distress as would have commanded the interposition and benevolence of Savages or Pagans. They were both Masons in good standing. Ye brethren of “the mystic tie” what think ye! Where is our good master Joseph and Hyrum? Is there a pagan, heathen, or savage nation on the globe that would not be moved on this great occasion, as the trees of the forest by a mighty wind? Joseph’s last

exclamation was “O Lord my God.” 50

455

The Masonic Grand Hailing Sign of Distress was taught to nineteenth-

century brethren of the Craft in the Master Mason Degree. The sign was

given “by raising both hands and arms to the elbows, perpendicularly,

one on each side of the head, the elbows forming a square.” The words

“O Lord, my God! is there no help for the widow’s son?” were then

spoken, as the hands were solemnly lowered. The phrase is reportedly

what King Solomon said when he learned of Hiram Abiff’s murder.51

Freemasons of the day took an obligation that “should I ever see that

sign given or the word accompanying it, and the person who gave it,

appearing to be in distress, I will fly to his relief at the risk of my life.”52

Smith’s close associates clearly imputed Masonic intentions to his last

spoken words. John D. Lee, secretary of the Council of Fifty, left an

embellished later account which included the entire phrase from the

456

ritual: “Joseph left the door, . . . and cried out, ‘Oh, Lord my God, is

there no help for the widow’s son!’ as he sprang from the window,

pierced with several balls.”53 Likewise, Zina D. H. Young, a member of

the Quorum of the Anointed, later president of the Relief Society, and

one of Smith’s plural wives, proclaimed:

I am the daughter of a master mason! I am the widow of a master mason, who, when leaping from the window of Carthage jail pierced with bullets, made the masonic sign of distress; but, gentlemen (addressing the representatives of the press that were present), those signs were not heeded except by the God of heaven. That man, the Prophet of the Almighty, was massacred without mercy! Sisters, this is the first time in my life that I have dared to give utterance to this fact, but I thought I could trust my soul to say it on this occasion; and I say it now in the fear of Israel’s God, and I say it in the presence of these gentlemen, and I wish my voice could be

heard by the whole brotherhood of masons throughout our proud land. 54

Thus, the men and women surrounding Smith were unanimous on this

point. With apparent pride in his standing as a Freemason, they called the

Masons in the crowd of assassins to task for failing to come to his aid.

Another possibility why Smith might have given the Masonic call is

suggested by a closer look at the legend behind the distress call in

William Morgan’s 1826 exposé. There, the brother representing King

Solomon is told at the grave of Hiram Abiff that his body has been

searched carefully for the Master’s word and nothing has been

discovered but “a feint resemblance of the letter G on the left breast.”

King Solomon then begins a three-fold distress call by raising his arms

and exclaiming, “Nothing but a feint resemblance of the letter G! that is

not the Master’s word nor a key to it. I fear the Master’s word is forever

lost!” He repeats this phrase three times, and upon the third repetition

adds the words, “O Lord my God, is there no help for the widow’s son?”

55 Perhaps Smith, in the final moments of his life, feared that the

“Master’s word was forever lost”—that the Temple ordinances in their

unfinished state, and the Mormon lodges in their current clandestine

condition, would not be sufficient to bring to pass the restoration he had

envisioned.

As mentioned, some modern Latter-day Saints, uncomfortable with the

Masonic associations of this phrase, construe Smith’s exclamation as a

prayer. This interpretation is not completely at odds with a Masonic view

of the Grand Hailing sign. Every Masonic obligation ends with a plea,

“So help me God, and keep me steadfast in the due performance of the

same.” The Grand Hailing cry can thus be given as a way to alert God to

a man’s distress when no human ear is there to hear.

457

Grand Hailing Sign of Distress, from William Morgan, Illustrations of Masonry, 1827 ed.

Inside the jail, Willard Richards, a Freemason himself, dragged John

Taylor to safety in another room and concealed him under a mattress.

Not completely sure that the Smith brothers were dead, he elevated his

hands three times and exclaimed, “Oh Lord, my God, spare Thy

servants!”56 Both Richards and Smith, in their hour of extremity, turned

to Masonically inspired ritual to express their deepest longings.

Images of the Martyrdom

Several additional descriptions and pictures of the martyrdom

possessed distinctive Masonic characteristics. Newly baptized Mormon

convert William M. Daniels collaborated with Nauvoo Freemason

Lyman Littlefield to produce a pamphlet titled A Correct Account of the

Murder of Generals Joseph and Hyrum Smith at Carthage on the 27th

day of June, 1844. In this controversial 1845 account, Joseph Smith is

depicted hanging out of the window of Carthage Jail, repeating the words

458

O Lord my God “two or three times.” Daniels insisted as an eyewitness

that Smith was not shot until after a young man propped him “agains[t]

the South side of the well-curb.” Following the shooting, a sudden and

powerful light “burst from the heavens upon the bloody scene,”

dissuading the ruffian who was about to decapitate him.57 Although this

account was questioned by the court at the trial of Smith’s accused

assassins, Latter-day Saint leaders embraced and perpetuated the myth.

For examples, claims that a “man with a bowie knife raised his hand to

cut off Joseph’s head” and that “a vivid flash of lightning caused his arm

to fall powerless” were reprinted in an 1882 Deseret Sunday School

manual printed by Elder George Q. Cannon’s Juvenile Instructor

office.58

“Fig.1, the Carthage Greys. Fig. 2, Col. Williams. Fig. 3, the four ruffians who shot Gen. Joseph

Smith. Fig.4, the well-curb. Fig. 5, the flash of light. Fig. 6, Elder Richards at the window of the

jail from which Gen. Smith fell. Fig. 7, Gen Smith, after he was shot. Fig. 8, the ruffian who was

about to sever his head from his body. Fig. 9, the door leading into the entry, through which the

murderers entered. Fig. 10, Capt. Smith. Fig. 11, the mob. Fig. 12, the point of wood which the mob entered when going to the jail.” From William M. Daniels, A Correct Account of the Murder

of Generals Joseph and Hyrum Smith at Carthage on the 27th day of June, 1844, 1845.

Daniels’s pamphlet contains an engraving depicting the Masonic

elements of the scene. With Smith fallen on his face next to the well, a

“ruffian” is “about to sever his [Joseph’s] head from his body” while

streams of miraculous light break through the clouds. Prominent in the

foreground is Colonel Levi Williams, who gave the order to shoot and

kill Smith.

459

A similar 1851 lithograph places Smith’s body upon the well-curb,

with a masked man brandishing a knife above him.59 The scene is also

flooded with otherworldly light and the Carthage Greys skulking in the

shadows. However, the commanding figure to the left of the well does

not seem to represent Colonel Williams. Rather than instigating the

murder, this fellow has his arm and hand raised in a halting gesture and

seems almost to be an embodied heavenly messenger stopping the

intended mutilation. Dressed in formal top hat and tails, he resembles

nothing so much as a symbolic Freemason, dressed for a lodge meeting,

and come to advocate for Smith in his final hour.60

Martyrdom of Joseph and Hiram Smith in Carthage jail, June 27th, 1844. G.W. Fasel pinxit; on

stone by C.G. Crehen; print by Nagel & Weingaertner, N.Y.

While the attempted decapitation by the young ruffian was said to

have been motivated by an offer of one thousand dollars for the head of

Smith, it is notable that decapitation is also one of the penalties for a

dishonored Mason. The elements of the well and the bright light are also

found in Masonic legend. There, Hiram Abiff’s spilled blood is traced

“to a well in the north part of the Temple,” where the searcher concludes

that he “had been killed and thrown into this well.” Seeing “a luminous

meteor which stood over the well,” he had it completely drained and

therein found the Master’s jewel. “It appears that Hiram Abiff, when

attacked by the ruffians, must have plucked off this jewel, and thrown it

460

into the well near the great staircase, rather than it should fall into the

hands of such villains.”61 In other ritual portrayals of the story of Hiram

Abiff, the jewel is found on his dead body, by which it is identified.

Jewels of the Lodge

When he went to Carthage, Hyrum Smith apparently carried on his

person the Worshipful Master’s jewel from Nauvoo Lodge. A Masonic

jewel, in this usage, is a badge of office that a Masonic officer wears,

often around his neck. The Nauvoo Masonic Lodge possessed a full set

of such jewels, one for each officer in the Lodge. This set of jewels,

missing one, was ultimately hidden in an old stable in Carthage. They

were subsequently discovered in the 1920s and given to the Herman

Lodge in Quincy. Later, the missing Worshipful Master’s jewel was

found hidden in the cell of the Carthage jail where Hyrum had been

killed, and it was sent to the Herman Lodge to complete the set.62 Their

silver appearance and the similarity they possess to symbols used in

early Mormon ceremonies suggest they were crafted by an early

Mormon metalworker in Nauvoo.63

Another curious silver piece was said to have been found “in the

Prophet’s pocket at the time that he died,” although it was not listed on

an inventory of the deceased Smith’s possessions.64 This piece was a

Jupiter talisman engraved according to instructions in occultist Francis

Barrett’s The Magus for making magic talismans.65 On the piece were,

among other symbols, the astrological sign for Jupiter and Hebrew letters

representing the names of Deity. Charles Bidamon signed an affidavit

saying that he received the amulet from his father, Lewis Bidamon,

Freemason and second husband of Emma Smith. Charles Bidamon said

that Emma Smith considered this talisman her husband’s “intimate

possession.”66 In 1937, Bidamon sold the talisman to collector Wilford

Wood, who displayed it in his museum for decades as “the Prophet’s

Masonic jewel.” Although this is likely a conflation of Freemasonry with

esoteric items relating to magic, a coincidence connects the talisman to

Masonic ritual.

461

Herman Lodge Jewels once belonging to the Nauvoo Lodge. Courtesy of Herman Lodge No. 39

in Quincy, Illinois.

In the legend of Hiram Abiff, those who searched for his body were

looking for something that may have preserved the Grand Omnific Word,

the name of God. A Masonic jewel found on his body might serve as a

key to distinguish him as the Master. In Joseph Smith’s case, the amulet

in his possession was engraved with the identifying astrological sign of

Jupiter, under which planetary influence he had been born. It also

contained names of God, with which the Lost Master’s Word is often

equated.

The Villains Escape Punishment

In the Master Mason ritual, the murderers of Hiram Abiff “flee into the

interior parts of the country” to “avoid being taken as long as

possible.”67 So, too, did several of those who were instrumental in the

Smiths’ deaths. Governor Ford returned to his residence in Springfield,

and county officials removed important county records from Carthage to

the town of Quincy. William Voorhease and Marcellus Black, two men

who do not appear on Illinois Masonic returns but were identified as

Freemasons, “sought safety from the law and Mormon vengeance by

heading to the vicinity of El Dorado, Union County, Arkansas.”68

Voorhease had been wounded by Joseph Smith’s pistol in the initial fray.

In October 1844, nine men were indicted for the murders, but four fled

and were never arrested. Three of these were wounded by Smith and

therefore most closely linked to the shootings—Voorhease, William

Gallagher, and John Wills. Five remained to stand trial in Carthage in

May 1845: Mark Aldrich (commander of the Warsaw Independent

Battalion), Jacob C. Davis (state senator and commander of the Warsaw

Cadets), Thomas C. Sharp (publisher of the Warsaw Signal), Levi

462

Williams (colonel and commanding officer of the 59th Regiment of the

Illinois militia), and William N. Grover (captain of the Warsaw Rifle

Company).

Mark Aldrich had been a Freemason for over twenty years and was a

founding member of Warsaw Lodge No. 21 in January 1843, serving as

secretary that year. In October of 1843 he was elected as Steward. On

December 19, 1844, Aldrich was elected Senior Deacon of the Lodge

while under indictment for murder, despite Masonic prohibitions against

elevating a member currently in conflict with the law. On June 24, 1845,

shortly after his acquittal on May 30, he was elected Worshipful Master

of the Lodge.69

Thomas Sharp and Levi Williams had crossed to the Missouri side of

the Mississippi and negotiated with Illinois officials for several

concessions. They agreed to return to Illinois and surrender only after

Governor Ford promised reasonable bail and no state resistance to a

motion for a change of venue. At their trial they were acquitted.70 On

September 23, 1844, Jacob C. Davis filed a petition with Warsaw Lodge

No. 21 and by November 18 he was a Master Mason. On that day, Sharp

and Williams followed suit, being passed on Jan. 9, 1845, and raised on

March 17, 1845, respectively. This action was especially noteworthy for

Sharp, who as a newspaper editor in western New York had been fiercely

anti-Masonic. He was credited with inventing the term “‘Jack Mason’ for

persons who refused to take part in the anti-Masonic movement of that

day and neighborhood.”71 The timing of these petitions suggests that the

men feared retaliation by the Mormons and hoped that association with

the Lodge would protect them. They had good reason to expect a

favorable result—their petitions were investigated by Mark Aldrich and

Henry G. Stevens, both men who appeared on Backenstos’s list of

participants in the murder and who would not have thought this

disqualified the petitioners from entering the Fraternity.

Warsaw Lodge was well aware of the pending indictments, having

discussed them in their meetings prior to taking action.72 Months later,

when Bodley Lodge reported this irregularity to the Grand Lodge, a

committee was appointed to examine the matter and “ascertain by any

means in their power, whether said Lodge has conferred any of the

degrees upon any person or persons while under indictment.” Warsaw

Lodge had not submitted their 1845 returns, perhaps in an effort to

disguise their irregularities. Thus, the Grand Master, at his discretion,

suspended their charter until the next annual communication of the

463

Grand Lodge.73 When the report of the committee was returned, they

suggested that perhaps leniency should be extended to Warsaw Lodge:

“Although the Lodge in question erred, and greatly erred, yet they

conceive the error was an error of the head and not of the heart; that all

the harm has been done in the case that can be done; the men have been

since tried by the laws of their country and a jury of their peers, and

acquitted.”74

After hearing the report from his Committee on Warsaw Lodge, the

Grand Master adopted the recommendation of the committee and

deemed that “it would be well to let the Lodge off.”75 Notwithstanding

that on October 5, 1846, the Grand Lodge voted to “receive said Lodge

to their affectionate confidence,” Warsaw Lodge did not reclaim their

charter for almost five years.76 Carthage Lodge was also closed just

after the Grand Lodge made their decision.

A Curious Pattern of Burials

In the legend of Hiram Abiff presented during the Master Mason

degree, after the three ruffians have murdered Abiff, they bury the body

in temple rubble and plan to return at midnight to give the body a more

secure interment. At the appointed hour, they carry the body to a hill

west of Mt. Moriah, where Abiff is reburied. The next day, the

Fellowcrafts working in Solomon’s Temple who did not go through with

the conspiracy confess the plot. A search is conducted, and Abiff’s body

is found after it has been in the grave for fifteen days.77

Malcolm C. Duncan’s Masonic Ritual and Monitor states:

The body of our Grand Master [Hiram Abiff] was buried three times: first, in the rubbish of the Temple; secondly, on the brow of a hill west of Mount Moriah; and, thirdly and lastly, as near the “Sanctum Sanctorum, or Holy of Holies,” of King Solomon’s Temple, as Jewish law

would permit. 78

This story of Abiff’s burial has several parallels to the curious pattern of

burials that took place for Joseph and Hyrum Smith’s bodies.

Perhaps wishing to imitate the legend, Joseph Smith had prepared a

tomb on the grounds of the Nauvoo Temple patterned after the legendary

Solomon’s Vault as a place of interment for himself and his family.

Joseph Johnstun has persuasively shown that “the Tomb of Joseph was

located on the south side of the temple block, off the southeast corner of

the temple, the same corner that William Clayton called ‘Joseph’s

corner,’ near Mulholland Street.” It was a two-chambered structure, with

one side meant for the family of Smith and the other for Sidney

464

Rigdon.79 Although these vaults were both completed, the Smith family

was afraid that the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum would be desecrated if

they were buried in the expected resting place. A complex subterfuge

was required.

On the hot, sunny morning of Friday, June 28, 1844, two rough

wooden boxes containing the bodies of the deceased brothers were

conveyed to Nauvoo. With a protective covering of blankets, branches,

and hay, they were escorted by their younger brother Samuel H. Smith,

Willard Richards, and a guard of eight soldiers. After arriving around

three in the afternoon, the bodies were laid out in coffins built by George

Cannon and placed side by side beneath the south windows of the

Mansion House dining room. This private viewing allowed the family to

openly express their most profound grief. Captain Dan Jones later wrote:

[M]y eyes beheld the blood of the two godly martyrs mingling in one pool in the middle of the floor, their elderly mother, godly and sorrowful, on her knees in the midst of the blood between the two, a hand on each one of her sons who lay in gore, her heart nearly broken by

the excruciating agony and the indescribable grief. 80

Mary Fielding Smith and Emma Smith entered the room to view the

bodies of their respective husbands, each overwrought with their own

painful sorrow. Perhaps most surprising, however, was the presence of

another woman in what would seem to be a position of honored respect

on the occasion. B. W. Richmond recalled:

While the two wives were bewailing their loss, and prostrate on the floor with their eight children, I noticed a lady standing at the head of Joseph Smith’s body, her face covered, and her whole frame convulsed with weeping. She was the widow of William Morgan, of Masonic memory, and twenty years before had stood over the body of her husband, found at the mouth of Oak Orchard Creek, on Lake Ontario. She was now the wife of a Mr. Harris, whom she

married in Batavia, and who was a saint in the Mormon church, and a high Mason. 81

Lucinda Pendleton Morgan Harris, whose first husband was most

likely killed by vengeful Freemasons in New York, now mourned the

murder of a second husband—albeit a secret one—at the hands of

Freemasons in Illinois. For those few Masons present, her standing vigil

no doubt evoked the image of the fabled monument atop Hiram Abiff’s

final resting place under the Holy of Holies of King Solomon’s Temple,

described as “a virgin weeping over a broken column, with a book open

before her” representing the “unfinished state of the temple” and the fact

that “one of the principal supports of Masonry had fallen.”82

In Masonic lore, the ruffians who murdered Hiram Abiff immediately

feared discovery and punishment. They quickly hid the body in the

rubbish outside the west gate of the Temple, within the construction

rubbish until “low twelve,” or midnight, at which time they carried the

465

body westward and buried it at the brow of a hill. Before making their

escape, they marked the location with a small acacia tree.83

The morning following the family viewing, the Mansion House was

opened to thousands of visitors for a public viewing of the Smith

brothers’ bodies. Once the crowds were cleared, the bodies were secretly

hidden in a northeast corner closet adjoining the dining room where the

viewing took place. The pine coffins, meanwhile, were filled with

sandbags and rocks for weight, after which they were closed and carried

in a large procession for public burial in the Nauvoo graveyard.84

At midnight, the bodies were removed from their hiding place by nine

Freemasons: Dimick B. Huntington, Edward Hunter, William D.

Huntington, William Marks, Jonathan H. Holmes, Gilbert Goldsmith,

Alpheus Cutler, Lorenzo D. Wasson, and Philip B. Lewis.85 While being

guarded by James Emmet, member of both the Nauvoo Police and

Council of Fifty, the men conveyed the coffins westward to the Nauvoo

House, which was under construction nearby. There in the northwest

corner of the foundation, two graves awaited, having been secretly

prepared beforehand.86 The bodies were buried, and the spot was

covered with “chips of wood and stone and other rubbish”87 to

camouflage the site, secreting it until late fall or early winter.

These initial events corresponded with Hiram Abiff’s first and second

burials—in the rubbish of the temple and the brow of a hill westward of

the temple. While the Mansion House was not a temple, the Smith

brothers’ bodies were briefly hidden from discovery there until midnight.

Then, they were carried due westward, where their burial took place in

the foundation of the Nauvoo House. A careful examination of the

Nauvoo House reveals that the northwest corner burial was, in fact, on

the brow of a hill, as the ground slopes from that point sharply down

toward the Mississippi River.

The bodies remained in their temporary Nauvoo House graves until the

fall of 1844 when Emma Smith and Mary Fielding Smith became

concerned that renewed construction work on the building would

inevitably reveal their hiding place.88 Again at midnight, under Emma’s

direction, the bodies were moved by Dimick B. Huntington, William D.

Huntington, Jonathan H. Holmes, and Gilbert Goldsmith, all Freemasons

who had helped with the previous burial, to a location near the Smith

Homestead where Emma resided. A small spring house or “bee house”

marked and concealed the spot.89 This seemed a fitting place of repose,

466

bees being the Masonic symbol of regeneration and recovery from the

grave.

In 1846, perhaps anticipating later claims that Brigham Young and the

other apostles would have taken the bodies west with them, Emma again

had the bodies secretly transported to a new location further from

potential thieves. The new site, south of Nauvoo, lay within the wooded

property of David Hibbard alongside the Mississippi River. According to

a later account by Joseph F. Smith, this was the location referred to by

the Prophet’s son, David Hyrum Smith, in the hymn “The Unknown

Grave.” David was known to frequent the location so often that it

remains known today as David’s Chamber.90 Many years later, with the

assistance of a trusted Black servant by the name of Cleveland, Emma

moved the bodies back to the Homestead, this time placing them beneath

the existing foundation of a spring house.91 Over the years, other

deceased Smith family members were reinterred in “Emma’s garden.”

Emma herself was also buried there. It became a family plot, gathering

together the Smith family according to Joseph’s wishes, but the site

gradually fell into decay, and the locations of Joseph and Hyrum’s graves

were forgotten.

The theme of a forgotten burial site was yet another correspondence to

Masonic legend. Upon learning of Hiram Abiff’s murder, King Solomon

sent out Fellowcrafts in search of the body. One happened to rest himself

on the hill where the body lay, and when rising, grasped hold of the

acacia tree to help himself stand. The ease with which the tree gave way

betrayed the recently disturbed soil, and soon the badly decayed body

was discovered. King Solomon then directed that the body be reinterred

beneath the Holy of Holies of the temple, the spot honored by a marble

monument.92

By 1928, the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints

(RLDS, now Community of Christ) had become the custodians of the

Smith Homestead property. Driven by persistent rumors that Joseph’s

body was in Utah and new concerns that construction of the Keokuk

Dam might cause the bodies to be lost in a flood of the Mississippi,

RLDS Church president Frederick M. Smith directed a search for the

bodies of Joseph, Hyrum, and Emma in the Nauvoo Smith Cemetery.93

After six days, the bodies were rediscovered, carefully identified, raised,

and finally reburied in a concrete tomb that would be safe from rising

water. Beautiful new marble monuments and garden surroundings were

467

added in a 1991 renovation under the joint direction of the LDS and

then-RLDS churches.94

Where is Our Good Master?

The death of their prophet at the age of thirty-nine was a devastating

blow to the Latter-day Saints, and they struggled mightily to make some

sense of it. Connecting his death with the murder of Hiram Abiff—

himself a symbol of Christ—was a way to give meaning to a horrific

loss. The associations between this Masonic legend and the final chapter

of Joseph Smith’s life are remarkable. These were recognized and

perpetuated by the Prophet’s followers, their imaginations captured by

the symbols they had learned from Masonry.

Hiram Abiff is one manifestation of the mystery school hero. This

drama is foreshadowed in the biblical account of the Christian Messiah,

but the formula is even more ancient. It is the concept of the sacred king,

destined for sacrifice, who rises from death that the earth might become

regenerated and uplifted by divine power.

The legend of Joseph Smith began with a young initiate experiencing a

rite of passage that brought him into contact with the Divine. His “hero’s

journey” set him on a quest to bring forth sacred scripture and to restore

the Lost Word. Along the way he struggled to build a holy city, and he

almost succeeded in Nauvoo. He developed ritual ceremonies to usher

his people into a state of initiation so that they could experience the same

journey to become kings and priests, queens and priestesses. Finally

thrust out of his kingdom, he entered the condition of lonely, persecuted

hero. The addition of Masonic overtones added meaning to what was

otherwise a futile, bloody death. God would hear the Prophet’s cry of

distress even if no one else did. His public martyrdom made him even

more powerful in death than he was in life.

Though the Master Mason’s Word was lost by three great knocks at the

death of the Master Hiram, it becomes each Mason’s duty to recover that

symbolic Word. The Nauvoo Masons would not end their work with

their prophet’s passing. The funeral of Joseph and Hyrum included a

procession of the various Mormon lodges,95 which would continue to

work tirelessly, bringing hundreds more Mormon men into the craft of

Freemasonry. Though persecution and conflict continued for years, the

Saints were no longer committed to work within the established political

or social system. Brigham Young would pick up where his predecessor

left off, presiding over the merging of Mormon lodges and dictating the

468

rapidity of Masonic work and LDS temple work simultaneously from

1844 to 1846.96 Then at last, they would leave Nauvoo and Freemasonry

behind.

Notes

469

470

471

Translation of some of the Sacred Scripture Names, 3:35, 40. See also Michael W. Homer, “‘Similarity of Priesthood in Masonry’: The Relationship Between Freemasonry and Mormonism,” 96.

472

473
