ALL MANNER OF “–ITES”

They’re traced in lines on the Parthenon,

Inscribed by the subtle Greek;

And Roman legions have carved them on

Walls, roads and arch antique;

In Syria, Carthage and Pompeii,

Buried and strewn and stark,

The Mason craft in many a land

Has graven its Mason mark.

—Anonymous

Following the death of its core luminary in 1844, the Latter-day Saint movement exploded like a star into shards both great and small. Individual Saints, like dust, began to coalesce around larger personalities, eventually forming groups and constellations of groups.

Each held within it sparks of that original genius from the mind and heart

of the Prophet Joseph Smith; each sought to replicate the brilliance of

that original star. Like Kepler’s music of the spheres, these new bodies

gave off their own unique sound, imbued with the truth of those

principles brought from the original star, blended with the sounds and

unique genius of their formative persona. The focus of these groups

varied, but each retained remnants of the Masonic influence that Smith

had brought to Mormonism.

Brigham Young: Proprietor of the Ritual

After Joseph Smith’s death, the annual meeting of the Grand Lodge of

Illinois was held on October 7, 1844, in Jacksonville, Illinois. The

dispensations for Nauvoo, Helm, Nye, and Keokuk Lodges had been

revoked and a messenger sent to Nauvoo to demand their dispensation.

This communication “was treated with contempt, and not only a positive

refusal given by said Lodge, but a determination expressed to continue

their work.”1 Therefore, the Grand Lodge declared the Mormon lodges

clandestine and all fellowship was withdrawn.

At the time of Smith’s assassination there were approximately seven

hundred Master Masons listed in the minute book of Nauvoo Lodge. By

the end of 1845 over thirteen hundred Master Masons had been made in

474

that lodge. Not only did lodge work continue after Smith’s death, but the

pace practically doubled.

The Nauvoo Temple opened for ordinances on December 10, 1845,

and closed on February 7, 1846—the same date on the final existing

document for a Nauvoo Lodge meeting. The shared closure date has

been overlooked and demonstrates a connection of sorts between the

rituals performed in each building, but clearly one sort of ritual did not

replace the other. Some have supposed that after endowments became

available, lodge work ceased; however, to the contrary, Nauvoo Lodge

continued to initiate, pass, and raise Masons until just a few days before

Brigham Young and the first company of Saints crossed the frozen

Mississippi River. At the final meeting of Nauvoo Lodge, business was

carried on as usual, with Hirum Jackson visiting from Montrose,

Benjamin Meginnis initiated, and William W. Meguire and Robert Hoar

raised Master Masons.2 Even under the direction of Brigham Young and

the Twelve, neither reception of the endowment nor even the Second

Anointing eliminated the value of receiving the Masonic Degrees.3 Like

Meginnis, some of the men who were raised in the final months of Lodge

work had been endowed previously, demonstrating that Masonic degrees

accompanied the LDS endowment and were not given solely as a

precursor.

475

Page from Nauvoo Masonic Lodge minute book, final day of lodge work.

After the death of Smith, it was not the Worshipful Master of the

Lodge who directed the Mormon Masonic work; it was instead the

president of the Quorum of the Twelve, Brigham Young, who held no

regular position in any Masonic body whatsoever. By virtue of his

priesthood authority and as the keeper of Smith’s own restored and

purified ritual, Young regulated all ritual work taking place in Nauvoo.

This infuriated non-Mormon Masons in Illinois. Latter-day Saint

Masons, however, accustomed to the role of Smith in Masonic affairs,

seemed to take it in stride.

For example, the officers of Nauvoo Lodge had routinely taken orders

from Church leaders. On the pleasant spring day of April 10, 1845, the

Twelve sequestered themselves in the upper room of Willard Richards’s

home to discuss Church business. During the afternoon, Lucius Scovil,

then serving as Master of the Nauvoo Lodge, was called to the meeting.

The brethren directed Scovil to “get the Masonic Hall [set up] fore [a]

Printing office.”4 This directive was in response to a Council of Fifty

conversation on March 22 on the subject of upcoming printing projects.

There had been difficulties in keeping in print both the secular Nauvoo

Neighbor and the church-oriented Times and Seasons to which “the

saints look for religious matters, minutes of meetings, minutes of

conferences, and items of doctrine.”5 Keeping the journals in press was

to take precedence over the making of Masons, which Scovil was asked

to do “only as times shall permit.”6 That a sitting Worshipful Master

would take instruction from an ecclesiastical body on the operation of

the Lodge building and the frequency of Masonic work is unparalleled.

Scovil acquiesced to these instructions, but the Nauvoo Lodge would

still raise at least 228 additional Masons following this April mandate—

more than twenty per month.

476

Brigham Young pictured wearing his Masonic pin, ca. 1853.

Young believed that Freemasons in Illinois and nationwide conspired

to kill Joseph and Hyrum Smith and that non-Mormon Freemasonry

operated contrary to the interests of the Church. After the exodus from

Nauvoo, there were many Mormon Freemasons who hoped for the

formation of a Mormon-controlled Grand Lodge within the State of

Deseret. George A. Smith, though realizing that the association of

Mormon and non-Mormon lodges was like “mix[ing] hair and wool,”

still proposed a trip to England to “obtain five Charters for lodges which

would give us a Grand Lodge which would make us independent of all

other grand lodges in the world.”7 While Scovil supported this idea,

Young feared that non-Mormon Masons moving into the territory

planned to establish a lodge to “try to get an influence with some here to

lay a plan to try to murder me & the leaders of the Church.” He

considered the idea of bringing Masonry into Utah Mormonism but

ultimately decided that “we have got to look to Lord God of Israel to

sustain us & not to any institution or kingdom or people upon the earth

except the kingdom of God.” He thus told his followers that the

establishment of such a Grand Lodge would in the end be used to destroy

the Church and its work.8

Ironically, the Mormon lack of action was a self-fulfilling prophecy,

for the Church’s delay in this matter left the formation of a Grand Lodge

to both “Gentiles” and LDS critics residing in Utah Territory. These non-

Mormon lodges were supported by surrounding Grand Lodges that

477

required as a part of their sponsorship the barring of active Latter-day

Saints from membership.

Though he opposed establishing a Grand Lodge in Utah, Young

continued to identify as a Mason by wearing his Masonic pin, and he

used Masonic references in his speeches, indicating his continued belief

in the literal nature of Masonic myth.9 Furthermore, he “delig[h]t[ed] to

speak of it [the endowment] as ‘Celestial Masonry’”10 and retained—

and possibly even added to—overt Masonic elements of the ritual such

as tokens, signs, and penalties, three knocks at the veil, Masonic

markings on garments, and the five points of fellowship. However, after

the tragedy at Mountain Meadows, Young removed his Masonic pin and

never wore it again, aware that Freemasons from Arkansas, possibly

including members of the Fancher party, were responsible for the murder

of Parley P. Pratt.11

Sidney Rigdon, Freemason to the End

Sidney Rigdon was raised a Master Mason along with Joseph Smith at

the installation of the Nauvoo Lodge in March 1842. Although he had a

somewhat rocky ride in Church leadership, he was nevertheless the

senior surviving member of the First Presidency of the Church following

the tragic deaths of Joseph and Hyrum Smith in June 1844. (At that time,

he was in Pittsburgh establishing residency there as Joseph Smith’s vice

presidential running mate for the 1844 campaign.) Rigdon arrived back

in Nauvoo on Saturday, August 3, and the next day he preached a sermon

to the grieving Saints. There, he related “a vision which the Lord had

shown him concerning the situation of the Church” and the necessity of

having “a Guardian appointed to build the Church up to Joseph as he has

begun it.”12

478

Sidney Rigdon, 1873.

A large assembly was held in the Grove on the morning of Thursday,

August 8, 1844, attended by the nine members of the Twelve Apostles

who had been able to arrive in Nauvoo after the death of the Smiths. At

the morning meeting, Rigdon made a claim to succeed Joseph Smith by

asserting that he “should be a spokesman for our prophet who has been

taken from us.” Brigham Young opposed Rigdon’s claim and called for a

decision to be made in the afternoon meeting, instead of on August 13,

as had been originally slated. Young’s and Rigdon’s speeches were

carefully stated to be as unifying as possible. Young asked “Brother

Rigdon [to] come and take his seat at our right hand . . . and we can do

the business in 5 minutes.”13

In the more well-attested afternoon meeting, Young and several of the

apostles advocated that the leadership of the Church be given to the

Twelve. Rigdon “did not ask that his name be submitted for vote and

committed himself to fully support the decision of the Church by

following the Twelve.”14

Despite this cautiously hopeful beginning, Rigdon and the Twelve

would part ways less than a month later. Rigdon was cut off from the

Church, and in return, he petulantly excommunicated the members of the

Twelve. He then left Nauvoo in a huff of antagonism. Historians LaJean

Carruth and Robin Jensen write that it was “due in part to these later

activities” that “Rigdon became increasingly marginalized and vilified in

479

the narrative surrounding the death of Smith and the Twelve’s

assumption of authority over the Church.”15

Back in Pittsburg, Rigdon briefly led a faction of Latter-day Saints

called the “Church of Christ” or the “Church of Jesus Christ of the

Children of Zion.” It was reorganized at a conference on April 6, 1845,

with a First Presidency, Quorum of Twelve Apostles, High Council,

Presiding Bishopric, and Presiding Patriarch. The organization did not

last long, however, and was dissolved two years later. During its brief

existence, the group retained many of the Masonic features evident in the

Church under the direction of Smith. Rigdon’s sect was directed by a

“Grand Council” of seventy-three men. In an endowment ritual, Rigdon

pronounced initiates “kings over whom the Son of God shall reign as

King of Kings and Lord of Lords.”16

After the dissolution of Rigdon’s Church of Christ in 1847, he retained

his association with Freemasonry and continued to be strongly

influenced by the Craft until the end of his life. Upon leaving

Pennsylvania, he and his Mormon sons-in-law joined local Masons to

petition for a Lodge in Friendship, New York, in the spring of 1851.

Among the charter members were Rigdon, George W. Robinson,

Jeremiah Hatch, and Edward B. Wingate.17 All four of these men had

been raised Master Masons in Nauvoo Lodge and deemed it important to

continue to affiliate with Freemasonry. Allegany Lodge No. 225 received

a dispensation on April 25, 1851, with Robinson as Worshipful Master

and Hatch as Junior Warden.18 The Lodge was given a warrant on June

18, 1851. Rigdon’s son, John W., noted that his father was a “very

devoted Mason and was a regular attendent [sic] at the Masonic Lodge.”

In addition, John maintained that his father was “frequently called upon

to speak on public occasions of the order.”19 When Rigdon died on July

14, 1876, lodge members mourned “the loss of our brother as one of the

oldest and most venerable members of our fraternity, whose counsel and

advice always challenged our respect.”20 Rigdon was buried with

Masonic honors, and the Lodge was draped in mourning for thirty

days.21

Strangite Masonry and the Order of Illuminati22

James J. Strang, a New York Freemason, was a careful student and

aspiring successor of Joseph Smith. As a young man, Strang kept a diary

documenting the years 1832 to 1836. Portions of his diary he deemed too

480

esoteric for common mortals were encoded in a slight variation of a

cipher associated with Royal Arch Masonry, demonstrating an early

familiarity with the Craft. Strang used the code to record such

confessions as “I have spent the day in trying to contrive some plan of

obtaining in marriage the heir to the English crown . . . my mind has

allways [sic] been filled with dreams of royalty and power” and “I am a

perfect atheist but do not confess it lest I bring my father grey hair with

sorrow to the grave.”23

James J. Strang, 1856.

Strang traveled to Nauvoo in February 1844 and was instructed by

Joseph and Hyrum Smith and Sidney Rigdon. He was baptized and

confirmed by the Prophet on February 25, 1844, and ordained an elder

the next Sunday by Hyrum Smith.24 During his short time in Nauvoo,

Strang observed Joseph Smith closely. After the Prophet’s death, Strang

related that he had received two visions, one of them involving an angel

who anointed his head. Additionally, he claimed that Smith had written

him a letter of appointment shortly before his death calling him to gather

the Saints to Wisconsin to establish a settlement named “Voree” and

build there a house of God.25

On September 1, 1845, Strang claimed to have received a vision of

records that, like Smith’s golden plates, were written and buried in the

ancient past. The details of the discovery of these records align with the

coming forth of the Book of Mormon as well as the Masonic story of a

481

golden plate engraved with the name of God being found in an

underground cavern. Less than two weeks after his vision, on September

13, Strang directed four of his followers to go and dig up the plates he

had envisioned. The Voree plates were found on a hill beneath a tree, and

by September 18, Strang had provided a translation of the record.

The description of the Voree plates, as well as the printed depiction,

have Masonic elements. The cut of the first of the Voree plates is

composed of a surfeit of Masonic symbols: in the top left-hand corner is

a plumb line, the Masonic emblem of uprightness; next to this is an all-

seeing eye, in Masonic terms representing Divine omniscience or

enlightenment, wisdom, and intelligence. The character in the center of

the plate holds his arm to the square and grasps a sword, similar to a

candidate taking the Fellow Craft obligation, as shown in William

Morgan’s Illustrations of Masonry. Below the figure are three marks that

look like candlesticks, the “lesser lights” of Masonry that are placed in a

triangular configuration around the altar, and surrounding these, on the

bottom third of the plate, are the sun, moon, and stars, which are readily

recognized by Masons as the “great lights.”

(Left) From an 1845 broadside of the Voree Plates. (Right) A candidate taking the Fellow Craft

obligation from William Morgan, Illustrations of Masonry, 1827 ed.

The Voree plates were written in a sophisticated cipher, reminiscent of

those used by Freemasons. More complicated than the code in Strang’s

482

early diary, the “Vorite” language still contained Masonic elements. For

instance, one of the plates contains a representation of the Divine name,

a preoccupation of Freemasons. Strang’s goal then was the same as it

was for Joseph Smith and for the Masons: to recover the lost name of

Deity.

A revelation dated July 1, 1846, commanded the Voree Saints to build

both a house for Strang and a house for the Lord in preparation for a holy

endowment.26 In this ritual, they were to be instructed in the principles

and the mysteries of the kingdom of God. Strang began work on a temple

in 1848 after moving his followers to Beaver Island in Lake Michigan.

Here, he promised his followers an endowment and a restoration,

carrying on Joseph Smith’s vision of building a temple to restore that

which was lost.

Cipher from an 1845 broadside of the Voree Plates.

Members of the Strangite movement were encouraged to make a

covenant, also known as the Oath of the Illuminati, that replicated the

obligations taken in Blue Lodge Masonry and used specific oaths and

language from the Masonic ritual. The Strangite covenant professed faith

in God, Jesus Christ, the Holy Spirit, and James J. Strang as “Prophet of

God; Apostle of the Lord Jesus; and chief Pastor of the Flock.”

Adherents entered God’s “oath and covenant” solemnly promising to

“forever hail, ever conceal, and never reveal, any of the ceremonies,

483

secrets and misteries [sic] of the order of the Illuminatti, which I may

now or at any time hereafter be acquainted with, to any person in the

world except it be an Illuminattus [sic].”27 In addition, they

“renounce[d] all allegiance to any and every other Potentate State and

Nation,” and they vowed to maintain the kingdom of God “in defiance”

of any other kingdom, state, or nation. This was a revolution of the social

order that clothed subversive oaths in the language of Masonry. The Oath

placed Strangites in the same treasonous condition in which Joseph

Smith was found. It even concluded with a lurid penalty.28

Many influential Nauvoo Masons such as John C. Bennett, George

Miller, George J. Adams, William Marks, William Smith, and John E.

Page joined Strang’s organization and contributed to the development of

his rituals. The logical conclusion to those who had been involved in

Smith’s Council of Fifty was the crowning of their leader as King. Just as

Joseph Smith, on April 11, 1844, had been “ordained a king, to reign

over the house of Israel forever,” so the Beaver Island Saints moved

forward with the implications of Smith’s theocratic ideas.29 A royal

procession of several hundred proceeded to the unfinished Beaver Island

tabernacle on July 8, 1850, to witness the coronation of James Jesse

Strang.

Thespian George J. Adams presided over the ritual. The emergent king

was accompanied by his council and a grand procession of twelve

Elders, the Seventy, and additional quorums as he marched into the

tabernacle. Strang’s robe was bright red, a color assigned in Freemasonry

to the Royal Arch degree and symbolic of life and regeneration. It had

been fashioned under Adams’s direction to resemble the Masonic

conception of a Jewish High Priest and was further ornamented with

Masonic regalia.30

In a dramatic ceremony, Strang took his seat on a large chair on an

elevated platform. Surrounding his makeshift throne were painted panels

replicating pillars. He was invested with a wooden scepter and crowned

with a thin metal circlet adorned with a projecting cluster of stars.31

Strang chose a “grand council of 8” to serve with him as a ruling body.32

This group totaling nine men numbered the same as the minimum

number required to form a chapter of Royal Arch Masons. The same

number formed Joseph Smith’s first group inaugurated into the Anointed

Quorum.

484

Filled with emotion at the religious display they had witnessed,

Strang’s followers took the Oath of the Illuminati as it had been given in

Voree, and they covenanted with God to become “a nation of Kings and

Priests to the nations of the earth.”33 They then signed a document

entitled the “Record of the Organization of the Kingdom,”34 in like

manner to Masons, who do not become full members of a lodge until

they sign the lodge’s bylaws. Thereafter, the commemoration of “King’s

Day” on July 8 would be marked with a “convocation and a feast,”35

similar to the celebration of St. John’s Day in Masonic lodges

worldwide.36

One of Strang’s plural wives, Elvira Field (who masqueraded for a

time as his male assistant “Charles Douglas”), was supportive of the

religion’s Masonic ideals. While in Baltimore, she wrote an article

published in the November 17, 1849, Gospel Herald touting the benefits

of secret combinations. In this piece, Field elegantly synthesizes the

secular and legendary history of secret societies and hinted at a new

secret society (the Strangite Illuminati) founded on religious principles

and containing all that is good in Masonry. The principles of elevation of

the worker, a one-minded body, and support of government that would

secure their ends were all expounded.37

In 1853, a letter signed by “Jas. J. Strang, Master Mason” and seven

other men was sent from St. James, Beaver Island, to the Grand Lodge of

Michigan requesting dispensation to form a Masonic lodge on the island

and to engage in the ritual work of Freemasonry, with George Miller as

proposed Master. Just over a decade earlier, half of the petitioners for this

new lodge had been made Masons in Nauvoo Lodge, U.D., where

George Miller had served as first Master. Even after providing the rite of

illumination to his followers and being crowned king, Strang still wanted

to create a local Masonic lodge under the jurisdiction of a recognized

Grand Lodge.

It is not known if the Grand Lodge of Michigan ever officially

responded to the request for a Beaver Island lodge. But long before this

letter of petition, the Strangite organization had already succeeded in

continuing and creatively expanding Joseph Smith’s Mormon Masonry.

James J. Strang died six years and one day after he had been crowned

king. Though he lived for weeks after being fatally wounded by an

assassin, he refused to name a successor. Thus, the movement that was

closest in numerical strength to challenging the claims of Brigham

485

Young and the Twelve foundered. Students of Strang’s legacy cannot

help but be impressed by the similarities in Joseph Smith’s and James

Strang’s utilization of Masonic forms in Mormonism’s highest rituals.

Charles Thompson: The Free and Accepted Order of Baneemy, and

Fraternity of the Sons of Zion38

Charles Thompson was born a Quaker in 1814 and was baptized into

the Methodist Episcopal Church at age eighteen. However, within two

years he became dissatisfied with his new faith’s doctrine and desired to

find something more rewarding. After closing up his tailor’s shop and

traveling about, he arrived in Kirtland, Ohio, where he was promptly

baptized into the faith that would be his religious home for the next

decade. Joseph Smith performed the ordinance of confirmation on

February 10, 1835.

In Kirtland, Thompson was anointed in the House of the Lord in 1836.

In March of that year, he received “the washing of feet at the Solemn

Assembly held in the Temple.”39 He passed through the tribulations in

Missouri, then served in New York state, organizing the Genesee

Conference of the Church in Le Roy, Genesee County, New York. At the

counsel of Smith, he moved to Hancock County, Illinois, in 1843.

Thompson remained in Nauvoo after the martyrdom of the Smith

brothers, and he at first supported the Twelve. He was ordained a high

priest and joined the Masonic Lodge there, an act with profound

influence on his later religious workings.40 On Christmas Eve, 1845, he

was endowed in the Nauvoo Temple and was both remarried and sealed

to his wife, as well as sealed to his first wife who died a few months after

childbirth in 1839.41 Despite being eternally sealed to both women, he

was strongly opposed to polygamy and severed ties with Brigham Young

over it.

In 1846 Thompson became a follower of James J. Strang. Eventually,

however, Thompson criticized Strang for his ordination by an angel, his

inability to translate without heavenly assistance, and for moving his

headquarters to Beaver Island.42 After breaking with Strang, Charles

moved to St. Louis, Missouri, with his family. There, he formed the

Congregation of Jehovah’s Presbytery of Zion. In 1848 he issued his first

“Proclamation,” which he published in a newspaper he founded and

called Zion’s Harbinger and Baneemy’s Organ.

486

Beginning in October 1852, Thompson published extracts of the

Ethiopic Book of Enoch, which had been reintroduced into Europe by

Freemason James Bruce in 1773. This work of pseudepigrapha, with

themes of transformation, theosis, and communion with the Divine,

significantly influenced American Royal Arch Freemasonry.43 Just as

Joseph Smith drew from the Enoch pseudepigrapha through

Freemasonry’s Enoch legends to produce his inspired version of the

biblical account now found in the Pearl of Great Price (see Chapter 6),

Thompson carried on this tradition in monthly installments in his Zion’s

Harbinger and Baneemy’s Organ. Thompson’s publication of the

Ethiopic Book of Enoch was based on Richard Lawrence’s translation of

1821, but it was “revised, corrected, and the missing parts restored by

Divine inspiration, through Baneemy, Patriarch of Zion.”44 The result

was Mormon and Masonic in flavor, showing evidence of borrowing,

expansion, recontextualization, and revelation upon the ancient Enoch

tradition. One of Thompson’s restored passages speaks of Iame (the

embodiment of all intelligence) who created Iada (the place of light) out

of unorganized matter. Iame impregnated Iada with “the seed of

intelligence,” and she brought forth many intelligences who were clothed

with refined matter and were called Spirits.

Iame, therefore, finding these Spirits imperfect as to the quantity of intelligence they possessed, by his wisdom concerted a plan to increase their intelligence and thereby make them perfect; and having completed the plan, he called them together to consult them in reference to their willingness to enter into his plan; and when he had made known his plan to them they were glad, and he organized them that they might accomplish his will and be made

perfect.45

This passage is indebted both to Joseph Smith’s conception of

premortal intelligences (Abr. 3:22) and the Masonic Grand Council. It

continues with a Masonic ordination of four grand quorums of Angels,

twenty-four ministers, and seven Chief Ones, with three of these

presiding over the seven and an Elect, Anointed, or “Concealed One”

under the appellation of “Father.”46

487

Charles Thompson, 1841.

By 1854 Thompson’s group had attracted between fifty and sixty

families who eventually moved to Monona County, Iowa. There they

established a communal settlement they called Preparation. At its zenith

in 1858, the settlement had swelled to over five hundred inhabitants.47

In Preparation, Thompson carried on in the traditions of both Joseph

Smith and James Strang, founding an organization that was overtly

Masonic in nature. The full name of Thompson’s group, “The Free and

Accepted Order of Baneemy, and Fraternity of the Sons of Zion” (also

known as the Presbytery of Zion), suggests this influence, patterned as it

was after the fraternal organization known as the “Free and Accepted

Order of Masons.”

Thompson did not intend for the Presbytery of Zion to take the place

of a church. Rather, he envisioned an extra-ecclesiastical body of the

priesthood, organized for the purpose of completing the work of

gathering preparatory to the Second Coming.48 Like Masonry,

Thompson’s system could also be described as “a progressive science

taught by degrees” through which God’s grand design would eventually

be revealed to the individual outside the context of a church

488

organization. Thompson formulated his own innovative system of

degrees within priesthood schools, utilizing, as do Masons, a catechism

as a tool of instruction.

The covenant members took upon themselves when entering the

Presbytery of Zion was remarkably similar to a Masonic obligation. For

instance, initiates assumed an allegorical new name as in the Entered

Apprentice degree.49 Perhaps Thompson came closest to realizing his

ritual ideal in a ceremony he instituted at the August Solemn Assembly

in 1856. There, members were asked to give Thompson a paper bill of

sale for everything they owned. As they came into a darkened room, he

poured alcohol on the paper and burned it in token of their full and

complete sacrifice. Two chiefs, Guy C. Barnum and Rowland Cobb,

entered the room, surrendered their clothing, and were given a simple

cotton smock that Thompson named the “Garment of Holiness.”50

Barnum and Cobb then seated themselves on either side of Thompson.

After this, the rest of the members, men and women in turn, came into

their presence and repeated the ritual enactment.51 Mormon Masons

would likely have been moved by this ceremony, as it contained

elements of both the Masonic initiation rite and the temple endowment.

Zion’s Harbinger and Baneemy’s Organ published its last issue under

the date of December 1854. By then, Baneemyites were becoming

disillusioned with the hardscrabble details of their communal lifestyle.

Over the next few years, increased demands and poor decisions on

Thompson’s part would cause his disgruntled followers to dramatically

eject him, signaling the collapse of the settlement in October 1858.

Twice, Thompson endeavored to reestablish the congregation, but neither

attempt was successful.

Despite an ignominious ending, Thompson left an important legacy.

For a brief period, he provided a home for the religiously dispossessed.

He kept alive the principle of gathering and of Mormon

communitarianism. He introduced the idea of a priesthood group

independent of a church—a uniquely Mormon variation of a Masonic

idea. Charles B. Thompson thus included Freemasonry in his own

distinctive and irreplaceable part of the broader Restoration movement.

Lyman Wight and the Community at Zodiac

A more dedicated Mormon could not be found than Lyman Wight,

affectionately nicknamed the “Wild Ram of the Mountains.” This

stalwart advocate of Joseph Smith joined the Church in 1830 and was

489

heavily involved in the spotlight events of early Mormonism. Wight had

been a part of Isaac Morley’s common-stock utopian society in Kirtland,

and after his conversion he remained therein. He attended the School of

the Prophets for two and a half months and received his washings and

anointings prior to the dedication of the Kirtland Temple. Over the years

he was a member of Zion’s Camp, a Danite leader in Missouri, part of

the stake presidency in Adam-ondi-Ahman, and in both the Quorum of

the Twelve and the Council of Fifty. On April 28, 1842, Wight was

raised a Master Mason in Nauvoo Lodge, just over a month after Smith.

Two years later he became a member of the Anointed Quorum, receiving

his endowment on May 14, 1844. Weeks before Smith’s death, Wight, as

a member of the Fifty, was appointed by the Prophet to lead a mission to

form a Mormon colony in Texas. According to Wight, Smith ordained

him to be like Moses, leading “the armys of Israel to Zion . . . [to] lead

the children of Israel out of Egypt,” and gave him “a white seer stone” to

help him accomplish this task.52

Wight and George Miller were two of the mainstays of the lumbering

effort in the Wisconsin pineries (see Chapter 13). At Black River, they

led a group of families in a communal arrangement as they worked to

send lumber down the Mississippi to Nauvoo for use in Church building

projects. Wight initially supported Brigham Young in the succession

crisis following the death of Joseph Smith, and Young reluctantly gave

Wight and George Miller permission to lead the former “Pine Company”

on an expedition to Texas to fulfill Smith’s request.

Wight departed Nauvoo with a company of 160 on the riverboat

General Brooks for Black River, Wisconsin, to prepare for departure to

Texas in the spring. Many of these persons were Freemasons. A family

history relates that Lavinia Hawley died on the boat and was taken

ashore at Potosi, Wisconsin. Since the company could not stop long

enough for a funeral, her son Pierce, an ardent Freemason, “gave his

mother’s body into the hands of the Masons of the town of Potosi with

implicit confidence that it would be carefully, even tenderly buried.”53

When the company reached what they called “the Valley of Loami,”

Wisconsin, they performed the ritual acts of rebaptism, partook of their

own version of the Passover, ordained both a patriarch and a bishop,

confirmed members, offered sustaining votes of the Twelve, held a

ceremonial feast, and blessed children.54

In April 1845, the Wight group started their 1,400-mile journey to

Texas, arriving at their destination nearly seven months later on

490

November 10, where they spent the winter in the ruins of old Fort

Johnson. The next spring, they passed several months in Austin before

finally founding a small communitarian colony four miles down the

Pedernales River from Fredricksburg. They named their town Zodiac.

In 1848, the twenty-six families were joined by George Miller and a

few others. The settlement was constructing a large, two-story log

building that would serve as a multi-purpose community center with

room for a storehouse; an upstairs floor would serve as a functioning

temple.55 In December of 1848, Wight was disfellowshipped and later

excommunicated by the Brighamites for refusing to join with the Saints

in the West. He had never received his endowment in Nauvoo, but

George Miller had.56 From what is known about the Wightite temple

rites, it seems likely that Miller contributed his Mormon and Masonic

knowledge of ritual to the development of the ceremonies.

Temple ordinances at Zodiac were concise and crisp compared with

the lengthy Utah version.57 With their emphasis on foot washings and

anointings, they seemed to be based more upon the earlier Mormon ritual

that Wight had received in the Kirtland Temple. However, influence from

the Nauvoo ritual was also apparent. Celebrants wore a special garment

and an apron during the ceremony, and they were ordained kings,

queens, and priests, as in the Nauvoo Second Anointing. Covenants they

made, such as submission to “the principle of all they have and being

placed under the control of the Almighty God,” were similar to those in

the Nauvoo endowment. No less than the ceremonies in both Kirtland

and Nauvoo, Zodiac’s ritual carried the aroma of Freemasonry.58

491

Lyman Wight, date unknown.

In uniquely Mormon adaptations of Nauvoo ritual, baptisms for the

dead were vital, and marriage and adoption sealings were performed

both for monogamous and polygamous relationships. One of Wight’s

followers, Gideon Carter Jr., affirmed, “Lyman Wight also said that

Joseph Smith had given him othority [sic] to perform these plural

marriage ceremonies in connection with other ceremonies of the

Church.”59 The Zodiac temple functioned from 1849 to 1851.

Wight believed that the Prophet’s youngest surviving brother, William,

had patrilineal rights to the office of “Patriarch of the Most High God”

with “the blessing of Prophet and Seer to rest upon Joseph’s eldest son if

he will receive it.”60 Therefore, Wight was in frequent communication

with William. On October 3, 1849, every member of the Zodiac group,

without exception, pledged to sustain William Smith as “prophet, seer,

revelator, and translator” until someone of Joseph’s posterity came forth

to take his place.61 In the spring of 1850, William Smith held a

conference at Covington, Kentucky, which was attended by a delegation

of four men from the Zodiac community. Otis Hobart, one of the

delegates, died suddenly upon arrival. As in a Masonic or Mormon

burial, Hobart was interred in his ceremonial clothing.62

According to the minutes of the 1850 Covington Conference published

in Isaac Sheen’s Melchisedek & Aaronic Herald, William Smith planned

for his congregation to immigrate to Texas and unite with Lyman

492

Wight’s group. Here they were to receive endowments and ordinances in

the Zodiac temple.63 William accepted that temple as his own and also

called for another to be built in Jackson County, Missouri.64

Flooding of the Zodiac mill dam caused the community to pick up

stakes. As they moved from place to place over the next seven years, the

colony was gradually reduced. In 1858, Lyman Wight and a small band

of followers started for Jackson County, Missouri. However, before they

left central Texas, Wight died of a seizure on March 31. His oldest son,

Orange Lysander Wight, assisted in the last rites. These “consisted of

washing and anointing the body from head to foot, then dressing it in

holy garments—the cap, loose-frock robe, apron, and moccasins

associated with the ritual of the Zodiac temple.”65

Lyman Wight and his followers found justification for their mission to

find a dwelling place for the Saints in Texas from Wight’s appointment

from the “Grand Council” of Mormonism—the theocratic Council of

Fifty. Thanks to his experiences in Missouri and Nauvoo, Wight had

learned much about living in peace with dissimilar and discontented

neighbors. In his pursuit of his assignment and his duty, he focused on

Christian principles such as millennialism and communitarianism. But

the Mormon character and Masonic significance of his religion emerged

from time to time, especially in his adaption of temple ritual.

Alpheus Cutler: Chief Architect and Master Workman of God’s

Holy Houses

Remnants of the Masonic nature of Mormon temple ordinances were

also seen in Alpheus Cutler’s Church of Jesus Christ. Cutler was a

stonemason by trade and was raised to Master Mason in Nauvoo Lodge

on January 14, 1843. He was said to have a “natural parabolical,

allegorical symbolical, mysterious, secretive way of telling things,”

which would have suited him well as a nineteenth-century Freemason.66

In Kirtland, he attended the School of the Prophets and worked on the

construction of the Kirtland Temple. In Missouri, he was named “chief

architect and master workman of all God’s holy houses” and laid the

cornerstone for the Far West Temple.67 In Nauvoo, he oversaw

construction of the Nauvoo Temple and supervised workmen cutting logs

for the building in the Wisconsin Pineries. As a member of the Anointed

Quorum, Cutler received his endowment on October 12, 1843, and his

Second Anointing on November 15 of that same year. He was brought

493

into the Council of Fifty and directed by Joseph Smith to serve a mission

to the Lamanites, taking this as seriously as Lyman Wight took his

assignment to Texas.

Alpheus Cutler, ca. 1840s.

After Smith’s martyrdom, Cutler sided with Brigham Young and the

Twelve. As a member of the High Council, he participated in the

excommunication trials of Sidney Rigdon, James Strang, and William

Smith. He renewed his endowment in the Nauvoo Temple in December

1845 and then helped establish the launching communities of Cutler’s

Park and Winter Quarters, Nebraska, for the emigrating Saints. With the

approval of Young, he began missionary work among the Native

American tribes in the fall of 1847. He soon, however, ran afoul of Orson

Hyde, who as a member of the Twelve attempted to regulate his efforts.

Cutler broke with the Saints heading west in 1851 and brought a small

group of followers with him to Manti, Iowa.

On September 19, 1853, Alpheus Cutler organized “the Church of

Christ,” a reorganization of Joseph Smith’s church that he believed had

become necessary because of the failure of the Saints to complete the

Nauvoo Temple. Under Cutler’s authority, all ordinances, including

baptism and temple endowments, would need to be repeated, and the

Law of Consecration would have to be established. A meetinghouse was

constructed with a floor plan similar to that of the Nauvoo Temple. It

served as a pattern for three future Cutlerite meetinghouses with a public

assembly hall on the first floor, a private space on the upper floor, and a

494

baptismal font in the basement.68 In this edifice, work on the upper floor

retained Masonic elements from the Nauvoo Temple ritual. According to

Cutler biographer Danny Jorgensen, this “involved a secretive initiation,

assignment of a sacred personal identity, passwords to the celestial

world, endowments (or blessings), ritual cleaning by water and

anointings with oil, the receipt of a sacred undergarment, and ritual

reenactment of sacred myths.” Other ordinances included baptism by

proxy for the salvation of the dead and monogamous marriage for

eternity.69

Males progressed through three degrees of the priesthood: Aaronic,

Melchisedek, and High Priest. Though sermons from the Manti period

“stressed the essential nature of the office of high priest,” Cutler

disclosed in 1860 that “there were ‘two keys’ remaining, an allusion to

ordination as a king and priest through the second anointing ceremony

associated with the Holy Order and later with the temple in Nauvoo.”

Cutler had received this ritual, providing him with the fulness of the

Priesthood and guaranteeing exaltation. According to historian

Christopher Blythe, “These final keys, along with the preliminary

endowment ceremony, pertained to entrance in the Kingdom of God.”70

Blythe theorizes that “the strategy of the [Cutlerite] ritual system and

its associated discourse was designed to produce a collective identity.”

This corresponds with the effect of the ritual system in the fraternal

structure of Freemasonry. In a further parallel, Blythe adds that the

progressive nature of the ritual system “was intended to strengthen bonds

within the community, as individuals advanced through the series of rites

and ordinances.” In Cutler philosophy, advancement by degrees was key

to beginning the process of sanctification.71

After the death of Alpheus Cutler on June 10, 1864, the Cutlerites

moved to Clitherall, Minnesota. Here, the few remaining families

established the “Order of Enoch,” a religiously based common-stock

company similar to the Mormon United Order, organized and directed by

its church corporation. A two-story log church was built and dedicated in

the building. “Windows were covered with curtains and space set aside

for the secret temple ordinances they had learned in Nauvoo.” These

included “blessings, sealings, baptisms for the dead, ordinations and

other secret rituals of Nauvoo Mormonism.”72 Hallie Gould, raised as a

child in Clitherall, described the upper room as a “secret chamber” where

495

only those men or women holding the priesthood were allowed to enter,

“and we have heard rumors of strange ceremonies, covenants, and

endowments, the altar, the tree of life, the ordinance of feet washing, and

the peculiar though necessary and significant grave-clothes which no one

will explain.”73 Gould speculated “as to where the ideas executed there

originated,” adding that “some have wondered if masonry did not have

an influence on them and affect their secret rites.”74

Blythe has pointed out that F. Lewis Whiting, an endowed Cutlerite

member, preached a conference sermon advocating the internal Masonic

narrative “that Masonry had first been revealed in King Solomon’s

Temple.” Blythe observes that the “Cutlerites, like others who placed

their faith in the antiquity of fraternal rites, did not see a ceremony

stemming from God or from Freemasons as mutually exclusive ideas.”75

William Smith’s Priest and Priestess Lodges

William Smith, brother of Joseph and Hyrum, was raised a Master

Mason in the Nauvoo Lodge on April 13, 1842, during its first full

month of operation. Though he and his brother had a rocky relationship,

Joseph was supportive of William and was influential in securing his call

as an inaugural member of the Council of Twelve Apostles.76 Following

his brother’s lead, William associated the concept of a Masonic Lodge

and its structure with confidential instruction and plural marriage.

William was practicing unauthorized spiritual wifery as early as 1842

while serving a mission in the Eastern States. Elder John Hardy exposed

“the base and Licentious Teachings and Practices” of Elder George J.

Adams and William Smith while in New Bedford, Massachusetts. In

return, Hardy was accused of slander, and at Hardy’s trial, testimony was

given that Adams brought Miss Susan Clark and another sister “into a

room and swore them into the secrets of a lodge, which secrets were not

to be revealed under the penalty of their lives.” Additionally, a letter was

cited “sent from Boston by Elder G. J. Adams, to an Elder in New York,”

reading, “I have just returned from New Bedford and sister Susan is with

me. I was S. U. [sealed up] to her last night, go it!”77

According to historian Connell O’Donovan, while in the East, William

“set up his own abolitionist and feminist oriented newspaper that also

politically stumped for unapproved political candidates” and “established

several ‘Penny & Sewing Societies’” that were almost identical to the

Nauvoo Female Relief Society in structure and purpose.78 William’s

496

involvement in clandestine spiritual wifery, however, casts an ominous

light on these seemingly progressive activities.

William did not return to Nauvoo until May 4, 1845, almost a year

after the death of his brothers. As next in line to his brother Hyrum, he

seemed determined to stand in the station of “Patriarch over the whole

Church,”79 but Brigham Young’s position that William must be subject

to the control of the Twelve caused tension, and William was

excommunicated on October 19, 1845.

William B. Smith, ca. 1860.

William followed James Strang until 1847, when he announced his

leadership of the Latter Day Saint Church to gather in Lee County,

Illinois. Lyman Wight put the support of his followers behind William’s

claims in 1849 and 1850.

In 1851 at Palestine Grove, Illinois, William established a recreation of

the Masonically based Nauvoo Anointed Quorum and Relief Society,

which he called the “Priests Lodge” for men, and the “Priestess Lodge”

for women. Few records exist documenting what occurred in these

lodges, but it is apparent that they were oath-bound societies in which

William performed washings and anointings and plural sealings. In a

letter dated July 18, 1851, a revelation by William stated:

[C]oncerning those females who have received the priesthood by being sealed to my servants William Smith and Joseph W[oo]d, and have been washed and anointed and ordained under their hands having been received into the priestess lodge—having taken the covenant thereof;

497

if they, or either of them, shall fall, or altogether turn therefrom, she or they shall be excluded

therefrom and from my church also, and shall not come forth in the resurrection of the just. 80

In a further Masonic amplification, men were to “exalt” their wives and

make them their Queens by performing the Second Anointing ceremony.

As he had in Boston, William used Masonically based, oath-bound

societies to introduce the practice of polygamy to the members of his

sect. Incorporating a lodge for females demonstrated his familiarity with

his brother’s brand of Masonry in Nauvoo. There, Joseph Smith played

with male-transmitted authority, binding women to his doctrines and

practices, yet attempting to provide them with opportunities not often

available in Victorian society.

William proved unable to sustain the loyalty of his followers. One of

his apostles, Jason Briggs, wrote about his discovery that plural marriage

was still taught in William’s organization. At a conference in October

1851, Briggs was initiated into the inner circle. Here, he wrote, “they

threw off the mask, in a council called the Priests’ Lodge, and confessed

to the practice of polygamy in the name of the Lord.” Briggs wrote that

William’s “true character was discovered by many of us,” indicating that

more than a few were introduced into the secret society.81

As members of William Smith’s movement discovered his secrets,

more and more of them defected. Many joined Briggs in a movement

that would become the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day

Saints in 1860 under William’s nephew, Joseph Smith III. The son of

Joseph Smith Jr. commented on his uncle’s system of polygamy, calling

it “a sort of promiscuity of affinities under the guiss [guise] of a

‘priestess lodge.’”82

The Smith Family and the Reorganization

After the death of her husband, Emma Hale Smith married Lewis

Bidamon, a non-Mormon major in the Illinois militia. When, in 1848, a

group of non-Mormon Masons formed a lodge in Nauvoo they named

“Reclamation Lodge,” Bidamon became a member. Though he was

expelled from the Lodge in 1856, the Smith boys were raised in a home

where Masonry was part of their experience.

Unlike other groups springing from Joseph Smith’s original vision, the

followers of his son Joseph Smith III were largely ambivalent toward

what they saw as Nauvoo-era innovations such as polygamy and

Freemasonry. Smith III resisted aligning himself with either Masonry or

anti-Masonry, even though there was great pressure for him to do so.

498

However, his son and the founding prophet’s grandson, Frederick

Madison Smith, was very involved with Fraternal organizations. He was

raised a Master Mason in 1927 while he was the president of the

Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints and served

vigorously in various officer positions, including Worshipful Master, in

his lodge of over 600 men. F. M. Smith was also a Knight Templar, a

Scottish Rite Mason, and a Shriner.83 His progression through the

Masonic degrees affected his development as a mystic and proponent of

the social gospel.

Smith brothers with Lews Bidamon (seated bottom left); Joseph Smith III is seated bottom right,

ca. 1850.

Freemasonry’s Legacy Among the Mormons

Masonry was a part of the calculus of many of the Restoration groups

that formed after the death of Joseph Smith. This widespread

continuation of esoteric and Masonic tendencies confirms their existence

in the early Church. Those who claimed the right to Mormon succession

continued along the path laid out by Joseph Smith. There is clear

evidence that these groups intentionally retained Masonic elements as

part of their version of the temple endowment. Their followers, a large

number of whom were Masons, knew these features were Masonic and

did not question their presence.

499

In several cases, successors took steps to continue their association

with authorized Freemasonry. They understood that Masonry was an

important part of the restoration of Mormonism and made efforts to

officially petition for lodges where they did not already exist. It was not

until the twentieth century that Masonry would lose its significance in

the collective memory of the Mormon diaspora.

Notes

500

501

John’s Day has traditionally been celebrated in Masonic lodges with sumptuous repasts and commemorative events.

502

Blythe, “‘The Upper Room Work’: Esotericism in the Church of Jesus Christ (Cutlerite), 1853– 1912,” 55.

503
