THAT WHICH WAS LOST

M. Most Perfect Senior Warden, what is the o’clock?’

SW. The moment when the vail of the temple was rent; when

darkness and consternation covered the earth; when the stars

disappeared, and the lamp of day was darkened; when the

implements of Masonry were lost, and the cubic stone [sweat] blood

and water; that was the moment when the great Masonic Word was

lost.

M. Since Masonry, my brethren, has sustained so great a loss, let us

employ ourselves, by new works, to recover the Word which was

lost.

-Light on Masonry: The History and Rituals of America’s Most

Important Masonic Exposé

As the founder and builder of one of the most American of religions, Joseph Smith chose stones from many quarries to create the institution of Mormonism. By itself, Freemasonry cannot stand as a suitable explanation for every aspect of the Mormon

restoration, nor can it impart meaning to every important development

within the faith. However, its explanatory power is significant and may

be acknowledged as a substantial contributing factor to many of its

aspects. Smith’s involvement in Masonry was earlier and broader than

modern historians have supposed. This book has highlighted some of the

gems that the Prophet mined from Freemasonry to beautify his religious

edifice. These include a recovered Book of the Law, bifurcated

priesthoods, oath-bound organizations, and a temple in the tradition of

King Solomon with a ritual-based ceremony to fill it. Smith’s use of

Masonic midrash in developing new scripture, as well as his aspirations

to restore and eventually lead all American Freemasonry, were important

structural elements in the construction of Mormonism. In the final

analysis, the Mormon story can appropriately be seen as the story of

“that which was lost”—a major theme of Freemasonry.

In Edward FitzGerald’s adaptation of Omar Khayyám’s Rubáiyát, the

narrator laments:

Ah Love! could you and I with Him conspire

To grasp this sorry Scheme of Things entire,

Would not we shatter it to bits—and then

504

Re-mould it nearer to the Heart’s Desire!1

Such longing rests at the very core of Smith’s religious

experimentation. Throughout his life he sought to break social

convention—that “sorry scheme of things” that ground the face of the

poor, held no regard for the plight of widows and orphans, held back

individual progress, and offered no salvation of any kind in this world or

in the world to come. He and his associates worked to replace the

existing system with a social, political, economic, and spiritual order

“nearer to the heart’s desire.” Such an order would recognize our nature

as children of God and reflect the interrelatedness and interdependence

of all humanity. Whatever the weaknesses of the system they envisioned,

these men desired a society with a soul and conscience that recognized

the innate value of each individual and sought to lift and empower. This

shared and Masonically inspired grand vision was a persistent thread

running through early Mormonism: socially progressive but also

inherently subversive, morally shocking, and politically treasonous.

Joseph Smith, like many Masons of his day, believed that an ancient,

pristine form of Freemasonry had become apostate. He believed he had

found “that which was lost,” enabling him to restore both true religion

and pure Masonry to the earth.2 By starting work on the construction of

a temple and bringing forth the ritual that would be therein enacted, he

had done what King Solomon, Hiram Abiff, and Hiram of Tyre had not

been able to do.3 By building up Mormon Masonic lodges in Nauvoo

and surrounding areas, his people were well placed to influence

Freemasonry in Illinois and on a national scale. Smith’s vision likely

included a reconciliation of what he saw as “spurious” Freemasonry and

the pure form he had restored. There is not enough evidence to know

how Smith planned to merge the two. With his death, the Prophet’s

vision regarding how Freemasonry would work in tandem with the

Church was abandoned.

Transition by Degrees

Brigham Young’s decision not to pursue Masonry in Utah began an

estrangement between Freemasonry and Mormonism of the

Intermountain West. Like their leader, the typical Mormon of Young’s

day distrusted the people they called their “gentile” neighbors. Latter-day

Saints were forced to hide their polygamous lifestyle for fear of being

thrown in jail, and they felt persecuted and ridiculed for dearly cherished

beliefs. In addition, gentile lodges began prohibiting active Latter-day

505

Saints from joining their fraternities, despite such a policy being a

violation of Masonic principles of inclusiveness. On the other hand, non-

Mormons in Utah struggled with exclusive economic policies

encouraged by the Church. They felt Latter-day Saint loyalty to religious

authority was obsessive and unhealthy and that allegiance to an

institution that would ask their members to break the law was likewise

inconsistent with Masonic principles.

By the late nineteenth century, Mormonism was in profound transition.

As those fires that had driven its vision of revolution began to cool, the

Church worked to reinvent itself, seeking both renewed theological and

social relevance in a rapidly changing world. The cost for this was high:

Mormon leaders understood they would be forced to abandon the

fundamental theocratic system for which they had struggled and

sacrificed. Concepts related to nineteenth-century Freemasonry had

served as a model for early Mormon social transformation; these would

be laid aside in favor of something friendlier to established American

institutions the Church had once excoriated. What is often called the

“modernization of Utah” was in some degree an assimilation, bringing it

closer to those American mainstream values that made it an acceptable

candidate for Statehood.

Despite transitioning into the new century and greater accommodation

to American Christian mores and values, Latter-day Saints and

Freemasons in Utah continued to harbor strong animosities. The divides

of prejudice and culture would take nearly a century to find amicable

resolution. One notable event was the publication of literature critical of

the Church by Samuel Goodwin, Congregationalist minister and Past

Grand Master of Masons in Utah. Widely circulated and compelling, his

1921 Mormonism and Masonry: Origins, Connections and Coincidences

between Mason and Mormon Temple/Templar Ritual troubled many

readers. Particularly worrisome to Latter-day Saints was his assertion

that Mormon Temple rites were largely pilfered from Masonic ritual and

that endowed Latter-day Saints were participating in what amounted to a

form of clandestine Masonry. Freemasons were similarly galled by

Goodwin’s accusation that contemporary Mormons commonly believed

Freemasonry was nothing more than a poor imitation of God’s true

ordinances—a secret combination handed down from Cain and authored

by the evil one.

In response, LDS President Heber J. Grant formed a committee with

Elder George F. Richards as the chairman. One of the tasks of this

committee was to revise elements of LDS temple ritual that

506

corresponded to Masonic rituals and had been exposed by Goodwin. For

the first time, portions of the endowment were specifically modified or

eliminated to remove overtly Masonic aspects.4

Allen Roberts and others have noted that the transformation within

Mormonism sought to emulate a more “respectable” Christian tradition.

As the Church came to adopt more Protestant Christian theological

views, they also took in negative views of mainstream Christianity about

Masonry. This resulted in Great Basin Mormons becoming further

distanced from their mystical and hermetic roots and viewing Joseph

Smith’s and the early Latter-day Saints’ experiences regarding

Freemasonry with ambivalence. Masonic symbols that had been

enthusiastically embraced by earlier generations of Saints were

eventually the cause of “embarrassment, suspicion, and even disdain.”5

Gradually, they pulled away from doctrines, traditions, and organizations

that were deeply rooted in the Craft.

A Loss of Understanding

Because the Masonic connection within many of the church

organizations that Joseph Smith created has been lost, it is sometimes

difficult to understand their meaning and purpose. Every institution set

up by Smith may be seen as an experimentation with Masonic form. The

Danite band in Missouri, for example, is difficult for the modern eye to

comprehend. Without the Masonic connection, Danite looting and

shooting appears brutal and unseemly. Its symbolic and ritual structure,

fraternal zeal, and defensive intentions are obscured. Similarly, the

Council of Fifty is best understood from a Masonic perspective. Once its

radical, revolutionary nature had been subdued—once its purpose as a

kingdom with keys and power sustaining a prophet, priest, and king was

removed—it had little reason for existence and was eliminated.6

507

Plaque on Spring City Endowment House, featuring square, compasses, and beehive. Courtesy of Utah State Historical Society.

Mormon material culture was once rich in iconography suggestive of

that restored, celestialized Masonry that surrounded the early Saints and

formed a part of their cultural experience. By the mid-1900s, the Latter-

day Saint sense of the sacred had significantly evolved. Symbols such as

the square and compasses, once prominently featured, became a little-

understood aspect of the temple ceremony and inappropriate for public

exposure. For example, the angel weathervane that had graced the

Nauvoo temple was designed with a flaming heart, the intertwined

square and compasses, and “Book of the Law.” In 2002, when the temple

was rebuilt, the angel was replaced with a modern, upright Moroni.

Reproductions of the weathervane angels, sold as memorabilia, likewise

lack the Masonic symbolism.

Similarly, the square and compasses were engraved on a plaque on a

small brick edifice in Spring City, Utah, first constructed in 1876 as a

Relief Society building and later used as a school.7 When Elders Spencer

W. Kimball and Ezra Taft Benson became aware of the symbols in the

1970s, they requested that they be effaced from the plaque, explaining

that “sacred symbols openly displayed would only create confusion

among the members.”8 When the Masonic significance of the square and

compasses had been more widely known and understood, Latter-day

Apostles and members would not have been confused at their presence

outside of the temple. They would have recognized that the symbolism

of “square,” or ethical actions and circumspect or prudent living, was as

appropriate for Relief Society or educational uses of the building as it

was for secret temple rites.

Masonic icons with symbolism once meaningful to early Mormons

also included the all-seeing eye, the inverted star, the fraternal

handshake, the beehive, and representations of the celestial bodies. The

Salt Lake City Endowment House, a temporary building where

ordinances were performed while temples were being constructed,

incorporated “representations of the square, compass, level, and plumb

on the garden room walls, the depiction of sun, moon, and stars in the

same room, and flaming swords over the door in the world room.”9

Public versions of these symbols also abounded. The all-seeing eye was

a common feature on signs advertising Zion’s Cooperative Mercantile

Institution (ZCMI), America’s first department store. With the Masonic

import that God’s searching eye watches everyone, it was meaningful to

508

Mormons who valued honesty in their business dealings. Once placed on

temples, tabernacles, business establishments, and even coins, the

symbol has gradually lost favor in the Intermountain West. As well as

disappearing from public view, the all-seeing eye was painted out of the

walls in the St. George and other temples.

As Mormonism’s profound and vital material culture has receded, so

has its interior symbolism. Unlike the first generation of Mormons,

contemporary Saints no longer understand the endowment in relation to

Masonry. Masonic symbols or gestures used in Latter-day Saint temples

have been reinterpreted by members with no Masonic background.

Retaining little to no relevance to modern Mormons, it is not surprising

to see such elements disappear. Under George F. Richards’ purview, the

Oath of Vengeance and Masonic significance of the symbolic penalties

were removed. In 1936, hoping to generate greater reverence for the

temple garment, it was recommended that “a definition be given in the

temple of the symbolism and significance of the various marks in the

garment.” Similar but reinterpreted LDS meanings of these Masonic

markings were given by President David O. McKay, who was not a

Freemason:

A. The square: Honor, integrity, loyalty, trustworthiness. B. The compass: An undeviating course in relation to truth. Desires should be kept within proper bounds. C. The navel: That spiritual life needs constant sustenance. D. The knees: Rever[e]nce for God, the source of

divine guidance and inspiration.10

Continuing this trend, the lecture at the veil, what remained of the

penalties, and the five points of fellowship were omitted from the

endowment in 1990. The latter was a meaningful ritual to eighteenth-

and nineteenth-century Masons, with each point of contact being a

welcoming reminder of principles binding them together as companions.

Times changed, and young Latter-day Saints with modern ideas of

personal space found the symbolic embrace baffling and uncomfortable

when they encountered it prior to serving a mission or getting married.

The ritual no longer served the purpose for which it was originally

adopted. Finally, the threefold “return and report” sequence modeled

upon the ritual opening of a Lodge was gradually truncated until it was

completely removed in 2019.

In recent decades, Mormon apologists have pointed to subtle

similarities between the LDS temple endowment and ancient rituals in

order to reject the Masonic context of many crucial elements.11 As seen,

when disconnected from traditional Masonic interpretations, many

features of the endowment could not stand on their own and were

509

eliminated from the ceremony, sometimes at the expense of what their

Masonic origins might reveal to the thoughtful Latter-day Saint.

In addition to the loss of specific aspects of Mormonism’s material

culture and shared ritual elements, Latter-day Saints became increasingly

disconnected from the nuances of their earlier shared history. Eventually,

they could no longer recall the significant role Masonry played in

shaping Mormon scripture, theology, and ritual practice. Concepts such

as the chain of belonging,12 the eternity of matter, eternal regression of

divinity, the grand chain of masters and dispensation heads, the Grand

Council in Heaven, and the earthly gathering of Adam and his posterity

at Adam-ondi-Ahman came to be viewed as singular revelations to

Joseph Smith without precedent. Likewise, following the loss of

knowledge of important Masonic concepts, Book of Mormon scriptural

passages lost the underlying contrast between Spurious and Authentic

Masonry and were read as a carte blanche criticism of “secret

combinations” like Freemasonry. For Saints of the last century,

Masonry’s connection with Mormonism has largely been diminished to a

historical footnote and to a few remaining but obvious ritual borrowings.

This loss slowly and quietly continued over the course of time, from

the move to the Great Basin up to the present day. This is evidenced by

an 1884 Paris, Idaho, Stake Conference question and answer session,

when Stake President William Budge was asked if elders of the Church

were justified in performing the rites and ceremonies of the Freemasons.

He answered, “No! All the good that may be found in such societies are

found in the Gospel of Christ and what do we want more?”13 Such a

rejection of Masonic influence upon the Church was also exemplified in

Apostle Anthony W. Ivins’s 1934 response to Samuel H. Goodwin’s

Mormonism and Masonry. In his work, Goodwin devotes some time to

describing certain symbols of Mormonism and, according to Ivins,

“infers that they are taken from Freemasonry.”14 Rejecting this, Ivins

indignantly affirms that “the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

was not influenced by Masonry, either in its doctrines, organization, or

the bringing forth of the Book of Mormon.”15 For example, he insists

that the all-seeing eye and clasped hands “were at no time in general

use” among the Latter-day Saints, or, if they were in use, “have long

since become obsolete.” Ivins continues:

There are not in the Salt Lake Temple, or any other temple of the Church, a series of stones, “in emblematical and significant designs,” as stated [by Goodwin] . . . the few astrological

510

figures which are engraved on the outside of the temple . . . are without significance to Church

members.16

It is astounding that such well-known symbols could be so easily

discounted.

As noted in the Introduction to this volume, this forgetting of

Mormonism’s Masonic past was well under way by the time Apostle

Franklin D. Richards travelled back to Nauvoo in 1885 to witness the

pillars Jachin and Boaz on the woodpile waiting to be burned. Only

Richards’s sharp eye caught the significance of what had been discarded

in a jumble on the trash-heap—the items were meaningless for later

builders who removed the lodge-room story when renovating the home.

To Richards, this was a poignant indication of a loss of the Mormon

collective memory.

Richards’s fears have been realized. Sharing the name of a large multi-

purpose room in modern Latter-day Saint meetinghouses that

accommodate anything from proms to basketball games, Nauvoo’s

restored Masonic Hall is now identified as “The Cultural Hall” with

barely a nod to its Masonic functions. The third-floor room where

Nauvoo Lodge met thrice daily for over four years, where hundreds of

Mormon men were made Masons, is an open space with no Masonic

furnishings. Visitors are informed by guides that here in this room,

banquets and balls were held. The modern revisioning gives no insight

into the original form and function of the Lodge’s ritual space. Activities

like dances and dinners would have been impossible given the Nauvoo-

era Lodge furnishings, including an altar prominently placed in the

center of the room. Despite refinishing, faint marks in the floor still bear

witness to hundreds of Latter-day Saint men who circumambulated and

then knelt at that altar to promise God to be good men and true.

Human beings reshape all that we inherit from the past according to

our current needs and understandings. Sometimes, strict historical

truthfulness is sacrificed in order to create a narrative that is whole,

consistent, and meaningful. Such reconstruction of the history and

relationship between Mormons and Freemasons is an adjustment brought

about by the quite natural dislocations of our current faith and belief on

these points.

511

“Ruins of the Temple at Nauvoo,” from Frederick Piercy, Route from Liverpool to Great Salt Lake Valley, 1855.

In his book Understanding Freemasonry, Roy Wells explains that in a

Master Mason’s lodge a substitute is given for “that which was lost.”

This secret is “declared to be sanctioned and confirmed until time or

circumstances shall restore the genuine.” Only “patience and industry”

can entitle the worthy Freemason to recover what has been lost:

We all accept that Freemasonry is a system of morality veiled in allegory and illustrated by symbols, and that alone calls for some effort to understand not only what the ritual says but what it sets out to do. It certainly provides the tools but the application rests entirely with ourselves. The building of a Temple within ourselves commences when we begin to understand exactly what is “veiled in allegory and illustrated by symbols”. The search for “that which was lost” began after Adam fell from favour and bequeathed to mankind that

everlasting quest, for in every age there is that fall from grace.17

Because of the concerns about Freemasonry that existed in the post-

Morgan United States, Mormonism, which embodied many of its ideas,

was feared and rejected throughout the greater society. Yet history is not

without a sense of irony. In the modern age Freemasonry itself, as it

existed in the first sesquicentennial of this country, declined sharply, both

in numbers and in influence. In order to survive, it too underwent a great

transformation. Stephen Bullock writes of the slow return of the

Fraternity following the heyday of Antimasonry in the 1830s:

Antimasonry’s success cannot be measured simply by the number of brothers who left or who returned. The movement’s victory lay, rather, in its humbling of Masonic pretensions.

512

Antimasons decisively demystified the order, making its secrets available for a few cents in a bookstore or a tavern and allowing people to voice a distaste that would have been unbecoming when Masonry seemed a central emblem of religion or the Republic. The destruction of brothers’ openly expressed dreams of splendor and grandeur and the end of American society’s willingness to credit post-Revolutionary Masonry’s high claims allowed the fraternity to return—but only in another incarnation. Just as the post-Revolutionary swelling of Masonry’s numbers and pretensions shaped and energized Antimasonry, so the

fires of opposition molded a new fraternity. 18

Mormonism experienced the same after the martyrdom of Joseph

Smith in July of 1844. The Theocratic Kingdom did not move to Texas;

rather, it moved West one final time, sputtered, and finally gave up its

aspirations for a political kingdom of God. Over the years the Latter-day

Saints moved toward a slightly unconventional form of Christianity. The

Church no longer retains the undergirding of a literal understanding of

kingdom-building nor the social institutions that support it, but only the

remnants of the institutions that Joseph engendered. His hope was that

the Mormon kingdom would shatter all things to pieces, as prophesied by

Daniel. Instead, its own radical ideas and practices were broken and

scattered. Today The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints no

longer embodies the most beautiful nor the most feared ideas of

Masonry.

Seeing that Mormonism has sustained such an exceedingly great loss,

we have here attempted to “employ ourselves, by new works, to recover”

Mormonism’s early connection with Freemasonry, providing a key with

which to view the shared past of Mormonism and Freemasonry in a way

that is true and square.

Notes

513

the hig[h]er orders of the Priesthood.” See George F. Richards memorandum, June 7 and October 5, 1922. Richards also suggested eighteen wording changes in the ceremony, including writing a script for previously unscripted portions dealing with the covenants and instructions for the prayer circle and veil. His changes were approved by the First Presidency and announced to Salt Lake City temple workers on August 14. Four years later, administrators at the St. George Temple were notified: “At request of President Grant we have already adopted some of the changes decided upon, and it will be in order for you to do the same. In sealing for the dead, whether one or both be dead, omit the kissing. Omit from the prayer in the circle all references to avenging the blood of the Prophets. Omit from the ordinance and lecture all reference to retribution. . . . This letter is written with the approval of the Presidency.” See George F. Richards, “Letter to the President of the St. George Temple, February 15, 1927.”

514
