578

On the Road with Joseph Smith: An Author’s Diary

Richard L. Bushman

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Kobo, or Apple.

After living with Joseph Smith for seven years and delivering the final proofs of his landmark

study, Joseph Smith: Rough Stone Rolling to Knopf in July 2005, biographer Richard Lyman

Bushman went “on the road” for a year, crisscrossing the country from coast to coast, delivering

addresses on Joseph Smith and attending book-signings for the new biography.

Bushman confesses to hope and humility as he awaits reviews. He frets at the polarization that

dismissed the book as either too hard on Joseph Smith or too easy. He yields to a very human

compulsion to check sales figures on Amazon.com, but partway through the process stepped back

with the recognition, “The book seems to be cutting its own path now, just as [I] hoped.”

For readers coming to grips with the ongoing puzzle of the Prophet and the troublesome

dimensions of their own faith, Richard Bushman, openly but not insistently presents himself as a

believer. “I believe enough to take Joseph Smith seriously,” he says. He draws comfort both from

what he calls his “mantra” (“Today I will be a follower of Jesus Christ”) and also from ongoing

engagement with the intellectual challenges of explaining Joseph Smith.

Praise for On the Road With Joseph Smith:

“The diary is possibly unparalleled—an author of a recent book candidly dissecting his

experiences with both Mormon and non-Mormon audiences . . . certainly deserves wider

distribution—in part because it shows a talented historian laying open his vulnerabilities, and also

because it shows how much any historian lays on the line when he writes about Joseph Smith.”

-Dennis Lythgoe, Deseret News

“By turns humorous and poignant, this behind-the-scenes look at Richard Bushman’s public

and private ruminations about Joseph Smith reveals a great deal—not only about the inner life of

one of our greatest scholars, but about Mormonism at the dawn of the 21st century.”

-Jana Riess, co-author of Mormonism for Dummies

579

“Swell Suffering”: A Biography of Maurine Whipple

Veda Tebbs Hale

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, or Kobo.

2012 Best Biography Award - Mormon History Association

Maurine Whipple, author of what some critics consider Mormonism’s greatest novel, The Giant

Joshua, is an enigma. Her prize-winning novel has never been out of print, and its portrayal of

the founding of St. George draws on her own family history to produce its unforgettable and

candid portrait of plural marriage’s challenges. Yet Maurine’s life is full of contradictions and

unanswered questions. Veda Tebbs Hale, a personal friend of the paradoxical novelist, answers

these questions with sympathy and tact, nailing each insight down with thorough research in

Whipple’s vast but under-utilized collected papers.

Praise for “Swell Suffering”:

“Hale achieves an admirable balance of compassion and objectivity toward an author who

seemed fated to offend those who offered to love or befriend her. . . . Readers of this biography

will be reminded that Whipple was a full peer of such Utah writers as Virginia Sorensen, Fawn

Brodie, and Juanita Brooks, all of whom achieved national fame for their literary and historical

works during the mid-twentieth century”

—L S. P , author of The Backslider and Juanita Brooks: Mormon Historian

580

The Man behind the Discourse: A Biography of King Follett

Joann Follett Mortensen

Get it today for Kindle, Apple, Nook, or Kobo.

Who was King Follett? When he was fatally injured digging a well in Nauvoo in March 1844,

why did Joseph Smith use his death to deliver the monumental doctrinal sermon now known as

the King Follett Discourse? Much has been written about the sermon, but little about King.

Although King left no personal writings, Joann Follett Mortensen, King’s third great-

granddaughter, draws on more than thirty years of research in civic and Church records and in the

journals and letters of King’s peers to piece together King’s story from his birth in New

Hampshire and moves westward where, in Ohio, he and his wife, Louisa, made the life-shifting

decision to accept the new Mormon religion.

From that point, this humble, hospitable, and hardworking family followed the Church into

Missouri where their devotion to Joseph Smith was refined and burnished. King was the last

Mormon prisoner in Missouri to be released from jail. According to family lore, King was one of

the Prophet’s bodyguards. He was also a Danite, a Mason, and an officer in the Nauvoo Legion.

After his death, Louisa and their children settled in Iowa where some associated with the

Cutlerities and the RLDS Church; others moved on to California. One son joined the Mormon

Battalion and helped found Mormon communities in Utah, Idaho, and Arizona.

While King would have died virtually unknown had his name not been attached to the

discourse, his life story reflects the reality of all those whose faith became the foundation for a

new religion. His biography is more than one man’s life story. It is the history of the early

Restoration itself.

581

Hugh Nibley: A Consecrated Life

Boyd Jay Petersen

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

Winner of the Mormon History Association’s Best Biography Award

As one of the LDS Church’s most widely recognized scholars, Hugh Nibley is both an icon and

an enigma. Through complete access to Nibley’s correspondence, journals, notes, and papers,

Petersen has painted a portrait that reveals the man behind the legend.

Starting with a foreword written by Zina Nibley Petersen and finishing with appendices that

include some of the best of Nibley’s personal correspondence, the biography reveals aspects of

the tapestry of the life of one who has truly consecrated his life to the service of the Lord.

Praise for A Consecrated Life:

“Hugh Nibley is generally touted as one of Mormonism’s greatest minds and perhaps its most

prolific scholarly apologist. Just as hefty as some of Nibley’s largest tomes, this authorized

biography is delightfully accessible and full of the scholar’s delicious wordplay and wit, not to

mention some astonishing war stories and insights into Nibley’s phenomenal acquisition of

languages. Introduced by a personable foreword from the author’s wife (who is Nibley’s

daughter), the book is written with enthusiasm, respect and insight. . . . On the whole, Petersen is

a careful scholar who provides helpful historical context. . . . This project is far from

hagiography. It fills an important gap in LDS history and will appeal to a wide Mormon

audience.”

—Publishers Weekly

“Well written and thoroughly researched, Petersen’s biography is a must-have for anyone

struggling to reconcile faith and reason.”

—G T , Association for Mormon Letters

582

Mormon Thunder: A Documentary History of Jedediah

Morgan Grant

Gene A. Sessions

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, and Kobo.

Jedediah Morgan Grant was a man who knew no compromise when it came to principles—and

his principles were clearly representative, argues Gene A. Sessions, of Mormonism’s first

generation. His life is a glimpse of a Mormon world whose disappearance coincided with the

death of this “pious yet rambunctiously radical preacher, flogging away at his people, demanding

otherworldliness and constant sacrifice.” It was “an eschatological, pre-millennial world in which

every individual teetered between salvation and damnation and in which unsanitary privies and

appropriating a stray cow held the same potential for eternal doom as blasphemy and adultery.”

Updated and newly illustrated with more photographs, this second edition of the award-

winning documentary history (first published in 1982) chronicles Grant’s ubiquitous role in the

Mormon history of the 1840s and ’50s. In addition to serving as counselor to Brigham Young

during two tumultuous and influential years at the end of his life, he also portentously befriended

Thomas L. Kane, worked to temper his unruly brother-in-law William Smith, captained a

company of emigrants into the Salt Lake Valley in 1847, and journeyed to the East on several

missions to bolster the position of the Mormons during the crises surrounding the runaway judges

affair and the public revelation of polygamy.

Jedediah Morgan Grant’s voice rises powerfully in these pages, startling in its urgency in

summoning his people to sacrifice and moving in its tenderness as he communicated to his

family. From hastily scribbled letters to extemporaneous sermons exhorting obedience, and the

notations of still stunned listeners, the sound of “Mormon Thunder” rolls again in “a boisterous

amplification of what Mormonism really was, and would never be again.”

583

Lot Smith: Mormon Pioneer and American Frontiersman

Carmen R. Smith and Talana S. Hooper

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

Lot Smith: Mormon Pioneer and American Frontiersman is the comprehensive biography of

Utah’s 1857 war hero and one of Arizona’s early settlement leaders. With over fifty years of

combined research, mother and daughter co-authors Carmen R. Smith and Talana S. Hooper take

on many of the myths and legends surrounding this lesser-known but significant historical figure

within Mormonism.

Lot Smith recounts the Mormon frontiersman’s adventures in the Mormon Battalion, the

hazardous rescue of the Willie and Martin handcart companies, the Utah War, and the Mormon

colonization of the Arizona Territory. True stories of tense relations with the Navajo and Hopi

tribes, Mormon flight into Mexico during the US government’s anti-polygamy crusades, narrow

escapes from bandits and law enforcers, and even Western-style shoot-outs place Lot Smith:

Mormon Pioneer and American Frontiersman into both Western Americana literature and

Mormon biographical history.

584

William B. Smith: In the Shadow of a Prophet

Kyle R. Walker

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Kobo, and Apple.

Younger brother of Joseph Smith, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and

Church Patriarch for a time, William Smith had tumultuous yet devoted relationships with

Joseph, his fellow members of the Twelve, and the LDS and RLDS (Community of Christ)

churches. Walker’s imposing biography examines not only William’s complex life in detail, but

also sheds additional light on the family dynamics of Joseph and Lucy Mack Smith, as well as the

turbulent intersections between the LDS and RLDS churches. William B. Smith: In the Shadow

of a Prophet is a vital contribution to Mormon history in both the LDS and RLDS traditions.

Praise for William B. Smith:

“Bullseye! Kyle Walker’s biography of Joseph Smith, Jr.’s lesser known brother William is

right on target. It weaves a narritive that is searching balanced, and comprehensive. Walker puts

this former Mormon apostle solidly within a Smith family setting, and he hits the mark for

anyone interested in Joseph Smith and his family. Walker’s biography will become essential

reading on leadership dynamics within Mormonism after Joseph Smith’s death.”

-M S , author of the award-winning Hearken, O Ye People: The Historical Setting of

Joseph Smth’s Ohio Revelations

“This perceptive biography on William, the last remaining Smith brother, provides a thorough

timeline of his life’s journey and elucidates how his insatiable disconte nt eventually tempered

the once irascible young man into a seasoned patriarch loved by those who knew him.”

—E B. M , president (2014–15) John Whitmer Historical Association

“Handsome, tall, eloquent, and charismatic, William Smith, Joseph Smith’s last surviving

brother, seemed well positioned to step into his prophet-brother’s leadership shoes. Instead, he

spent the decade after the martyrdom trying and failing to establish himself as the leader of a

585

significant movement, repeatedly dabbling in polygamy, and repeatedly destroying instead of

building relationships. Kyle Walker, approaching this gifted but turbulent man from a family

dynamics perspective, gives him full credit for his achievement but also laments his insecurity,

temper, and feeling of entitlement that so severely limited his achievement.”

—L F A , Lucy’s Book: A Critical Edition of Lucy Mack Smith’s Family

Memoir

“I suspect that this comprehensive treatment will serve as the definitive biography for years to

come; it will certainly be difficult to improve upon.”

—J S S III, Association for Mormon Letters

“Walker’s biography is an important addition to the growing literature on the rise of

Mormonism in the nineteenth century and the Joseph Sr. and Lucy Mack Smith family.”

—R N H , BYU Studies Quarterly

“The new biography of Smith ... is a magnificent work. Through extensive research, Walker has

compiled a detailed biography that highlights not only the many dysfunctions that hampered

Joseph’s younger brother, but spotlights his talents, and provides a poignancy, particularly in his

later years, that makes you admire and root for the younger brother who was tossed from the

main LDS Church a year-plus after Joseph’s death.”

—D G , Standard Examiner

“Kyle Walker has further solidified his position as the leading expert on the Smith family with

this extensive biography of Joseph Smith’s troubled younger brother, William.”

—S F , Juvenile Instructor

586
