587

Even unto Bloodshed: An LDS Perspective on War

Duane Boyce

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

When carefully examined, both secular and scriptural arguments for pacifism ultimately fail.

Once such pacifist arguments are considered, rebutted, and respectfully set aside, it is possible to

construct a sound framework for a scriptural view of war, at least in general terms. Such a

framework is not pacifist, but it is anything but aggressive, and includes the quality of heart—not

to mention, the wisdom—expected of all disciples of Christ, whatever their task or circumstance.

It was not an anomaly when the Lord instructed the Nephites to defend their families “even unto

bloodshed;” comprehensively understood, the statement expresses a genuine, profound, and

conceptually rich scriptural principle.

Praise for Even Unto Bloodshed:

“A careful and detailed argument against pacifism has long been needed, and it is hard to

imagine someone doing a better job of it. The scholarship in this volume is impressive, and it is

likely to be the definitive work on the subject for years to come. Truly a major

accomplishment.”

— K. C C , Professor of Philosophy, Brigham Young University

“The question of how (or whether) participation in war can be reconciled with Christian

ethics has occupied the minds of such great thinkers as Augustine, Aquinas, and Grotius. Latter-

day Saints, however, have given little systematic attention to the matter thus far. But it’s time.

This book brilliantly opens a long overdue conversation. Carefully and systematically weighing

all of the relevant scriptural texts as well as applicable statements of modern prophets, it will be

indispensable for all future Mormon discussions of the subject.”

— D C. P , professor of Islamic studies and Arabic at Brigham Young University,

founder of the Middle Eastern Texts Initiative, and editor of Interpreter: A Journal of Mormon

Scripture

588

“Finally, we have a comprehensive and thorough discussion of war from an LDS perspective.

Even Unto Bloodshed is a sustained argument that is impressive in what it delivers. It considers

and rebuts a wide expanse of arguments regarding war, including time-honored claims by Hugh

Nibley and Eugene England. The book brings to bear every important passage and narrative in

the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants and creates a general framework for

thinking about war from an LDS perspective. The book is clear, careful in its analysis, and

comprehensive in its approach. I highly recommend it!”

— R S , Professor of Linguistics, Brigham Young University, Editor, Book of

Mormon Critical Text Project

“Even Unto Bloodshed is a critical text for anybody that wishes to understand Mormon

thought on war and stands as a much-needed reassessment of pacifist ideas.”

— M D , Interpreter: A Journal of Mormon Scripture

“I recommend this book as an excellent treatment of an LDS point of view of war. Boyce has

clearly spent much effort in studying and understanding Book of Mormon and other texts

bearing on war and violence and in studying and answering the arguments of those who feel it is

a pacifist book. I suggest any that any interested Latter-day Saint buy it and read it. That

includes teachers, parents, young people, old people. As for me, I am going to give it to our

children for Christmas.”

— B. K H , SquareTwo

589

The Liberal Soul: Applying the Gospel of Jesus Christ in

Politics

Richard Davis

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

The Liberal Soul offers something lacking in LDS culture. That is the presentation of a

different way for Latter-day Saints to examine the question of how to be faithful disciples of

Christ and good citizens. It shows public policy decision-making regarding government role as

the manifestation of the “liberal soul” rather than as the libertarianism advocated by past Mormon

speakers and writers such as Ezra Taft Benson, Cleon Skousen, or Vern Andersen. It also takes a

different approach from the less radical but still traditional economic conservative attitudes of

well-known politicians such as Orrin Hatch or Mitt Romney.

Davis suggests that a Latter-day Saint can approach economic policy, war, the environment,

and social issues with the perspective that society is basically good and not evil, tolerance and

forbearance are desirable qualities instead of bad ones, and that government can and does play a

positive role as a vehicle of society in improving the lives of citizens. He describes how Latter-

day Saints can apply the Gospel of Jesus Christ to our roles at each of these three levels—

individual, group, and society—rather than assuming the societal level violates the principles of

the Gospel. The result is that Latter-day Saints can help bring about a Zion society—one where

all benefit, the most vulnerable are aided and not ignored, inclusion is the rule and not the

exception, and suspicion and fear are replaced by love and acceptance.

Praise for The Liberal Soul:

“Richard Davis searches the scriptures to indicate the many times that Christ and prophets

urge us to be “the liberal soul” when dealing with individuals and society. Suffering and need

are obvious to everyone, but applying these scriptures to the value of good government brings

a new dimension to its importance—both to citizens of this country and, more importantly, to

the world. In this election season, with so many critical issues to be considered for our state,

nation, and the world, it is important for every individual to understand the reason for

590

government and be willing to make choices based on the premise that “governments were

instituted of God . . . for the good and safety of society” (D&C 134:1).”

— Former Utah Governor O S. W

“Davis provides a thoughtful exploration into the principles of generosity, equality, and

Christian discipleship and their important relationship to democratic government. This book

clearly explains the strong connection between liberalism and Mormonism. I would

recommend it to anyone who has ever asked me, ‘How can you be a Democrat and a

Mormon?’”

— U.S. Senate Majority Leader H R

“During my years as a Democratic activist I was asked by fellow Mormons how I could be

a Mormon and a Democrat. Once I was elected to Congress I was asked by other Democrats

how I could be a Democrat and a Mormon. Finally, Professor Davis’s book The Liberal Soul

has built a strong case based on gospel tenets to support a more progressive agenda and will

begin the process of dismantling the notion that a ‘good’ Mormon must be a Republican.”

— Former Congressman R S (D-Idaho 2 1985–1993)

“The Liberal Soul is an eye-opening read, providing significant insight into the all-

encompassing nature of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Each unique chapter enhances our

understanding of the inclusive mission of the Savior, through modern and ancient examples,

leading to a greater increase of true discipleship.”

— S N H , Utah State Senate Minority Leader (1992-2000) and 2012 Candidate

for United States Senate

“Whether or not one chooses to change his or her political viewpoint to match Davis’ ideal,

in studying The Liberal Soul, readers can learn about another place from which to approach

politics as a member of the LDS Church.”

— K S , Mormon Times

“If you’re a Mormon conservative who wonders how a faithful Mormon can be liberal, The

Liberal Soul is worth reading. I hope you will read it, and I hope it will educate you,

challenge you, and, especially, inspire you to greater charity for those who disagree with you.

I just hope, in the end, it won’t persuade you.”

— A H , Patheos

“The Liberal Soul is an attempt to put forward a reading of Christianity’s call to generosity

which suggests that collective political action towards greater economic and social equality

and welfare is as legitimate a response as any other. How persuasive is the reading Davis puts

forward? I would say ‘very much so.’”

— R F , By Common Consent

591
