Craig L. Foster

Get it today for your Kindle, Nook, Kobo, or Apple.

In the contested terrain of American politics, nowhere is the conflict more intense, even brutal,

than in the territory of public life also claimed by religion. Mitt Romney’s 2007–08 presidential

campaign is a textbook example.

Religious historian (and ardent Republican) Craig L. Foster revisits that campaign with an

astute focus on the never-quite-contained hostility that Romney triggered among America’s

religious right. Although few political campaign are known for their kindness, the back-stabbing,

mean-spirited attacks, eruptions of irrationalism, and downright lies exploded into one of the

meanest chapters of recent American political history.

Foster readjusts rosy views of America as the tolerant, pluralistic society against the context of

its lengthy, colorful, and bruising history of religious discrimination and oppression against many

religious groups, among them Mormonism. Mormons are now respected and admired--although

the image hasn’t tilted enough to work for Romney instead of against him. Their turbulent past of

suspicion, marginalization, physical violence, and being deprived of voting rights has sometimes

made them, in turn, suspicious, hostile, and politically naive. How much of this pattern of mutual

name-calling stems from theology and how much from theocratic ideals?

Foster appraises Romney’s success and strengths—and also places where he stumbled,

analyzing an intriguing pattern of “what-ifs?” of policy, personality, and positioning. But perhaps

even more intriguing is the anti-Romney campaign launched by a divided and fragmenting

religious right who pulled together in a rare show of unity to chill a Mormon’s presidential

aspirations. What does Romney’s campaign and the resistance of the religious right mean for

America in the twenty-first century?

In this meticulously researched, comprehensively documented, and passionately argued

analysis of a still-ongoing campaign, Craig Foster poses questions that go beyond both Romney

and the religious right to engage the soul of American politics.

592

Latter-Day Dissent: At the Crossroads of Intellectual Inquiry

and Ecclesiastical Authority

Philip Lindholm

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

This volume collects, for the first time in book form, stories from the “September Six,” a group

of intellectuals officially excommunicated or disfellowshipped from the LDS Church in

September of 1993 on charges of “apostasy” or “conduct unbecoming” Church members. Their

experiences are significant and yet are largely unknown outside of scholarly or more liberal

Mormon circles, which is surprising given that their story was immediately propelled onto

screens and cover pages across the Western world.

Interviews by Dr. Philip Lindholm (Ph.D. Theology, University of Oxford) include those of the

“September Six,” Lynne Kanavel Whitesides, Paul James Toscano, Maxine Hanks, Lavina

Fielding Anderson, and D. Michael Quinn; as well as Janice Merrill Allred, Margaret Merrill

Toscano, Thomas W. Murphy , and former employee of the LDS Church’s Public Affairs

Department, Donald B. Jessee.

Each interview illustrates the tension that often exists between the Church and its intellectual

critics, and highlights the difficulty of accommodating congregational diversity while

maintaining doctrinal unity—a difficulty hearkening back to the very heart of ancient

Christianity.

593

War & Peace in Our Time: Mormon Perspectives

Edited by Patrick Q. Mason, J. David Pulsipher, and Richard L.

Bushman

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Kobo, or Apple.

“This provocative and thoughtful book is sure both to infuriate and to delight. . . . The essays

demonstrate that exegesis of distinctly Latter-day Saint scriptures can yield a wealth of

disputation, the equal of any rabbinical quarrel or Jesuitical casuistry. This volume provides a

fitting springboard for robust and lively debates within the Mormon scholarly and lay community

on how to think about the pressing issues of war and peace.” - R S. W , Dean Emeritus,

Center for Naval Warfare Studies, Chester W. Nimitz Chair Emeritus, U.S. Naval War College

“This is an extraordinary collection of essays on a topic of extraordinary importance. . .

.Whatever your current opinion on the topic, this book will challenge you to reflect more deeply

and thoroughly on what it means to be a disciple of Christ, the Prince of Peace, in an era of

massive military budgets, lethal technologies, and widespread war.” - G H , Professor

of History and Religious Studies, University of North Carolina, Asheville, Author,

Understanding the Book of Mormon: A Reader’s Guide

“Mormons take their morality seriously. They are also patriotic. Tragically, the second trait can

undermine the first. When calls for war are on the horizon, it is possible for well-intended Saints

to be too sure of our selective application of scripture to contemporary matters of life and death,

too sure that we can overcome evil by force, that we can control the results of military conflict,

that war is the only option for patriots. Yet pacifism has its own critics. This collection of

differing views by thoughtful scholars comprises a debate. Reading it may save us in the future

from enacting more harm than good in the name of God, country, or presumption.” - P

B , Arrington Chair of Mormon History and Culture, Utah State University, Author,

Mormons and the Bible: The Place of the Latter-day Saints in American Religion

594

Common Ground—Different Opinions: Latter-day Saints

and Contemporary Issues

Edited by Justin F. White and James E. Faulconer

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Kobo, or Apple.

There are many hotly debated issues about which many people disagree, and where common

ground is hard to find. From evolution to environmentalism, war and peace to political

partisanship, stem cell research to same-sex marriage, how we think about controversial issues

affects how we interact as Latter-day Saints.

In this volume various Latter-day Saint authors address these and other issues from differing

points of view. Though they differ on these tough questions, they have all found common ground

in the gospel of Jesus Christ and the latter-day restoration. Their insights offer diverse points of

view while demonstrating we can still love those with whom we disagree.

Praise for Common Ground—Different Opinions:

“[This book] provide models of faithful and diverse Latter-day Saints who remain united in the

body of Christ. This collection clearly demonstrates that a variety of perspectives on a number of

sensitive issues do in fact exist in the Church. . . . [T]he collection is successful in any case where

it manages to give readers pause with regard to an issue they’ve been fond of debating, or

convinces them to approach such conversations with greater charity and much more patience. It

served as just such a reminder and encouragement to me, and for that reason above all, I

recommend this book.” — B H , Maxwell Institute

595
