Fifteen-year-old Enid Gardner is a self-proclaimed “weird Mormon girl.”

When she isn’t chatting with Joseph Smith or the Book of Abraham

mummy, she’s searching for herself between the spaces of doubt and

belief. Along the way, she must grapple with her Mormon faith as it

adapts to the twenty-first century. She also must confront the painful

mysteries at the heart of her strained relationship with her ailing mother.

Praise for The Garden of Enid:

“Enid is one of my favorite figures in Mormon culture. She is incredibly

human for all of her two dimensions. On one hand, she’s a flawed yet

faithful individual constantly seeking after truth. On the other, she offers

a remarkable window into the life of a teen-aged girl growing up

Mormon. Creator Scott Hales uses his medium to his advantage, giving

The Garden of Enid a marvelous glint of theatricality. Enid bends time

and space to chat with an array of characters, from the Prophet Joseph to

a less historical but no less compelling guardian angel named Eugene.

It’s all just a little wacky—and yet completely true and relatable” —

M L L , writer of Pilot Program and Freetown

“Scott Hales [is] the cartoonist for this generation, who gets us like no

one else does. . . . Enid wants to believe the gospel—and she does, more

597

deeply than she realizes—but she is coming of age in a skeptical time,

challenging her Seminary teacher and her Young Women leaders in ways

they are not always prepared to deal with. She is awkward, she is

vulnerable, yet when she follows her heart she invariably does the right

thing.” —A E. P , Keepapitchinin

“Comics are always meant to help us take a look at ourselves and laugh

—something sorely needed in Mormon Culture. Enid, with her wise-

aleck streak, her unusual and difficult home life, and her overly

developed brain, is no usual Mormon fifteen year old girl. With late-

night imaginary conversations with long-dead prophets, well-told

moments of loneliness and self doubt, snarky Sunday-class encounters,

vulnerable, tense conversations with her closeted best friend, to midnight

faith crises, Enid brings something real, something faith-affirming,

something beyond Happy Valley and seminary videos and Saturday’s

warrior to the LDS audience.” —S D , author of Lightning

Tree and Mile 21

“I feel lucky to have lived at the time The Garden of Enid was being

published, because it gave me the chance to meet one of the best

characters in Mormon fiction. From the beginning, she’s sharp, sardonic,

and frighteningly straightforward—it was hard to know whether to be

amused or intimidated by this self-proclaimed weird Mormon girl. But

she’s so delightfully unassuming, it wasn’t long before she drew me in.

Enid made me wonder what it’s like to fly through the cosmos as an

unorganized intelligence, made me think about what God wonders when

he lies in bed at night, and taught me how to make it through Girls’

Camp safely. Get to know her: this book is a classic whether you rush

through it from cover to cover or linger over each moment, as the

original readers did, at a pace of a few comics a week.” —J

G , author of The Five Books of Jesus

“I’m at a loss how to convey how deeply The Garden of Enid:

Adventures of a Weird Mormon Girl affected me. Enid is witty,

insightful, ardent, and captures many of the particular and quirky aspects

of Mormonism. More than that, I found myself drawn into this fully

598

realized character in unexpected ways. Her wholehearted engagement

with life as she tries to find her place in the world had me rooting for her

success over and over. I ended up genuinely caring about Enid and her

story. Hales has created a world that will be an enduring addition to

Mormon Literature. Don’t miss this delightful work.” —S L.

P , author of A Short Stay in Hell and The Scholar of Moab

“They told us we were a chosen generation. And now I know why: We

get to read The Garden of Enid! Your Mormon nerd cred is directly

proportional to how many of these cartoons you laugh at. The Garden of

Enid has it all: laughs, esoterica, faith, messy hair, messy people, and

messy endings. The best Mormon comic collection since Cal Grondahl

and Pat Bagley.” —S C , author of iPlates

“Enid isn’t a real flesh-and-blood Latter-day Saint, but the more you read

the more you’ll swear she is. Like any good comic character, she makes

me laugh. Like only a few manage to pull off, she makes me cry, too.” —

B D H , Neal A. Maxwell Institute for Religious Scholarship

“There is much that Enid does not understand, just as there is much that I

do not understand. But she makes me laugh, gives me hope for the

future, and teaches me that it’s okay to be myself: a weird Mormon girl.”

—J R , author of Flunking Sainthood and The Twible

“The Garden of Enid is what it is to be an American Mormon in

microcosm . . . Like the best comic strips, Enid allows you to both laugh

and reflect. And it’s a nice reminder that not only is God colorful, but so

is life.” — W W , Worlds Without End

“Enid gives us something more unique, more heartfelt, more wonderfully

obscure... yes, more intellectual, but also more soulful and universal.” —

M S , author of The Fading Flower and Swallow the Sun

“Readers will find strips that will make them laugh, make them cry, give

them hope, and most importantly, make them think.” —A

H , Association for Mormon Letters

“Enid is able to affect us in such a powerful way.” —S E , By

Common Consent

599

“Enid, a weird Mormon girl with an active imagination who is always

contemplating the meaning of life as she tries understand the purpose of

her existence and her place in the world, is the Calvin and Hobbes for the

internet generation of Mormons.” —A H , Association for

Mormon Letters

“This graphic novel is a great one for parents to share with their

teenagers. . . . the stories open the door for discussions on life’s trials,

doubt and faith, relationships, and going through tough times with the

help of friends and a great bishop.” —G S , Millennial Star

“There is so much good to Enid, so much familiar Mormon weirdness,

and yet so much that is faith promoting and heart-warming, that it would

be a great read for any young woman. It’s equally great for weird

Mormons of all ages.” —A C., By Common Consent

“Everyone feels somewhat out-of-place in their communities. Everyone

has something in their life that makes them feel less than ideal. Everyone

is searching for identity, for home. The relatability of Enid is what makes

the comic so endearing.” —W W , Worlds Without End

“[Enid] faces hardship and heartbreak with courage . . . she is literally

setting out on a quest as real as any mythic hero’s. It’s funny, it’s tender,

it’s real, it’s oh-so-Mormon.” —A P , Keepapitchinin

“Just as Calvin and Hobbs, Peanuts, and other influential comics

captured a moment of societal concerns that reaches beyond the brackets

of those times, Enid captures something essential about Mormonism in

the early twenty-first century. . . . Kofford Books has blessed us as a

community by collecting these into two volumes.”

—S P , Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 50 no. 2

“Enid’s experiences and thoughts ring true to the turmoil of any young

woman; for the author, a father of four young kids, to be so in tune with

the indecisiveness of teen girl years is remarkable. . . . Hales skillfully

portrays the heart of a teenage girl and helps us relate to her as Enid is

learning to relate to the other women in her life.”

600

—B L O , Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 50

no. 2

601
