Andrew Jenson

Available as a four-volume, hardbound set at

www.gregkofford.com

In the Preface to the first volume Jenson writes, “On the rolls of the Church of Jesus Christ of

Latter-day Saints are found the names of a host of men and women of worth—heroes and

heroines of a higher type—who have been and are willing to sacrifice fortune and life for the sake

of their religion. It is for the purpose of perpetuating the memory of these, and to place on record

deeds worthy of imitation, that [this set] makes its appearance.”

Originally published between 1901 and 1936, and with over 5,000 biographical entries of

“heroes and heroines” complete with more than 2,000 photographs, the LDS Biographical

Encyclopedia is an essential reference for the study of early Church history. Nearly anyone with

pioneer heritage will find exciting and interesting history about ancestors in these volumes.

617

Villages on Wheels: A Social History of the Gathering to

Zion

Stanley B. Kimball and Violet T. Kimball

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, and Kobo.

The enduring saga of Mormonism is its great trek across the plains, and understanding that trek

was the life work of Stanley B. Kimball, master of Mormon trails. This final work, a

collaboration he began and which was completed after his death in 2003 by his photographer-

writer wife, Violet, explores that movement westward as a social history, with the Mormons

moving as “villages on wheels.”

Set in the broader context of transcontinental migration to Oregon and California, the Mormon

trek spanned twenty-two years, moved approximately 54,700 individuals, many of them in family

groups, and left about 7,000 graves at the trailside.

Like a true social history, this fascinating account in fourteen chapters explores both the

routines of the trail—cooking, cleaning, laundry, dealing with bodily functions—and the dramatic

moments: encountering Indians and stampeding buffalo, giving birth, losing loved ones to death,

dealing with rage and injustice, but also offering succor, kindliness, and faith. Religious

observances were simultaneously an important part of creating and maintaining group

cohesiveness, but working them into the fabric of the grueling day-to-day routine resulted in

adaptation, including a “sliding Sabbath.” The role played by children and teens receives careful

scrutiny; not only did children grow up quickly on the trail, but the gender boundaries guarding

their “separate spheres” blurred under the erosion of concentrating on tasks that had to be done

regardless of the age or sex of those available to do them. Unexpected attention is given to

African Americans who were part of this westering experience, and Violet also gives due credit

to the “four-legged heroes” who hauled the wagons westward.

618

Prisoner for Polygamy: The Memoirs and Letters of Rudger

Clawson at the Utah Territorial Penitentiary, 1884–87

Edited by Stan Larson

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

Rudger Clawson (1857–1943) was the first Mormon convicted of being in violation of the

Edmund–Tucker Act, which outlawed polygamy. Born into a polygamous family, Clawson

married Florence Dinwoodey in August 1882, Lydia Spencer is March 1883, and eventually

entered into a “post-Manifesto union” with Pearl Udall in 1904.

Clawson, a prominent member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, served in the

LDS Church as missionary, stake president, apostle, president of the Quorum of the Twelve

Apostles, and counselor in the First Presidency.

This book delves into Clawson’s time as a “cohab” in the Utah Territorial Penitentiary, as well

as a unique look at this time in Utah’s history. These prison memoirs and letters reflect the pride

felt by Mormon polygamists imprisoned “for conscience sake” and include Mormon doctrinal

discussions, details of their prison life, personal accounts of prison escape attempts, and the sense

of frustration felt by the men as a result of being separated from their families. In addition, these

memoirs show Clawson’s talent for storytelling and include select love letters written by Clawson

to his plural wife, Lydia.

S L received his Ph.D. from the University of Birmingham. He is the author of Quest

for the Gold Plates: Thomas Stuart Ferguson’s Archaeological Search for The Book of Mormon,

as well as editor of several titles including The Apostolic Diaries of Rudger Clawson, 1896–1904

and The Truth, The Way, The Life: An Elementary Treatise on Theology: The Masterwork of B. H.

Roberts. He has also been published in Dialogue, Ensign, BYU Studies, Sunstone, Journal of

Mormon History, and Evangelical Quarterly. He is currently the Curator of Manuscripts at the

University of Utah’s Marriott Library.

619

From Above and Below: The Mormon Embrace of

Revolution, 1840–1940

Craig Livingston

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

Winner of the 2014 Best International Book Award from the

Mormon History Association

For the first century of their church’s existence, Mormon observers of international events

studied and cheered global revolutions as a religious exercise. As believers in divine-human co-

agency, many prominent Mormons saw global revolutions as providential precursors to the

imminent establishment of the terrestrial kingdom of God. French Revolutionary symbolism,

socialist critiques of industrialism, American Indian nationalism, and Wilsonian internationalism

all became the raw materials of Mormon millennial theologies which were sometimes barely

distinguishable from secular utopianism. Many Mormon thinkers accepted secular revolutionary

arguments that the old world order needed to be destroyed, not merely reformed, to clear the way

for the new.

In From Above and Below, author Craig Livingston tells the story of Mormon commentary on

global revolutions from the European revolutions of 1848 to the collapse of Mormon faith in

progress in the 1930s when revolutionary communist and fascist regimes exposed themselves as

violent and repressive. As the Church bureaucratized and assimilated to mainstream American

and capitalist values, Mormons became champions of the conservative view of political and

social development for which they are known today. The first Mormon converts in Mexico and

France, both political radicals, would scarcely recognize the arch-conservative twenty-first

century Church.

Praise for From Above and Below:

“In this engaging study, Craig Livingston examines Mormon responses to political

revolutions across the globe from the 1840s to the 1930s. Latter-day Saints saw utopian

possibilities in revolutions from the European tumults of 1848 to the Mexican Revolution.

620

Highlighting the often radical anti-capitalist and anti-imperialist rhetoric of Mormon leaders,

Livingston demonstrates how Latter-day Saints interpreted revolutions through their unique

theology and millennialism.”

— M J. G , author of “Liberty to the Downtrodden”: Thomas L. Kane, Romantic

Reformer

“Craig Livingston’s landmark book demonstrates how 21st-century Mormonism’s arch-

conservatism was preceded by its pro-revolutionary worldview that was dominant from the

1830s to the 1930s. Shown by current opinion-polling to be the most politically conservative

religious group in the United States, contemporary Mormons are unaware that leaders of the

LDS Church once praised radical liberalism and violent revolutionaries. By this pre-1936

Mormon view, ‘The people would reduce privilege and exploitation in the crucible of

revolution, then reforge society in a spiritual union of peace’ before the Coming of Christ and

His Millennium. With profound research in Mormon sources and in academic studies about

various social revolutions and political upheavals, Livingston provides a nuanced examination

of this little-known dimension of LDS thought which tenuously balanced pro-revolutionary

enthusiasms with anti-mob sentiments.”

— D. M Q , author of Elder Statesman: A Biography of J. Reuben Clark

621

A House for the Most High: The Story of the Original

Nauvoo Temple

Matthew McBride

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

This awe-inspiring book is a tribute to the perseverance of the human spirit. A House for the

Most High is a groundbreaking work from beginning to end with its faithful and comprehensive

documentation of the Nauvoo Temple’s conception. The behind-the-scenes stories of those

determined Saints involved in the great struggle to raise the sacred edifice bring a new

appreciation to all readers. McBride’s painstaking research now gives us access to valuable first-

hand accounts that are drawn straight from the newspaper articles, private diaries, journals, and

letters of the steadfast participants.

The opening of this volume gives the reader an extraordinary window into the early temple-

building labors of the besieged Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the development of

what would become temple-related doctrines in the decade prior to the Nauvoo era, and the 1839

advent of the Saints in Illinois. The main body of this fascinating history covers the significant

years, starting from 1840, when this temple was first considered, to the temple’s early destruction

by a devastating natural disaster. A well-thought-out conclusion completes the epic by telling of

the repurchase of the temple lot by the Church in 1937, the lot’s excavation in 1962, and the

grand announcement in 1999 that the temple would indeed be rebuilt. Also included are an

astonishing appendix containing rare and fascinating eyewitness descriptions of the temple and a

bibliography of all major source materials. Mormons and non-Mormons alike will discover,

within the pages of this book, a true sense of wonder and gratitude for a determined people whose

sole desire was to build a sacred and holy temple for the worship of their God.

622

Converting the Saints: A Study of Religious Rivalry in

America

Charles Randall Paul

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

Missions are attacks no matter how benign the motive. The history of religious missions is

replete with complex social, political, economic, and religious conflict. This historical study of

how Americans have managed or mismanaged past religiously-influenced conflicts can provide

practical wisdom for our time when many social, political, and economic conflicts are strongly

influenced by religious factors. We live in local and global societies that are deeply troubled if

not torn apart by the perennial problem of religious or ideological conflict between

uncompromising rivals that desire mutually exclusive religious and political ends.

Converting the Saints focuses on American religious history and particularly on the early-

twentieth-century Protestant missions to Utah to convert Mormons to traditional Christian belief.

After the Mormons acquiesced to federal laws against polygamy and federal pressure to

secularize Utah’s governance, the religious conflict over Mormonism’s Christian legitimacy

remained unresolved. This was a religious conflict that, in true American style, was engaged as a

contest of persuasion held on the figurative battlefield for the human heart. Both rivals

understood this, and while unsettled by their mutual opponent’s aggressive criticisms, they did

not think it wrong or even strange for their rival to engage them. Centering on the cases of three

Protestant missions in Utah, this study explores the crucial understanding at the center of the

American experiment: that persuasive contestation over religion, ideology, or founding principles

is normal in our secular State, and even healthy for free citizens to flourish within a diverse

society.

Praise for Converting the Saints:

“Offers . . . a compelling course of action for transforming harsh conflict to peaceful

contestation.”

— R L. B , author of Joseph Smith: Rough Stone Rolling

623

“Readers should take enormous pleasure and profit from Converting the Saints”

—H B , author of The American Religion

624

Hearken, O Ye People: The Historical Setting of Joseph

Smith’s Ohio Revelations

Mark Lyman Staker

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, or Apple.

2010 Best Book Award - John Whitmer Historical Association

2011 Best Book Award - Mormon History Association

More of Mormonism’s canonized revelations originated in or near Kirtland than any other

place. Yet many of the events connected with those revelations and their 1830s historical context

have faded over time. Mark Staker reconstructs the cultural experiences by which Kirtland’s

Latter-day Saints made sense of the revelations Joseph Smith pronounced. This volume rebuilds

that exciting decade using clues from numerous archives, privately held records, museum

collections, and even the soil where early members planted corn and homes. From this vast array

of sources he shapes a detailed narrative of weather, religious backgrounds, dialect differences,

race relations, theological discussions, food preparation, frontier violence, astronomical

phenomena, and myriad daily customs of nineteenth-century life. The result is a “from the ground

up” experience that today’s Latter-day Saints can all but walk into and touch.

Praise for Hearken O Ye People:

“I am not aware of a more deeply researched and richly contextualized study of any period of

Mormon church history than Mark Staker’s study of Mormons in Ohio. We learn about

everything from the details of Alexander Campbell’s views on priesthood authority to the road

conditions and weather on the four Lamanite missionaries’ journey from New York to Ohio. All

the Ohio revelations and even the First Vision are made to pulse with new meaning. This book

sets a new standard of in-depth research in Latter-day Saint history.”

-R B , author of Joseph Smith: Rough Stone Rolling

“To be well-informed, any student of Latter-day Saint history and doctrine must now be

acquainted with the remarkable research of Mark Staker on the important history of the church in

the Kirtland, Ohio, area.”

-Neal A. Maxwell Institute, Brigham Young University

625

For the Cause of Righteousness: A Global History of Blacks

and Mormonism, 1830-2013

Russell W. Stevenson

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

This book broaches one of the most sensitive topics in the history of Mormonism: the story of

the LDS community’s turbulent relationship with the black population. For the Cause of

Righteousness: A Global History of Blacks and Mormonism, 1830-2013 promises to tell a story

of how an American religious community could wander through the rocky landscape of

American racial politics, all while hoping to hold onto its institutional integrity in the face of

attacks from both within and without. Drawing on a rich array of archival documents and oral

testimonies, For the Cause of Righteousness suggests that understanding race and Mormonism

requires far more than watching the movements of well-dressed men on North Temple; it calls for

understanding the dynamics of global Mormon communities ranging from Mowbray to Accra,

from Berkeley to Rio Di Janeiro.

But as any historian will say, primary sources matter. Thus, For the Cause of Righteousness

offers up not only a narrative history of the global black Mormon community but also an

anthology of primary source transcripts: letters, newspaper articles, and speech transcripts, all in

hopes that readers might take one more step toward understanding a story that simultaneously

inspires, troubles, and urges Latter-day Saints into understanding a provincial religion that has

reached global proportions.

Praise for For the Cause of Righteousness:

“In Russell Stevenson’s For the Cause of Righteousness: A Global History of Blacks and

Mormonism, he extends the story of Mormonism’s long-standing priesthood ban to the broader

history of the Church’s interaction with blacks. In so doing he introduces both relevant

atmospherics and important new context. These should inform all future discussions of this

surprisingly enduring subject.”

— L E. B , author of “Mormonism’s Negro Doctrine: An Historical Overview”

626

“Russell Stevenson has produced a terrific compilation. Invaluable as a historical resource, and

as a troubling morality tale. The array of documents compellingly reveals the tragedy and

inconsistency of racial attitudes, policies, and doctrines in the LDS tradition, and the need for

eternal vigilance in negotiating a faith that must never be unmoored from humaneness.”

— T L. G , author of Parley P. Pratt: The Apostle Paul of Mormonism and By the

Hand of Mormon: The American Scripture that Launched a New World Religion

“The story of Mormons and blacks shares much with the history of race in America. The

Mormon tale is further laden with entanglements peculiar to itself––often fraught, sometimes

inspiring. For the Cause of Righteousness breaks new ground with its mix of international

scope, comprehensive chronology, and theoretical vision. It recognizes that notions of race are

not merely dictated from the pinnacles of hierarchy, and it offers a complement of narrative

analysis and illuminating primary documents. This is a notable study.”

— P B , author of Mormons and the Bible: The Place of the Latter-day Saints in

American Religion

“In this book Russell Stevenson has given us a collection of essential documents for

understanding the relationship between Mormonism and race. Most critically, he works to

broaden our view beyond the conventional American narrative of Mormon history, helping us

to understand how the faith’s complex relationship toward race has affected its growth in and

outside the United States.”

— M B , author of The Mormon People

“This deeply-researched volume attending to race in the broad sweep of Mormon history—

both in the United States and internationally—performs a singular scholarly service. Attuned to

the complexities in this sweeping, dynamic story, Stevenson shows the ongoing negotiations

between church leaders and ordinary members, as well as an ever-changing spectrum of

opinion amongst those leaders. His choice of documents allows him to tell a story at once of

continuities, glacial change, and dramatic turning points that will provoke discussion as well as

enlighten readers.”

— M M , Associate Professor of History, Brigham Young University

“Global in scope and local in detail, this deeply-researched history is relevant for all seeking to

understand the complicated interactions between doctrine and culture, and leader and

congregant, as Mormonism moves into the 21st century. Told through the voices of women and

men in the United States, Nigeria, Ghana, South Africa, Brazil, and beyond as they attempted

to understand the role of race in the LDS Church and its teachings, this work is a crucial

reminder for all of us that whatever our differences, ‘all are alike unto God.’ The stories

Stevenson brings out of archival obscurity are going to be with us for a long time. As they

should be.” — R T , National Director of Mormons for Obama

627

“Russell Stevenson has provided an impeccable collection of research to shed light on the

historical space where two nineteenth-century minorities—Mormons and Blacks—converged

and co-existed. This documentary reader reveals the struggle of the fledgling church to

navigate the difficult territory between its vision, its emerging doctrine, and the widely-held

social and cultural prejudices of its day. The documents show that the Church’s maturation

process subsumed pain, progress, shame, yearning, and increased clarity over time. For the

Cause of Righteousness offers a balanced and thorough compilation of the available research.

The text begs the reader to acknowledge, reflect, and reconcile the sometimes disappointing

tendencies of human nature.”

— S S , author of Covenant Motherhood: Reflecting the Role of Christ in

Our Lives

“For The Cause of Righteousness is an honest look at an often misunderstood subject within

the LDS Church. Russell Stevenson creates an easy to understand narrative that takes the

reader from casual observer of the Church’s past to well-rounded historian. Bold and thought

provoking, it approaches a difficult subject with the sensitivity and respect it deserves.” —

R T. S , founder of The Cultural Hall Podcast

“You might wonder what a White man could possibly say to two Black women about Black

Mormon history. Surprisingly a whole lot! As people who consider ourselves well informed in

African-American Mormon History, we found a wealth of new information in For the Cause of

Righteousness. Russell Stevenson’s well-researched exploration of Blacks and Mormonism is

an informative read, not just for those interested in Black history, but American history as

well.”

— T S and Z V (a.k.a. Sistas in Zion), authors, Diary of Two Mad Black

Mormons.

“As I teach on this subject around the world, the most common and consistent question coming

out of the significant shift in paradigm is ‘How could this have happened?’ Russell has done a

wonderful job pulling together an incredible amount of historical accounts sufficient for every

reader to clearly understand how this could have and indeed did happen. I applaud this great

effort and attention to this much needed topic and history. This work will become a resource

for many to come and find a wealth of stories and history upon which they can expand both

their knowledge and research efforts” — M P , co-author of Blacks in the

Scriptures

“Russell Stevenson brings together a wealth of sources to create this ambitious and quick-

moving but detailed overview of the intersection of Latter-day Saint and black history.”

— A T T , The Journal of Mormon History, Vol. 42, No. 1.

628

“For the Cause of Righteousness is a valuable and welcome addition to our understanding of

the rich, diverse, and complex history of Mormonism. Scholars will for many years refer to and

build upon Stevenson’s insights.”

— P M , BYU Studies Quarterly, Vol. 55, No. 1

629

On Fire in Baltimore: Black Mormon Women and

Conversion in a Raging City

Laura Rutter Strickling

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

On Fire in Baltimore is more than just the personal stories of Black women who converted to

Mormonism. Against the background of a city known for its racial and economic inequality, these

devout women of color tell stories of drug addiction and rape, of nights spent in jail and days

looking for work, and of single motherhood and grief for lost children. Yet, their stories are also

filled with visitations from heavenly beings, dreams of deceased mothers, protection from

violence, and missionary messengers. They share how they reconcile their membership in a

historically White church that once denied them full membership because of their race. Laura

Rutter Strickling takes the reader on an intimate journey where Black and White racialized lives

meet, where she is compelled to question how her own whiteness has impacted her perspective,

and where an unquenchable spiritual fire burns bright in a raging city.

Praise for On Fire in Baltimore

“The Baltimore women who shared their stories for this volume have given us a gift. As

theologians and as Latter-day Saints, they tell deeply moving accounts that expand our

understanding of everyday religion. From plain-spoken theodicy to unflinching assertions on

faith, here are riches that you won’t want to miss.”

—K H , co-editor of At the Pulpit: 185 Years of Discourses by Latter-day Saint

Women and Women and Mormonism: Historical and Contemporary Perspectives

630
