Marjorie Newton

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

Best International Book Award, Mormon History Association

Mormon and Maori examines the appeal of Mormonism for the Maori of New Zealand

from its first introduction to them in the 1880s and the reasons for its continuing success. It

discusses the impact of an American religion on its Maori converts and their culture over the

last 130 years and surveys the attempts of American leaders and missionaries of the Church

of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to find a consistent policy reconciling Mormonism and

Maoritanga.

Praise for Mormon and Maori

“Mormon and Maori is the result of a labor of love that reflects not years but decades of

diligent research. Indeed, in combination with Newton’s earlier Tiki and Temple, it constitutes

the most detailed discussion in print of the fascinating 160-year saga of accommodation and

adjustment between Maori culture and Mormonism. Unflinchingly honest yet unfailingly

compassionate, Mormon and Maori is a must-read for anyone interested in the extraordinary

history of the LDS experience in New Zealand.”

— G U , Professor of History, Brigham Young University

“Marjorie Newton’s Mormon and Maori is an exemplary scholarly work. In this volume

Newton deftly untangles the historical and narrative threads that have given rise to a singular

variant of Mormonism. Mormon Studies scholars and general readers alike will find this

beautifully crafted book an important addition inasmuch as it draws attention away from

Mormonism at the core and seeks to make sense of an indigenous American religion in the

community’s cultural borderlands.” — G C , Ngati Porou, Nga Puhi; Lecturer,

University of Canterbury, New Zealand

634

“Mormon and Maori offers a substantial historical account that structures and organizes te

iwi Māori’s (The Māori people’s) often complex relationship and attachment to an American

religion. In this respect Newton’s work should be considered groundbreaking.” — G

C , Journal of Mormon History, Volume 42, Issue 1

635

The Trek East: Mormonism Meets Japan, 1901–1968

Shinji Takagi

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

2017 Best International Book Award, Mormon History Association

The Trek East represents Mormonism’s ongoing search for a haven in Japan that began at the

turn of the twentieth century. This effort to evangelize and grow in Japan occurred with the

backdrop of three forces of history that had emerged in the previous century. First, with the

aspirations of Manifest Destiny achieved in conquering the western frontier, the United States

was becoming a Pacific military and economic power. Second, Japan was opening up its borders

after 220 years of national seclusion, allowing its enterprising young men to travel abroad,

foreign missionaries to enter the country, and its citizens eventually to practice a religion of their

choice. Third, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, having been freed from

government harassment for the practice of polygamy, was beginning to think of going beyond the

then established missions.

Author Shinji Takagi takes a distinctively “macro” approach, focusing on the logic behind the

narrative—why certain decisions were made and their historical significance. The Trek East is

therefore as much about Japan as it is about Mormonism. Readers will observe, through the eyes

of Mormonism, the intellectual, legal, political, religious, and social aspects of Japan as the

country evolved across history.

Praise for The Trek East:

“Both this book and its author are unique in contemporary scholarship. The book is the first

scholarly (as contrasted with hagiographic) study of the challenges faced by the Mormons in

their effort to establish a new form of Christianity in a country already undergoing drastic

political, economic, and religious transformations. As a distinguished Japanese social scientist,

and an adherent himself of the Mormon religion, the author is well positioned to interpret both

the Japanese and the religious aspects of this encounter to the reader.” — A L. M ,

636

author of The Angel and the Beehive: The Mormon Struggle with Assimilation and All

Abraham’s Children: Changing Mormon Conceptions of Race and Lineage

“In The Trek East, Dr. Shinji Takagi has produced a masterful treatment of Mormonism’s

foundation in Japan. Dr. Takagi takes an approach that informs us of Mormonism in Japan in a

manner that focuses on inputs and results, environmental conditions in Japan and cultural

biases of a Mormonism informed by western assumptions.”

— M S , The Millennial Star

“[Shinji] Takagi, a professor of Economics who has published extensively in multiple

countries, refers consistently to newspapers, journals, diaries and other primary sources. His

work is both detached and intimate: Takagi describes not only the key dates and places, he

deals with the family stories and histories of the early Saints in Japan, luminaries such as

Takeo Fujiwara and Tatsui Sato whose influence over the Japanese Church are still felt today. .

. . The Trek East is a terrific, rigorous look into an underserved area of Mormon history.”

— S E , By Common Consent

“This is a wonderful book, full of historical knowledge on a lesser-known subject in LDS

history. The author, who is Japanese, LDS and lives in Virginia, is deeply invested in the

subject and carefully includes all sides of the history.”

— M W , Deseret News

“Shinji Takagi, Professor Emeritus of Economics at Osaka University, presents an ambitious

work that focuses on a “macro” and “analytical” approach to Mormonism’s historical presence

in Japan from 1901 to 1968.”

— J T., Juvenile Instructor

“[Shinji] Takagi is to be commended for embracing the vital undertaking of telling a story

about Japanese Mormonism that captures the richness and complexity of its local context.”

— E A , Mormon Studies Review, Vol. 5

“A monumental work of scholarship. . . . I can’t imagine that any future study of this period

could hope to provide a more thorough and engrossing analytical study of the origins and

growth of the Church in Japan. This remarkable contribution is unlikely ever to be

supplanted.”

— V C. G , Journal of Mormon History, Vol. 44, No. 2

“Shinji Takagi’s extremely detailed and thoroughly researched book The Trek East makes a

significant contribution to understanding early LDS Church history in Japan. Although the

book covers a period that has been extensively described in previous scholarship, Takagi does

637

not present another historical narrative of key events but rather provides a rigorous study of

the social influences that impacted those events. This analytical approach brings a layer of

explanatory depth that has, until now, been absent in studies of Church history in Japan. The

result is a product rich in insight into the ways religious, economic, and political environments

in Japan shaped the unfolding story of the LDS Church in that country.”

— S J. M , BYU Studies Quarterly, Vol. 57, No. 2

638
