Michael Austin and Ardis E. Parshall, Series Editors

For Boadicea on Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

For Dime Novel Mormons on Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo

For The Mormoness on Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo

The Mormon Image in Literature reprints important literary works by and about Mormons—

from the sensational anti-polygamy books and dime novels of the Civil War era to the first

attempts of Mormon writers to craft a regional literature in their Great Basin kingdom. Each

volume contains a critical introduction, helpful annotations, and multiple appendices that

enlighten and enliven the text. These volumes have been designed for both Mormon and non-

Mormon readers who want to understand the cultural importance of Mormonism during the first

Latter-day Saint century.

Praise for The Mormon Image in Literature series:

“The work that Michael Austin and Ardis E. Parshall have done in preparing useful critical

material allows for any reader to approach and appreciate this text. . . . Highly recommended

for those interested in the cultural history of America, the West, and Mormonism.” — J

W , Association for Mormon Letters

“Illustrate[s] . . . the wide variety with which Mormonism itself was received within the

early American cultural context. . . . there is a certain Mormon textuality that emerges from

these pages: experimental, provocative, heartfelt, and profoundly human.”—J W ,

Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought, Vol 49 No 4

“Reading these dime novels gives me perspective on why various people have such strange

ideas about Mormons. . . if you can suspend a feeling of deep outrage at the gross factual

distortions contained in these books, you will likely have a great time reading the tales.”—

M S , The Millennial Star

640

“Kofford has done a remarkable job in reproduction here from the original art to historic

typefaces. The editors provide helpful introductions to the now forgotten age of this piece-

work for hire. They are just fun to read.”—B S , By Common Consent

“Because of Mormon inspired fiction, like that found in these four dime novels, we have a

better understanding of the struggles and strains in the collision of the two worlds of Mormons

and Gentiles. We have Michael Austin, Ardis E. Parshall, and Greg Kofford Books to thank

for this great gift to our Mormon heritage. A great treasure is preserved for us to read and

ponder.”—G S , The Millennial Star

“There are a lot of folks that would be interested in reading these novels just for fun.

They’re chock-full of colorful dialogue and over-the-top stories about the dastardly acts and

aims of the Mormons.That’s just fun. Scholars could [also] pursue a number of projects using

the texts.”—J S , Juvenile Instructor

Upcoming Volumes in this series:

Bessie Baine; or, The Mormon’s Victim. A Tale of Utah

The Corianton Saga

Buttons Inn

The Tragedy of Thompson Dunar

Love Story of a Mormon

Artemus Ward: His Travels around the Mormons

Elias: An Epic of the ages

The Danites in the Sierras

641
