642

Mr. Mustard Plaster and Other Mormon Essays

Mary Lythgoe Bradford

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

Where do Mormon letters come from? How from within what has been perceived as a rigid,

highly practical culture do we continually produce those faithful enough to wrestle the angels for

Truth in its fully sticky and tumultuous relationship to mortality? To claim from our tradition

both those practical truths which guide our daily choices, as well as those metaphorical truths—

perhaps more shallow, perhaps more deep—which breath into our Mormon practices the very

spirit of Life?

Poet, editor, biographer, and author Mary Lythgoe Bradford has had one of the longest and

most consistent careers of anyone working in contemporary Mormon letters. This new collection,

Mr. Mustard Plaster and Other Mormon Essays, conveniently provides under one cover a

picaresque memoir of her impressive cultural contributions—from her graduate days, during the

late century, at the University of Utah where she received her Master’s degree in English

literature; through her becoming the first “Sister” to have edited Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon

Thought; well, now, to her later-life career as poet and author of the collection Purple: Poems by

Mary Lythgoe Bradford, published during the present century. Many more writers and readers

with a love of Mormon subjects will know her from her lively personal interactions, or her

regular participation in symposia, conferences and workshops—all drawing upon and her

inexhaustible energy, interest, and tolerance for mentoring younger writers.

Praise for Mr. Mustard Plaster and Other Mormon Essays:

“Mary Bradford is the original literary ‘Mormon Girl.’ Long before anyone even imagined the

bloggernacle, she believed that writing about everyday Mormon life—especially women’s lives

—could be beautiful and powerful. In her own essays, she brings unparalleled power of

perception, generous humanity, and quiet humor to bear on even challenging Mormon subjects.

This book is an incredible opportunity for a new generation of Mormon readers to get to know

one of our faith’s wise women elders. Don’t miss it.” — J B , author of The Book of

Mormon Girl: A Memoir of an American Faith

643

“I love Mary Bradford’s essays. They are a delicious combination of personal reflections and

family history! Everything I read of hers makes me hungry for more.” — L F

A , editor of Lucy’s Book: A Critical Edition of Lucy Mack Smith’s Family Memoir

“Mary Bradford believes that the distinctive nature of the personal essay originates from what

she calls the three “I’s” (“I’s,” eyes, ayes)—the authors’ first-person perspective, their clear and

rich vision, and their honest and affirming testimonies of life. Mary’s own essays are true to

form: her essays are vibrant portraits of a kind and loving soul, a rich and unique perspective, and

a life well-lived and deeply loved.” — B J P , author of Dead Wood and Rushing

Water: Essays on Mormon Faith, Culture, and Family

“For nearly half a century Mary Bradford has perfected the personal essay, that most under-

appreciated of literary genres. In revelation after revelation, she has used her life as a prism

through which she has looked inward and outward, illuminating the world from the perspective

Thoreau referred to ironically as ‘the narrowness of my experience.’ From such ‘narrowness’

Bradford has expanded our vision through the unique perspective of her poetic, feminine, and

Mormon voice—a voice of grace, beauty, and deep meaning.” — R A. R , author of The

Cost of Discipleship: The Dimensions of a Mature Mormon Faith

“Mary Lythgoe Bradford offers her autobiography in personal essay—revealing a lifetime that

bridged generations and pioneered the power of essay in Mormon literature. Since the first issue

of Dialogue in 1966, Mary’s wisdom and presence as an editor, writer, poet and biographer have

linked us together, reaching back to women like Virginia Sorensen and moving us forward into

feminism. Today at 84, Mary is still helping ‘Mormon women speak.’” — M H , editor

of Women and Authority: Re-emerging Mormon Feminism

“Mr. Mustard Plaster and Other Mormon Essays reminds me of what draws me to the personal

essay as a form, how rich it is with possibilities and connections. Besides bringing a lot of joyful

reading, I hope this book will inspire you to write your own essay chains so the people who come

after you will know and love and celebrate your humanity, even if you didn’t have to walk from

Nauvoo to Salt Lake through five-foot snow drifts uphill both ways.” — Harlow Clark,

Association for Mormon Letters

“She writes with [T. S.] Eliot’s ‘historical sense’ of the Mormon tradition, and the result is a

profoundly authentic portrait of a Mormon life. . . . Mormon culture needs Bradford-like writers

now more than ever.” — J F , Dialogue Journal

644

Writing Ourselves: Essays on Creativity, Craft, and

Mormonism:

Jack Harrell

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

2016 Best Literary Criticism Award, Association for Mormon

Letters

Continuing a conversation as old as Mormonism itself, Jack Harrell explores the relationship

between Mormonism and the writer. Mormons see the universe in mythic proportions. Their God

is a creator, their devil a destroyer. This makes meaningful conflict fundamental to their

worldview, and begs the terms for religious redemption, as well as the redemptive power of art.

Harrell urges writers to be authentic as they embrace the difficulties inherent in the creative

process. His essays blend faithful intellectual inquiry, personal narrative, research, and

application to offer insights for anyone who cares about writing, creativity, and the human

condition.

2016 AML Award Citation:

“The Association of Mormon Letters is pleased to present the award for Criticism to Jack

Harrell for his collection of essays on literary theory, creative writing strategies, Mormon

literary history, and his advice to would-be Mormon writers and critics, Writing Ourselves:

Essays on Creativity, Craft, and Mormonism, published by Greg Kofford Books. The best of

the essays, “Toward a Mormon Literary Thought,” is a worthy successor to the work of Eugene

England, one of the author’s heroes. And rightly so. At his most engaging, Harrell speaks

bluntly, knowingly, and aspirationally regarding the plight of the serious Mormon writer, and

by extension, their audience. His advice to writers to be honest and to embrace their weirdness,

among other things, seeks to reframe the discussion of Mormonism’s cultural debits and credits

into a workable and motivational mode of authentic creativity.”

Praise for Writing Ourselves:

645

“‘Embrace your weirdness!’ says Jack Harrell in his new book. That line should be a bumper

sticker, it’s so good. What a gift this book is to LDS writers and artists who are forever self-

censoring and experimenting! ‘As Mormon writers.’ says Harrell, ‘we should be suspicious of

our own stereotypes, our own snap judgments. All good writers seek to move their fiction

beyond stereotypes, political and social agendas, and institutional constraints. Mormon

theology is remarkably amenable to this complex view of art.’ Harrell’s book is for everyone

interested in creativity, and particularly for Mormons wondering what a Latter-day Saint

literary criticism should look like. It is a thought-provoking, inspiring, and beautifully written

book. I support ‘embracing our weirdness,’ and I enjoy Harrell’s examples of his own

particular weirdness thoroughly.” — M B Y , creative writing faculty at

Brigham Young University, and co-author of the Standing on the Promises series

“Jack Harrell’s essays on writing and Mormonism and life reflect a life spent in the service

of a thoughtful and compassionate humanism. Harrell values well crafted characters, stories

with epiphanic power and impact, narratives of consequence, not just incident. I found his

collection all the more provocative when I disagreed with him. And that’s a compliment;

Harrell invites us to a conversation, not a sermon. His prose will hook you; his argument

always engages. If you care about Mormonism and good writing and the moral implications of

fiction, you need to add this book to your library.” — Eric Samuelsen, playwright and former

president of the Association for Mormon Letters

“As one who does not consider himself a creative writer (at least not a fiction writer), I was a

bit hesitant to attempt a review of a book almost entirely dedicated to the art of writing. Yet, as

I made my way from essay to essay, it became clear to me that Harrell was not merely talking

about writing, but was describing the essence of Creation itself.” — W W , Worlds

Without End

“[Harrell] speaks to the function of language and narrative as communal acts. In his

exploration of literature as an ethical act intended to foster moral goodness, he encourages

writers to create narrative worlds and persons that feel as real as the space we inhabit and the

people we encounter in real life.”— T C , Association for Mormon Letters

“This book definitely gives me the motivation to write and explore my thoughts and organize

the stresses of life through my writing. I recommend this book not just to writers, but to

everyone. It’s not just about writing, but how to live a better life.”—D A , Exponent

### II

“Harrell’s text is original and insightful, at times daring. . . In this collection of essays,

Harrell has invested the most precious and personal parts of his humanity: faith, family, and

art.”—J Q , Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 50:1 (Spring 2017)

646

Dead Wood and Rushing Water: Essays on Mormon Faith,

Culture, and Family

Boyd Jay Petersen

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

For over a decade, Boyd Petersen has been an active voice in Mormon studies and thought. In

essays that steer a course between apologetics and criticism, striving for the balance of what

Eugene England once called the “radical middle,” he explores various aspects of Mormon life

and culture—from the Dream Mine near Salem, Utah, to the challenges that Latter-day Saints of

the millennial generation face today.

Praise for Dead Wood and Rushing Water:

“Dead Wood and Rushing Water gives us a reflective, striving, wise soul ruminating on his

world. In the tradition of Eugene England, Petersen examines everything in his Mormon life from

the gold plates to missions to dream mines to doubt and on to Glenn Beck, Hugh Nibley, and

gender. It is a book I had trouble putting down.” — R L. B , author of Joseph

Smith: Rough Stone Rolling

“Boyd Petersen is correct when he says that Mormons have a deep hunger for personal stories

—at least when they are as thoughtful and well-crafted as the ones he shares in this collection.”

— J R , author of The Twible and Flunking Sainthood

“Boyd Petersen invites us all to ponder anew the verities we hold, sharing in his humility,

tentativeness, and cheerful confidence that our paths will converge in the end.” — T . L.

G , author of People of Paradox: A History of Mormon Culture

647
