648

Mormonism and Evolution: The Authoritative LDS

Statements

Edited by William E. Evenson and Duane E. Jeffrey

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Kobo, or Apple.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (the Mormon Church) has generally been

viewed by the public as anti-evolutionary in its doctrine and teachings. But official statements on

the subject by the Church’s highest governing quorum and/or president have been considerably

more open and diverse than is popularly believed.

This book compiles in full all known authoritative statements (either authored or formally

approved for publication) by the Church’s highest leaders on the topics of evolution and the

origin of human beings. The editors provide historical context for these statements that allows the

reader to see what stimulated the issuing of each particular document and how they stand in

relation to one another.

649

Parallels and Convergences: Mormon Thought and

Engineering Vision

Edited by A. Scott Howe and Richard L. Bushman

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Kobo, or Apple.

If there is “no such thing as immaterial matter,” and “all spirit is matter,” then what are the

implications for such standard theological principles as creation, human progression, free will,

transfiguration, resurrection, and immortality? In eleven stimulating essays, Mormon engineers

probe gospel possibilities and future vistas dealing with human nature, divine progression, and

the earth’s future. Richard Bushman poses a vision-expanding proposal: “The end point of

engineering knowledge may be divine knowledge. Mormon theology permits us to think of God

and humans as collaborators in bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

Engineers may be preparing the way for humans to act more like gods in managing the world.”

From the foreword by R L. B :

Mormon theology leads us to see eternal implications in engineering. Engineers enable us to

make the world more comfortable and to perform incredible feats of movement and

communication. But their work may go beyond the amelioration of the human condition. The end

point of engineering knowledge may be divine knowledge. Mormon theology permits us to think

of God and humans as collaborators in bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

Engineers may be preparing the way for humans to act more like gods in managing the world.

Kindliness, wise parenting, righteousness, and service are probably more fundamental in

leading humans toward eternal life. But improving our physical world fits serves divine purposes,

too. In constructing better worlds, engineers may be learning godly skills. From a Latter-day

Saint perspective, they may be incipient creators.

The papers in this volume capture the thought of a group of LDS engineers exploring the

interactions of their work and their belief at the beginning of the twenty-first century. Ideally

these essays will launch a discussion that will continue for many years to come.

650

Who Are the Children of Lehi? DNA and the Book of

Mormon

D. Jeffrey Meldrum and Trent D. Stephens

Get it today for Kindle, Apple, Nook, or Kobo.

How does the Book of Mormon, keystone of the LDS faith, stand up to data about DNA

sequencing that puts the ancestors of modern Native Americans in northeast Asia instead of

Palestine?

In Who Are the Children of Lehi? Meldrum and Stephens examine the merits and the fallacies

of DNA-based interpretations that challenge the Book of Mormon’s historicity. They provide

clear guides to the science, summarize the studies, illuminate technical points with easy-to-grasp

examples, and spell out the data’s implications.

The results? There is no straight-line conclusion between DNA evidence and “Lamanites.” The

Book of Mormon’s validity lies beyond the purview of scientific empiricism—as it always has.

And finally, inspiringly, they affirm Lehi’s kinship as one of covenant, not genes.

651

“Let the Earth Bring Forth”: Evolution and Scripture

Howard C. Stutz

Get it today for Kindle, Apple, Nook, or Kobo.

A century ago in 1809, Charles Darwin was born. Fifty years later, he published a scientific

treatise describing the process of speciation that launched what appeared to be a challenge to the

traditional religious interpretation of how life was created on earth. The controversy has erupted

anew in the last decade as Creationists and Young Earth adherents challenge school curricula and

try to displace “the theory of evolution.”

This book is filled with fascinating examples of speciation by the well-known process of

mutation but also by the less well-known processes of sexual recombination and polyploidy. In

addition to the fossil record, Howard Stutz examines the evidence from the embryo stages of

human beings and other creatures to show how selection and differentiation moved development

in certain favored directions while leaving behind evidence of earlier, discarded developments.

Anatomy, biochemistry, and genetics are all examined in their turn.

With rigorously scientific clarity but in language accessible to a popular audience, the book

proceeds to its conclusion, reached after a lifetime of study: the divine map of creation is one

supported by both scientific evidence and the scriptures. This is a book to be read, not only for its

fascinating scientific insights, but also for a new appreciation of well-known scriptures.

652
