653

Re-reading Job: Understanding the Ancient World’s

Greatest Poem

Michael Austin

Get it today for your Kindle, Nook, Kobo, or Apple.

Job is perhaps the most difficult to understand of all books in the Bible. While a cursory reading

of the text seems to relay a simple story of a righteous man whose love for God was tested

through life’s most difficult of challenges and rewarded for his faith through those trials, a closer

reading of Job presents something far more complex and challenging. The majority of the text is

a work of poetry that authors and artists through the centuries have recognized as being one of--if

not the--greatest poem of the ancient world.

In Re-reading Job: Understanding the Ancient World’s Greatest Poem, author Michael Austin

shows how most readers have largely misunderstood this important work of scripture and

provides insights that enable us to re-read Job in a drastically new way. In doing so, he shows that

the story of Job is far more than that simple story of faith, trials, and blessings that we have all

come to know, but is instead a subversive and complex work of scripture meant to inspire readers

to rethink all that they thought they knew about God.

Praise for Re-reading Job:

“In this remarkable book, Michael Austin employs his considerable skills as a commentator to

shed light on the most challenging text in the entire Hebrew Bible. Without question, readers will

gain a deeper appreciation for this extraordinary ancient work through Austin’s learned analysis.

Rereading Job signifies that Latter-day Saints are entering a new age of mature biblical

scholarship. It is an exciting time, and a thrilling work.” — D B , author, Authoring

the Old Testament

654

Authoring the Old Testament: Genesis–Deuteronomy

David Bokovoy

Get it today for your Kindle, Nook, Kobo, or Apple.

For the last two centuries, biblical scholars have made discoveries and insights about the Old

Testament that have greatly changed the way in which the authorship of these ancient scriptures

has been understood. In the first of three volumes spanning the entire Hebrew Bible, David

Bokovoy dives into the Pentateuch, showing how and why textual criticism has led biblical

scholars today to understand the first five books of the Bible as an amalgamation of multiple texts

into a single, though often complicated narrative; and he discusses what implications those have

for Latter-day Saint understandings of the Bible and modern scripture.

Praise for Authoring the Old Testament:

“Authoring the Old Testament is a welcome introduction, from a faithful Latter-day Saint

perspective, to the academic world of Higher Criticism of the Hebrew Bible. . . . [R]eaders will

be positively served and firmly impressed by the many strengths of this book, coupled with

Bokovoy’s genuine dedication to learning by study and also by faith.” — J W. W ,

editor, BYU Studies Quarterly

“Bokovoy provides a lucid, insightful lens through which disciple-students can study

intelligently LDS scripture. This is first rate scholarship made accessible to a broad audience—

nourishing to the heart and mind alike.” — F G , co-author, The God Who Weeps: How

Mormonism Makes Sense of Life

“I repeat: this is one of the most important books on Mormon scripture to be published

recently. . . . [Authoring the Old Testament] has the potential to radically expand understanding

and appreciation for not only the Old Testament, but scripture in general. It’s really that good.

Read it. Share it with your friends. Discuss it.” — D T , The Improvement Era: A

Mormon Blog

655

The Expanded Canon: Perspectives on Mormonism and

Sacred Texts

Edited by Blair G. Van Dyke, Brian D. Birch, and Boyd J.

Peterson

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

Among the most distinctive and defining features of Mormonism is the affirmation of

continuing revelation through modern day prophets and apostles. An important component of this

concept is the acknowledgement of an open canon—that the body of authoritative scriptural texts

can expand as new revelations are made available and presented to the membership for

ratification.

This volume brings together both Mormon and non-Mormon scholars to examine the place,

purpose, and meaning of the LDS Standard Works (Christian Bible, Book of Mormon, Doctrine

and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price) in the Mormon tradition, as well as the extra-canonical

sources that play a near-scriptural role in the lives of believers. Approaching LDS scripture from

a variety of disciplines, methodologies, and perspectives, these scholars offer new insights into

both the historical and contemporary understandings of Mormon continuing revelation.

656

The Gift and Power: Translating the Book of Mormon

Brant A. Gardner

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Kobo, or Apple.

From Brant A. Gardner, the author of the highly praised Second Witness commentaries on the

Book of Mormon, comes The Gift and Power: Translating the Book of Mormon. In this first

book-length treatment of the translation process, Gardner closely examines the accounts

surrounding Joseph Smith’s translation of the Book of Mormon to answer a wide spectrum of

questions about the process, including: Did the Prophet use seerstones common to folk magicians

of his time? How did he use them? And, what is the relationship to the golden plates and the

printed text?

Approaching the topic in three sections, part 1 examines the stories told about Joseph, folk

magic, and the translation. Part 2 examines the available evidence to determine how closely the

English text replicates the original plate text. And part 3 seeks to explain how seer stones worked,

why they no longer work, and how Joseph Smith could have produced a translation with them.

Praise for The Gift and Power:

“Brant A. Gardner’s new book is a game changer—a paradigm-bending exercise combining

rigorous methodology with creativity in a historical analysis of the Book of Mormon

translation story. . . . Go read this wonderful, provocative, creative book. You may disagree

with his theory, but the conversation takes a big step forward in this book. I can’t recommend

The Gift and Power:Translating the Book of Mormon enough.” — B H , By

Common Consent.

“This is a wonderful book about how the Book of Mormon is actually translated.” —

M T , host Religion Today

“When interviewing Teryl Givens, I said, it’s hard for me to imagine a better hope in

credible apologetics than Terryl Givens, I think you (Brant Gardner) belong in his class.” —

J D , Mormon Stories Podcast.

657

“Whether or not one agrees fully with its conclusions, Gardner’s book contributes new and

exciting research and material worthy of consideration by all interested in exploring practical

concepts of revelation and the sacred and inspired transmission of scripture by the gift and

power of God.” — D T , Mormon Times, Deseret News.

“Gardner’s examination of the text and the scholarship is very thorough and his use of

cognitive science should pave the way to further research.” — S F , Juvenile

Instructor

“This book does not provide indisputable answers, but it is extremely convincing. Gift and

Power provides an excellent starting point for one to start thinking about questions

surrounding the translation process. Additionally, unlike many scholars, Gardner writes in a

style that is highly readable for a non-academic audience.” — K C , The Mormon

Book Review

658

Second Witness: Analytical and Contextual Commentary on

the Book of Mormon

Brant A. Gardner

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, or Apple.

Second Witness, a new six-volume series from Greg Kofford Books, takes a detailed, verse-by-

verse look at the Book of Mormon. It marshals the best of modern scholarship and new insights

into a consistent picture of the Book of Mormon as a historical document. Taking a faithful but

scholarly approach to the text and reading it through the insights of linguistics, anthropology, and

ethnohistory, the commentary approaches the text from a variety of perspectives: how it was

created, how it relates to history and culture, and what religious insights it provides.

The commentary accepts the best modern scholarship, which focuses on a particular region of

Mesoamerica as the most plausible location for the Book of Mormon’s setting. For the first time,

that location—its peoples, cultures, and historical trends—are used as the backdrop for reading

the text. The historical background is not presented as proof, but rather as an explanatory context.

The commentary does not forget Mormon’s purpose in writing. It discusses the doctrinal and

theological aspects of the text and highlights the way in which Mormon created it to meet his

goal of “convincing . . . the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God.”

Praise for the Second Witness series:

“Gardner not only provides a unique tool for understanding the Book of Mormon as an ancient

document written by real, living prophets, but he sets a standard for Latter-day Saint thinking and

writing about scripture, providing a model for all who follow. . . . No other reference source will

prove as thorough and valuable for serious readers of the Book of Mormon.”

-Neal A. Maxwell Institute, Brigham Young University

659

Traditions of the Fathers: The Book of Mormon as History

Brant A. Gardner

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

2015 Best Religious Non-fiction Award, Association for Mormon

Letters

The focus of the Book of Mormon is unquestionably on the things of God. Similar to the Bible,

its sermons and explications of religious principles are presented against the framework of the

story of a people. It is a story that covers a thousand years. In this book Brant Gardner looks

around and behind the religious purposes of the book and teases out how those thousand years of

Book of Mormon history correspond to those same years in the geographic and cultural context

where they most plausibly took place.

Gardner works through the Book of Mormon chronologically, examining how events in the

Book of Mormon reflect the greater historical and cultural developments happening around them

at the same time. Gardner asks and answers questions against particular historical backdrops.

Why does Nephi appear to be so Christian so long before Christ, and why does his particular time

period in Jerusalem help answer that question? Why do Nephi apostate groups from different

times appear to adopt the same religion? Why does the Book of Mormon end around A.D. 400?

Why not earlier or later? The answers are developed by looking at the Book of Mormon as

history in the context of what has become known of Mesoamerican history. Along the way,

Gardner also looks at the problem of anachronisms, DNA, and some popular “proofs” of the

Book of Mormon that need to be abandoned.

2015 AML Award Citation:

“This outstanding contribution synthesizes cutting edge Book of Mormon scholarship in a

compelling addition to the discussion on Book of Mormon historicity. Himself a seasoned

scholar of the Book of Mormon, Gardner adds depth and nuance to the intricacies surrounding

Book of Mormon historicity and provides both laypersons and scholars alike with an excellent

resource on this topic. With the Book of Mormon receiving increased scholarly attention both

660

inside and outside of Mormon circles, including scholarly investigations into the narrative,

theology, reception history, and transmission of the text, Traditions of the Fathers should

rightfully take center place in the discussion on the book’s historicity.”

“Gardner convincingly argues that the Book of Mormon can be taken seriously as an ancient

record. His fruitful methodology of seeking “convergences” (not “proofs”) between the text

and the archaeological record is illuminating. Whether it is geographical, cultural, or linguistic

convergences with the ancient Near East or pre-Columbian Mesoamerica, Gardner has

marshaled a substantive body of correlations between the Book of Mormon and the ancient

world that should raise important questions for readers of the text on all sides of the debate.

For these and other reasons, Traditions of the Fathers is essential reading for any student of the

Book of Mormon, and is this year’s winner of the Non-Fiction Award.”

Praise for Traditions of the Fathers:

“In the study of historical texts, context is king. Traditions of the Fathers masterfully

contextualizes the diverse peoples of the Book of Mormon as they move, merge, and multiply

across the Mesoamerican landscape. More than a simple lens, Gardner’s multidisciplinary

approach provides readers with illuminating, prismatic views of the Book of Mormon.” —

M A W , Assistant Professor of Ancient Scripture at Brigham Young University

and Associate Editor of the Journal of Book of Mormon Studies

“The work he has done is rich, thorough, provocative. Like all Kofford books, this one is

attractively produced, easy to hold in the hands and easy on the eyes. But best of all, it’s

informative, cogent, and altogether worth reading. I recommend it.” — J J. N ,

Association for Mormon Letters

661

Beholding the Tree of Life: A Rabbinic Approach to the

Book of Mormon

Bradley J. Kramer

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

Too often readers approach the Book of Mormon simply as a collection of quotations, an

inspired anthology to be scanned quickly and routinely recited. In Beholding the Tree of Life

Bradley J. Kramer encourages his readers to slow down, to step back, and to contemplate the

literary qualities of the Book of Mormon using interpretive techniques developed by Talmudic

and post-Talmudic rabbis. Specifically, Kramer shows how to read the Book of Mormon closely,

in levels, paying attention to the details of its expression as well as to its overall connection to the

Hebrew Scriptures—all in order to better appreciate the beauty of the Book of Mormon and its

limitless capacity to convey divine meaning.

Praise for Beholding the Tree of Life:

“Latter-day Saints have claimed the Book of Mormon as the keystone of their religion, but it

presents itself first and foremost as a Jewish narrative. Beholding the Tree of Life is the first book

I have seen that attempts to situate the Book of Mormon by paying serious attention to its Jewish

literary precedents and ways of reading scripture. It breaks fresh ground in numerous ways that

enrich an LDS understanding of the scriptures and that builds bridges to a potential Jewish

readership.” — T L. G , author of By the Hand of Mormon: The American Scripture

that Launched a New World Religion

“Bradley Kramer has done what someone ought to have done long ago, used the methods of

Jewish scripture interpretation to look closely at the Book of Mormon. Kramer has taken the time

and put in the effort required to learn those methods from Jewish teachers. He explains what he

has learned clearly and carefully. And then he shows us the fruit of that learning by applying it to

the Book of Mormon. The results are not only interesting, they are inspiring. This is one of those

books that, on reading it, I thought ‘I wish I’d written that!’” — J E. F , author of

The Book of Mormon Made Harder and Faith, Philosophy, Scripture

662

“Since readers of the Book of Mormon are directed to ponder on and search out the deeper

meanings of this scriptural record designed for our day, they would gain much from Beholding

the Tree of Life by Bradley J. Kramer. In this well-written and engaging work, Kramer calls on

processes of thinking about and studying the scriptures as inculcated by Talmudic and post-

Talmudic rabbis. In doing so, Kramer guides us in attentive ways of reading the Book of Mormon

that are stimulating and productive.” — R D R , author of Feasting on the

Word: The Literary Testimony of the Book of Mormon

“Beholding the Tree of Life opens up the Book of Mormon to deeper, fuller readings by

nourishing its Jewish roots with the application of the Rabbinic tradition of scripture study. It

advocates a continuous practice of careful, systematic scripture reading as an essential form of

individual and communal worship, consistent with current LDS practice but with a richer

awareness of the long tradition behind it. Without being the slightest bit tedious or obscure,

Bradley Kramer presents an original approach to Book of Mormon study that everyone can

appreciate and apply.” — P A. S , English Department Chair at Brigham Young

University

“Beholding the Tree of Life is a quiet master class in how to read scripture carefully in a way

that unleashes powerful spiritual meaning. Always clear and never condescending, Kramer

patiently introduces readers to Jewish ways of reading that have, for centuries, kept scripture

relevant to the lives of faith communities. While focused on the Book of Mormon, Beholding the

Tree of Life also invites readers to feast on the Hebrew Scriptures, while showing how the Book

of Mormon profoundly complements its Hebrew counterpart. If applied widely, the methods of

reading taught and exemplified in this book promise to make our discussions of scripture at home

and in church all the richer.” — J A. K , visiting assistant professor of English at

Brigham Young University

“Bradley Kramer sets forth tools developed through centuries by rabbis that help one connect

to Jewish modes of studying scripture and help one find greater meanings in the Book of

Mormon. . . . a stimulating and deeply enriching experience to feast on the fruit of the Tree, the

words of Christ.” — R D R , BYU Studies Quarterly

663

As Iron Sharpens Iron: Listening to the Various Voices of

Scripture

Julie M. Smith

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

2016 Best Religious Non-fiction Award, Association for Mormon

Letters

Our scripture study and reading often assume that the prophetic figures within the texts are in

complete agreement with each other. Because of this we can fail to recognize that those authors

and personalities frequently have different—and sometimes competing—views on some of the

most important doctrines of the Gospel, including the nature of God, the roles of scripture and

prophecy, and the Atonement.

In this unique volume, fictionalized dialogues between the various voices of scripture illustrate

how these differences and disagreements are not flaws of the texts but are rather essential features

of the canon. These creative dialogues include Abraham and Job debating the utility of suffering

and our submission to God, Alma and Abinidi disagreeing on the place of justice in the

Atonement, and the authors Mark and Luke discussing the role of women in Jesus’s ministry. It is

by examining and embracing the different perspectives within the canon that readers are able to

discover just how rich and invigorating the scriptures can be. The dialogues within this volume

show how just as “iron sharpeneth iron,” so can we sharpen our own thoughts and beliefs as we

engage not just the various voices in the scriptures but also the various voices within our

community (Proverbs 27:17).

2016 AML Award Citation:

As Iron Sharpens Iron provides an excellent study on the challenges found in the Mormon

scriptural cannon in a manner that is very intriguing and is sure to challenge Mormon readers

to rethink how they approach their scriptural studies and thought. Mormons try harder than

most Christians to try and find complete harmony in the scriptural cannon, but as Smith

observes, the scriptures are filled with “weird bits”, “profound disagreement(s)” and “not all

664

scripture texts agree with each other…since no writer has been freed from the confines of his

(or her) fallen state”. The authors in As Iron Sharpens Iron were allowed to choose various

scriptural authors and figures with disagreeing positions and rather than force them to

harmonize these authors allowed their subjects to have a “dialogue” and debate with each

other in an attempt to air out their differences and work through their opposing positions in a

search for more truth, even when that meant continuing to disagree with each other at the end

of the “conversation”. The result is a book that is sure to intrigue, challenge, and inspire all

those who read it. AML congratulates Julie M Smith, Kofford Books, and all of the contributors

for bringing new light, insight, and ideas to Mormon studies.

Praise for As Iron Sharpens Iron:

“A model for a new, Jewish-informed way of reading scriptures with rich potential for Latter-

day Saint audiences. One that embraces complexity rather than fleeing from it; an approach that

values nuance and richness over simplicity and closure. Highly recommended.” — F

G , co-author of The Crucible of Doubt: Reflections On the Quest for Faith and The God

Who Weeps: How Mormonism Makes Sense of Life

“This is a book worth reading. But it should be a beginning, not an end. It should be an

invitation to go back to the scriptures and reread these speakers’s stories in a new light, a model

on how to search out, approach, and celebrate additional disagreements in the scriptures, and an

invitation to practice disagreeing without letting conviction rob charity.” — JKC, By Common

Consent

“Smith and her authors provide a unique and absorbing engagement with the Mormon

scriptural canon that is well worth reading. . . . Reading these dialogues emphasizes a very real

humanity in these characters and their stories that is not always easy to locate when reading a

scriptural text. We have all their voices available to us—we know things unavailable to our

predecessors for a host of reasons, but do we really appreciate the value of these texts, and even

more, of these past lives?” — J W , Association of Mormon Letters

“These conversations are fascinating, enlightening, and in some cases, heartbreaking. . . .

[They] serve to sharpen our understanding of history and theology as we contemplate why

individual prophets’ views of their lives and experiences vary so widely. . . . Handle this book

carefully. It looks innocent enough, but you’ll likely end up needing a few bandages and

stitches as you play with the new sharper edges that it creates in your vision, thinking, and

faith.”

— K F , Keepapitchinin

“This volume represents a sincere effort to influence and improve the Latter-day Saint laity in

their understanding, appreciation, and engagement with their scriptural canon. It is a volume

that can provoke deep thinking and new insights. As such, it is a very important piece that

should be taken seriously by its Latter-day Saint audience, not as a fully academic undertaking

665

(though there are academic aspects and approaches utilized), but as an artistic or creative

endeavor promoting the broadening and deepening of interpretation and analysis of Mormon

scripture. It should likewise be viewed as an important secondary work on Latter-day Saint

scripture by scholars (LDS and non-LDS) interested in Latter-day Saint scripture and theology,

as well as scholars interested in the ways and means by which Mormons interpret and

understand their canon.”

— A C. S , Journal of Book of Mormon Studies, Vol. 27

666

Search, Ponder, and Pray: A Guide to the Gospels

Julie M. Smith

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

Latter-day Saints already familiar with the New Testament will find a wealth of new insights

into the cultural, historical, and literary background of the Gospels. Research previously

shrouded in academic jargon is presented in a way that is not only understandable, but

encourages readers to evaluate the evidence for themselves and to draw their own conclusions.

Over 4,000 thought-provoking questions allow readers to ponder the scriptures in new and

exciting ways. In many ways, this book immediately and directly facilitates a close, deliberate,

and thoughtful reading of the scriptural text.

Praise for Search, Ponder, and Pray:

“Julie Smith has made a substantial contribution, not simply to the growing field of serious

Mormon scholarship on the Bible, but to the LDS community as a whole. In Search, Ponder,

and Pray, Smith shares her impressive gift to ask questions that lead to powerful literary,

historical, and devotional insights. This is the type of book I wish I would have had at the

beginning of my career. It is my sincere hope that every teacher involved with church

education will take advantage of this incredible resource.” — D B , author of

Authoring the Old Testament

“It’s impossible to read any page of Search, Ponder, and Pray with your mind on autopilot,

because unless you take a stab at answering the questions yourself, there is really no point in

reading. . . . Using this book has made me a better teacher by causing me to ask better

questions during class discussions. It’s made me a better reader of the scriptures by training me

to ask similar questions as I study.” — A P , Keepapitchinin

“Smith’s goal was to produce a tool for using existing scholarship, while urging students to

continue to ponder, question, and analyze. The result is a readable, usable. and most welcome

volume. . . . I was amazed at the comprehensive nature of Smith’s research. In some cases, she

presents several alternative ways of understanding a scripture, and leaves it to the student to

667

determine that which seems right. It places the burden of thought on the student, and leaves the

teacher to guide the discussion and direct the students to a deeper experience with the

scriptures. . . . I really liked this book, and would gladly recommend it to those wanting to go

deeper in their Bible study, but especially to those teachers who hunger for new and innovative

ways to involve their classes in studies of the Gospels.” — J N , Association of

Mormon Letters

“We ask lots of questions in Church classrooms. Questions in form anyway, where the

answer is presumed, known, and an obvious given. But rarely do we ask genuine, real

questions, where the answer is not necessarily clear or certain and we actually have to think

about what the answer might be. I have long admired Julie’s talent, on full display in this

volume, of asking truly probing questions about a text as a way to compel a reader to encounter

it genuinely. I have used her material in my own teaching, and from the effort I have learned

and even grown a little bit better at coming up with such thought questions myself. I highly

recommend this volume for anyone who wishes to actually learn something from her encounter

with the Gospels.” — K B

“I have learned more from Search, Ponder, and Pray than from any scriptural commentary

or study guide I have ever encountered. Julie Smith goes well beyond asking interesting and

valuable questions about the Gospels. She walks with us through a familiar terrain and points

out things that we have been missing all of our lives—pertinent cross references, cultural and

linguistic contexts, rhetorical strategies, possible inconsistencies, stylistic choices, and curious

omissions. And she consistently resists the temptation to tell us what to think, preferring to

point out important facts and details and allow readers to form their own conclusions. The

result is a steady stream of insights that we produce ourselves in a process that feels a lot like

revelation.” — M A , author of Re-reading Job: Understanding the Ancient

World’s Greatest Poem

“Search, Ponder, and Pray is an in-depth study guide pulling readers into a deeper

exploration of the culture, symbolism and significance of the teachings of Matthew, Mark,

Luke and John. This weighty work joins lessons from the Old Testament and New Testament

and the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible with ideas from the Book of Mormon, Doctrine

and Covenants and even modern prophets and Bible scholars. . . . Smith’s approach in this

commentary allows ample opportunity for readers to plunge into the teachings of the New

Testament in a way that is personal and geared directly to each reader’s interests and

understanding.” — M D M , Mormon Times

668

Textual Studies of the Doctrine and Covenants: The Plural

Marriage Revelation

William Victor Smith

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

Joseph Smith’s July 12, 1843, revelation on plural marriage was the last of his formal written

revelations and a transformational moment in Mormonism. While acting today as the basis for

the doctrine of eternal nuclear families, the revelation came forth during a period of theological

expansion as Smith was in the midst of introducing new temple rituals, radical doctrines on God

and humanity, a restructured priesthood and ecclesiastical hierarchy, and, of course, the practice

of plural marriage.

In this volume, author William V. Smith examines the text of this complicated and rough

revelation to explore the motivation for its existence, how it reflects this dynamic theology of the

Nauvoo period, and how the revelation was utilized and reinterpreted as Mormonism fully

embraced and later abandoned polygamy.

Praise for Textual Studies of the Doctrine and Covenants

“A model of what the future of Mormon scriptural studies should be.” — S C. T

“Done rigorously with fierce scholarship to help us make sense of one of the most

controversial passages of scripture in the LDS canon.” — G C

“A level of detailed analysis that is essential for future readings.” — J S

669

The Vision of All: Twenty-five Lectures on Isaiah in Nephi’s

Record

Joseph M. Spencer

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

In The Vision of All, Joseph Spencer draws on the best of biblical and Latter-day Saint

scholarship to make sense of the so-called “Isaiah chapters” in the first two books of the Book of

Mormon. Arguing that Isaiah lies at the very heart of Nephi’s project, Spencer insists on

demystifying the writings of Isaiah while nonetheless refusing to pretend that Isaiah is in any way

easy to grasp. Presented as a series of down-to-earth lectures, The Vision of All outlines a

comprehensive answer to the question of why Nephi was interested in Isaiah in the first place.

Along the way, the book presents both a general approach to reading Isaiah in the Book of

Mormon and a set of specific tactics for making sense of Isaiah’s writings. For anyone interested

in understanding what Isaiah is doing in the Book of Mormon, this is the place to start.

Praise for The Vision of All:

“Joseph Spencer uses a lecture style to gently ease his readers into what many Book of

Mormon readers fear the most—Isaiah. Spencer’s approach carefully replaces the fear with

understanding, elucidates textual complexities, examines scholarly issues, and is remarkably

helpful in showing his readers how and why we should care deeply about the presence of this

Old World prophet in our New World scripture.” — B A. G , author of Traditions

of the Fathers: The Book of Mormon as History

“With this book, Joseph M. Spencer has accomplished a remarkable feat. He has produced

a reader-friendly, engaging study of the writings of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon that makes

Isaiah accessible without overly-simplifying his theology and message. After reading

Spencer’s book, Latter-day Saints will more fully understand why Nephi devoted so much of

his life and writings to Isaiah and why Jesus expressed to the Nephites that ‘great are the

words of Isaiah.’ This book needs to be on the shelf of every serious Book of Mormon

student.” — N J. F , Assistant Professor of Ancient Scripture, Brigham

Young University, author of The Bible, Mormon Scripture, and the “Rhetoric of Allusivity”

670

“Spencer is one of the most careful readers of scripture in Mormon Studies and this book

puts his skill on full display. . . . The Vision of All is easily one of the best books in the genre.”

— W W , Worlds Without End

“Make no mistake: this book is remarkable. We’ve never seen anything quite like it in the

history of Mormonism. And once you’ve seen it, you’ll wonder what on earth we have been

doing for the past 200 years.” — A S. M , author of Future Mormon and Rube

Goldberg Machines

“Spencer, a Visiting Assistant Professor of Ancient Scripture at BYU, has done the

impossible: he has made me want to read Isaiah.” — S E , By Common Consent

“Within the pages of The Vision of All can be found both brilliant insight and moments of

illumination, both of which make it a memorable read.” — C B , Association for

Mormon Letters

“From topics small to big, Spencer makes Isaiah’s writings accessible to LDS Church

members who may have had difficulty with the chapters. Spencer’s instructive yet

conversational style of writing endears readers to a tough subject without boring or

intimidating them.” —T C , Deseret News

671

Theology & Philosophy

672

Mormonism at the Crossroads of Philosophy and Theology:

Essays in Honor of David L. Paulsen

Edited by Jacob T. Baker

Get it today for your Kindle, Nook, Kobo, or Apple.

“There is no better measure of the growing importance of Mormon thought in contemporary

religious debate than this volume of essays for David Paulsen. In a large part thanks to him,

scholars from all over the map are discussing the questions Mormonism raises about the nature of

God and the purpose of life. These essays let us in on a discussion in progress.” —R

L B , author of Joseph Smith: Rough Stone Rolling.

“This book makes it clear that there can be no real ecumenism without the riches of the

Mormon mind. Professor Paulsen’s impact on LDS thought is well known. . . . These original and

insightful essays chart a new course for Christian intellectual life.” —P A. H , and author

of Vatican II and The Voice of Vatican II

“This volume of smart, incisive essays advances the case for taking Mormonism seriously

within the philosophy of religion–an accomplishment that all generations of Mormon thinkers

should be proud of.” —P Q. M , Howard W. Hunter Chair of Mormon Studies,

Claremont Graduate University

“These essays accomplish a rare thing—bringing light rather than heat to an on-going

conversation. And the array of substantial contributions from outstanding scholars and

theologians within and outside Mormonism is itself a fitting tribute to a figure who has been at

the forefront of bringing Mormonism into dialogue with larger traditions.” —T L. G ,

author of People of Paradox: A History of Mormon Culture

“The emergence of a vibrant Mormon scholarship is nowhere more in evidence than in the

excellent philosophical contributions of David Paulsen.” —R J. M , President, Fuller

Theological Seminary, author of Talking with Mormons: An Invitation to Evangelicals

673

The End of the World, Plan B: A Guide for the Future

Charles Shirō Inouye

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

Environmental decline, political gridlock, war and rumors of war, decadence, and immorality.

The End of the World, Plan B traces the idea of the end, or destruction, of the world through a

number of spiritual traditions. It shows that our present understanding of the “end game” has

been distorted by a modern emphasis and demand on justice as the ultimate good. As an

alternative to this self-destructive approach, Charles Shirō Inouye shows that in these traditions,

justice is not the isolated end in itself that we ought strive for; rather it is taught in tandem with

its balancing companion: compassion. Plan B is a hopeful alternative to our fears about how

things are going.

Praise for The End of the World, Plan B:

“Mormonism needs Inouye’s voice. We need, in general, voices that are a bit less Ayn Rand

and a bit more Siddhartha Gautama. Inouye reminds us that justice is not enough and that

obedience is not the currency of salvation. He urges us to recognize the limits of the law, to see

that, severed from a willingness to compassionately suffer with the world’s imperfection and

evanescence, our righteous hunger for balancing life’s books will destroy us all.” — A S.

M , author of Rube Goldberg Machines: Essays in Mormon Theology and Letters to a Young

Mormon

“Drawing on Christian, Buddhist, Daoist, and other modes of thought, Charles Inouye shows

how an attitude of hope can arise from a narrative of doom. The End of the World, Plan B is not

simply a rethinking of the end of our world, but is a meditation on the possibility of

compassionate self-transformation. In a world that looks to the just punishment of the wicked,

Inouye shows how sorrow, which comes from the demands of justice, can create peace,

forgiveness, and love.” — M D.K. I , Assistant Professor, Department of Religious

Studies, Indiana University

674

“For years I’ve hoped to see a book that related Mormonism to the great spiritual traditions

beyond Christianity and Judaism. Charles Inouye has done this in one of the best Mormon

devotional books I’ve ever read. His Mormon reading of the fourfold path of the Bodhisattva

offers a beautiful eschatology of the end/purpose of the world as the revelation of compassion. I

hope the book is read widely.” — J M. M L , Professor of Philosophy and Religion

at Western Carolina University; co-editor of Discourses in Mormon Theology: Philosophical and

Theological Possibilities.

“We are heading for one of two world endings: final violent extinction or continual

collaborative creativity. Inouye turns to several of the world’s religions, including Mormonism, to

shockingly and clearly warn us that our Plan A religious and secular stories focused on justice

will bring calamity, and inspire us to instead encounter the sorrow of the world as we bring to

pass the strenuous joy of Plan B. The book is a unique mix of literary, theological, psychological,

and political wisdom that will change the way we think of the end times.” — C R

P , President, Foundation for Religious Diplomacy

“This short book challenged me in ways I did not expect.” — B D , Rational Faiths

“I highly recommend this volume for a wide variety of readers, both devotional and secular. If

you are interested in viewing Mormonism within a comparative religious context, if you are

intrigued by eschatology, or if you are looking for a book that will generously help you to think

through questions and ideas in order to develop compassion and charity, then The End of the

World, Plan B is waiting for you.” — J W , Association for Mormon Letters

675

Whom Say Ye That I Am? Lessons from the Jesus of

Nazareth

James W. McConkie and Judith E. McConkie

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

The story of Jesus is frequently limited to the telling of the babe of Bethlehem who would die

on the cross and three days later triumphantly exit his tomb in resurrected glory. Frequently

skimmed over or left aside is the story of the Jesus of Nazareth who confronted systemic

injustice, angered those in power, risked his life for the oppressed and suffering, and worked to

preach and establish the Kingdom of God—all of which would lead to his execution on Calvary.

In this insightful and moving volume, authors James and Judith McConkie turn to the latest

scholarship on the historical and cultural background of Jesus to discover lessons on what we can

learn from his exemplary life. Whether it be his intimate interactions with the sick, the poor,

women, and the outcast, or his public confrontations with oppressive religious, political, and

economic institutions, Jesus of Nazareth—the son of a carpenter, Messiah, and Son of God—

exemplified the way, the truth, and the life that we must follow to bring about the Kingdom of

Heaven.

Praise for Whom Say Ye That I Am?

“This book is the most important Jesus study to date written by believing Mormons for an LDS

audience. It opens the door for Mormons to come to know a Jesus most readers will know little

about—the Jesus of history.” — David Bokovoy, author of Authoring the Old Testament:

Genesis-Deuteronomy

“The McConkies have done a great job introducing modern New Testament scholarship in a

gentle way for an LDS audience.” — Wheat & Tares

“The McConkies draw on scholarship that is often underutilized in LDS writing to bring a

fresh perspective on many aspects of Jesus’ life and teaching.” — Exponent II

“Meticulously documented and researched, the authors have crafted an insightful and

enlightening book that allows Jesus to speak by providing both wisdom and council. The

676

McConkies masterfully weave in sources from the Gospels, ancient and modern scholars, along

with Christian and non-Christian religious leaders.” — Deseret News

677

Discourses in Mormon Theology: Philosophical and

Theological Possibilities

Edited by James M. McLachlan and Loyd Ericson

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

A mere two hundred years old, Mormonism is still in its infancy compared to other theological

disciplines (Judaism, Catholicism, Buddhism, etc.). This volume will introduce its reader to the

rich blend of theological viewpoints that exist within Mormonism. The essays break new ground

in Mormon studies by exploring the vast expanse of philosophical territory left largely untouched

by traditional approaches to Mormon theology. It presents philosophical and theological essays

by many of the finest minds associated with Mormonism in an organized and easy-to-understand

manner and provides the reader with a window into the fascinating diversity amongst Mormon

philosophers. Open-minded students of pure religion will appreciate this volume’s thoughtful

inquiries.

These essays were delivered at the first conference of the Society for Mormon Philosophy and

Theology. Authors include Grant Underwood, Blake T. Ostler, Dennis Potter, Margaret Merrill

Toscano, James E. Faulconer, and Robert L. Millet

Praise for Discourses in Mormon Theology:

“In short, Discourses in Mormon Theology is an excellent compilation of essays that are sure to

feed both the mind and soul. It reminds all of us that beyond the white shirts and ties there exists

a universe of theological and moral sensitivity that cries out for study and acclamation.”

-J N , Association for Mormon Letters

678

Future Mormon: Essays in Mormon Theology

Adam S. Miller

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

I have three children, a girl and two boys. Our worlds overlap but, already, these worlds are not

the same. Their worlds, the worlds that they will grow to fill, are already taking leave of mine.

Their futures are already wedged into our present. This is both heartening and frightening. So

much of our world deserves to be left. So much of it deserves to be scrapped and recycled. But,

too, this scares me. I worry that a lot of what has mattered most to me in this world—Mormonism

in particular—may be largely unintelligible to them in theirs. This problem isn’t new, but it is

perpetually urgent. Every generation must start again. Every generation must work out their own

salvation. Every generation must live its own lives and think its own thoughts and receive its own

revelations. And, if Mormonism continues to matter, it will be because they, rather than leaving,

were willing to be Mormon all over again. Like our grandparents, like our parents, and like us,

they will have to rethink the whole tradition, from top to bottom, right from the beginning, and

make it their own in order to embody Christ anew in this passing world. To the degree that we

can help, our job is to model that work in love and then offer them the tools, the raw materials,

and the room to do it themselves.

These essays are a modest contribution in this vein, a future tense apologetics meant for future

Mormons. They model, I hope, a thoughtful and creative engagement with Mormon ideas while

sketching, without obligation, possible directions for future thinking.

Praise for Future Mormon:

“The gospel as Adam expounds it in Future Mormon is challenging, but like all good exercise,

the work needed to understand these ideas feels productive. I broke a good mental sweat.”

—A C., By Common Consent

“This is not your grandfather’s Mormon Doctrine. This is the future of Mormon theology, and

Adam establishes a strong and powerful foundation upon which we can develop a richer and

greater LDS doctrinal base.”

—The Millennial Star

679

“Future Mormon is important not just because it represents some of the most careful, creative,

and charitable work going on in Mormon theology today, but precisely because it encourages

readers to engage and respond in a similar manner. . . . Go read this book. Enjoy it. It’s some of

Miller’s best work to date, and it’s a powerful invitation. One you won’t regret accepting.”

— J W , Association for Mormon Letters

“Adam Miller sets his spirit and intellect loose on the important task of helping clear away

debris and suggesting some possible new framings for Mormonism that might appeal to coming

generations.” — D W , Mormon Matters Podcast

“[Future Mormon] starts conversations, gets the mental wheels turning, and begins to

transform the reader into a theologian. Miller’s book is the very world-building and alliance-

making he describes. In it, he helps lay the foundation for a more thoughtful, earthy, and creative

Mormonism; all while extending his hand to readers as an invitation to join him in the process.”

—W W , Worlds Without End

“The philosophical and theological tools he offers to his children and ours are impressive and

set forth here, with Miller’s characteristically arresting formulations, in a style that is both

engaging and highly evocative.”

—R C. H , Interpreter: A Journal of Mormon Scripture

“Adam S. Miller’s Future Mormon, his collection of ‘Essays in Mormon Theology,’ is one of

the most intriguing reads I’ve encountered in LDS studies.”

—J L , Interpreter: A Journal of Mormon Scripture

“Miller puts some postmodern philosophical meat in the Mormon sandwich.”

—D B , Times and Seasons

“Adam Miller is poetic and inspiring. . . . And this ranks as one of my favorite LDS books.

Adam Miller will challenge his readers. But if you work at it, you will leave spiritually fed,

inspired to be a better person, and proud to be a Mormon.”

—R B , LDS Church is True Blog

“Future Mormon approaches theology with ideas and methods that most Latter-day Saints may

not be familiar or comfortable. After all, theology is often a different animal than doctrine and

devotional religion. . . . Miller’s theses are bold, insightful, and provocative, and they are laid out

in clear language and arguments. . . . those interested in Mormon theology must read this book,

and many others ought to.”

—J E. F , BYU Studies Quarterly Vol 56, No 1

680

Rube Goldberg Machines: Essays in Mormon Theology

Adam S. Miller

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

“Adam Miller is the most original and provocative Latter-day Saint theologian practicing today.”

—R B , author of Joseph Smith: Rough Stone Rolling

“As a stylist, Miller gives Nietzsche a run for his money. As a believer, Miller is as submissive as

Augustine hearing a child’s voice in the garden. Miller is a theologian of the ordinary, thinking

about our ordinary beliefs in very non-ordinary ways while never insisting that the ordinary

become extra-ordinary.”

—J F , Richard L. Evans Chair of Religious Understanding,Brigham

Young University

“Miller’s language is both recognizably Mormon and startlingly original. . . . The whole is an

essay worthy of the name, inviting the reader to try ideas, following the philosopher pilgrim’s

intellectual progress through tangled brambles and into broad fields, fruitful orchards, and

perhaps a sacred grove or two.”

—K H , editor of Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought

“Miller’s Rube Goldberg theology is nothing like anything done in the Mormon tradition before.

”

—B O , author of the E M T series

“The value of Miller’s writings is in the modesty he both exhibits and projects onto the

theological enterprise, even while showing its joyfully disruptive potential. Conventional

Mormon minds may not resonate with every line of poetry and provocation—but Miller surely

afflicts the comfortable, which is the theologian’s highest end.”

—T G , author of By the Hand of Mormon: The American Scripture that

Launched a New World Religion

681

Modern Mormonism: Myths and Realities

Robert L. Millet

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo

What answer may a Latter-day Saint make to accusations from those of other faiths that

“Mormons aren’t Christians,” or “You think God is a man,” and “You worship a different Jesus”?

Not only are these charges disconcerting, but the hostility with which they are frequently hurled

is equally likely to catch Latter-day Saints off guard.

Now Robert L. Millet, veteran of hundreds of such verbal battles, cogently, helpfully, and

scripturally provides important clarifications for Latter-day Saints about eleven of the most

frequent myths used to discredit the Church. Along the way, he models how to conduct such a

Bible based discussion respectfully, weaving in enlightenment from LDS scriptures and

quotations from religious figures in other faiths, ranging from the early church fathers to the

archbishop of Canterbury.

Millet enlivens this book with personal experiences as a boy growing up in an area where

Mormons were a minuscule and not particularly welcome minority, in one-on-one conversations

with men of faith who believed differently, and with his own BYU students who also had lessons

to learn about interfaith dialogue. He pleads for greater cooperation in dealing with the genuine

moral and social evils afflicting the world, and concludes with his own ardent and reverent

testimony of the Savior.

682
