Blake T. Ostler

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

I , The Attributes of God, Blake T. Ostler explores Christian and Mormon notions

about God.

I , The Problems of Theism and the Love of God, Blake Ostler explores issues

related to soteriology, or the theory of salvation.

I , Of God and Gods, Ostler analyzes and responds to the arguments of

contemporary international theologians, reconstructs and interprets Joseph Smith’s important

King Follett Discourse and Sermon in the Grove, and argues persuasively for the Mormon

doctrine of “robust deification.”

Praise for the Exploring Mormon Thought series:

“These books are the most important works on Mormon theology ever written. There is nothing

currently available that is even close to the rigor and sophistication of these volumes. B. H.

Roberts and John A. Widtsoe may have had interesting insights in the early part of the twentieth

century, but they had neither the temperament nor the training to give a rigorous defense of their

views in dialogue with a wider stream of Christian theology. Sterling McMurrin and Truman

Madsen had the capacity to engage Mormon theology at this level, but neither one did.”

—Neal A. Maxwell Institute, Brigham Young University

683

Fire on the Horizon: A Meditation on the Endowment and

Love of Atonement

Blake T. Ostler

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, and Kobo.

Blake Ostler, author of the groundbreaking Exploring Mormon Thought series, explores two of

the most important and central aspects of Mormon theology and practice: the Atonement and the

temple endowment. Utilizing observations from Søren Kierkegaard, Martin Buber, and others,

Ostler offers further insights on what it means to become alienated from God and to once again

have at-one-ment with Him.

Praise for Fire on the Horizon:

“Fire on the Horizon distills decades of reading, argument, and reflection into one potent dose.

Urgent, sharp, and intimate, it’s Ostler at his best.” — A S. M , author of Rube Goldberg

Machines: Essays in Mormon Theology

“Blake Ostler has been one of the most stimulating, deep, and original thinkers in the Latter-

day Saint community. This book continues and consolidates that status. His work demonstrates

that Mormonism can, and indeed does, offer profound nourishment for reflective minds and soul-

satisfying insights for thoughtful believers.” — D C. P , editor of Interpreter: A

Journal of Mormon Scripture

684
