Brian D. Birch and Loyd Isao Ericson, Series Editors

Get Scripture Theology for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

Get Apologetics for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

Perspectives on Mormon Theology is designed to facilitate and advance the academic study of

Latter-day Saint thought. As Mormon Studies continues to develop as an academic field, there is

increasing demand for scholarship that engages theological studies and the philosophy of

religion. This series is a response to this need and is designed to provide interested readers

additional resources in understanding this rich and intriguing religious tradition. Each volume

engages a specific theological topic and exhibits a variety of perspectives in the topic area. The

series is not intended to defend any particular position, but rather to provide a forum within

which a range of approaches and methodologies are given voice.

Forthcoming titles in this series:

Grace, edited by Robert L. Millet and Sheila Taylor

Revelation, edited by Brian D. Birch and Richard Livingston

Atonement, edited by Deidre Green and Eric D. Huntsman

Praise for the Perspectives on Mormon Theology Series:

“This was a great series of articles that will expand our understanding of what it is to defend

the Church, and the various ways to do so.”

— G S , Millennial Star

“Divine love can come in ideas as well as other forms. . . . So here’s a book of ideas. I hope

you find it nurturing and stimulating, worth thinking and writing and talking about.”

— H C , Association for Mormon Letters

“Those who want to learn about the art and practice of defending the faith—known classically

as apologetics—will enjoy reading Perspectives on Mormon Theology: Apologetics. . . . The

686

fifteen authors share a variety of perspectives, both praising and critiquing past and present

approaches.”

— D J , BYU Religious Studies Center

687

For Zion: A Mormon Theology of Hope

Joseph M. Spencer

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

What is hope? What is Zion? And what does it mean to hope for Zion? In this insightful book,

Joseph Spencer explores these questions through the scriptures of two continents separated by

nearly two millennia. In the first half, Spencer engages in a rich study of Paul’s letter to the

Roman to better understand how the apostle understood hope and what it means to have it. In the

second half of the book, Spencer jumps to the early years of the Restoration and the various

revelations on consecration to understand how Latter-day Saints are expected to strive for Zion.

Between these halves is an interlude examining the hoped-for Zion that both thrived in the Book

of Mormon and was hoped to be established again.

Praise for For Zion:

“Joseph Spencer is one of the most astute readers of sacred texts working in Mormon Studies.

Blending theological savvy, historical grounding, and sensitive readings of scripture, he has

produced an original and compelling case for consecration and the life of discipleship.” —

T G , author, Wrestling the Angel: The Foundations of Mormon Thought

“For Zion: A Mormon Theology of Hope is more than a theological reflection. It also consists

of able textual exegesis, historical contextualization, and philosophic exploration. Spencer’s

careful readings of Paul’s focus on hope in Romans and on Joseph Smith’s development of

consecration in his early revelations, linking them as he does with the Book of Mormon, have

provided an intriguing, intertextual avenue for understanding what true stewardship should be for

us—now and in the future. As such he has set a new benchmark for solid, innovative Latter-day

Saint scholarship that is at once provocative and challenging.” — E D. H , author,

The Miracles of Jesus

688

Women’s Studies

689

Mormon Women Have Their Say: Essays from the

Claremont Oral History Collection

Edited by Claudia L. Bushman and Caroline Kline

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Kobo, or Apple.

The Claremont Women’s Oral History Project has collected hundreds of interviews with

Mormon women of various ages, experiences, and levels of activity. These interviews record the

experiences of these women in their homes and family life, their church life, and their work life,

in their roles as homemakers, students, missionaries, career women, single women, converts, and

disaffected members. Their stories feed into and illuminate the broader narrative of LDS history

and belief, filling in a large gap in Mormon history that has often neglected the lived experiences

of women. This project preserves and perpetuates their voices and memories, allowing them to

say share what has too often been left unspoken. The silent majority speaks in these records.

This volume is the first to explore the riches of the collection in print. A group of young

scholars and others have used the interviews to better understand what Mormonism means to

these women and what women mean for Mormonism. They explore those interviews through the

lenses of history, doctrine, mythology, feminist theory, personal experience, and current events to

help us understand what these women have to say about their own faith and lives.

Praise for Mormon Women Have Their Say:

“Using a variety of analytical techniques and their own savvy, the authors connect ordinary

lives with enduring themes in Latter-day Saint faith and history.” --L T U ,

author of Well-Behaved Women Seldom Make History

“Essential. . . . In these pages, Mormon women will find ourselves.” --J B , author

of The Book of Mormon Girl: A Memoir of an American Faith

“The varieties of women’s responses to the major issues in their lives will provide many

surprises for the reader, who will be struck by how many different ways there are to be a

690

thoughtful and faithful Latter-day Saint woman.” --A M , author of All Abraham’s

Children: Changing Mormon Conceptions of Race and Lineage

691

Women at Church: Magnifying LDS Women’s Local Impact

Neylan McBaine

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

Women at Church is a practical and faithful guide to improving the way men and women work

together at church. Looking at current administrative and cultural practices, the author explains

why some women struggle with the gendered divisions of labor. She then examines ample real-

life examples that are currently happening in local settings around the country that expand and

reimagine gendered practices. Readers will understand how to evaluate possible pain points in

current practices and propose solutions that continue to uphold all mandated church policies.

Readers will be equipped with the tools they need to have respectful, empathetic and productive

conversations about gendered practices in Church administration and culture.

Praise for Women at Church:

“Such a timely, faithful, and practical book! I suggest ordering this book in bulk to give to your

bishopric, stake presidency, and all your local leadership to start a conversation on changing

Church culture for women by letting our doctrine suggest creative local adaptations—Neylan

McBaine shows the way!” — V H C , author of Women in Eternity, Women of

Zion

“A pivotal work replete with wisdom and insight. Neylan McBaine deftly outlines a workable

programme for facilitating movement in the direction of the ‘privileges and powers’ promised the

nascent Female Relief Society of Nauvoo.” — F G , co-author of The God Who Weeps:

How Mormonism Makes Sense of Life

“In her timely and brilliant findings, Neylan McBaine issues a gracious invitation to rethink

our assumptions about women’s public Church service. Well researched, authentic, and respectful

of the current Church administrative structure, McBaine shares exciting and practical ideas that

address diverse needs and involve all members in the meaningful work of the Church.” —

C F O , author of Women of the Old Testament and Women of the New Testament

692

Voices for Equality: Ordain Women and Resurgent Mormon

Feminism

edited by Gordon Shepherd, Lavina Fielding Anderson, and

Gary Shepherd

Get it today for Kindle, Nook, Apple, or Kobo.

The inexorable movement toward gender equality in the modern world has taken root in the

consciousness of many Latter-day Saints and has publicly emerged as a major concern for the

LDS Church. Spearheaded by a new generation of internet-savvy feminists, equality issues in

Mormonism attained high public visibility in 2013 through online profiles posted by the Ordain

Women organization and its plea to Church authorities to pray about an expanded role for LDS

women. The June 2014 excommunication of OW co-founder Kate Kelly generated increased

international media attention. This volume is the first book to provide a comprehensive

examination of these issues and is based on chapters written by both scholars and activists. Its

twenty-five authors explore in detail theological debates about gender and priesthood authority,

the historical and cultural context of these debates, and the current role played by lay activists

seeking to stimulate change in the Church.

Praise for Voices for Equality:

“Timely, incisive, important—this book teaches us that our sometimes very personal

struggles with gender and equality in Mormonism have profound and far-reaching

significance. In these pages, some of Mormonism’s finest researchers and thinkers bring a

richness of historical and scholarly perspective and a powerful new survey of tens of

thousands of Mormon people to bear on headline-making issues like women’s ordination,

sister missionaries, church discipline, the internet and faith, and change in the LDS church.

They offer us a rare and precious opportunity to grasp the full significance of this moment.

This book is a much needed mirror for our time.”

— J B , co-editor of Mormon Feminism: Essential Writings and author of The

Book of Mormon Girl: A Memoir of an American Faith

693

“Voices for Equalty: Ordain Women and Resurgent Mormon Feminism is a very important

contribution to the discussion of Mormon feminism and the struggle for the ordination of

women to the priesthood in the LDS Church. Anyone interested in this subject, any library

concerned to be up-to-date on these issues, needs to have this book.”

— R R R , world-renowned feminist scholar and Catholic theologian,

author of Sexism and God-Talk: Toward a Feminist Theology and Women-Church: Theology

and Practice of Feminist Liturgical Communities

“[Voices For Equality] does, indeed, provide an important collection of both anecdotal and

data-driven information which pinpoints Mormon feminism and where it belongs in the early

21st century. Its valuable contribution to the conversation will both challenge and inform the

reader.” — L C , Association for Mormon Letters

“Voices for Equality remains a ground-breaking work that should gain a wide readership. It

can be a valuable tool for Church members of all stripes who want a better understanding of

feminist ideas in the modern church.” — R L , Rational Faiths

“[F]or anyone interested in Mormon women’s issues, the rich combination here of historical

and contemporary perspectives makes for stimulating and worthwhile reading.” — L W.

D S , Journal of Mormon History, Vol. 42, No. 4

694

Índice

Cover

1

About Greg Kofford Books

2

Title Page

3

Copyright

4

Epigraph

5
