Why is it important to participate in general conference? Conferences have been a part of the Church since the early days of the Restoration, and many references are made to them in the Doctrine and Covenants. One particular example is recorded in section 124 where William Law, an early Church member, received a personal directive: “Await patiently and diligently for further instructions at my general conference, saith the Lord” (Doctrine and Covenants 124:88, emphasis added).

The Lord clearly had an important message for William.

While none of us will likely ever have a personal summons to general conference canonized in the Doctrine and Covenants, as did William, the Lord’s same invitation for us to await patiently and diligently for further instructions at general conference should ring clear in our ears and be felt deeply in our hearts. For general conference is a time when everyone around the world can sit at the feet of prophets and apostles and be taught the word and will of the Lord.

The people of Zarahemla in the Book of Mormon, as recorded in the first chapters of the Book of Mosiah, were summoned to a general conference, of sorts, by their leader—the righteous king Benjamin (See Mosiah 1–6). Most were able to attend in person with their families and friends. There they heard their beloved king speak about many things, including the Saviour Jesus Christ and His Atonement, of sharing their substance with the poor, and doing all things in wisdom and order.

Some—for several reasons—were not able to attend in person and yet Benjamin “caused that the words which he spake should be written and sent forth among those that were not under the sound of his voice, that they might also receive his words” (Mosiah 2:8). Those records were made available as he instructed and we especially, 2,000 years later, are blessed with Benjamin’s foresight to have his words written so that Mormon could include them in the Book of Mormon for us to read and study.

Today, in the dispensation of the fulness of times, we are blessed with so much communication technology and multiple ways to consume general conference. We can watch live video on broadcast television or over the internet. We can listen live on internet radio. We can read the printed words on a smartphone, on websites, and in printed magazines. Even those who live in areas of the world where live sessions are happening in the middle of the night can enjoy general conference at a later, more convenient time—over and over again.

How is the Zarahemla experience not like general conference in our day? Who can dispute the blessings for us to hear the word of the Lord directly from the mouth of His servants? Or who can ignore the benefit of being able to ponder those very same words in our personal study, with our families, and at our elders quorum and Relief Society meetings?

In the October 2007 general conference, President Henry B. Eyring said, “I testify to you that the warm feelings you have had as you have listened to truth being spoken in this conference are from the Holy Ghost. The Savior, who promised that the Holy Ghost would come, is the beloved, glorified Son of our Heavenly Father.

“Tonight, and tomorrow night, you might pray and ponder, asking the questions: Did God send a message that was just for me?”

When we exercise faith in God, we learn from the conference messages and we receive inspiration. President Eyring taught, “You show your trust in Him when you listen with the intent to learn and repent and then you go and do whatever He asks. If you trust God enough to listen for His message in every sermon, song, and prayer in this conference, you will find it.”

So, prepare for general conference. Study the scriptures, read and ponder counsel from previous general conferences, understand direction from local leaders, and seek personal inspiration.

“Await patiently and diligently for further instructions at my general conference.”
