While serving as president of the Mbuji-Mayi Democratic Republic of the Congo Mission from 2016 to 2019, I had to travel on muddy and sandy roads to reach some zones to hold zone conferences and to conduct interviews with missionaries every six weeks—and to have meetings with district leaders.

In one particular case, I travelled to Ngandajika, a city located 58 miles from Mbuji-Mayi. The road connecting these two cities had a section constructed from packed clay and a section constructed from sand. It was difficult to travel the section in packed clay during the rainy season because it was always slippery.

When it rained, this road was closed and traffic could only resume four hours after the rain had stopped. This road was closed by metal barriers with a padlock so that no one could open it before this prescribed time. These barriers were called “rain barriers” and the posted notice was visible for every driver.

The reason for closing this road was to protect it from damage and to ensure it lasted for a long time—for if a vehicle drove on it before these four hours had passed, the road might deteriorate and become not only impassable but also unsafe for travellers. These four hours allowed water to completely drain off into the soil so that the road remained passable for the sake of all travellers.

During this particular trip to Ngandajika, we got caught in the rain on this road and when we arrived at the barrier, it was closed already. We had to wait, and we experienced for the first time, the impact of this rain barrier to our drive. We stopped and waited before we could continue with our journey. There was no other option.

This experience made me reflect on and better understand how gospel principles and the teachings of the prophets apply to ourselves in particular circumstances. I learnt many lessons from this event, but I am going to share with you three gospel principles I have had to apply and which allowed me to complete my assignment: patience, perseverance and diligence.

We had to wait for four hours after the end of the rain to continue our journey. I had no choice if I wanted to reach my destination and accomplish what I had planned for. I definitely had to be patient.

I was patient with myself with regard to this difficulty relating to my missionary life—given that I had to go and meet with the missionaries and fulfil my duty as a mission president. The Book of Mormon gives us an example of Alma and the sons of Mosiah:

“And the Lord said unto them also: Go forth among the Lamanites, thy brethren, and establish my word; yet ye shall be patient in long-suffering and afflictions, that ye may show forth good examples unto them in me, and I will make an instrument of thee in my hands unto the salvation of many souls ” (Alma 17:11).

No matter the afflictions or difficulties relating to our calling or our service in the kingdom of God, patience is required of us.

This patience is twofold: patience with ourselves and patience with others.

Patience with ourselves means having the capacity to wait for four hours without getting angry or being annoyed. It was not enough for me to simply wait—all the while being angry because of this measure which put all my plans for meetings at risk. I had to stay calm in my heart and continue to express the joy of the gospel on my lips and on my face. I had to control this personal feeling, which arises sometimes and makes us think that we are unable to overcome a weakness, or which causes us to underestimate ourselves due to a displeasure, a difficulty, or a failure in life.

Life on Earth is full of hardship, afflictions and disappointments. All these things will challenge our patience. But the gospel of Jesus Christ and the teachings of the prophets teach us and encourage us to be patient with ourselves.

When came the time to open the barrier and the person who held the key was late, some travellers who also waited like us became angry with him and rose their voices to rebuke him.

I understood that we should be patient with him, and with others in general. We have to apply patience when we are faced with actions that hurt us. We must be patient when faced with the weaknesses, faults and recklessness of others. We should be patient with regard to the efforts of others in their respective responsibility as the Lord is equally patient with us all.

While picturing and reflecting on the condition of this road and the inherent difficulties to take it in the rainy season, we could be afraid and discouraged.

But thanks to the teachings of the gospel as found in the scriptures, we found power: “For God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power” (2 Timothy 1:7).

“Brethren, shall we not go on in so great a cause? Go forward and not backward. Courage, brethren; and on, on to the victory!” (Doctrine and Covenants 128:22)

James E. Faust said, “Perseverance is demonstrated by those who keep going when the going gets tough, who don’t give up even when others say, ‘it cannot be done.’”

It is this perseverance I needed to keep going on the way to Ngandajika in spite of the poor road condition. I did it throughout my mission.

“The Lord expects you to work diligently—persistently and with great effort and care…

“Focus on the most important things and avoid wasting time. . . . Plan regularly and effectively.”

In Doctrine and Covenants 88:119, we read, “Organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing.” 

The hours wasted at the rain barrier had an impact on our program of meetings and activities. We had to know how to reorganize things within the remaining time without impairing the quality of the training or of the scheduled meetings. We had to do the essentials while reaching the initial goal.

We couldn’t waste more time and energy regretting our wait, but we needed, in an effective manner, to reorganize ourselves and focus on what is important. The great way is to rely upon the Holy Ghost and listen to the whisperings of the Spirit in order to know what to do and how to do it. It is all about receiving the revelation from God. That is why, if we are well prepared we shall not fear, and if we are worthy, the Holy Spirit shall be our constant companion.

Our dear prophet, President Russell M. Nelson, said, “I renew my plea for you to do whatever it takes to increase your spiritual capacity to receive personal revelation.

“Doing so will help you know how to move ahead with your life, what to do during times of crisis, and how to discern and avoid the temptations and the deceptions of the adversary.”

This invitation applies to all difficult situations.

It is true that “all victory and glory is brought to pass unto you through your diligence.” (Doctrine and Covenants 103:36).

I know that patience, perseverance, diligence and so many other Christlike attributes are useful for mankind in his progress in this mortal world in order to be able to face the difficult realities of life and to qualify to live with our Heavenly Father in His eternal glory.

Alfred Kyungu was called as an Area Seventy in October 2019. He is married to Lucie Kabulo, they are the parents of three children. They reside in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
