It was the trip of a lifetime for 76 members of the Jos Nigeria District. They traveled to the Aba Nigeria temple in August 2023.

The travel from Jos to Aba was 749 km making a total of 1,498 km traveled. The journey had its challenges but once they reached the temple, those challenges were forgotten. Hearts were eager to go into the temple.

Because of the desire to go to the temple, youth and recent converts prepared themselves for proxy baptism. With the help of the district temple and family history specialist, most of them came with family names. The experience touched hearts and increased testimonies.

“After I became a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, I kept hearing from other members how marvelous it felt to be in the temple, and I yearned to experience it.

“Upon entering the temple, I couldn’t help but be in awe. What I felt couldn’t be compared to what I had heard. The temple felt peaceful and serene; indeed, it is the house of the Lord.

“I could only perform baptisms for the dead, but I was so happy I could perform an ordinance in the house of the Lord. It was a divine experience for me. Being in the temple further strengthens my testimony. I can testify that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is true. The gospel is true. God is in the temple and ordinances performed there are of the Lord. I look forward to my next visit as I prepare both spiritually and physically.”

– Nanman Glory Danan, Dogon Dutse Branch, Jos Nigeria District

“Generally, I will start with the trip. It was the longest that I have ever been on and the most uncomfortable, but it was a new experience for me.

“Aside from that, getting to Abia State, where the temple is and getting to the apartment gave me relief. I really appreciated the idea of all the sisters staying together because it gave me the opportunity to create friendships with those that I never thought I would talk to.

“Visiting the temple itself was a whole different experience. The temple was beautiful, comforting, and welcoming. My favorite part of the temple experience was when I went to perform baptisms for the dead. That was the best experience for me personally. I was skeptical about it at first because I did not exactly know what it felt like. But once I went into the water and started the process, it felt really nice. It gave me a comforting feeling that I wanted to keep going.

“I was happy that I was able to perform this ordinance on behalf of someone. I love this temple trip because it brought us together and made us feel united. This experience was very nice and if I am given the chance to go to the temple, I would love to go again. I am very happy for the opportunity I had to go to the temple.”

– Emmanuel Erina Esonazi, Jos Branch, Jos Nigeria District

On this trip, 23 members had been previously endowed. There were 25 individuals going to the temple for their own endowment. Half of those were prospective missionaries preparing to go on a mission. One of those has already received her mission call and shares her experience and testimony.

“My first trip to the temple was lovely! I never thought temples were built like this. It is big and indeed the house of the Lord. After my endowment, in the celestial room, I was crying, imagining life after death. I thought to myself, one day we will end up somewhere. I began thinking of my late parents who had not been given the opportunity to visit the temple and have this experience for themselves. I thank God for the opportunity to visit for myself.

“I love the teachings of the prophet, President Russell M. Nelson, who said, ‘The temple lies at the center of strengthening our faith and spiritual fortitude because the Savior and His doctrine are the very heart of the temple. Everything taught in the temple, through instruction and through the Spirit, increases our understanding of Jesus Christ. His essential ordinances bind us to Him through sacred priesthood covenants. Then, as we keep our covenants, He endows us with His healing, strengthening power. And oh, how we will need His power in the days ahead.’

“I know that the temple is the house of the Lord and as we strive to visit the temple regularly, the Lord will guide and strengthen us in all our decisions. I know that the prophet is called of God.”

– Haji Mary Musa, Jos Branch, Jose Nigeria District

The Jos district had four families that were sealed together for time and all eternity. It was a great thing of joy for other members to witness this ordinance performed for exaltation.

This trip will long be remembered by those that were able to attend. In fact, even with the bad roads, car challenges, and hot weather, the members asked, “When is the next trip?” as if the long journey did not matter, because it doesn’t.

Note
