Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED TWENTY

Seeking a New Home

References

D.H.C.Vol. 3:245-256; 261; 322-323.

Topics

a. Prisoners of Hope.

b. Oppressed in a "loathsome dungeon."

c. Parley P. Pratt and companions still in Richmond.

d. Severe beating of Anson Call by mobbers.

a. The Prophet's petition to the Missouri Legislature.

b. Citizens of Far West meet to consider means for departure from Missouri.

c. Second meeting of citizens.

d. President Brigham Young's resolution.

a. Committee on removal appointed.

b. Text of the covenant.

c. The Prophet's family leaves for Illinois.

d. Vicious action of Missourians.

e. President Brigham Young goes to Illinois to save his life.

f. Committee winds up its affairs and flees from the mob.

g. Saints arrive in Illinois.

Notes

January 7, 1839, Anson Call returned to his farm near the forks of Grand River endeavoring to secure some of his property which he had been forced to leave behind when he was driven away by the mob. He was overtaken by the mob and severely beaten with a hoop pole about his limbs, body and head. The wielder of the pole was one George W. O'Neal, an active member of the mob. With difficulty Brother Call made his way back to Far West realizing that it was useless to attempt to retrieve any of his property. This kind of treatment was given to any member of the Church discovered away from the centralized community of the saints.

Tuesday, January 29th, the second meeting was held in Far West. The committee appointed on the 26th made their report and presented a memorial of the transactions of the people of Missouri towards the Latter-day Saints since the first settlement in that state. This document contained the views and sentiments in relation to the persecutions, mobbings and murders which were committed by the authority of the state officials, and how the members of the Church were deprived of their rights as citizens and had been robbed of their possessions. The document, it was stated, was not finished because of lack of opportunity, but was accepted by the members of the Church with the promise that other matters would be added. It was then to be furnished to the press so that the people might know the truth in relation to the difficulties in Missouri.

President Brigham Young offered a resolution to the effect that "we this day enter into a covenant to stand by and assist each other to the utmost of our abilities in removing from this state, and that we will never desert the poor who are worthy, till they shall be out of the reach of the exterminating order of General Clark, acting for and in the name of the state."

Following is the covenant:

"We, whose names are hereunder written, do for ourselves individually hereby covenant to stand by and assist one another, to the utmost of our abilities, in removing from this state in compliance with the authority of the state; and we do hereby acknowledge ourselves firmly bound to the extent of all our available property, to be disposed of by a committee who shall be appointed for the purpose of providing means for the removing from this state of the poor and destitute who shall be considered worthy, till there shall not be one left who desires to remove from the state: with this proviso, that no individual shall be deprived of the right of the disposal of his own property for the above purpose, or of having the control of it, or so much of it as shall be necessary for the removing of his own family, and to be entitled to the overplus, after the work is effected; and furthermore, said committee shall give receipts for all property, and an account of the expenditure of the same."

"Far West, Missouri, January 29, 1839."

Then follows the list of names of the subscribers (D.H.C. 3:251-254) two hundred fourteen in all. That same night the committee met again and resolved to see the removal of the families of the prisoners first. Elder John Taylor was also appointed to visit the branches of the Church at Log and Upper Goose creeks in relation to the removal, and Charles Bird was appointed to go down towards the Mississippi River and deposit corn for the use of the exiles as they journeyed out of the state and he was also to make contracts for the ferrying of these people over the river.

Elder Stephen Markham started on the first week in February with the Prophet's family for Illinois. Elder Don C. Smith carried a petition to the mob, to see if he could get assistance from this evil source to help his father's family and others out of the state. It is not known whether he received any help or not, but on the 14th of February, Patriarch Joseph Smith and his wife Lucy left for Illinois with an ox team.

The committee on removal discussed the problem of paying the debts of the saints in Clay County. Alanson Ripley was requested to call on Lawyer Barnet, who was in Far West and make arrangements concerning this matter. A letter of attorney was drawn up for the brethren to sign, who felt willing to dispose of their real estate to discharge their debts, appointing Alanson Ripley their attorney for this purpose. This was beyond the instructions given Brother Ripley, who was instructed only to confer with Attorney Barnet to find out what could be done, and it was expected that other brethren would be appointed with the power to act for the state.

With all three members of the First Presidency prisoners in the hands of the Missourians, the burden of the removal of the saints rested on the shoulders very largely of President Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and John Taylor. These brethren received wonderful assistance from many other elders who served on the committee on removal and those who were able to direct the exiles by team to the Mississippi. It was the severest weather of the winter when the exodus began, not because this was the most convenient time, but because of the heartless driving of the Missouri mob. Many of the members of the Church were unable to get away before the spring of 1839. When April arrived the vicious, inhuman band of mobbers met and determined that all the "Mormons" should be out of Caldwell County by the 12th of the month. The persecution against President Brigham Young became so bitter and the threats so determined that he was forced to flee Far West, and he left that place for Illinois, February 14, 1839. The grave responsibility, however, of removing the saints rested upon him, and he directed the movements as best he could after his departure.

In January President Young said to the Bishop that they should help the poor out of the state of Missouri, the answer he got was: "The poor may take care of themselves, and I will take care of myself." President Young replied, "If you will not help them out, I will." For this removal all available teams were secured and many of the families were taken to Tenney's Grove, twenty-five miles out of Far West. Most of the members of the committee on removal remained in Far West until the members were all removed.

It was on Thursday, April 18, 1939, that Elder Heber C. Kimball notified the members of the committee on removal to wind up their affairs at once, and be off, for their lives were in grave danger. At that time an armed force, impatient at the delay of the stragglers renewed their activities and tried to kill Heber C. Kimball in the streets of Far West. By this time the members of the Church had departed. Most of them had crossed the Mississippi and the few remaining were seeking the banks of that river. The members of the committee were told they could have one hour to get out of the place, Far West. They hurriedly gathered such articles as they could take with them and by force complied with this demand. After they were gone the robbers looted the homes of all that still remained.

In all his wicked thoughts it is doubtful if Governor Boggs spent many nights of peace, after he had accomplished his fiendish purpose. The truth concerning the real troubles with the saints, their drivings, mobbings and abuse, were being circulated in other states and the perfidy and wickedness of the Missourians was being made known. Of this change of sentiment which was spreading, the Prophet wrote while still in Liberty prison:

"As nigh as we can learn, the public mind has been for a long time turning in our favor, and the majority is now friendly; and the lawyers can no longer browbeat us by saying that this or that is a matter of public opinion, for public opinion is not willing to brook it; for it is beginning to look with feelings of indignation against our oppressors, and to say that the 'Mormons' were not in the fault in the least. We think that truth, honor, virtue and innocence will eventually come out triumphant." (D.H.C. 3:292.)
