Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-ONE

The Founding of Nauvoo

References

D.H.C. Vol. 3:260-318.

Topics

a. Uncertainty of a place to settle when driven from Missouri.

b. The Prophet's suggestion and counsel.

a. Exiles fleeing got to Quincy.

b. Kindness of citizens of Quincy.

c. Resolutions of "Democratic Association."

d. John Taylor's counsel.

e. Ulterior motives as well as sympathy of people of Quincy.

a. Committee appointed to secure lands.

b. They hesitate, awaiting return of Joseph Smith.

c. Dr. Isaac Galland's assistance.

d. Sympathy for saints in Iowa.

a. Purchase of land at Commerce.

b. Commencement of the city.

c. Other settlements commenced.

d. Long time notes given for property.

e. Dr. Galland and others join Church.

Notes

"Now brethren, I would suggest for the consideration of the conference, it being carefully and wisely understood by the council or conferences that our brethren scattered abroad, who understand the spirit of the gathering, that they fall into the places and refuge of safety that God shall open unto them, between Kirtland and Far West. Those from the east and from the west, and from far countries, let them fall in somewhere between those two boundaries, in the most safe and quiet places they can find; and let this be the present understanding, until God shall open a more effectual door for us for further considerations." (D.H.C. 3:301.)

"Resolved that we regard the rights of conscience as natural and inalienable, and the most sacred guaranteed by the Constitution of our free government.

"Resolved, that we regard the acts of all mobs as flagrant violations of law; and those who compose them, individually responsible, both of the laws of God and man, for every depredation committed upon the property, rights, or life of any citizens.

"Resolved that the inhabitants upon the western frontier of the state of Missouri, in their late persecutions of the class of people denominated Mormons have violated the sacred rights of conscience, and every law of justice and humanity.

"Resolved, that the governor of Missouri, in refusing protection to this class of people, when pressed upon by a heartless mob, and turning upon them a band of unprincipled militia, with orders encouraging their extermination, has brought a lasting disgrace upon the state over which he presides." (D.H.C. 3:270-271.)

The saints were received kindly also by Governor Carlin and Senator Richard M. Young and other prominent individuals in western Illinois. They also found a friend in Governor Robert Lucas of Iowa who knew them in Ohio. Governor Lucas denounced the evil treatment they had received in Missouri and invited them to find refuge in Iowa, should they choose.

Elder John Taylor, wrote to the "Quincy Argus" expressing the gratitude of the Latter-day Saints for the kind treatment they were receiving but cautioned the saints to respect this kindness, and warned the citizens against imposition on the part of some who pretended to belong to the community of the Latter-day Saints, but who were not, for some of this class had also found their way out of Missouri, some of whom had for good cause been expelled from the Church.

The good will on the part of the citizens of Quincy was not entirely free from selfishness. It was quite evident from the events which followed, that they expected to obtain some profit and political advantage out of the kindness thus extended. They were under heavy debt, and had abundance of land to sell, and the members of the Church were seeking homes and farms. Then residence in the state gave the citizens a right to vote after six months residence in the state. One of the most important presidential elections was soon to be held, and the politicians on both sides lost no opportunity to seek the advantage which the vote of the saints might bring. Our people with their minds so filled with the persecutions they had suffered, and so intent on finding places of residence, failed to see this political situation, and to realize that if they favored one side they would antagonize the other. In course of time this feeling of kindness and solicitation, changed because of these conditions.

Other lands were also purchased and more land adjoining the Galland and White purchases was obtained. Some of this was purchased from Davidson Hibbard, Daniel H. Wells, Hiram Kimball, Horace Hotchkiss and others, which parts were incorporated into the City of Nauvoo. On the Iowa side of the river other settlements were undertaken, one named Zarahemla, one at Montrose and one at Nashville opposite Nauvoo.

In the poverty of the saints all of these lands which were purchased had to be obtained on long time notes, and with but one of these did trouble arise, that was the Hotchkiss purchase. The amount involved in this purchase was for upwards of five hundred acres of land and the sum was fifty-three thousand five hundred dollars, half to be paid in ten years, and the remainder in twenty years. Two notes were given to cover this transaction signed by the Prophet and his counselors, Sidney Rigdon and Hyrum Smith. These difficulties were later adjusted to the satisfaction of all. Dr. Isaac Galland who held the other range tract of land purchased by the Church gave the brethren very liberal terms on the purchase. He was in full sympathy with the saints and desired to help them as much as he could. He very graciously transferred some of these lands for lands held by the members of the Church in Missouri, and this lightened their load, for the Missouri lands were of no value to them because of conditions prevailing in Missouri. While the saints had been robbed right and left by their enemies, they had to respect Dr. Galland, who at the time was not a member of the Church. Later, however, Dr. Galland joined the Church, and in the revelation given January 19, 1841, the Lord said it was his will that Dr. Galland put stock into Nauvoo House; "for I, the Lord, love him for the work he hath done, and will forgive all his sins; therefore, let him be remembered in that house from generation to generation." The value of the lands thus exchanged for lands in Missouri amounted to eighty thousand dollars, and good titles were secured by the purchasers of his lands. In addition to these purchases others were made in Iowa where settlements were built. Hiram Kimball and Daniel H. Wells, others from whom the Church obtained lands, also joined the Church. Daniel H. Wells, always a very close friend to the Prophet did not come in the Church, however, until after the martyrdom.
