Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-TWO

Fulfillment of Prophecy

References

D.H.C. Vol. 3:46, 306, 336.

D. & C. Sec. 118.

Wilford Woodruff, Life and Labors, pp. 99-102.

Topics

a. The call to leave Far West, April 26, 1839. (D. & C. 118.)

b. Scattering of saints made fulfillment seem impossible.

c.Bogart and company ridicule the revelation. Note 2.

d. Elder Theodore Turley's defense.

e. John Whitmer's shame.

f. He bears witness that he handled plates of the Book of Mormon.

a. The prophecy fulfilled.

b. The Apostles gather at the temple lot.

c. Transaction of business.

d. Corner marker laid at Temple site.

e. Elder Turley's visit to Isaac Russell. Note 4.

a. Consulation of the apostles in relation to the prophecy.

b. Brigham Young's proposition to the brethren.

c. Their willingness to go to Far West.

d. Dangers confronting them on the journey.

e. The protection of the Lord.

Notes

At the time this revelation was given several of the members of the council of the apostles had been excommunicated for rebellion, and the Lord called to fill vacancies by this apostasy, the following: John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff and Willard Richards. Elder Richards was in England acting in the presidency of the British Mission at that time. When this word was revealed the troubles in Caldwell County had not come to a climax, and members of the Church were gathering to Far West and other settlements in Caldwell and Daviess Counties in Missouri. The Lord knew, of course, that events would happen before April 26, 1839, by which the Latter-day Saints who remained true to the faith would be driven from Missouri by the exterminating order of Governor Boggs, but apostates would be permitted to remain and be nurtured by the mob. It appears that this call was made to try the faith of the brethren, to see if they would fulfill the commandment at the risk of their lives. Before the end of the year 1838 most of the saints had been driven from their homes. The few who remained were given orders to be gone by Friday, April 11, 1839, or forfeit their lives. The last to leave were the members of the committee on removal, who were told April 18th, to be gone within one hour or take the consequences. By the 26th of that month Far West was practically deserted, so far as members of the Church were concerned. That this prophecy might be fulfilled appeared to be impossible, for the members of the mob had declared that should one of the apostles return to Far West they would kill him on the spot.

Turley jumped up and said: "In the name of God that revelation will be fulfilled!" They laughed him to scorn. As Elder Turley spoke, John Whitmer hung his head, and the Bogart group said, "If they (the apostles) come, they will get murdered; they dare not come to take their leave here; that is like all the rest of Joe Smith's d......n prophecies." They then attempted to persuade Elder Turley to do what John Corrill had done, and they said: "He (Corrill) is going to publish a book called 'Mormonism Fairly Delineated!' he is a sensible man, and you had better assist him."

Elder Turley replied: "Gentlemen, I presume there are men here who have heard John Corrill say that 'Mormonism' was true, that Joseph Smith was a prophet, and inspired of God. I now call upon you, John Whitmer: you say Corrill is a moral and a good man; do you believe him when he says the Book of Mormon is true, or when he says it is not true? There are many things published that they say are true, and again turn around and say they are false?" Whitmer, asked, "Do you hint at me?" Elder Turley said, "If the cap fits you, wear it; all I know is that you have published to the world that an angel did present those plates to Joseph Smith." Whitmer replied to this: "I now say, I handled those plates; there were fine engravings on both sides. I handled them." Then he described in the presence of these bitter enemies how the plates were fastened and he said, "they were shown to me by a supernatural power." After making this statement, Elder Turley asked, "Why is not the translation now true?" Whitmer answered, "I could not read it (the writing on the plates) and I do not know whether it (the translation) is true or not." This testimony may have been suprising to John Whitmer's companions, but not enough to make any deep impression. They had hailed him, as they did others who had turned away from the Church, as being "brave" and "sensible." Down in their hearts, however, we may wonder if they did not really despise them.

On the night of April 25, 1839, the little band of apostles with a small company of faithful brethren, high priests, elders and priests, arrived at Far West. Shortly after midnight, on the morning of April 26th, they assembled on the temple lot in Far West, and there they held a conference. One of the first actions was the passing of the following resolution:

"Resolved: That the following persons be no more fellowshipped in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, but excommunicated from the same, viz.: Isaac Russell, Mary Russell, John Goodson and wife, Jacob Scott, Sen. and wife, Isaac Scott, Jacob Scott, Jun., Ann Scott, Sister Walton, Robert Walton, Sister Cavanaugh, Ann Wanless, William Dawson, Jun., and wife, William Dawson, Sen., and wife, George Nelson, Joseph Nelson and wife and mother, William Warnock and wife, Jonathan Maynard, Nelson Maynard, George Miller, John Grigg and wife, Luman Gibbs, Simeon Gardner, and Freeborn Gardner.

"The council then proceeded to the building spot of the Lord's House; when the following business was transacted: Part of a hymn was sung, on the mission of the twelve.

"Elder Alpheus Cutler, the master workman of the house, then recommenced laying the foundation of the Lord's House, agreeably to revelation, by rolling up a large stone near the southeast corner.

"The following of the twelve were present: Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John E. Page, and John Taylor." The brethren then proceeded to ordain Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith, who had been called to fill the places of those who had fallen.

At the close of these exercises the assembly sang, "Adam ondi-Ahman," and then the apostles took their leave of those who were there assembled, as follows: Alpheus Cutler, Elias Smith, Norman Shearer, William Burton, Stephen Markham, Shadrach Roundy, Wm. O. Clark, John W. Clark, Hezekiah Peck, Darwin Chase, Richard Howard, Mary Ann Peck, Artimesa Grainger, Martha Peck, Sarah Grainger, Theodore Turley, Hirum Clark and Daniel Shearer.

Alpheus Cutler then placed the stone, as previously described, in its proper position after which, in consequence of the peculiar situation of the members present, the meeting adjourned until some future time, "when the Lord shall open the way." The meeting then adjourned, Brigham Young, president and John Taylor, clerk,

"The brethren immediately returned to Quincy, taking with them the families from Tenney's Grove." (D.H.C. 3:336-340.)

It will be remembered that Isaac Russell was one of the first missionaries to Great Britain, accompanying Elder Heber C. Kimball in 1887. He had turned away from his brethren and was at the time endeavoring to destroy the faith of the converts in England. Later, he came back humbly to the Church. John Goodson, another of these missionaries, was also among the number excommunicated on this occasion in Far West.

There are some interesting incidents in the journal of Elder Wilford Woodruff in relation to this gathering and the fulfillment of this prophecy. Elder Woodruff writes:

"To understand fully the risk the Twelve ran in making this journey, it should be understood that Lilburn W. Boggs, governor of the state of Missouri, had issued a proclamation in which all the Latter-day Saints were required to leave Missouri or be exterminated. Far West had been captured by the militia, who really were only an organized mob; the citizens had been compelled to give up their arms; all the leading men who could be got hold of had been taken prisoners; the rest of the saints—men, women, and children—had to flee out of the state as best they could to save their lives, leaving their houses, lands and other property, which they could not carry with them, to be taken by the mob. The latter shot down the cattle and hogs of the saints wherever they could find them, and robbed the people of nearly everything they could lay their hands on. The saints were treated with merciless cruelty, and had to endure the most outrageous abuses. It was with the greatest difficulty that many of them, especially the prominent ones, got out of Missouri, for at that time many people of that state acted as though they thought it no more harm to shoot a Mormon than to shoot a dog. * * *

"Having determined to carry out the requirement of the revelation, on the 18th of April, 1839, I took into my wagon Brigham Young and Orson Pratt; Father Cutler took into his wagon John Taylor and George A. Smith, and we started for Far West. On the way we met John E. Page, who was going with his family to Quincy, Illinois. His wagon had turned over, and when we met him he was trying to gather up with his hands a barrel of soft soap. We helped him with his wagon. He then drove into the valley below, left his wagon, and accompanied us on our way. On the night of the 25th of April we arrived at Far West, and spent the night at the home of Morris Phelps. He had been taken a prisoner by the mob, and was still in prison." History of Wilford Woodruff (Cowley) pages 99-101.

Then President Woodruff gives the account already related, of the meeting at the temple lot in Far West.
