Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-THREE

The Escape of Parley P. Pratt and Companions—General Conference

References

D.H.C.Vol. 3:352-368, 399-402.

Topics

a. Charges against Parley P. Pratt and others. Note 1.

b. He and companions imprisoned in Richmond.

c. Cruel treatment by guards.

d. Elder Pratt's letter to Judge King. Note 2.

a. Elder Pratt and Companions Taken to Columbia. Note 3.

b. Hardships and suffering on the way.

c. They are placed in a dungeon, hungry and sick.

d. They are visited by friends.

e. The plan for their escape. Note 4.

f. A memorable Fourth of July.

a. Why general conference was not held April 6, 1839. Note 5.

b. Important business transacted.

c. Joseph Smith in attendance.

d. Preparation for petition to Washington.

Notes

On the 24th day of April, 1839, six months after their confinement, Elder Pratt and his fellow prisoners were brought before the grand jury in Ray County, where they again faced their old enemy Judge King. Darwin Chase and Norman Shearer were dismissed, after serving six months on these malicious false charges, but another prisoner, Elder King Follett, was taken from his distressed family and thrown into this dungeon, just as he and his family were about to leave the state. He was charged with robbery, which charge was based on the fact that he and others had taken a keg of powder from a gang of mobbers, who were intending to use it against the saints. This left in the prison Parley P. Pratt, Morris Phelps, King Follett, and Luman Gibbs in confinement. Gibbs thinking that he would be released if he renounced his faith, left the Church. The crafty guards, however, did not release him but kept him as a spy to report on his former brethren.

This second summons before Judge King proved to be just as much a mock trial as the first one had been. Elder Pratt says that when Judge King came into the court room he hung his head and would not look at his prisoners, evidently feeling his shame and contemptibleness before them.

"First: I have never received any protection by law, either of my person, property or family, while residing in this state, to which I first emigrated in 1831.

"Secondly: I was driven by force of arms from Jackson County, wounded and bleeding, in 1833, while my house was burned, my crops and provisions robbed from me or destroyed, and my land and improvements kept from me until now, while my family was driven out, without shelter, at the approach of winter.

"Thirdly: Those crimes still go unpunished, notwithstanding I made oath before the Hon. Judge Ryland, then Circuit Judge of that district, to the foregoing outrages; and I also applied in person to his excellency, Daniel Dunklin, then Governor of the State, for redress and protection, and a restoration of myself and about 1,200 of my fellow-sufferers, to our rights—but all in vain.

"Fourthly: My wife and children have now been driven from our home and improvements in Caldwell County, and banished from the State on pain of death, together with about ten thousand of our Society, including all my friends and witnesses, and this by the express orders of his excellency, Lilburn W. Boggs, Governor of the State of Missouri, and by the vigorous execution of this order by Generals Lucas and Clark, and followed up by murders, rapes, plunderings, thefts and robberies of the most inhuman character, by a lawless mob who had, from time to time, for more than five years past, trampled upon all law and authority, and upon all the rights of man.

"Fifthly: All these inhuman outrages and crimes go unpunished, and are unnoticed by you, sir, and by all the authorities of the State. Nay, rather, you are one of the very actors. You, yourself, threatened in open court the extermination of the 'Mormons' if they should ever again be guilty of cultivating their lands.

"Sixthly: The legislature of the state has approved of and sanctioned this act of banishment, with all the crimes connected therewith, by voting an appropriation of two hundred thousand dollars for the payment of troops engaged in this unlawful, unconstitutional and treasonable enterprise.

"In monarchial governments the banishment of criminals after their legal trial and condemnation has been frequently resorted to, but the banishment of innocent women and children from house, and home, and country, to wander in a land of strangers unprotected and unprovided for, while their husbands and fathers are retained in dungeons, is an act unknown in the annals of history, except in this single instance, in the nineteenth century, when it has actually transpired in a republican State, where the Constitution guarantees to every man the protection of life, liberty and property, and the right of trial by jury.

"These, sir, are outrages which would put monarchy to the blush, and from which the most despotic tyrants of the dark ages would turn away with shame and disgust. In the proceedings, sir, Missouri has enrolled her name on the list of immortal fame. Her transactions will be handed down the stream of time to the latest posterity, who will read with wonder and astonishment the history of proceedings which are without a parallel in the annals of time.

"Why should the authorities of the state strain at a gnat and swalow a camel?

"Why be so strictly legal as to compel me to pass through all the forms of a slow and pretended legal prosecution (previous to my enlargement) out of a pretence of respect to the laws of the State, which have been openly trampled upon and disregarded towards us from first to last?

"Why not include me in the general wholesale banishment of our Society, that I may support my family, which are now reduced to beggary in a land of strangers?

"But, sir, when the authorities of the State shall redress all these wrongs, shall punish the guilty according to law, and shall restore my family and friends to all the rights . . . and shall pay all the damages which we, as a people, have sustained, then I will believe them since in their professed zeal for law and justice; then shall I be convinced that I can have a fair trial in the State.

"But until then I hereby solemnly protest against being tried in this State, with the full and conscientious conviction that I have no just grounds to expect a fair and impartial trial.

"I therefore, most sincerely pray your honor, and all the authorities in the State, to either banish me without further prosecution, or I freely consent to a trial before a judiciary of the United States.

"With sentiments of consideration and due respect, I have the honor to subscribe myself,

"Your prisoner

"P. P. Pratt."

(Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, pp. 230-232; also D.H.C. 3:352-354.)

The sheriff then undertook to cross on his horse but was thrown off and buried in the stream. Being completely wet he decided that all should cross. With some difficulty all got across. Throughout the journey the prisoners received cruel treatment from the sheriff and his guards. Sunday, May 26th, they arrived in Columbia, and were immediately hurried to the prison, although they were tired and without refreshments. The next morning they were lowered through a huge trap door into a dungeon full of cobwebs and filth, the building having been empty for nearly two years. They were furnished neither beds nor chairs and were without food and friends or a drink of water. "When thrust into this dungeon," says Elder Pratt, "we were nearly ready to faint of hunger and thirst and weariness." They walked back and forth in the room for a few moments, and then sank down upon the floor in despondency and wished to die, "for like Elijah of old, if the Lord had inquired, 'What dost thou here?' we could have replied, 'Lord, they have killed thy prophets, and thrown down thine altars and driven out all Thy saints from the land, and we only are left to tell Thee; and they seek our lives, to take them away; and now, therefore, let us die.' "

After they had been confined in this dungeon for some time, their new jailer passed down to them some provisions, but by that time they were too tired and faint to eat. Later some chairs were lowered down to them and the sheriff and a deputy entered the dungeon. They talked so kindly to the prisoners, something that was so new to them, that their spirits revived. The next day they were privileged to come out of the dungeon and occupy during the day time, an upper room which privilege continued until the time of their escape.

"Sister Phelps, Orson Pratt, and Sister Phelps' brother came from Illinois on horseback and visited with us for several days. On the Fourth of July we felt desirous as usual to celebrate the anniversary of American liberty; we accordingly manufactured a white flag, consisting of the half of a shirt, on which was inscribed the word, 'Liberty,' in large letters, and also a large American eagle was put on in red; we then obtained a pole from our jailer, and on the morning of the fourth, the flag was suspended from the front window of our prison, overhanging the public square, and floating triumphantly in the air to the full view of the citizens who assembled by hundreds to celebrate the national jubilee.

"With this the citizens seemed highly pleased, and sent a portion of the public dinner to us and our friends, who partook with us in prison with merry hearts, as we intended to gain our liberties or be in paradise before the close of that eventful day.

"While we were thus employed in prison, the town was alive with troops parading, guns firing, music sounding, and shouts of joy resounding on every side. * * *

"Our dinner being ended, our two brethren took leave of us and started for Illinois (leaving Mrs. Phelps to still visit with her husband;) they had proceeded a mile or two on the road and then took into the woods, and finally placed their three horses in a thicket within one-third of a mile of the prison, and there they waited in anxious suspense until sundown. In the meantime we put on our coats and hats and waited for the setting sun. * * *

"Thus ended the celebration of our National Liberty; but the gaining of our own was the grand achievement now before us. In the meantime, the sun was setting; the moment arrived—the footsteps of the jailer were heard on the stairs; every man flew to his feet, and stood near the door. The great door was opened, and our supper handed in through a small hole in the inner door, which still remained locked; but at length the key was turned in order to hand in the pot of coffee. No sooner was the key turned than the door was jerked open and in a moment all three of us were out—and rushing down the stairs, through the entry, and out into the door yard, when Phelps cleared himself without injurying the jailor, and all of us leaped several fences, ran through the fields towards the thicket, where we expected to find our friends and horses.

"In the meantime the town was alarmed; and many were seen rushing after us, some on horseback, and some on foot; prepared with dogs, guns, and whatever came to hand. But the flag of Liberty, with its eagle, still floated on high in the distance; and under that banner, our nerves seemed to strengthen at every step.

"We gained the horses, mounted, and dashed into the wilderness, each his own way. After a few jumps of my horse, I was hailed by an armed man at pistol shot distance, crying 'd...... you, stop, or I'll shoot you.' I rushed onward deeper into the forest, while the cry was repeated in close pursuit, * * * till at length it died away in the distance. I plunged a mile into the forest—came to a halt—tied my horse in a thicket—went a distance, and climbed a tree, to await the approaching darkness.

"Being so little used to exercise, I fainted through over-exertion, and remained so faint for nearly an hour that I could not get down from the tree; but calling on the Lord, He strengthened me, and I came down from the tree. But my horse had got loose and gone. I then made my way on foot for several days and nights, principally without food, and scarcely suffering myself to be seen.

After five days of dreadful suffering, with fatigue and hunger, I crossed the Mississippi, and found myself once more in a land of freedom. Mr. Phelps made his escape also; but King Follett was retaken and carried back. Luman Gibbs continued in the prison; he had apostatized and turned traitor to the others." (D.H.C. 3:399-402.)

The account of the escape of Brother Phelps and the re-capture of King Follett is given in footnotes in the History, pages 401-402, and a more complete account in the Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt.
