Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-FOUR

The Prophet's Instruction on Doctrine

References

D.H.C.Vol. 3:379.

Topics

a. "First principle of revealed religion."

b. "The assurance of things hoped for."

a. A glorious gift from God.

b. True repentance based on faith.

c. True repentance is permanently turning away from sin.

a. Baptism the door into the celestial kingdom. Note 3.

b. For the remission of sins.

c. Baptism compared to birth into mortality. (P. of G. P. Moses 6:57-60. 1 John 5:7-8.)

d. Three witnesses in mortal birth; three in spiritual birth.

a. Received by laying on of hands by one in authority.

b. The gift is the right to companionship, or guidance, of third member in Godhead.

a. Given for purpose of teaching the Gospel.

b. Paul's counsel on the gift of tongues.

c. The devil can deceive by tongues.

Notes

In this instruction on various principles of the Gospel the Prophet made only a brief reference to the first four. Evidently he took it for granted that the members of the Church for whom his instructions were intended were sufficiently informed so that they needed no special guidance at this time. The fact remains, however, that there is none among us who comprehends these principles in their fulness and a few comments added will not be out of order.

In the days of Kirtland seven lectures on faith were carefully prepared and given in the school of the Elders. These lectures are just as worthy of our consideration today. The following paragraphs are copies from the first of these lectures:

"Faith being the first principle in revealed religion, and the foundation of all righteousness, necessarily claims the first place in a course of lectures which are designed to unfold to the understanding the doctrine of Jesus Christ. * * *

"The author of the epistle to the Hebrews, in the eleventh chapter of that epistle and first verse, gives the following definition of the word faith:

" 'Now faith is the substance (assurance) of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.'

"From this we learn that faith is the assurance which men have of the existence of things which they have not seen, and the principle of action in all intelligent beings.

"If men were duly to consider themselves, and turn their thoughts and reflections to the operations of their own minds, they would readily discover that it is faith, and faith only, which is the moving cause of all action in them; that without it both mind and body would be in a state of inactivity, and all their exertions would cease, both physical and mental.

"Were this class to go back and reflect upon the history of their lives, from the period of their first recollection, and ask themselves what principle excited them to action, or what gave them energy and activity in all their lawful avocations, callings, and pursuits, what would be the answer? Would it not be that it was the assurance which they had of the existence of things which they had not seen as yet? Was it not the hope which you had, in consequence of your belief in the existence of unseen things, which stimulated you to action and exertion in order to obtain them? Are you not dependent on your faith, or belief, for the acquisition of all knowledge, wisdom, and intelligence? Would you exert yourselves to obtain wisdom and intelligence, unless you did believe that you could obtain them? Would you have ever sown, if you had not believed that you would reap? Would you have ever planted, if you had not believed that you would gather? Would you have ever asked, unless you had believed that you would receive? Would you have ever sought, unless you had believed that you would have found? Or, would you have ever knocked, unless you had believed that it would have been opened unto you? In a word, is there anything that you would have done, either physical or mental, if you had not previously believed? Are not all your exertions of every kind, dependent on your faith? * * *

"And as faith is the moving cause of all action in temporal concerns, so it is in spiritual; for the Savior has said, and that truly, 'He that believeth and is baptized, shall be saved.'

"As we receive by faith all temporal blessings that we do receive, so we in like manner receive by faith all spiritual blessings that we do receive. But faith is not only the principle of action, but of power also, in all intelligent beings, whether in heaven or on earth. * * *

"Faith, then, is the first great governing principle which has power, dominion, and authority over all things; by it they exist, by it they are upheld, by it they are changed, or by it they remain, agreeable to the will of God. Without it there is no power, and without power there could be no creation nor existence!"

Faith is a gift of God. The Prophet has declared, speaking of the things of the kingdom of God, "Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin." (Teachings, p. 58.) We increase our faith through obedience to the principles of the Gospel. The difficulty with most of us is that our minds are set so constantly upon the things of this world, that we fail to obtain the faith which is so essential to our eternal welfare; hence we do not find ourselves in harmony as fully as we should be with the spiritual and eternal things.

What a terrible thing it would be if there was no principle of repentance and forgivness for sin, and if we had to go through eternity with the weight of our transgressions upon us. Through the free gift of God and the atonement of Jesus Christ, all may repent and receive remission of their sins through obedience to the Gospel.

"That by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory." (Moses 6:59.)

Every child born into this world comes by the water; the blood and the Spirit. The unborn babe is cradled in water, the blood enters its body and by blood it is born and the spirit which the Lord created enters its body, thus there are three witnesses in birth, the water, the blood and the spirit of the child. So likewise we must be born again, by a burial in water, "for by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified, and by the blood ye are sanctified." (Moses 6:60.) John the Beloved understood this principle thoroughly and he said: "For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one. And there are three that bear witness in earth, the spirit, and the water, and the blood: and these three agree in one." (1 John 5:7-8.)

"For he that speaketh in an unknown tongue speaketh not unto men, but unto God; for no man understandeth him; howbeit in the spirit he speaketh mysteries.

"But he that prophesieth speaketh unto men to edification, and exhortation and comfort.

"He that speaketh in an unknown tongue edifieth himself; but he that prophesieth edifieth the church.

"I would that ye all spake with tongues, but rather that ye prophesied for greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh with tongues, except he interpret, that the church may receive edifying.

"Now, brethren, if I come unto you speaking with tongues, what shall I profit you, except I shall speak to you either by revelation, or by knowledge, or by prophesying, or by doctrine?

"And even things without life giving sound, whether pipe or harp, except they give a distinction in the sounds how shall it be known what is piped or harped?

"For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle?

"So likewise ye, except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? For ye shall speak into the air. * * *

"Yet in the church I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue." (1 Cor. 14:2-9; 19.)

July 2, 1839, the Prophet said in relation to this gift:

"Speak not in the gift of tongues without understanding it, or without interpretation. The devil can speak in tongues; the adversary will come with his work; he can tempt all classes; can speak in English or Dutch. Let no one speak in tongues unless he interpret, except by the consent of the one who is placed to preside; then he may discern or interpret, or another may. Let us seek for the glory of Abraham, Noah, Adam, the Apostles, who have communion with (knowledge of) these things, and then we shall be among that number when Christ comes." (D.H.C. 3:392.)
