Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-FIVE

The Prophet's Instruction on Doctrine (2)

References

D.H.C Vol. 3:379-381.

Topics

a. The resurrection one of the great principles of the Gospel.

b. All will be raised from the grave.

c. All to be judged according to their works.

a. The sealing spoken of by Peter and Paul.

b. The "Holy Spirit of Promise."

c. Saints may know all truth when prepared to receive it.

a. The Holy Ghost one Comforter.

b. The mission of the Holy Ghost.

c. Purging effect of the Holy Ghost.

d. The Second Comforter.

e. Who may receive the Second Comforter.

a. How revelation is received.

b. Pure Intelligence.

a. The office of Patriarch.

b. Why Evangelists (Patriarchs) are ordained in the Church.

Notes

The doctrine of the resurrection is one of the great principles of the Gospel. It shows forth the loving mercy of our Father and his Beloved Son in granting to mankind the means of escape from the bondage of death. Lehi has discoursed on this effectually in his teachings to his children. (2 Nephi 2.) The Book of Mormon is very plain and clear in the beauty in which this doctrine is recorded. In it and in other scripture also, we are taught that the restoration of life, through the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, will come to every creature. To live again, after this mortal probation has come to an end, and have our individual identity, shows forth the great love our Father has for mankind and is the greatest principle of the Gospel. All other principles are centered in life after this mortal probation. Eternal life becomes the crowning blessing, for that is life in the presence of the Father and the Son in all its fulness.

The doctrine of the resurrection as taught in the scriptures proclaims the coming forth from their graves of every soul born into this world. The Spirit and the body will be reunited inseparably that they can die no more. Paul declared, "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:22.) Amulek, when preaching to the people in the land of Ammonihah, declared the universal resurrection. He said: "Now, this restoration shall come to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the righteous; and even there shall not so much as a hair of their heads be lost; but everything shall be restored to its perfect frame, as it is now, or in the body, and shall be brought and be arraigned before the bar of Christ the Son, and God the Father, and the Holy Spirit, which is one Eternal God, to be judged according to their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil." (Alma 11:40-46.) Our Savior declared to the Jews that the hour was coming when all the dead should hear his voice and should come forth, those who had done good to everlasting life, and those who had done evil to the resurrection of damnation. (John 5:25-29.)

We have the testimony given by Matthew that the graves were opened after the resurrection of our Lord and the righteous dead came forth and went into the city and appeared unto many. (Matt. 27:52-53.) In our own day we have the evidence that ancient Prophets who had died, came to the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery in their resurrected bodies and revealed to them Priesthood and keys of Priesthood.

The doctrine of eternal judgment is also vital to our existence. It is only just that every man should be judged according to his works. Free agency has been given to each of us and we have access to knowledge of the truth; therefore as agents to ourselves we merit the reward or punishment which will be measured to us hereafter. The Lord has made provision for all those who have not been subject to law, and this is well expressed by Alma: "Yea, and I know that good and evil have come before all men; he that knoweth not good from evil is blameless; but he that knoweth good and evil, to him it is given according to his desires, whether he desireth good or evil, life or death, joy or remorse of conscience." (Alma 29:5.)

"For it is written, As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God.

"So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God." (Roman 14:11-12.)

"In whom ye also trusted, that after ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation; in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of Promise.

"Which is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of His glory, that we may be sealed up unto the day of redemption." (Eph. 1st chapter.)

"This principle ought (in its proper place) to be taught, for God hath not revealed anything to Joseph, but what he will make known unto the twelve, and even the least saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear them, for the day must come when no man need say to his neighbor, Know ye the Lord; for all shall know him (who remain) from the least to the greatest. How is this to be done? It is to be done by this sealing power, and the other Comforter spoken of, which will be manifest by revelation." (D.H.C. 3:380.)

Up to this time very little had been taught or recorded in relation to the sealing ordinances. There was little opportunity during the years of trouble and the imprisonment of the Prophet. Since the Prophet's liberation from Missouri, these glorious principles began to be proclaimed. The keys of this sealing power were, as we know, bestowed by Elijah, April 3, 1836.

For some reason many members of the Church are troubled over the expression "sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise." They have wondered if this is a separate Spirit other than the Holy Ghost, and if the sealing by the Holy Spirit of promise, has reference only to marriage for eternity. The Holy Spirit of promise is the Holy Ghost. Not only is he a Spirit of promise in marriage, but in every other ordinance—baptism, confirmation, ordination, etc. The promise is that the Holy Spirit places the stamp of approval on each ordinance and there it will remain if the recipient is just and true. Every blessing is based upon this promise of faithfulness. If the covenanting person or persons break their covenant, the Holy Spirit removes the seal and the promised blessing is not received.

In quoting the words of Paul (Eph. 1:14) the Prophet added these words to the Bible text: "that we may be sealed up unto the day of redemption." This evidently was said by Paul, but was not included in the translation, as it has come down to us.

"The other Comforter spoken of is a subject of great interest, and perhaps understood by few of this generation. After a person has faith in Christ, repents of his sins and is baptized for the remission of his sins and receives the Holy Ghost, (by the laying on of hands), which is the first Comforter, then let him continue to humble himself before God, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, and living by every word of God, and the Lord will soon say unto him, Son, thou shalt be exalted. When the Lord has thoroughly proved him, and finds that the man is determined to serve him at all hazards, then the man will find his calling and election made sure, then it will be his privilege to receive the other Comforter, which the Lord hath promised the Saints, as is recorded in the testimony of St. John, in the 14th chapter, from the 12th to the 27th verses.

"Note the 16, 17, 18, 21, 23, verses:

"16. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you forever;

"17. Even the Spirit of Truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him; but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you.

"18. I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you. * * *

"21. He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him.

"23. If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.

"Now what is this other Comfoter? It is no more nor less than the Lord Jesus Christ himself; and this is the sum and substance of the whole matter; that when any man obtains this last Comforter, he will have the personage of Jesus Christ to attend him, or appear to him from time to time, and even he will manifest the Father unto him, and they will take up their abode with him, and the vision of the heavens will be opened unto him, and the Lord will teach him face to face, and he may have a perfect kncwledge of the mysteries of the Kingdom of God; and this is the state and place the ancient saints arrived at when they had such glorious visions — Isaiah, Ezekiel, John upon the Isle of Patmos, St. Paul in the three heavens, and all the saints who held communion with the general assembly and Church of the First Born." (D.H.C. Vol. 3:379-381.)

It is pointed out in this discourse by the Prophet that the companionship of the Second Comforter cannot be obtained only by the most faithful adherence to every principle of righteousness. "When the Lord has thoroughly proved him, and finds that the man is determined to serve him at all hazards, then the man will find his calling and election made sure, then it will be his privilege to receive the other Comforter, which the Lord has promised the saints, as is recorded in the testimony of St. John, in the 14th chapter, from the 12th to the 27 verses." This great gift has been received by many of the prophets. Nephi and Jacob testify of this visitation. Abraham, Moses, Daniel, Elijah and many others anciently were so blessed. There have been some in our own dispensation besides the Prophet Joseph Smith who have realized the blessing of this promise.

In relation to this thought on revelation, it is well to consider the words of Alma, Chapter 12:9-11, and likewise the first ten verses of the "Vision," Section 76.

Revelation may be given to every member of the Church. The Prophet said that every man should be a prophet; that the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. It is not only the privilege but the duty of each member of the Church to know the truth which will make him free. This he cannot know unless it is revealed to him. Moroni has promised every person who humbly and sincerely reads the Book of Mormon that he may know by revelation that it is true. The gift of the Holy Ghost is given to the members of the Church so that they may have the spirit of prophecy and revelation. Let it be understood however, that they will not receive revelation for the guidance of the Church. That gift is reserved for and vested in the man who holds the keys of the Priesthood. But the members of the Church are entitled to receive revelation which is needful for their progress and if they will hearken to the Spirit of truth and walk humbly before the Lord, they will not fall short of this spiritual guidance. Members of the Church, who neglect their duty and who are indifferent to the commandments, place themselves in danger of being deceived. Failing to obtain the guiding influence of the Holy Ghost, they become liable to the enticing influence of deceivers because they lack the ability to discern between truth and error. Alma called attention to this in his instruction to Zeezrom. These words it is well for us all to heed.

"And now Alma began to expound these things unto him, saying: It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him.

"And therefore, he that will harden his heart, the same receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and he that will not harden his heart, to him is given the greater portion of the word, until it is given unto him to know the mysteries of God until he know them in full.

"And they that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction. Now this is what is meant by the chains of hell." (Alma 12:9-11.)

We have discussed previously the Patriarchal Priesthood. (See D. & C. 107:39-56.)
