Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-SIX

The Prophet's Instruction on Priesthood

References

D.H.C. Vol. 3:383-389.

Topics

a. Not sent to be taught, but to teach.

b. To beware of Gentile Sophistry.

c. The sin of treachery.

d. The sin of fault-finding.

a. Adam holds keys of presidency.

b. He is Michael the Ancient of Days.

c. He is the father of the human family in the flesh.

d. The Grand Council at Adam-ondi-Ahman.

a. The intelligent part of the spirit always existed.

b. Spirits born sons and daughters of God.

c. They were organized in the creation.

a. Moses and Elias hold keys of Priesthood.

b. They gave the keys to Peter, James and John.

c. The descent of Priesthood.

d. Adam's Patriarchal blessing.

e. Moses' attempt to bless Israel with Priesthood.

Notes

"O ye Twelve! and all Saints! profit by this important Key—that in all your trials, troubles, temptations, afflictions, bonds, imprisonments and death, see to it, that you do not betray heaven; that you do not betray Jesus Christ; that you do not betray the brethren; that you do not betray the revelations of God, whether in the Bible, Book of Mormon, or Doctrine and Covenants, or any other that ever was or ever will be given and revealed unto man in this world or that which is to come. Yea, in all your kicking and flounderings, see to it that you do not this thing, lest innocent blood be found upon your skirts, and you go down to hell. All other sins are not to be compared to sinning against the Holy Ghost, and proving a traitor to the brethren.

"I will give you one of the Keys of the mysteries of the Kingdom. It is an eternal principle, that has existed with God from all eternity: That man who rises up to condemn others, finding fault with the Church, saying that they are out of the way, while he himself is righteous, then know assuredly, that that man is in the high road to apostasy; and if he does not repent, will apostatize, as God lives. The principle is as correct as the one that Jesus put forth in saying that he who seeketh a sign is an adulterous person; and that principle is eternal, undeviating, and firm as the pillars of heaven; for whenever you see a man seeking after a sign, you may set it down that he is an adulterous man." (D.H.C. 3:385.)

The Lord made known to the Prophet Joseph Smith the true nature of Adam's mission both in this world and before his advent on this earth. Unfortunately the truth in relation to Adam has disappeared from the translations of the Bible which have come down to our day. The Prophet taught his brethren as follows:

"The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation. He obtained it in the Creation, before the world was formed, as in Gen. 1:26, 27, 28. He had dominion given him over every living creature. He is Michael the Archangel, spoken of in the Scriptures. Then to Noah, who is Gabriel; he stands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood; he was called of God to this office, and was the father of all living in his day, and to him was given the dominion. These men held keys first on earth, and then in heaven." (D.H.C. 3:385-386.)

So it is with all those who have been called to hold keys of Priesthood. They obtained them in their ministry on the earth and they possess them in eternity.

"The Priesthood is an everlasting principle, and existed with God from eternity, and will to eternity, without beginning of days or end of years. The keys have to be brought from heaven whenever the Gospel is sent. When they are revealed from heaven, it is by Adam's authority." (D.H.C. 3:386.) The expression, "whenever the Gospel is sent," has reference to the times when it has become necessary because of apostasy for a restoration of the Gospel to the earth. Whenever this has occurred someone vested with authority has to be sent from the heavens to restore it. It is by Adam's authority, because he holds the keys of all the dispensations of time. We learn, also, by revelation, that Adam holds this authority and the "keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy One (i.e. Jesus Christ) who is without beginning of days or end of life." (D. & C. Sec. 78:16.) It is the natural thing for Adam to hold the keys of all dispensations since he stands at the head of the human family as the great Patriarch of the race. We read in the scriptures (Daniel ch. 7) that there is to be a grand council in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, at which will be gathered all those who have held keys of dispensations, and a multitude of others. At this council reports will be given of stewardships by these servants who held the keys, Jesus Christ will come to take his rightful place as King of kings on the earth. At this council Adam will deliver up his stewardship along with the others, but will retain his standing as the head, or presiding officer, over the human family. Adam is named the "Ancient of Days," because, as the Prophet says, "Daniel in his seventh chapter speaks of the Ancient of Days; he means the oldest man, our father Adam, Michael, he will call his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man." (D.H.C., Vol. 3:386.)

The Prophet says that anything created cannot be eternal. They become eternal, however, through the grace of God and the atonement of Jesus Christ. Our mortal bodies must die because they are not in their present state, eternal. Through the atonement of Jesus Christ they will be called forth from the grave, or from the elements, no matter what has, or may, happen to them, and when they receive the resurrection they will become eternal. The spirit and the body will then become inseparably connected; never to be divided; never again to die, except it should be the spiritual death through transgression, and all men will become immortal, and after the judgment will be assigned to their proper place. (Alma 11:40-46.) The Savior said to Mary: "I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God." (John 20:17.) Paul said to the Greeks: "For in him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets have said, 'For we are also his offspring.' Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man's device." (Acts 17:28-29.) President Brigham Young has said:

"Jesus was the first man that ever went to preach to the spirits in prison, holding the keys of the Gospel of salvation to them. Those keys were delivered to him in the day and hour that he went into the spirit world, and with them he opened the door of salvation to the spirits in prison." Journal of Discourses, 3:370.)

In an epistle to the Church, published by the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve in 1916, this appears:

"Scriptures embodying the ordinary signification—literally that of parent—are too numerous and specific to require citation. The purport of these scriptures is to the effect that God the Eternal Father, whom we designate by the exalted name-title 'Elohim,' is the literal Parent of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and of the spirits of the human race. Elohim is the Father in every sense in which Jesus Christ is so designated, and distinctively He is the Father of spirits." ("The Articles of Faith," Talmage, p. 466.)

It is a glorious thing to know that we are in very deed the begotten children of God, the Father, in the spirit and that Jesus Christ is the first born in the spirit and the only begotten of the Father in the flesh.

"Our Savior speaks of children and says, Their angels always stand before my Father. The Father called all spirits before Him at the creation of man, and organized them. He (Adam) is the head, and was told to multiply. The keys were first given to him, and by him to others. He will have to give an account of his stewardship, and they to him." (D.H.C. 3:387.) It is possible that we may overlook the fact that in the spirit world before mortality began, there was organization in heaven. There was evidently the organization of the Church there, with officers comparable to the officers we have here, and the organization of the spirits was perfect. The fact that there was such an organization, and we were in the presence of our eternal Father, makes the rebellion of Lucifer and those who followed him all the more serious and unforgiveable.

"How have we come at the Priesthood in the last days? It came down, in regular succession. Peter, James and John had it given to them and they gave it to others. Christ is the Great High Priest, Adam next."

The Prophet saw in vision, Adam in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman. "He called together his children and blessed them with a patriarchal blessing. The Lord appeared in their midst, and he (Adam) blessed them all, and foretold what should befall them to the latest generation. (D. & C. 107:53-57.)

"This is why Adam blessed his posterity; he wanted to bring them into the presence of God. They looked for a city, etc. ["whose builder and maker is God." Heb. 11:10.] Moses sought to bring the children of Israel into the presence of God, through the power of the Priesthood, but he could not. In the first ages of the world they tried to establish the same thing; and there were Eliases raised up who tried to restore these very glories, but did not obtain them; but they prophesied of a day when this glory would be revealed. Paul spoke of the dispensation of the fulness of times, when God would gather together all things in one, etc.; and those men to whom these keys have been given, will have to be there; and they without us cannot be made perfect." (D.H.C. 3:388-389.)

It is strange that anyone should be led astray in regard to the descent of Priesthood and Adam's rightful place. Naturally he stands at the head of his posterity as explained in the revelation (Sec. 107). He is "Michael, the prince, the archangel," or, in other words, the greatest of the angels. But he is not greater than Jesus Christ. He holds his keys for this earth, under the authority of Jesus Christ, and according to the Prophet's discourse, and the teachings in Hebrews, our Savior is the great, or supreme, High Priest under his Father. "Christ is the Great High Priest Adam next." Then following Adam comes Noah, because he also was appointed to people the earth after the flood.
