Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-SEVEN

The Prophet's Instruction on Priesthood (continued)

References

D.H.C. 3:389-392.

Topics

a. The work of angels.

b. The kingdom like a grain of mustard seed.

c. The children of Israel baptized.

d. The "horn" makes war upon the saints and prevails until Adam comes. Note 2.

a. The Church always guided by revelation.

b. Every authorized minister is a prophet.

c. Importance of the testimony of Jesus.

d. Signs of the coming of the Son of Man (Son Ahman.)

a. The restoration of the sealing power.

b. The work for both living and the dead.

c. The whole earth to be smitten if the sealing power is not restored.

d. Preaching of the Gospel required.

e. The judgment to come.

a. The ministration of angels.

b. Righteous living requisite to the discerning between the true and the false.

c. Lying spirits are abroad.

d. Danger of being deceived.

e. Angels do not have wings.

a. Satan a spirit of great power.

b. He is an orator.

c. Not every vision, or singing, is of God.

d. The devil can speak many tongues.

e. The elders should seek for the gift of discernment.

Notes

"The Kingdom of Heaven is like a grain of mustard seed. The mustard seed is small, but brings forth a large tree, and the fowls lodge in the branches. The fowls are the angels. Thus angels come down, combine together to gather their children, and gather them. We cannot be made perfect without them, nor they without us; when these things are done, the Son of Man will descend, the Ancient of Days sit; we may come to an innumerable company of angels, have communion with and receive instructions from them. Paul told about Moses' proceedings: spoke of the children of Israel being baptized. (I Cor. 10:1-4.) He knew this, and that all the ordinances and blessings were in the Church.

2 "The 'Horn' made war with the Saints and overcame them, until the Ancient of Days came; judgment was given to the Saints of the Most High from the Ancient of Days; the time came that the Saint possessed the Kingdom. This not only makes us ministers here, but in eternity." (D.H.C. 3:389.)

Daniel and John each saw the opposition the little horn made against the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This opposition will continue until the grand council is held at Adam-ondi-Ahman. This "little horn" (Dan. 7:20-22; Rev. 13) is making a renewed and determined effort today to destroy the Church. The Lord has decreed otherwise and while its power will last until Michael comes and the Son of Man receives his rightful place, this great power will endure. It must, however, fall, and according to the scriptures its end will come rather suddenly. (D. & C. 29:21; 1 Nephi 13:1-9; Rev. Chapters 17-18.)

On another occasion the Prophet said: "The plea of many in this day is, that we have no right to receive revelations; but if we do not get revelations, we do not have the oracles of God; and if they have not the oracles of God, they are not the people of God. But say you, What will become of the world, or the various professors of religion who do not believe in revelation and the oracles of God as continued to His Church in all ages of the world, when He has a people on earth? I tell you, in the name of Jesus Christ, they will be damned; and when you get into the eternal world, you will find it will be so, they cannot escape the damnation of hell."

"Men profess to prophesy. I will prophesy that the signs of the coming of the Son of Man are already commenced. One pestilence will desolate after another. We shall soon have war and bloodshed. The moon will be turned into blood. I testify of these things, and that the coming of the Son of Man is nigh, even at your doors. If our souls and our bodies are not looking forth for the coming of the Son of Man; and after we are dead, if we are not looking forth, we shall be among those who are calling for the rocks to fall upon them." (D.H.C. 3:390.)

Some of the members of the Church think they are too busy and that there are too many things to be done in this life for them to be bothering about the coming of the Son of Man. In a revelation given March 7, 1831, the Lord said:

"Ye look and behold the fig trees, and ye see them with your eyes, and ye say when they begin to shoot forth, and their leaves are yet tender, that summer is now nigh at hand;

"Even so it shall be in that day when they shall see all these things, then shall they know that the hour is nigh.

"And it shall come to pass that he that feareth me shall be looking forth for the great day of the Lord to come, even for the signs of the coming of the Son of Man.

"And they shall see signs and wonders, for they shall be shown forth in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath.

"And they shall behold blood, and fire, and vapors of smoke." (Sec. 45:37-41.)

If the signs of the coming of our Lord were apparent in the days of the Prophet, surely we have evidence today that the great day of his coming is drawing very near, for the signs have multiplied a thousand fold. The Prophet continues his discourse and declares, that the Lord had commanded the gathering of his people. "Some may have cried peace, but the saints and the world will have little peace henceforth. Let them not hinder us from going to the stakes; for God has told us to flee, not dallying, or we shall be scattered, one here, and another there. There your children shall be blessed, and you in the midst of friends where you may be blessed. The Gospel net gathers of every kind."

He said the building of Zion should be held as our greatest object. He predicted wars, and when they come people will have to flee to Zion if they seek peace. Troubles, wars, pestilence, one after another, will continue until the Ancient of Days shall come. He saw men hunting the lives of their own sons, brother murdering brother, mothers and daughters at enmity. Armies were arrayed against armies, and there shall be blood, desolation, war and fire. Satan will rage, and then, he adds: "I know not how soon these things will take place; but with a view of them, shall I cry peace? No! I will lift up my voice and testify of them. How long you will have good crops, and the famine be kept off, I do not know; when the fig tree leaves, know then that the summer is nigh at hand." (D.H.C. 3:290-301.)

Up to the Nauvoo period very little was said about salvation for the dead. The keys of the sealing power held by Elijah were restored April 3, 1836, in the Kirtland Temple. Occasionally thereafter the Prophet made passing remarks about the salvation of the dead and the virtue of this sealing power. In the midst of the persecutions and mobbings in Kirtland and Missouri, there was little time or opportunity for the teaching of this great principle. The Prophet after being freed from Liberty dungeon, was privileged to enter into a brief period of comparative peace, and the doctrines of the kingdom which he had been unable to develop, as the Lord had revealed them, in the days of persecution, were now constantly on his mind. This is one of the first references he was privileged to make in relation to the importance of Elijah's keys.

According to the plan the Lord revealed it becomes necessary not only for the baptism for the dead, but that both the living and the worthy dead, shall be sealed—husbands and wives sealed to each other, children to parents, and the family organization made intact as a part of the great family of God. (Eph. 3:5.) If the power to perform these sealings had not been restored the whole earth would today be in danger of a dreadful curse. Members of the Church, as well as those not of the Church, could not have escaped the dire calamity. Now, with the sealing power in the Church, the work of salvation and uniting of families can go on, both for the living and for the dead, and by this power and activity, the earth is spared the curse. The wicked, however, who reject this authority and refuse to accept these ordinances, shall partake of the curse which will be upon the earth among the rebellious.

While we have this great responsibility of seeking after our dead and performing in the Temples the ordinances of salvation and exaltation, yet the Church is not relieved of the important labor of declaring this message of salvation to the world. The Lord promised that this Gospel of the kingdom should again be preached "in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come." (Matt. 24:14, P. of G. P. page 44, verse 30.) The Prophet says in speaking of the proclamation of the Gospel to the world, "The last revelation says, Ye shall not have time to have gone over the earth until these things come." (D.H.C. 3:390.) These great judgments are to follow the preaching of the Gospel by the Elders. (See D. & C. 88:88-93.)

In order to have the power to distinguish between truth and error and to interpret properly a dream or vision, one must have a pure heart and a contrite spirit and be living a righteous life. Satan's mission is to deceive, and he can, and does, give revelation to those who permit themselves to fall into his power. "Lying spirits are going forth in the earth. There will be great manifestations of spirits, both false and true." (D.H.C. 3:391-392.)

The Lord has given us sound counsel in relation to all such matters in Section 46, verses 7-10. Men are often deceived by the revelations from lying spirits. This is a danger confronting all those who yield to temptation; who violate covenants, speak evil of authorities, etc. When a man does any of these things he becomes subject to deception and inspiration from an evil source.

A very peculiar belief exists among many people that angels have wings. This belief is illustrated in pictures of sacred events. Even in some illustrated editions of the Bible this notion is portrayed. The Prophet teaches: "An angel of God never has wings. Some will say that they have seen a spirit; that he offered them his hand, but they did not touch it. This is a lie. First, it is contrary to the plan of God: a spirit cannot come but in glory; an angel has flesh and bones; we see not their glory. The devil may appear as an angel of light. Ask God to reveal it; if it be of the devil, he will flee from you; if of God, He will manifest himself, or make it manifest. We may come to Jesus and ask him; He will know all about it; if He comes to a little child, He will adapt himself to the language and capacity of a little child.
