Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-EIGHT

The Foreign Mission of the Twelve

References

D.H.C. Vol. 3:393-397; 4:1-390.

Topics

a. Charge of the Presidency to the twelve.

b. The epistle of the apostles.

c. Distressing circumstances connected with their departure.

a. Ordination of Willard Richards.

b. Establishment of the Millennial Star.

c. Publication of the Book of Mormon and other publications.

a. Organization of branches of the Church.

b. Ordination of patriarchs and others.

c. Ministry of Brigham Young, and associates.

d. Wilford Woodruff's Ministry.

e. Orson Hyde's mission to Palestine.

f. Failure of John E. Page and William Smith.

g. Return of the apostles.

Notes

July 2, 1839, the First Presidency met with the apostles and those who were appointed to accompany them, and gave them insstruction. A good part of this instruction on doctrine has already been discussed in Lesson 127. After receiving this charge from the Presidency the apostles issued an epistle to the elders of the Church, the branches of the Church scattered abroad, and all the saints, giving them instruction and encouragement in their afflictions. In the course of this instruction the brethern said: "We wish to stimulate all the brethern to faithfulness; you have been tried, you are now being tried; and those trials, if you are not watchful, will corrode the mind and produce unpleasant feelings; but recollect that now is the time of trial; soon the victory will be ours; now may be a day of lamentation—then will be a day of rejoicing; now may be a day of sorrow—but by and by we shall see the Lord; our sorrow will be turned into joy, and our joy no man taketh from us." (D.H.C. 3:394.)

To the elders they said:

"God has called you to an important office; he has laid upon you an onerous duty. He has called you to an holy calling, even to be the priests of the Most High God, messengers to the nations of the earth; and upon your diligence, your perserverance and faithfulness, the soundness of the doctrines which you preach, the moral precepts that you advance and practice, and upon the sound principles that you inculcate, while you hold that Priesthood, hang the destinies of the human family. You are the men that God has called to spread forth his kingdom. He has committed the care of souls to your charge, and when you received this Priesthood, you became the legates of heaven; and the Great God demands it of you, that you should be faithful; and inasmuch as you are not, you will not be chosen; but it will be said unto you, 'Stand by and let a more honorable man than thou art take thy place and receive thy crown.' "

A meeting was held in the open air Sunday, July 7, 1839, where the apostles gave their farewell addresses. Meetings were held in the morning and also in the afternoon. John E. Page, spoke in the morning on the subject of the Book of Mormon. In the afternoon Elder John Taylor spoke on the subject of the dispensation of the Fulness of Times and bore testimony. He was followed by Elder Wilford Woodruff, who exhorted the saints to faithfulness. Elder Orson Hyde bore testimony to the truth of the Gospel and the misery of falling away from it. Elder Brigham Young bore a strong testimony and invited those who sought the truth to come forward and be baptized. President Sidney Rigdon then gave counsel for the benefit of all present, a large number of those present not being members of the Church.

At the time of this meeting several of these brethren were far from being well. Because of the unhealthful condition prevailing in Commerce, as the settlement was called at that time, many members of the Church were desperately ill, and among this number nearly all of these missionaries. Many remarkable healings are recorded in the history of the Church. Monday following this farewell meeting, Elders John Tayor and Wilford Woodruff commenced their journey to their field of labor. August 29th Elder Parley P. Pratt, who only a short time before had obtained his liberty from his imprisonment in Missouri, took his departure with his brother Orson Pratt and Elder Hiram Clark. September 18th, President Brigham Young and Elder Heber C. Kimball departed, and three days later, Elders George A. Smith, Reuben Hedlock and Theodore Turley, also departed. William Smith failed to go. Willard Richards was at the time in England in the presidency of that mission. Orson Hyde and John E. Page had been set apart to go to Palestine and there dedicate the land for the return of the Jews and the house of Israel. President Brigham Young was so sick, when he left his home in Montrose on the 14th of September, on the Iowa side of the river, that he was unable to reach the Mississippi only a distance of thirty rods, without assistance. After crossing the river he rode behind Israel Barlow on his horse to the house of the Prophet. His wife was also ill and with a baby only three weeks old, and all of the other children ill, each without a second suit of clothes, having been robbed of all by the Missourians. President Heber C. Kimball wrote of their plight at the time of their departure as follows:

"September 18, Charles Hubbard sent his boy with a wagon and a span of horses to my house; our trunks were put into the wagon by some brethren; I went to my bed and shook hands with my wife who was then shaking with a chill, having two children lying sick by her side; I embraced her and my children, and bade them farewell. My only well child was little Heber P., and it was with difficulty he could carry a couple of quarts of water at a time, to assist in quenching their thirst.

"It was with difficulty we got into the wagon, and started down the hill about ten rods; it appeared to me as though my very inmost parts would melt within me at leaving my family in such a condition, as it were almost in the arms of death. I felt as though I could not endure it. I asked the teamster to stop, and said to Brother Brigham, 'This is pretty tough, isn't it; let's rise up and give them a cheer.' We arose, and swinging our hats three times over our heads, shouted: 'Hurrah, Hurrah for Israel.' Vilate hearing the noise, arose from her bed and came to the door. She had a smile on her face. Vilate and Mary Ann Young cried out to us: 'Good by, God bless you.' We returned the compliment, and then told the driver to go ahead. After this I felt a spirit of joy and gratitude, having had the satisfaction of seeing my wife standing upon her feet, instead of leaving her in bed, knowing well that I should not see them again for two or three years." (Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 265-266.)

Elder George A. Smith and companions upset their wagon in the soft ground before they got out of sight of the village of Commerce. Elders Smith and Turley were so weak they could not get up and Brother Hedlock had to lift them into the wagon again. As they started on their journey again they passed some gentlemen who asked them who had been robbing the burying ground. Elder Wilford Woodruff was in like physical condition. Arriving on the banks of the Mississippi he lay down on the side of some sole leather. The Prophet came by and said to him, "Well, Brother Woodruff, you have started upon your mission." "Yes," said Brother Woodruff, "but I feel and look more like a subject for the dissecting room than a missionary." The Prophet replied: "What did you say that for? Get up, and go along all will be right with you." As Elders John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff passed Elder Parley P. Pratt who was hewing a log, preparatory to building a cabin for his family, he said, "Brother Woodruff, I have no money, but I have an empty purse, which I will give you." A few rods farther they met Elder Heber C. Kimball, also hewing a log to build a cabin. Brother Kimball said, "As Parley has given you a purse, I have got a dollar I will give you to put in it." ("Wilford Woodruff—His Life and Labors," p. 108.)

At the first council meeting which they held in England, at Preston, April 14, 1840, at the house of Elder Willard Richards, he was ordained to the apostleship by President Brigham Young and his associates. The brethren were then assigned to their several fields of labor. President Brigham Young was unanimously sustained by the brethren of the twelve, as the president of that council. There were present at this meeting: President Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith and Willard Richards. (D.H.C. 4:114-115.)

The following day, April 15, 1840, a general conference of the saints in the British Isles was held, at which there were represented, 36 elders, 45 priests; 36 teachers; 11 deacons and 1686 members. There were 31 branches which had been raised up since the opening of the mission by Elder Kimball and companions in 1837. This conference decided to publish a hymn book and a monthly periodical under the supervision of the apostles. At a council meeting held on the 16th Elder Parley P. Pratt was chosen to edit the monthly magazine which was to be called, "The Latter-day Saints Millennial Star." The first number of this publication was issued Wednesday, May 27, 1840, in Manchester, and contained 24 pages. On the cover of the first issue appeared the hymn, "The Morning Breaks, the Shadows Flee," by Elder Parley P. Pratt. This periodical has continued constantly since that day. On June 15, 1845, it was changed to a semimonthly paper, and April 15, 1852, it was made a weekly paper, and following the war it was changed again, in April 1843, to a monthly publication. The publication was later transferred to Liverpool, which became the headquarters for publishing tracts, books and pamphlets in the British Isles.

The brethren also secured the copyright to the Book of Mormon and published that book with the sanction of the First Presidency. A hymn book was also published and many tracts and pamphlets.

In the course of a few months branches of the Church had been organized in all parts of the British Isles. At a general conference held in Manchester, Tuesday, October 6, 1840, there were over thirty branches represented. There were present six members of the council of the apostles, out of the eight in Great Britain, five high priests, nineteen elders, 28 priests, four teachers and two deacons and over 3900 members.

Elder Wilford Woodruff and Elder Theodore Turley had a wonderful experience. Elder Woodruff had been laboring in Burslem, Hanley, Stoke and the Potteries from the time he arrived in England to the second of March, and many were baptized. While preaching on the Sabbath day, March 1, 1840, the anniversary of his birth, it was made known to him by the spirit that he was to move to the south. Acting on this impression, he journeyed to the farm communities of Herefordshire and stopped at the home of Mr. John Benbow at Castle Frome, Ledbury. Mr. Benbow was a prosperous farmer, cultivating some three hundred acres of land. Brother Woodruff introduced himself as a missionary from America representing the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and said that he had been sent to preach the Gospel to Mr. Benbow in his household. Mr. Benbow was impressed by Elder Woodruff's story and said that there were in that place six hundred persons and more, who had broken off from the Methodists and had taken the name of "United Brethren." They had forty-five preachers and a number of meeting houses, duly licensed. These people were dissatisfied with the teachings of the churches and were looking for light and truth. On the morning of the 5th, at the request of Mr. Benbow, the people were invited to come to a large hall in the mansion of Mr. Benbow, to hear Elder Woodruff preach. The people flocked to the hall to hear the American stranger speak. Meetings continued to be held, and in a short time Elder Woodruff had baptized over six hundred persons, mostly from these dissenters from the Methodist church. On the 8th at the meeting a constable was sent on complaint of a minister to arrest Brother Woodruff for preaching to the people. Elder Woodruff said he had a license to preach as well as the rector, and if the constable would take a chair and sit beside him until the close of the meeting he would be at his service. He then gave a discourse on the first principles and at the close of the meeting opened the door for baptism. Several came forward among whom were four of the preachers and the constable, who said: "Mr. Woodruff, I would like to be baptized." He then went to the complaining rector and told him that if he wanted Mr. Woodruff arrested, he must serve the writ himself, for he had heard him preach the only true Gospel sermon he had ever heard. The rector then sent two clerks of the Church of England as spies, and they were both baptized. The ministers and rectors of the Church of England then sent a petition to the Archbishop of Canterbury, to request Parliament to pass a law prohibiting the "Mormons" from preaching in the British Isles, declaring that they had baptized fifteen hundred persons, many of whom were members of the Church of England. The archbishop replied that if the petitioners had the worth of souls at heart as much as they valued ground where hares, foxes and hounds ran, they would not lose so many of their flock.

All of the brethren met with similar success. The people in all parts of Great Britain were ripe and waiting for the truth. In October 1840, the Church population was about 4,000 souls.

Elders Orson Hyde and John E. Page had been called to go to Palestine instead of Great Britain. On the 15th of April, 1840, Elder Hyde left Nauvoo for Jerusalem. Working his way across the country to New York. He sailed, after some delay, February 13, 1841, traveling alone. Elder Page who was appointed to go with him, failed to make the journey through lack of faith. William Smith, for the same reason, failed to accompany his brethren to Great Britain.

On the 20th day of April 1841, President Brigham Young with Elders Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith and Willard Richards, sailed from Liverpool, with a large company of saints on the ship "Rochester," for New York. They were about one month on the water and arrived in Nauvoo, July 1, 1841. When they left some eighteen months before, they were poverty stricken, their families destitute and ill. They left for their mission without money and returned in the same condition, but they had accomplished a wonderful work. They printed an edition of five thousand copies of the Book of Mormon in Great Britain; a hymn book; over five thousand tracts and pamphlets, and had established the "Millennial Star." They had also established an emigration agency, and had brought several thousand souls into the Church. Elder Parley P. Pratt remained in England to continue his labors, preside over the Church there, and edit the "Star." (See D.H.C. Vol. 4:390.)
