Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-NINE

Appeal to Washington for Redress of Wrongs

References

D.H.C. 3:332, 4:23.

Topics

a. An appeal to the people to help stop the persecution of the saints.

b. Missouri's abuse of the saints a disgrace to the nation.

a. Constitution guarantees an obligation of the Government.

b. Encouragement received from governors of states.

a. Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon and Judge Elias Higbee appointed.

b. Departure of Joseph Smith and Judge Higbee.

c. Incidents on the way.

a. His visit to the President of the United States.

b. The President's attitude.

c. Visiting members of congress.

a. Petition referred to the judiciary committee.

b. Judge Higbee before the committee.

c. Opposition of Missourians.

d. Report of the committee.

e. Resolutions at April Conference. Note 6.

Notes

"Is there no virtue in the body politic? Will not the people rise up in their majesty, and with that promptitude and zeal which are so characteristic of them, discountenance such proceedings, by bringing the offenders to that punishment which they so richly deserve, and save the nation from that disgrace and ultimate ruin, which otherwise must inevitably fall upon it?" (D.H.C. 3:332.)

"I persuaded my fellow travelers to be quiet and retain their seats, but had to hold one women to prevent her throwing her infant out of the coach. The passengers were execeedingly agitated, but I used every persuasion to calm their feelings; and opening the door, I secured my hold on the side of the coach the best way I could, and succeeded in placing myself in the coachman's seat, and reining up the horses, after they had run some two or three miles, and neither coach, horses, or passengers received any injury. My course was spoken of in the highest terms of commendation, as being one of the most daring and heroic deeds, and no language could express the gratitude of the passengers, when they found themselves safe, and the horses quiet. There were some members of Congress with us, who proposed naming the incident to that body, believing they would reward such conduct by some public act; but on inquiring my name, to mention as the author of their safety, and finding it to be Joseph Smith the 'Mormon Prophet,' as they called me, I heard no more of their praise, gratitude, or reward." (D.H.C. 4:23.)

"But we were not to be intimidated; and demanded a hearing, and constitutional rights. Before we left him he promised to reconsider what he had said, and observed that he felt to sympathize with us, on account of our suffeings."

The President, Martin Van Buren, was frank enough to inform them that the vote of Missouri was of greater importance than his endeavor to do justice in their defense. That the Prophet was greatly disturbed in his feelings by Van Buren's attitude, is very evident. On several occasions he referred to the treatment they received in that interview. On his return journey the Prophet states "I did not fail to proclaim the iniquity and insolence of Martin Van Buren, toward myself and an injured people, which will have its effect upon the public mind; and may he never be elected again to any office of trust or power, by which he may abuse the innocent and let the guilty go free." (D.H.C. 4:89.)

After the interview with Mr. Van Buren the Prophet called on other leading characters in congress, among them Mr. John C. Calhoun, "whose conduct," said the Prophet, "towards me very ill became his station. I became satisfied there was little use for me to tarry, to press the just claims of the Saints on the consideration of the President or Congress, and stayed but a few days, taking passage in company with Porter Rockwell and Dr. Foster on the railroad and stages back to Dayton, Ohio." (D.H.C. 4:80.)

Brother Higbee continued to keep the Prophet posted as the matter awaited action by congress. Mr. Jamison and Mr. Lynn of Missouri went to great pains to try to convince the committee that Missouri was a law abiding state. The matter dragged along in the committee for many days. February 26th, 1840, Judge Higbee wrote to the Prophet and said:

"Dear Brother: I am just informed, by General Wall (the chairman of the Committee), before whom, or to whom, our business is referred, that the decision is against us, or in other words unfavorable, that they believe redress can only be had in Missouri, the courts and legislature. He says, they will report this week. I desire to get a copy of it, and also the papers. I feel a conscience void of offense towards God and man in this matter; that I have discharged my duty here; and as I wish not to be on expense, as soon as I can write to President Rigdon, get my papers, and draw some money to bear my expenses, I shall bid adieu to this city, to return to my family and friends.

"I feel now that we have made our last appeal to all earthly tribunals; that we should now put our whole trust in the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. We have a right now which we could not heretofore so fully claim—that is, of asking God for redress and redemption, as they have been refused us by man." (D.H.C. 4:88.)

March 4, 1840, the day the Prophet arrived in Nauvoo from Washington, the senate committee made its report, which was unfavorable to the Church. After giving a synopsis of a portion of the memorial, and without reference to the vast array of affidavits which accompanied it, the report concluded in the following words:

"The committee have examined the case presented by the petition, and heard the views urged by their agent, with care and attention; and after full examination and consideration, unanimously concur in the opinion—

"That the case presented for their investigation is not such as one as will justify or authorize any interposition by this government.

"The wrongs complained of are not alleged to be committed by any of the officers of the United States, or under the authority of its government in any manner whatever. The allegations in the petition relate to the acts of its citizens, and inhabitants and authorities of the state of Missouri, of which state the petitioners were at the time citizens, or inhabitants.

"The grievances complained of in the petition are alleged to have been done within the territory of the state of Missouri. The committee, under these circumstances, have not considered themselves justified in inquiring into the truth or falsehood of the facts charged in the petition. If they are true, the petitioners must seek relief in the courts of judicature of the state of Missouri, or of the United States, which has the appropriate jurisdiction to administer full and adequate redress for the wrongs complained of, and doubtless will do so fairly and impartially; or the petitioners may, if they see proper apply to the justice and magnanimity of the state of Missouri—an appeal which the committee feel justified in believing will never be made in vain by the injured or oppressed.

"It can never be presumed that a state either wants the power or lacks the disposition to redress the wrongs of its own citizens, committed within her own territory, whether they proceed from the lawless acts of her officers or any other persons. The committee therefore report that they recommend the passage of the following resolution:

"Resolved, That the committee on the judiciary be discharged from the further consideration of the memorial in this case; and that the memorialists have leave to withdraw the papers which accompany their memorial." (D.H.C. 4:90-92.)

"Whereas, we learn, with deep sorrow, regret, and disappointment, that the Committee on the Judiciary to whom was referred the Memorial of the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (commonly called 'Mormons'), complaining of the grievances suffered by them in the state of Missouri, have reported unfavorably to our cause, to justice, and humanity;

"Therefore Resolved 1st: That we consider the report of the Committee on Judiciary, unconstitutional, and subversive to the rights of a free people, and justly calls for the disapprobation of all the supporters and lovers of good government and republican principles.

"Resolved 2ndly: That the Committee state, in their report, that our Memorial aggravates the case of our oppressors, and at the same time say, that they have not examined into the truth or falsehood of the facts mentioned in said Memorial.

"Resolved 3rdly: That the Memorial does not aggravate the conduct of our oppressors, as every statement set forth in said Memorial was substantiated by indubitable testimony; therefore we consider the statements of the Committee, in regard to that part, as false and ungenerous.

"Resolved 4thly: That that part of the report referring us to the justice and magnanimity of the state of Missouri for redress, we deem it is a great insult to our good sense, better judgment, and intelligence, when numerous affidavits, which were laid before the Committee, prove that we could only go into the state of Missouri contrary to the exterminating order of the Governor, and consequently at the risk of our lives.

"Resolved 5thly: That after repeated appeals to the constituted authorities of the state of Missouri for redress, which were in vain, we fondly hoped that in the Congress of the United States, ample justice would have been rendered us; and upon that consideration alone, we pledged ourselves to abide their decision.

"Resolved 6thly: That the exterminating order of Governor Boggs is a direct infraction of the Constitution of the United States, and of the state of Missouri; and the committee in refusing to investigate the proceedings of the Executive and others of the state of Missouri, and turning a deaf ear to the cries of widows, orphans, and innocent blood, we deem no less than seconding the proceedings of that murderous clan, whose deeds are recorded in heaven, and justly call down upon their heads the righteous judgments of an offended God.

"Resolved 7thly: That the thanks of this meeting be tendered to the citizens of the state of Illinois, for their kind, liberal, and generous conduct towards us; and that we call upon them, as well as every patriot in this vast Republic, to aid us in all lawful endeavors to obtain redress for the injuries we have sustained.

"Resolved 8thly: That the thanks of this meeting be tendered to the delegation of Illinois, for the bold, manly, noble and independent course they have taken in presenting our case before the nation, amid misrepresentation, contumely and abuse, which were heaped upon us in our suffering condition.

"Resolved 9thly: That the thanks of this meeting be tendered to Governor Carlin of Illinois, Governor Lucas of Iowa Territory, for their sympathy, aid, and protection; and to all other honorable gentlemen who have assisted us in our endeavors to obtain redress.

"Resolved 10thly: That Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon, and Elias Higbee, the Delegates appointed by this Church to visit the City of Washington, to present our sufferings before the authorities of the nation, be tendered the thanks of this meeting for the prompt and efficient manner in which they have discharged their duty; and that they be requested, in behalf of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints throughout the world, to continue to use their endeavors to obtain redress for a suffering people. And if all hopes of obtaining satisfaction for the injuries done us be entirely blasted, that they then appeal our case to the Court of Heaven, believing that the Great Jehovah, who rules over the destiny of nations and who notices the falling sparrows, will undoubtedly redress our wrongs, and ere long avenge us of our adversaries.

"On Motion, Resolved, That the report of the committee on the Judiciary, as well as the foregoing Preamble and Resolutions, be published in the Quincy papers." (D.H.C. 4:107-109.)

In the revelation of December 16, 1833, (Sec. 101) the Lord had counseled the Church to importune the judge, and if he heed them not, then to importune the governor and if he heeded them not, then to importune "at the feet of the president; and if the president heed them not, then will the Lord arise and come forth out of his hiding place, and in his fury vex the nation." (D. & C. 101:88-89.) The Church had complied with this commandment, and had failed to receive favorable action in each case. Therefore the Church in conference appealed to the Lord.
