Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED THIRTY

The Founding of Nauvoo

References

D.H.C. Vol. 3:265, 243, 244, 295.

Topics

a. The purchase of lands at Commerce.

b. The Prophet moves to Commerce.

c. Unhealthful condition of the location.

d. Healing of the sick.

2.The City of Nauvoo. Note 2.

a. Meaning of the name.

b. Description of the site.

c. Other sites for settlement.

d. Stakes of Zion proposed.

a. Securing the charter.

b. Liberal provisions in the charter.

c. Educational features.

d. The Nauvoo Legion.

e. Election of officers.

f. Character of the mayor.

g. The first measures passed.

Notes

Friday, May 10, 1839, President Joseph Smith took up his residence in a small log house on the bank of the Mississippi, on the White purchase, one mile south of the small settlement of Commerce. The first house built in that part by a member of the Church was erected by Theodore Turley in June, 1839. When the purchase of the White and Galland properties was made, Commerce consisted of one stone house, three frame and two block houses. Between Commerce and Davidson Hibbard's place a short distance south on the river front, there were four houses, three of which were long cabins. It was into one of these that the Prophet moved. This place was virtually a wilderness. The land was low and swampy covered by trees and bushes. The lower parts were so wet that travel by team was impossible, and very difficult on foot. This created a very unhealthful condition. However the Prophet felt that by drainage, and the blessing of the Lord, it could be made a beautiful and pleasant place for habitation, where a city could be built. This location is one of the most favorable in the United States for the building of a beautiful, prosperous city, so there was inspiration in the Prophet's decision. The Mississippi River makes a half circle at this point, giving three fronts on its bank. The ground gradually rises from the river front for a distance of about one mile to the common level of the prairie lands which extend beyond. Immediately after settling on this land steps were taken to drain the low lands and correct the unfavorable condition. In the meantime, however, there was much sickness due to this unhealthful condition. Some of the refugees were sheltered only in tents and wagons, for there had been little time to build houses and the people lacked the means with which to build. In the morning of July 22, 1839, the Prophet arose from his own bed where he had been lying ill, and filled with the spirit of the Lord, went forth along the river bank healing all who were afflicted. Among the number were Henry G. Sherwood and Benjamin Brown, who appeared to be dying. He later crossed the river to Montrose and healed Brigham Young and other brethren of the twelve, and took them along with him to assist in this ministry. What took place in Iowa is related by Elder Wilford Woodruff as follows:

"After healing all that lay sick upon the bank of the river as far as the stone house, he called upon Elder Kimball and some others to accompany him across the river to visit the sick at Montrose. Many of the saints were living at the old military barracks. Among the number were several of the Twelve. On his arrival, the first house he visited was that occupied by Elder Brigham Young, the President of the Quorum of the Twelve, who lay sick. Joseph healed him, then he arose and accompanied the Prophet on his visit to others who were in the same condition. They visited Elder Wilford Woodruff, also Elders Orson Pratt and John Taylor, all of whom were living in Montrose. They also accompanied him. The next place they visited was the home of Elijah Fordham, who was supposed to be about breathing his last. When the company entered the room, the Prophet of God walked up to the dying man, and took hold of his right hand and spoke to him; but Brother Fordham was unable to speak, his eyes were set in his head like glass, and he seemed entirely unconscious of all around him. Joseph held his hand and looked into his eyes in silence for a length of time. A change in the countenance of Brother Fordham was soon perceptible to all present. His sight returned, and upon Joseph asking him if he knew him, he, in a low whisper, answered, 'Yes.' Joseph asked him if he had faith to be healed. He answered: 'I fear it is too late; if you had come sooner I think I would have been healed.' The Prophet said, 'Do you believe in Jesus Christ?' He answered in a feeble voice, 'I do.' Joseph then stood erect, still holding his hand in silence several moments; then he spoke in a very loud voice, saying: 'Brother Fordham, I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to arise from this bed and be made whole.' His voice was like the voice of God, and not of man. It seemed as though the house shook to its very foundations. Brother Fordham arose from his bed and was immediately made whole. His feet were bound in poultices, which he kicked off, then putting on his clothes, he ate a bowl of bread and milk, and followed the Prophet into the street." (Footnote D.H.C. 4:3-4.)

Other lands were also purchased on easy terms, for the gathering of the saints. Additional properties were obtained from Davidson Hibbard, Daniel H. Wells, Hiram Kimball, Horace R. Hotchkiss and others which were incorporated within the limits of the city of Nauvoo. Holdings were obtained on the Iowa side of the river. The village of Nashville, in Lee County, with twenty thousand acres adjoining were purchased. The Prophet instructed that in this place a city should be built to be named Zarahemla. It was the intention also to organize stakes of Zion just as soon as there was sufficient population gathered in these places, both in Illinois and Iowa. At a general conference held at Commerce, October 5-7, 1839, two stakes of Zion were organized; one at Commerce, or Nauvoo, and the other in Iowa. Others were contemplated in anticipation of an influx of population to other settlements, but these were later abandoned. In a revelation given January 19, 1841, the saints scattered abroad were instructed to gather in Hancock County, Illinois. About one year after the first settlers came to Commerce, Nauvoo had a population of over three thousand, and six years later, at the time of the exodus from that place, the population numbered about twenty thousand souls.

Nauvoo was incorporated in December 1840. On the 16th day of that month Governor Thomas Carlin signed the bill. Stephen A. Douglas was secretary of state; and Abraham Lincoln was a member of the legislature and had favored the bill. The boundaries of the city were defined, with ample provision for expansion. The city council was to consist of a mayor, four aldermen and nine councilors and the election of officers was to be held on the first Monday in February 1841.

There has come to pass a great deal of criticism by the enemies of the Church because of the liberal powers in this charter. Our enemies declare that it was the work of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and they forget that he, or any other person, could not have created such a charter, without the action and approval of the governor and legislature of the state. It is a fact, however, that the provisions in this document were the suggestions of the Prophet. They were incorporated also because of the ill-treatment and persecutions which the saints had been forced to endure. It was the intention to take steps, if possible, to prevent the recurrence of such scenes as had taken place in Missouri. Speaking of this charter, the Prophet said: "The City Charter of Nauvoo is of my own plan and device. I concocted it for the salvation of the Church, and on principles so broad, that every honest man might dwell secure under its protective influence without distinction of sect or party." (D.H.C. 4:249.)

This charter was one of most liberal powers. It was more than the saints hoped to obtain. It contained twenty-eight sections and was bounded in its limitations only by the Constitution of the United States and the constitution of the state of Illinois. All the powers "conferred on the city council of the city of Springfield" were granted in the charter of Nauvoo. The mayor and aldermen were given all the rights and powers of justices of the peace, both in civil and criminal cases, arising under the laws of the state. A municipal court was provided composed of the mayor as chief justice, and the aldermen as associates. This court had power to grant writs of habeas corpus in all cases arising under the ordinances of the city council, and trial by jury was guaranteed before twelve men.

The educational features were well advanced for that day. The city council was empowered with authority to establish the "University of the City of Nauvoo," for the teaching of the arts, sciences and learned professions. This university was to be under the management of a board of trustees, consisting of a chancellor, registrar and twenty-three regents. The trustees were to be appointed by the city council, and they were empowered with all the "privileges for the advancement of the cause of education which appertain to the trustees of any other college or university in the state." This school was established with some very eminent teachers, but, of course, never reached the stage of a full-fledged university while the saints resided in Nauvoo.

The feature which has caused the greatest amount of criticism by our enemies was the provision for the establishment of the "Nauvoo Legion," which was to be a part of the state militia. The city council had the power to "organize the inhabitants of said city, subject to military duty, into a body of independent military men, to be called the 'Nauvoo Legion,' the Court Martial of which shall be composed of the commissioned officers of said legion, and constitute the law-making department, with full power and authority to make, ordain, establish, and execute all such laws and ordinances as may be considered necessary for the benefit, government, and regulation of said Legion; provided said Court Martial shall pass no law or act, repugnant to, or inconsistent with, the Constitution of the United States, or of this State; and provided also that the officers of the Legion shall be commissioned by the Governor of the State." (D.H.C. Vol. 4:244.) This legion was to perform the same amount of military duty as other bodies of the regular militia, and to be subject to the call of the mayor in executing the laws and ordinances of the city, and the governor for public defense. On the fourth day of February 1841, the officers of the legion were chosen as follows: Joseph Smith, lieutenant-general; John C. Bennett, major-general; Wilson Law, brigadier-general, first cohort; Don Carlos Smith, brigadier-general, second cohort. The legion was composed of six companies. (D.H.C. 4:295-296.)

John C. Bennett, who was elected mayor of Nauvoo, came to that place near the close of the year 1840. He was born in Massachusettes in 1804. He prepared himself to practice medicine and did so in Ohio and later in Illinois. He became acquainted with the Latter-day Saints during their persecutions in Missouri. At that time he was a resident of Illinois and was quartermaster-general of the state of Illinois. He had previously served as brigadier-general of the "Invincible Dragoons," in the state militia. He commenced a correspondence with the Prophet in the summer of 1840, expressing great sympathy with the saints and vigorously disapproving of the evil treatment they had received. He expressed the desire to move to Nauvoo and was encouraged to do so. He was a man of considerable ability, with many human weaknesses, one of which was an excellent opinion of himself. He was bombastic but at the time of his coming to Nauvoo was evidently sincere. He was a man, however, easily provoked when crossed and accustomed to having his own will gratified. Shortly after coming to Nauvoo he joined the Church and was the most active agent in securing the charter of Nauvoo. Like Lucifer, he was ambitious and sought his own advancement. He became very prominent in the councils of the Church. The Lord spoke of him in the revelation of Jan. 19, 1841, as follows:

"Again, let my servant John C. Bennett help you in your labor in sending my word to the kings and people of the earth, and stand by you, even you my servant Joseph Smith, in the hour of affliction; and his reward shall not fail if he receive counsel.

"And for his love he shall be great, for he shall be mine if he do this, saith the Lord. I have seen his work which he hath done, which I accept if he continue, and will crown him with blessings and great glory." (D. & C. 124:16-17.)

His inaugural address after, being elected mayor of Nauvoo, contains many very worthy sentiments, but breathes a spirit of pedantry which spoiled much of the good effect.

He failed to heed the warning of the Lord, to continue faithful and to accept counsel. He fell into sin, lost the spirit and became a bitter traitor to the Prophet. He moved from Nauvoo when his wicked acts were discovered and joined forces with the Missourians to bring the Prophet to his death.

The first act passed by the city council of Nauvoo, was a resolution presented by the Prophet, thanking the governor, the council of revision and the legislature of the state of Illinois, "for the unparalleled liberality" for the powers which the charter conferred. Among the first ordinances passed was one assuring protection to Catholics, Presbyterians, Methodists, Baptists, Latter-day Saints, and all other religious organizations. They were to have "free toleration, and equal privileges in this city; and should any person be guilty of ridiculing and abusing, or otherwise deprecating another, in consequence of his religion, or of disturbing or interrupting any religious meeting within the limits of this city, he shall, on conviction before the Mayor or Municipal Court, be considered a disturber of the public peace, and fined in any sum not to exceed five hundred dollars, or imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both, at the discretion of said Mayor or Court." (D.H.C 4:306.)
