Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-ONE

Return to the Church of Wayward Brethren—Passing of Prominent Elders—More Difficulty with Missouri

References

D.H.C. Vol. 4:110, 141-160, 180-189.

Topics

a. Return of Frederick G. Williams.

b. Return of William W. Phelps.

a. Passing of John Young.

b. Passing of Bishop Partridge.

c. Passing of Patriarch Joseph Smith.

d. Passing of Seymour Brunson.

e. Passing of James Mulholland.

f. Passing of Don Carlos Smith.

g. Passing of Robert B. Thompson.

a. Reason for the new outbreak of lawlessness.

b. Kidnapping of Alanson Brown, Benjamin Boyce and others.

c. Statement of James Allred.

d. Action of Citizens of Nauvoo.

e. Memorial to Governor Carlin.

Notes

In the following June, William W. Phelps wrote to the Prophet from Dayton, Ohio, asking to be permitted to come back to the Church. He had served in the presidency in Zion, and had played a very important part in those early days in Missouri. With his brethren of that presidency he commenced to speculate and charges were brought against him, David Whitmer and John Whitmer, for some transactions in Missouri, the claim being that they were taking unrighteous advantage in these dealings with the members of the Church. He became estranged along with the other two brethren and lost his standing in the Church. At the time when the difficulties in Missouri first resulted in violence in 1833, he offered his life as a ransom, along with John Corrill, John Whitmer, Algernon S. Gilbert, Edward Partridge and Isaac Morley, if the mob would spare the rest of the members of the Church from persecution. These brethren on that occasion nobly presented themselves to the mob and offered their lives as a sacrifice, but this was refused. In the days of spiritual darkness, when so many brethren fell by the wayside, Brother Phelps also partook of that spirit and became somewhat bitter towards the Prophet and those who remained faithful to him. At the trial of Joseph Smith and other leading brethren before Judge Austin A. King, November 12, 1838, he gave testimony against his former brethren and helped to send them to the dungeons where they suffered for so many months. In later months his conscience troubling him for his misdeeds he began to feel his way back into the Church. June 29, 1840, he wrote to the Prophet, in which he said:

"Brother Joseph: I am alive, and with the help of God I mean to live still. I am the prodigal son, though I never doubt or disbelieve the fulness of the Gospel. I have been greatly abused and humbled, and I bless the God of Israel when I lately read your prophetic blessing on my head, as follows:

"'The Lord will chasten him because he taketh honor to himself, and when his soul is greatly humbled he will forsake the evil. Then shall the light of the Lord break upon him as at noonday and in him shall be no darkness, etc.'"

"I have seen the folly of my way, and I tremble at the gulf I have passed. So it is, and why I know not. I prayed and God answered, but what could I do? Says I, 'I will repent and live, and ask my old brethren to forgive me, and though they chasten me to death, yet I will die with them, for their God is my God. The least place with them is enough for me, yea, it is bigger and better than all Babylon.' Then I dreamed that I was in a large house with many mansions, with you and Hyrum and Sidney, and when it was said, 'Supper must be made ready,' by one of the cooks, I saw no meat, but you said there was plenty, and you showed me much, and as good as I ever saw; and while cutting to cook, your heart and mine beat within us, and we took each other's hand and cried for joy, and I awoke and took courage.

"I know my situation, you know it, and God knows it, and I want to be saved if my friends will help me. Like the captain that was cast away on a desert island; when he got off he went to sea again, and made his fortune the next time, so let my lot be. I have done wrong and I am sorry. The beam is in my own eye. I have not walked along with my friends according to my holy anointing. I ask forgiveness in the name of Jesus Christ of all the Saints, for I will do right. God helping me. I want your fellowship; if you cannot grant that, grant me your peace and friendship, for we are brethren, and our communion used to be sweet, and whenever the Lord brings us together again, I will make all the satisfaction on every point that Saints or God can require, Amen." (D.H.C. 4:141-142.)

The Prophet readily answered him saying that his case had been presented to the Church and an expression of the feelings of the members obtained and unanimously they voted to receive William W. Phelps back into the Church.

Patriarch John Young, father of President Brigham Young, died Friday, October 12, 1839, in Quincy, in his seventy-seventh year. He was a soldier of the Revolution and with his family received the Gospel and passed through the persecutions, mobbings and driving from Missouri, and became a victim of this cruel and inhuman treatment which had been forced upon the saints. His death was brought about through the exposure and.suffering which he had to endure. At the time of his death his son Brigham, president of the council of the twelve, was on his way to Great Britain to fulfill the mission which had been appointed by revelation to the twelve.

Elder Seymour Brunson, fearless and faithful to his trust and loyal in his trust and loyal in his integrity to the Church, passed away in Nauvoo, August 10, 1840. He also became a victim of persecution. He was among the first settlers in Nauvoo. He, it was that brought charges against Oliver Cowdery for his disobedience and rebellion which resulted in Oliver's excommunication from the Church. The Prophet wrote of him: "He has always been a lively stone in the building of God and was much respected by his friends and acquaintances. He died in the triumph of faith, and in his dying moments bore testimony to the Gospel that he had embraced." (D.H.C. 4:179.)

Elder James Mulholland, the Prophet's secretary, died November 3, 1839, while the Prophet was returning from Washington where he went to plead the cause of the Saints. He was only thirty-five years of age and the Prophet said of him, "He was a man of fine education, and a faithful scribe and Elder in the Church." (D.H.C. 4:89.)

The Patriarch Joseph Smith, also a victim of Missouri persecution, died in Nauvoo, September 14, 1840. He was the first person to accept the Prophet's story. He was ordained Patriarch December 18, 1834. For a number of years he acted as a special counselor to the Prophet. During the persecutions in Kirtland he was made a prisoner by the apostate enemies of the Church, but gained his liberty and made his way to Far West in 1838. He was driven from Missouri by the exterminating order of Lilburn W. Boggs in the winter of 1838-9. He went to Quincy and later in the spring of 1839 to Commerce where he made his home. He was six feet two inches tall and weighed in perfect health about 200 pounds. His sufferings in Missouri and the exposure brought him to his grave. (D.H.C. 4:189-197.)

Don Carlos Smith, youngest brother of the Prophet, died Sunday, August 7, 1841 at the age of twenty-six years. He was one of the first to receive the testimony of the Prophet's mission. He received the Priesthood when but fourteen years of age, and in 1836, was made president of the high priests' quorum. He went on a mission to Tennessee and Kentucky in 1838, and during his absence, in the winter, his wife was driven from her home which was burned, and she was forced to wade Grand River with her two little children. He learned the printing trade while laboring with Oliver Cowdery in Kirtland. When driven from Missouri he took charge of his father's family and saw them safely removed to Quincy, Illinois.

At the time of his death he, with Robert B. Thompson, was printing the "Times and Seasons" in Nauvoo. He was six feet four inches tall, very straight and strong. The Prophet said of him "I never knew any fault in him; I never saw the first immoral act, or the first irreligious or ignoble disposition in the child from the time he was born until the time of his death. He was a lovely, a good-natured, a kind-hearted, and a virtuous and faithful, upright child; and where his soul goes, let mine go also." (D.H.C. 4:393-399.)

Robert Blashel Thompson, associate editor with Don Carlos Smith of the "Times and Seasons" died on the 27th day of August 1841, three weeks later than Don Carlos Smith. He was born October 1, 1811, in Great Driffield, Yorkshire, England. He moved to Canada in 1834 and was baptized and confirmed by Elder Parley P. Pratt, and shortly after was ordained an elder by Elder John Taylor. He moved to Kirtland in 1837, where he married Mercy Rachel Fielding, sister to Joseph Fielding and Mary Fielding Smith. He was driven with the saints out of Missouri. In Nauvoo he became a secretary to the Prophet Joseph Smith and associated with Don Carlos in the editing of the "Times and Seasons." On the 16th day of August he was seized with the same disease which had taken Don Carlos Smith. The attachment between these two was very strong. Elder Thompson had preached the funeral sermon over the remains of Don Carlos Smith. He was a most loyal and trusted friend of the Prophet Joseph Smith. (D.H.C. 4:411-412.)

July 7, 1840, Alanson Brown, Benjamin Boyce, Noah Rogers and James Allred, were surrounded by an armed force of mobbers, while they were minding their own affairs. These ruffians with the vilest kind of oaths swore that they were duty bound to kill "all the damned 'Mormons' that they could find." These brethren were forced across the river to a small town in Lewis County, Missouri, called Tully. Here they were kept under guard until about 11 P.M. that night. Then the mobbers took Alanson Brown and Benjamin Boyce to the woods with ropes around their necks. Brother Boyce inquired of them what they were going to do and they answered that they were going to kill them and "make catfish bait" of them. The two brethren were then separated. Brother Boyce was stripped and tied to a tree and whipped with gads until his body was mangled from his shoulders to his knees. The ruffians who had taken Alanson Brown hung him by the neck until life appeared to be gone, then they cut him down, revived him, and returned him to Tully with the other prisoners. They then placed ropes on the necks of Allred and Rogers and took them out to the woods, where they stripped them and made many threats against their lives. Rogers was then whipped in a similar manner to the whipping of Boyce, but for some reason they refrained from whipping Allred. Then these brethren were returned to Tully and with Boyce and Brown were confined in a room.

After a number of days they released Brothers Brown and Allred, but Brothers Boyce and Rogers were confined in irons until the 21st day of August, when, through the blessing of the Lord they made their escape. When they returned to Nauvoo, Alanson Brown and Benjamin Boyce made affidavit before Daniel H. Wells, justice of the peace, stating their abuses administered by this mob. James Allred made another statement also before Justice Wells.

In the affidavit by Brown and Boyce we find the account of events as previously given. They were peacefully engaging in their own business within the limits of Hancock County in Illinois, when set upon by William Allensworth, John H. Owsley H. M. Woodward, John Bain, Light T. Tait, Halsay White, William Martin and one named Huner. There were other members of this mob gang. James Allred in his statement, which agrees with that given by his brethren, presents the following:

"Tully, Missouri, July 12, 1840 The people of Tully, having taken up Mr. Allred, with some others and having examined into the offenses committed, find nothing to justify his detention any longer, and have released him. By order of the committee."

"H. M. Woodward."

On the 13th day of July 1840 a meeting of the citizens of Nauvoo was held. Judge Elias Higbee presided and Robert B. Thompson was appointed secretary. On motion a committee was appointed to report resolutions, expressive of the sense of the meeting. The members of the committee were: Isaac Galland, Robert B. Thompson, Sidney Rigdon and Daniel H. Wells. They retired, and after a short time reported the following resolutions:

PREAMBLE: The committee appointed to express the sense of this meeting, in relation to the recent acts of abduction, and other deeds of cruelty and inhumanity committed upon our citizens by (some of) the citizens of the state of Missouri, beg leave respectfully to report:

"That having under consideration the principal matters involved in the discharge of their duty, they have been forced to arrive at the following conclusions:

"First—That the people of Missouri, not having sufficiently slacked their thirst for blood and plunder, are now disposed to pursue us with a repetition of the scenes of brutality which marked their whole course of conduct towards us during our unhappy residence among them.

"Second—That notwithstanding they have already robbed us of our homes, murdered our families, stolen and carried away our property; and to complete the measure of their infamy as a state, their executive caused unoffending thousands to be banished from the state, without even the form of a trial, or the slightest evidence of crime; they are now sending their gangs of murdering banditti, and thieving brigands, to wreak further vengeance, and satisfy their insatiable cupidity in the state of Illinois, and that too before we have even had time to erect shelters for our families.

"Third—That for the purpose of giving a semblance of justification to their most unhallowed conduct, the people of Missouri have again commenced concealing goods within the limits of our settlements, as they had done before in the state of Missouri, in order to raise a charge of stealing against our citizens, and under this guise they have within a few days kidnapped, and carried away, several honest and worthy citizens of this county.

"Fourth—Under these circumstances the first duty and the only redress which seems to offer itself to our consideration is an appeal to the executive of the state of Illinois, for redress, and protection from further injuries, with a confident assurance that he, unlike the governor of Missouri, will extend the executive arm to protect from lawless outrage, unoffending citizens. Therefore,

"Resolved 1st: That we view, with no ordinary feelings, the approaching danger as a necessary consequence following the lawless and outrageous conduct of the citizens of Missouri, in setting at defiance the laws of this, as well as of all other states in this Union, by forcing from their homes, and from the state, civil citizens of Illinois, and taking them into the state of Missouri, without any legal process whatever, and there inflicting upon them base cruelties in order to extort false confessions from them, to give a coloring to their (the Missourians) iniquities, and screen themselves from the just indignation of an incensed public.

"Resolved 2ndly: That while we deeply deplore the cause which has brought us together on this occasion, we cannot refrain from expressing our most unqualified disapprobation at the infringement of the laws of this state, as set forth in the above Preamble, and strongest indignation at the manner in which the people of Missouri treated those whom they had thus inhumanly taken from among us.

"Resolved 3rdly: That inasmuch as we are conscious of our honest and upright intentions, and are at all times ready and willing to submit to the just requirements of the laws, we claim of the citizens and authorities of this state, protection from such unjust and, before, unheard of oppressions.

"Resolved 4thly: That the forcible abduction of our citizens by the citizens of Missouri, is a violation of the laws regulating the federal compact, subversive to the rights of freemen, and contrary to our free institutions, and republican principles.

"Resolved 5thly: That the cruelties practiced upon our citizens, since their abduction, is disgraceful to humanity; the height of injustice and oppression, and would disgrace the annals of the most barbarous nations, in either ancient or modern times; and can only find its parallel in the 'Auto da Fe'—the inquisitions of Spain.

"Resolved 6thly: That such unconstitutional and unhallowed proceedings on the part of the citizens of Missouri, ought to arouse every patriot to exertion and diligence to put a stop to such procedure, and use all constitutional means to bring the offenders to justice.

"Resolved 7thly: That we memorilize the Executive of this state, of the gross outrage which has been committed on our citizens; and pledge ourselves to aid him in such measures as may be deemed necessary to restore our citizens to freedom, and have satisfaction for the wrongs we have suffered."

"Elias Higbee, Chairman,

"Robert B. Thompson, Secretary."

(D.H.C. 4:157, 159.)

The committee in harmony with this meeting of the citizens of Nauvoo, sent a memorial to Governor Carlin in which the particulars of these outrages were recorded. Daniel H. Wells, and George Miller waited upon the governor and laid the case before him. It is reported that as they laid the case before the governor in the presence of his wife, she was moved to tears, and the governor promised to take the matter in hand. However, he was fearful of giving offense to Missouri, and his friendliness towards the saints had greatly cooled. No action was ever taken by Thomas Carlin, governor of Illinois, to release the prisoners, or to bring to justice these inhuman creatures guilty of these crimes. To the contrary, he joined with Missouri in their attempt to inflict further atrocities and continued to persecute the Prophet Joseph Smith; but this is a story to be told.
