Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-TWO

Missouri's Requisition for Return of Joseph Smith and Brethren

References

D.H.C. Vol. 4:198-199, 364-371.

Topics

l. Governor Boggs Demands Return of Joseph Smith and Others as Fugitives from Justice.

a. Attempt of Missouri to have former prisoners returned. Note 1.

b. Comment of the "Times and Seasons."

c. Accused brethren go into retirement.

a. Joseph Smith lays his case before Governor Carlin.

b. Governor Carlin's perfidy.

c. The Prophet arrested.

d. Brethren from Nauvoo go to his assistance.

e. The Prophet, under arrest, goes with officers to Nauvoo.

f. He nurses the sheriff who was ill.

g. Brethren accompany Joseph Smith to Monmouth.

a. Excitement and opposition.

b. The postponement of the trial.

c. The case before the court.

d. Decision of Judge Douglas.

e. The Prophet's gratitude for deliverance.

f. Eloquent appeal by Attorney Browning.

g. The contract between justice in Missouri and at Monmouth at a trial.

Notes

This action aroused the indignation of these brethren and all the members of the Church, and the "Times and Seasons" published a rousing denunciation of this action in which the paper said:

"The demand it seems has been complied with by Governor Carlin, and an order issued for their apprehension; accordingly our place has recently received a visit from the sheriff for these men; but through the tender mercies of a kind Providence, who by His power has sustained, and once delivered them from the hands of the blood-thirsty and savage race of beings in the shape of men that tread Missouri's delightful soil; they were not to be found—as the Lord would have it, they were gone from home, and the sheriff returned, of course without them.

"These men do not feel disposed to again try the solemn realities of mob law in that state; and a free and enlightened republic should respond against it, for Missouri has no claim on them, but they have claim on Missouri.

"What right have they to demand of Governor Carlin, as fugitives from justice, men against whom no process had ever been found in that state—no, not so much as the form of a process? They were taken by a mob militia, and dragged from everything that was dear and sacred, and tried (without their knowledge) by a court martial, condemned to be shot, but this failing, they were forced into confinement, galled with chains, deprived of the comforts of life, and even that which was necessary to save life, then brought to a pretended trial, without even having a legal process served, and then deprived of the privilege of defense. They were taken by a mob, tried, condemned and imprisoned by the same, and this Missouri cannot deny.

"What a beautiful picture Governor Boggs has presented to the world, after driving twelve or fifteen thousand inhabitants from their homes, forcing them to leave the state under the pain of extermination, and confiscating their property, and murdering innocent men, women and children; then, because that a few made their escape from his murdering hand, and have found protection in a land of equal rights, so that his plans and designs have all been unfruitful, to that extent that he has caused 'Mormonism' to spread with double vigor; he now has the presumption to demand them back, in order that his thirst for innocent blood may yet be satiated.

"He has no business with them; they have not escaped from justice, but from the hands of a cursed, infuriated, inhuman set, or race of beings who are enemies to their country, to their God, to themselves, and to every principle of righteousnes and humanity. They loathe Christianity, and despise the people of God; they war against truth, and inherit lies; virtue they tread under their feet; while vice (with her ten thousand offspring) is their welcome associate; therefore men on whom Missouri has no claim, she cannot, no, she never shall have." (D.H.C. 198-199.)

Naturally these brethren, after Governor Carlin had honored the requisition, were forced to go into retirement, for they knew what the result would be should the Missourian ruffians get them in their clutches.

Sunday, June 6th, the news of the Prophet's arrest reached Nauvoo and was rapidly circulated throughout the city. At once Hosea Stout, Tarleton Lewis, William Hickman, John S. Higbee, Elijah Able, Uriel C. Nickerson and George W. Clyde started from Nauvoo in a skiff in order to overtake the prophet and rescue him if it became necessary. They made haste with the help of a favorable wind and arrived in Quincy at dusk that evening. There they found that the Prophet, in charge of two officers had gone to Nauvoo; Sheriff King was seized with sudden sickness and the Prophet nursed him, and waited on him at his own house when they arrived in Nauvoo. The Prophet then notified some of the brethren to get ready to go with him to Monmouth the next morning.

Monday morning, June 7th, the Prophet in custody of Sheriff King, left for Monmouth, seventy-five miles from Nauvoo. On the way the Prophet attended Sheriff King who was still ill. He was accompanied on this journey by Charles C. Rich, Amasa Lyman, Shadrack Roundy, Reynolds Cahoon, Charles Hopkins, Alfred Randall, Elias Higbee, Morris Phelps, John P. Green, Henry G. Sherwood, Joseph Younger, Darwin Chase, Ira Miles, Joel S. Miles, Lucien Woodworth, Vinson Knight, Robert B. Thompson, George Miller and a number of others. They camped that night on the road.

That evening great excitement prevailed and the citizens who were hostile employed several attorneys to assist in the case against the Prophet. While waiting for the trial many requests were made that the Prophet preach to the citizens of Monmouth. Being a prisoner and because of such curiosity, he could not even come from his room to take his meals because the people would crowd the windows and doors and create great confusion. The Prophet appointed Amasa Lyman to preach in the court house on Wednesday evening.

The court house was crowded Wednesday morning with spectators. Mr. Morrison, of the prosecution, wished to send to Springfield for the indictment, as it was not found with the rest of the papers. This would have delayed the trial, and not being considered important to the trial, the defense admitted that there was an indictment. Mr. Warren for the defense read the petition, which stated that the Prophet was unlawfully held in custody, and that the indictment, in Missouri, was obtained by fraud, bribery and duress, which the Prophet declared, "all of which I was prepared to prove." Witnesses were called, and for the Prophet, Morris Phelps, Elias Higbee, Reynolds Cahoon and George W. Robinson, were sworn. The state's counsel objected to hearing evidence on the merits of the case, as they could not go beyond the indictment. This caused a long and heated discussion which occupied the time of the entire day. "All the lawyers on the opposite side, excepting two, viz. Messrs. Knowlton and Jennings, confined themselves to the merits of the case, and conducted themselves as gentlemen; but it was plainly evident that the design of Messrs. Knowlton and Jennings was to excite the public mind still more on the subject and inflame the passions of the people against me and my religion," said the Prophet.

The counsel for the defense was Messrs. Charles A. Warren, Sidney H. Little, O. H. Browning, James H. Ralston, Cyrus Walker and Archibald Williams. These men stood nobly in defense of their client, notwithstanding there had been threats that if they engaged on the side of the defense, they need not look to the citizens of that county for any political favors. They were not influenced, however, by such threats. They demanded that the court examine the evidence, stating that the threats of the people made them more determined than ever to perform to the uttermost their duty. The court adjourned about 6 P.M.

When the Prophet was seated at dinner, a man rushed out and said: "Which is Jo. Smith? I have got a five dollar Kirtland bill, and I'll be damned if he don't take it back I'll sue him, for his name is to it." "I replied," said the Prophet, "I am the man"; he then took the bill, paid the man who took the money rather reluctantly, evidently hoping that the Prophet would refuse so that he could bring against him another charge. "The crowd in the court was so intense that Judge Douglas ordered the sheriff of Warren County to keep the spectators back; but he neglected doing so, when the judge fined him ten dollars. In a few minutes he again ordered the sheriff to keep the men back from crowding the prisoner and witnesses. He replied, 'I have told a constable to do it,' when the judge immediately said, 'Clerk, add ten dollars more to the fine.' The sheriff, finding neglect rather expensive, then attended to his duty." (D.H.C. 4:368.)

A young lawyer from Missouri volunteered to plead against the Prophet and did his best to convict him, but being so filled with liquor and chewing tobacco, he turned sick, and requested to be excused by the court and went out of the court room spewing down the stairs, whereupon some one called the Missourians "pukes," to the amusement of the court. Mr. O. H. Browning made a wonderful plea for the Prophet stating that he was an eye witness to much of the abuse which had been poured out upon the saints. "When he tracked the persecuted women and children by their bloody footmarks in the snow, they were so affecting that the spectators were often dissolved in tears. Judge Douglas himself and most of the officers also wept." The attitude of many of the people was changed after Elder Amasa M. Lyman preached an inspiring discourse on the first principles of the Gospel.

Thursday, June 10, 1841, the court was convened at 8 o'clock and Judge Douglas delivered his opinion. He said:

"That the writ being once returned to the Executive by the sheriff of Hancock County was dead, and stood in the same relationship as any other writ which might issue from the Circuit Court and consequently the defendant could not be held in custody on that writ. The other point, whether evidence in the case was admissible or not, he would not at that time decide, as it involved great and important considerations relative to the future conduct of the different states. There being no precedent, as far they had access to authorities to guide them, but he would endeavor to examine the subject, and avail himself of all the authorities which could be obtained on the subject, before he would decide that point. But on the other, the defendant must be liberated." (D.H.C. 4:370.)

The Prophet wrote: "Thus have I been once more delivered from the fangs of my cruel persecutors, for which I thank God, my Heavenly Father. I was discharged about 11 A.M. when I ordered dinner for my company now increased to about sixty men; and when I called for the bill, the unconscionable fellow replied, 'One hundred and sixty dollars.' The Prophet and his company then returned to Nauvoo rejoicing in their deliverance. The "Times and Seasons" in giving an account of the trial had this to say about the defense speech of Attorney Browning:

"We have just returned from the Court House, where we have listened to one of the most eloquent speeches ever uttered by mortal man, in favor of justice and liberty, by O. H. Browning, Esq., who has done himself immortal honor in the sight of all patriotic citizens who listened to the same. He occupied the attention of the court for more than two hours, and showed the falsity of the arguments of the opposite counsel, and laid down principles in a lucid and able manner which ought to guide the court in admitting testimony for the defendant, Joseph Smith." (D.H.C. 4:369.)

How different the nature of this trial from the mock trials in Missouri where defense witnesses were thrust into prison if they dared to speak a friendly word in defense of the persecuted brethren.
