Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-THREE

The Nauvoo Temple—The Nauvoo House—The Calling of Hyrum Smith

References

D.H.C. Vol. 4:274-286.

D. & C. Section 124.

Topics

a. Prayer of Joseph Smith accepted. (Vs. 1-2.)

b. A Proclamation to be sent to all kings and rulers. (Vs. 3-7; 13-16.)

c. Nations and rulers to be remembered in day of visitation. (Vs. 8-11.)

a. Hyrum Smith and others to take the direction of the building. (Vs. 15-24.)

b. The Name of the Lord to be upon it if it is not polluted. (Vs. 24, 56.)

c. The Prophet Joseph Smith and others to subscribe for stock. (Vs. 56-83, 111-120.)

a. An invitation to all saints to help build the temple. (Vs. 25-27.)

b. No place found where the Lord can come. (Vs. 28-29.)

c. The ordinance of baptism for the dead belongs to house of the Lord. (Vs. 30.)

d. Sufficient time given to build the house for baptism for the dead. (Vs. 31-36.)

e. Why Moses built a portable temple in the wilderness. (Vs. 37-39.) Note 4.

f. Hidden things to be revealed. (Vs. 40-44.)

g. Saints commanded to be diligent. (Vs. 45-48.)

h. The Lord accepts the labors of the saints when they are hindered by enemies. (Vs. 49-55.) Note 5.

a. Hyrum Smith to take the office and Priesthood of Patriarch. (Vs. 91-93.)

b. To be also a prophet, seer and revelator, and take the place vacated by Oliver Cowdery. (Vs. 94-96.)

c. William Law called to be a counselor. (Vs. 97-112.)

d. Sustaining of Church authorities. (Vs. 123-144.)

Notes

This was merely a statement that the posterity of Joseph Smith should have claim after him to the extent of the stock which he held in his name. Similar expressions are made in regard to others who paid stock into this house, that their generations after them should inherit holdings of their sires. This house was never finished because of the persecutions which later arose and the necessity on the part of the saints to build the temple.

Again so important did the Lord consider baptisms for the dead that he authorized the Saints to be baptized for their dead in the Mississippi River, until a place could be provided in his house for this purpose. He further said he would give them sufficient time to build such a house, and while they were doing so, their baptisms for their dead would be acceptable to him if performed in the river, but after a place was prepared, then all baptisms for the dead in the river must cease for this ordinance as well as other ordinances for the dead, properly belongs to the house of the Lord. This revelation was given January 19, 1841, and from that time until the October conference of the Church in 1841, the baptisms in the river were accepted. At the conference in October, the Prophet announced that the time for the discountinuance of the river baptism for the dead had come, and from that time forth they must be performed in the temple. The temple was not finished at that time, but it had in the six months progressed far enough so that the basement could be enclosed, and in the basement a font had been built and dedicated, so that early in November, 1841, under the direction of the Prophet Joseph, baptisms for the dead commenced in the house of the Lord.

The Lord had commanded the saints to labor diligently in the building of this house, and told them that they would be rejected with their dead if they failed to heed his instruction. They did not fail. It was not failure to build the house which was to constitute the offense which would bring rejection, but a careful reading of the revelation will show that it was to be the failure to perform the ordinances therein, when the opportunity came, that would bring the rejection. There are those who try to pervert this word of the Lord. There is no time to discuss this question fully at this time, but for a discussion of the matter reference is given to "Origin of the Reorganized Church and the Question of Succession," pages 35-58.

"Jesus was the first man that ever went to preach to the spirits in prison, holding the keys of the Gospel of salvation to them. Those keys were delivered to him in the day and hour that he went into the spirit world, and with them he opened the door of salvation to the spirits in prison." (Journal of Discourses, 3:370.)

The Lord said to Enoch, in speaking of the spirits of men, "But behold, these which thine eyes are upon shall perish in the floods; and behold, I will shut them up; a prison have I prepared for them. And That which I have chosen hath plead before my face. Wherefore, he suffereth for their sins; inasmuch as they will repent in the day that my Chosen shall return unto me, and until that day they shall be in torment." (Moses 7:38-39.) The first work for the dead was accomplished by the primitive saints after the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

There was at this time another office of the greatest importance which was conferred upon Hyrum Smith. It was to hold the keys of Presidency jointly with his brother Joseph Smith, the two standing at the head of this dispensation of the Fulness of Times. This was in accord with the divine law of witnesses. This blessing had first been given to Oliver Cowdery by the heavenly messengers, but he lost it through transgression, and the Lord conferred it upon Hyrum Smith. Whenever the heavens were opened and authority bestowed from the coming of John the Baptist to the coming of Elijah in the Kirtland Temple, Oliver Cowdery received, from these resurrected prophets, the keys in conjunction, or jointly, with the Prophet Joseph Smith. In this manner there were two men holding the keys of authority, and Oliver Cowdery was the second president, or associate president, of the Church, Joseph Smith being first. All of this authority which had been given to Oliver Cowdery was transferred to Hyrum Smith by divine appointment. Had Hyrum Smith lived after the martyrdom of Joseph Smith, he would have been, as he already was, President of the Church. It was necessary that both of these men should seal their testimony, as witnesses, with their blood. (See Conference Pamphlet, April 1930, pp. 91-94; also "Who Ordained Brigham Young," in "Origin of the Reorganized Church and Question of Succession," pp. 136-139.)

William Law was called by revelation to act as second counselor in the First Presidency, in 1841, but when the doctrine of celestial marriage was revealed he turned away from the Church, and was one of the chief plotters against the Prophet and Patriarch and helped to bring them to martyrdom.
