Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-FOUR

Celebrating the Foundation of the Church—Laying Corner Stones of the Temple—General Conference of April 1841

References

D.H.C.. Vol. 4:326-331-336-343.

Topics

a. The gathering of the Nauvoo Legion.

b. The assembly at the temple site.

c. Address by Sidney Rigdon.

a. The Prophet's instruction.

b. Order in laying of corner stones of temples.

c. Temple building in the present day, and ordinances in them.

a. Report of the First Presidency.

b. Transaction of business.

c. Salvation for the dead.

Notes

At noon the procession arrived at the Nauvoo Temple site and formed a hollow square and after the officers of the legion, the architects of the building and invited guests had taken their place on the stand, religious services were commenced by singing and prayer near the southeast corner of the temple site. President Sidney Rigdon was the principal speaker. He said this was the third occasion at which he had been present under similar circumstances at the laying of corner stones of houses to be erected in honor of our eternal Father and the saints. He referred to the varied scenes which had occurred since the first corner stone of a temple was laid. Since that time he with others "had waded through scenes that no other people had ever seen. * * * They had seen the blood of the innocent flow, and heard the groans of those dying for the witness of Jesus; in all those scenes of tribulation, his confidence, his courage and his joy had been increasing instead of diminishing. Now the scene had changed; persecution had in a measure subsided; peace and safety, friendship and joy, crowned their assembling; and their endeavors to serve God were respected and viewed with interest. The saints had assembled, not to violate law and trample upon equity and good social order; not to devastate and destroy; but to lift up the standard of liberty and law, to stand in defense of civil and religous rights, to protect the innocent; to save mankind, and to obey the will and mandate of the Lord of glory." (D.H.C. 4:327-328.) In this manner he spoke with great feeling, and closed with an exhortation, first to the assembled multitude and then to the Church. He then gave out a hymn and after singing, this part of the service was closed by prayer.

"This principal corner stone in representation of the First Presidency, is now duly laid in honor of the Great God; and may it there remain until the whole fabric is completed; and may the same be accomplished speedily; that the saints may have a place to worship God, and the Son of Man have where to lay His head."

He was followed by President Rigdon who said:

"May the persons employed in the erection of this house be preserved from all harm while engaged in its construction till the whole is completed, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Even so. Amen."

Adjournment was then taken for one hour. Upon re-assembling the officials proceeded to the remaining corner stones in order; first to the southwest corner, under the direction of the President of the High Priesthood and William Marks, president of the Nauvoo Stake. This corner stone was laid, and President Smith offered the following benediction:

"The second corner stone of the Temple now building by the Church of Jesus Chirst of Latter-day Saints, in honor of the Great God, is duly laid, and may the same unanimity, that has been manifested on this occasion continue till the whole is completed; that peace my rest upon it to the laying of the top stone thereof, and the turning of the key thereof; that the Saints may participate in the blessings of Israel's God within its walls, and the glory of God rest upon the same. Amen."

The brethren then moved to the northwest corner where, superintended by the high council, the corner stone at this place was duly laid. Judge Elias Higbee then gave the following benediction:

"The third corner stone is now duly laid; may this stone be a firm support to the building that the whole may be completed as before proposed."

The fourth, or northeast corner stone, was then lowered into its place, superintended by the Bishops, and Bishop Whitney pronounced the following benediction:

"The fourth and last corner stone, expressive of the Lesser Priesthood, is now duly laid, and may the blessings before pronounced, with all others desirable, rest upon the same forever. Amen."

The services then came to an end; the military companies retired to the parade grounds and were dismissed. Music had been furnished during all of the proceedings by the military band under the direction of Captain Duzette. The choir did its singing under the direction of B. S. Wilber, and the assembled multitude returned to their homes rejoicing in the hope that at last they were to have a temple to the name of the Lord, which they could go and receive blessings for themselves and likewise for their dead.

At this time the Prophet gave instruction in relation to the proper order of laying corner stones of temples built to the name of the Lord. He said:

"If the strict order of the Priesthood were carried out in the building of Temples, the first stone would be laid at the south-east corner by the First Presidency of the Church. The south-west corner should be laid next. The third, or north-west corner next; and the fourth, or north-east corner next. The First Presidency should lay the south-east corner stone and dictate who are the proper persons to lay the other corner stones.

"If a Temple is built at a distance, and the First Presidency are not present, then the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles are the persons to dictate the order for that Temple; and in the absence of the Twelve Apostles, then the Presidency of the Stake will lay the south-east corner stone; the Melchizedek Priesthood laying the corner stones on the east side of the Temple, and the Lesser Priesthood those on the west side." (D.H.C. 4:331.)

The reason for the discontinuance of baptisms in the river came by reason of the fact that the temple had progressed to the point where the basement could be covered. The Lord has revealed that the place for the font in the temple was in the basement, or under the surface of the ground where living people walked; for this was an ordinance for those in their graves. (D. & C. 128:12-13.) At the time of this startling proclamation there had been built in the basement of the temple a font and every preparation had been made so that the saints could assemble in this holy house and there perform this ordinance, rather than in the river. One month after the conference had adjourned this font in the temple was dedicated. President Brigham Young, under the direction of the Prophet, offering the prayer of dedication. This font is described as being in the center of the basement room, under the main hall of the temple. It was constructed of pine timber, and put together on staves tongued and grooved. It was oval in shape, sixteen feet long east and west, and twelve feet wide seven feet high from the foundation, the basin four feet deep, the moulding of the cap and base were formed of beautiful carved work. It stood upon twelve oxen, four on each side, and two at each end, their heads, shoulders and fore legs projecting out from under the font. These were carved, as well as the ornamental mouldings, by Elder Elijah Fordham. He was eight months in their preparation. This font was later replaced by a more durable one.

November 21st, 1841, the apostles met at the home of President Brigham Young and at four P.M. they repaired to the temple where President Brigham Young and Elders Heber C. Kimball and John Taylor baptized about forty persons for their dead. These were confirmed for the dead by Elders Willard Richards, Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith. In this manner the great work of salvation for the dead, which had been practiced by the apostles following the resurrection of our Lord, but which had been discarded when the great apostasy set in, was again restored. Today the faithful Latter-day Saints are engaged in this work, and all other ordinances for the dead, in all the temples built for this purpose by the saints. It is now possible for all worthy members of the Church to engage in this glorious work of redemption for their dead who died without the opportunity of hearing and receiving the gospel. That they do this work is an imperative commandment from the Lord.

In these later times the strict conformity to the laying of corner stones has not been followed, because corner stones have not always been laid. Concrete has in large measure replaced the laying of the stones. However, this procedure is always followed under the direction of the Priesthood as indicated.

All that they had to say was true, yet this was the lull before another storm. The black clouds were even then gathering, and Lucifer in his anger was again preparing in greater fury to destroy the work. Yet at that particular time, "peace and prosperity" as these brethren stated, did attend the Church and virtuous men were looking towards the Church favorably. "The truth, like the sturdy oak, has stood unhurt amid the contending elements, which have beat upon it with tremendous force. The floods have rolled, wave after wave, in quick succession, and have not swallowed it up. 'They have lifted up their voice, O Lord; the floods have lifted up their voice; but the Lord of Hosts is mightier than the mighty waves of the sea;' nor have the flames of persecution, with all the influence of mobs, been able to destroy it; but like Moses' bush, it has stood unconsumed, and now at this moment presents an important spectacle both to men and angels. Where can we turn our eyes to behold such another?" (D.H.C. 4:337.)

The saints had ample reason to rejoice at this time. They had met a friendly reception after coming out of Missouri and all its wickedness. A peaceful habitation and friendly treatment had not, up to this time, been afforded them; yet they had not seen all the persecution and suffering which the Lord would permit their enemies to inflict on them. Other scenes of tribulation and trial, to help in their purification, awaited them; but they had the divine assurance that they would never be overwhelmed. The Lord had established his Church for the last time and it was not to be destroyed or given to other people.

Sitting on the stand with the Presidency was a man who was yet to prove himself an archtraitor and help with all his might to bring the Prophet to his death and the Church to a miserable end.

It was at this conference that Lyman Wight was sustained to fill the vacancy occasioned by the death of Elder David W. Patten. Other offices were also filled. The wonderful revelation given January 19, 1841, was read to the conference and approved by it and the saints showed their joy and enthusiasm in the knowledge therein presented in relation to the salvation for the dead. During the conference much was said in regard to baptism for the dead, and at the conclusion of the conference many new members were baptized in the Mississippi River for the remission of their sins.

This conference which convened first at the laying of the corner stones April 6th, continued on until Sunday April 11th. It was a glorious time of rejoicing. Part of the time bad weather prevailed; but the spirit pervading the conference was not dampened, and the saints went to their homes with a new light concerning the greatness of the plan of salvation, which extends out and reaches after every soul who never had the opportunity to know the truth in mortal life, but who may, on true repentance in the spirit world also obtain the exaltation through the vicarious work which the Lord provides.
