Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-FIVE

Dedication of Palestine

References

D.H.C. 4:372-379. 384-388. 454-459.

Topics

a. Action of the April conference in 1840.

b. Remarks by Orson Hyde and John E. Page.

c. Orson Hyde departs; John E. Page fails to go.

d. Orson Hyde's letter to Rabbi Hirschell.

a. Orson Hyde on the Mount of Olives.

b. Synopsis of his prayer.

c. Gathering of the Jews and Israel.

d. Erection of monuments of stones.

a. The Savior's judgment on the Jews and Jerusalem.

b. Their fulfillment.

c. Prophecies on the restoration. (Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel.)

a. Movements towards the restoration.

b. Balfour's Proclamation.

c. The endorsement by the United States Congress.

d. The present state of affairs in Palestine.

e. The ultimate outcome.

Notes

The journeying of both of these brethren was delayed, however, for some time after the other members of the Council of the apostles had journeyed to Great Britain. Elder Hyde did as he said he would and spent some time in New York, London and other cities on the continent of Europe, before he proceeded to the Holy Land. However, the enthusiasm of John E. Page died out, he never left the shores of the United States. In June, 1841, he was still in Philadelphia gathering funds to enable him to sail with Orson Hyde. While in Philadelphia Elder George A. Smith met him and chided him for his delay and requested that he be prepared to sail with Orson Hyde, two days after this interview. Although Elder Page had money in hand enough for his passage to Europe, he refused to go so Elder Hyde had to travel alone. (D.H.C. 4:372.)

In England Elder Hyde wrote to Rabbi Solomon Hirschell, president of the Hebrew Society in England, stating the purpose of his mission abroad and his interest in the Jewish people. In the body of this communication Elder Hyde said: "About nine years ago, a young man with whom I had had a short acquaintance, and one, too, in whom dwelt much wisdom and knowledge—in whose bosom the Almighty had deposited many secrets, laid his hand upon my head and pronounced these remarkable words—'In due time thou shalt go to Jerusalem, the land of thy fathers, and be a watchman unto the house of Israel; and by thy hands shall the Most High do a great work, which shall prepare the way and greatly facilitate the gathering together of that people." (D.H.C. 4:375.) He then bore testimony to this Jewish Rabbi, of the restoration of the Gospel and called on the Jews to repent and "go out from among the Gentiles," for "Jerusalem is thy home."

He plead with the Lord to listen to his prayer, to forgive all his follies, weaknesses, vanities, and sins, and strengthen him to resist all such in the future. He declared that he had been obedient to the heavenly vision which the Lord had given him before he left America, and had arrived safely in the land of Israel, to dedicate it and consecrate it to the Lord, for the gathering of Judah's scattered remnants, as predicted by the holy prophets. He gave thanks that the violence of men had been restrained, and by the protection of the Lord he had arrived at the place of his destination.

"O Thou, Who didst covenant with Abraham, Thy friend, and Who didst renew that covenant with Isaac, and confirm the same with Jacob with an oath, that Thou wouldst not only give them this land for an everlasting inheritance, but that Thou wouldst also remember their seed forever. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob have long since closed their eyes in death, and made the grave their mansion. Their children are scattered and dispersed abroad among the nations of the Gentiles like sheep that have no shepherd, and are still looking forward for the fulfillment of those promises which Thou didst make concerning them; and even this land, which once poured forth nature's richest bounty, and flowed, as it were, with milk and honey, has, to a certain extent, been smitten with barrenness and sterility since it drank from murderous hands the blood of Him who never sinned." (D.H.C. 4:456-457.)

He prayed that the land might be healed; that living waters might break forth and the vine and olive tree produce in strength once again. Likewise he prayed that the curse that had been placed upon the land might be removed; that the nations appointed to take a hand in the restoration of the land and of its ancient people, might be blessed, and that they might know it is the pleasure of the Lord to restore the kingdom of Israel, raise up Jerusalem, and make of the people a distinct nation. "Let the large ships of the nations bring them from the distant isles; and let kings become their nursing fathers, and queens with motherly fondness wipe the tear of sorrow from their eye." He also prayed for Zion and her stakes. "She has been grievously afflicted and smitten; she has mourned; she has wept; her enemies have triumphed, and have said, 'Ah, where is thy God?' " He prayed for the Presidency of the Church, and the apostles, that they might have strength to bear a fruitful testimony, and to finish the work entrusted to their hands.

On top of the Mount of Olives he erected a pile of stones as a witness according to the ancient custom, and another on Mount Moriah where the ancient temple stood. Many Jews listened to his story. He said that Jerusalem at that time had about 20,000 inhabitants, and about seven thousand of that number were Jews. (D.H.C. 4:456-459.)

We know that for over one hundred years Israel has been gathering to Zion, as the prophets foretold. The Jews are also gathering to Palestine. After the division of the kingdom of Israel into two nations, Israel and Judah, the ten tribes of the kingdom of Israel were carried as captives into Assyria. From that land they went north and disappeared. Where they are now has not been revealed; but they will eventually come to Zion to be crowned at the hands of the gathered saints of the tribe of Ephraim. (D. & C. 133:26-34.)

Now we see many of the tribe of Judah fleeing to Jerusalem. (D. & C. 133:13, 35.) The waste places of Palestine are recovering from the curse which so long has been placed upon it because of the wickedness of its inhabitants, and because they rejected their prophets. The promise was given to them that they could have possessed the land for ever if in humility they would have served the Lord.

The Jews, because of their wickedness in the days of Nebuchadnezzar, were taken captive and carried to Babylon where they remained for seventy years. They were then restored by the Persian king, Cyrus, but in the days of our Lord, they had become more corrupt than any other people on the face of the earth. The Savior said of them that they were hypocrites who built the tombs of the prophets and garnished the sepulchers of the righteous, but killed the living prophets who were sent among them. He called them serpents, a generation of vipers, and he predicted their destruction in the following words:

"They shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into all nations: and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled." (Luke 21:24.)

This destruction came upon them in the year 70 A.D., and Jerusalem was trodden down; the Jews were scattered over the whole face of the earth. All through the years they have been persecuted, murdered, driven and hated by peoples of other nations. A curse came upon their land. The fruitful fields and vineyards disappeared. The mountains of Canaan, which once were covered with forests became denuded. The once thriving villages all but ceased to exist. The earth became parched and barren; other tribes possessed these cities and villages thus stricken with the curse. It is true that after the dedication of the land these physical conditions began to improve, but the Jewish population of Jerusalem was not greatly increased for years following the time when Orson Hyde went to that land.

The Lord had given his promise, however, that these sombre and unhealthful conditions should not always endure; nor would the ancient inhabitants remain scattered, and be a hiss and a byword among the nations. He remembered his promise to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and he promised these persecuted people that the time was to come when they would be restored again. "Fear not, for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west; I will say to the north, give up; and to the south, keep not back; bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth." (Isa. 43:5-6.)

"Go and proclaim these words toward the north, and say, return, thou backsliding Israel, saith the Lord: and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you; for I am merciful, saith the Lord, and I will not keep anger forever." (Jer. 3:12.)

"Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord God: Although I have cast them far off among the heathen, and although I have scattered them among the countries, yet will I be to them as a little sanctuary in the countries where they shall come. Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord God: I will even gather you from the people, and assemble you out of the countries where ye have been scattered, and I will give you the land of Israel." (Ezek. 11:16-17.)

However, it was but a short time after Orson Hyde visited that land that the Jews commenced to take steps towards their return. Under Turkish rule this could not be accomplished, but prominent Jews took steps looking toward the rehabilitation of their home-land. In 1844, Warden Creason, the United States consul in Palestine, lent encouragement to such a movement. The English Premier, Disraeli, and Sir Moses Montefiore became champions of such a movement, but the British government could do nothing under the dominion of the Sultan. England did, however, send an expedition to explore the part of Sinai which lay within the Egyptian frontier, but Jews did not look on it favorably and nothing came of it.

In 1903, Lord Landsdowne, under the guidance of Joseph Chamberlain, the colonial secretary for Great Britain, was authorized to offer the Zionists a tract of land in the highlands of British East Africa, for a Jewish home, with full powers of autonomy under the British government's control. This the Jews failed to accept. Their eyes were on Palestine.

In the sixties, David Gordon, Hirch Lalisher and Moses Hess, with others, aided in the creation of the foundation of the "Chovevei Zion" (Lovers of Zion) societies, the chief object being the colonization of Palestine by Jews. The Zionist Federation was commenced in 1896, and was supported by Theodore Hertzel and Baron Rothschild. The first congress of this federation was held in Basel, Switzerland, in 1897. Since that day the efforts on the part of prominent Jews has increased, to bring to pass a national home for the Jews in Palestine.

The first modern settlement of Jews in Palestine was established in 1876, by the International Association of the Alliance Israelites. This organization established an agricultural school, "Mikweh Israel" (the Gathering of Israel) a few miles from Jaffa.

Colonization before the great war of 1914-1918, was undertaken under great difficulties, for the land was still trodden down of the Gentiles. In 1881, there were about 25,000 Jews in all of Palestine. By 1914, the number had grown to nearly 80,000. At the close of hostilities in 1918 Great Britain was given the mandate over Palestine and France over Syria. This was a very significant sign indicating that the days of the Gentiles were coming to their close.

Palestine was freed from Turkish rule by General Allenby in December 1917. In 1920 Sir Herbert Samuel, a Jew was sent to Palestine by Great Britain, as its governor, or high commissioner, and a civil government was set up under his direction. We should keep in mind the prediction of our Lord concerning the downfall of Jerusalem, which included also the downfall of Palestine.

Until the close of the hostilities in 1918, there had never been a time since the scattering, when a Jew held authority in Palestine. A short time following this appointment, Sir Arthur Balfour, in behalf of the British Foreign office, wrote to Lord James Rothschild the following memorable declaration:

"His Majesty's Government views with favor the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people, and will use their best endeavors to facilitate the achievement of that object, it being clearly understood that nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine or the rights and political status enjoyed by Jews in any other country."

As the United States had taken part in the war, the government claimed the right to be consulted in the terms of the mandate in relation to Palestine and Syria. To this request Great Britain agreed. The draft of the Palestine mandate was submitted to the United States Government, and at its request certain minor changes were made in it. On June 30, 1922, the following joint resolution was adopted by Congress, favoring the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people:

"Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, that the United States of America favors the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people, it being clearly understood that nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and religious rights of Christians and of all other non-Jewish communities in Palestine, and that the holy places in Palestine shall be adequately protected."

In this manner both nations committed themselves to this program. Following these proclamations, Jews from downtrodden nations began to flock to Palestine by thousands; so fast did they come that they could not readily be absorbed. In more recent months because of great difficulties, Great Britain relinquished her mandate and asked that it be given into the hands of the newly acting and quarreling United Nations. The friendliness of the British Government has cooled in its ardor for the Jews for reasons which we could probably quite accurately guess. Upon the withdrawal of Great Britain the Jews in Palestine proclaimed themselves a Jewish Nation which they gave the name of Israel. This has brought on a war between Jews and Arabs who inhabit Palestine. What the immediate result may be we do not know, but we can safely predict—for the Lord has spoken it—the Jews are going to return. They are to have their own national government; their cities will be rebuilt and they will prepare themselves to fulfill the scriptures when our Lord shall come. Then will come their cleansing and they shall find favor with the Lord, and they shall once more be his people.

It is interesting to learn of some of the developments in Palestine in recent times. "During the long dispersion the Jews were forced into channels of trade and barter and away from the soil. Originally they were tillers of the soil. Strange as it may appear the amount of land now in Jewish ownership for agricultural purposes in 1936 was 1,333,000 dunums. A dunum is about one quarter of an acre. There are now 203 agricultural settlements containing some 100,000 people. (1936). The city of Tel Aviv, entirely Jewish, has a population of over 150,000, and covers more than 1,500 acres. The population of Jerusalem has grown to include 125,000 Jews. Other towns have been settled by Jews. They have a national flag, and a national anthem, a cultural system including schools, a university and other civic organizations. Their internal affairs are managed by a national assembly or council and a Rabbinical council.

"In 1929-30 the value of the fruit exported from Jewish orange, grapefruit and lemon enterprises, was valued at $1,500,000. In 1937 it was estimated to have been increased to $20,000,000. During the same period the productions of the industrial enterprises of the Jewish people rose from $11,000,000 to over $40,000,000. From 1898 to the present, the sum of over $70,000,000 has been invested in Palestine through the "national funds" and roughly, the sum of $315,000,000 by private investors, nearly half of this sum in the course of the past four or five years." (Joseph Fielding Smith—Deseret News, April 6, 1940.)

The sea of Galilee, is now a great reservoir, and the flood waters from various streams are now diverted into this beautiful body of water. Canals have been built, and the Jordan has been turned from its natural channel into artificially created concrete canals on each side of the original stream. These are used to irrigate about 7,000,000 acres which would not be under cultivation otherwise. Hydro-electric stations have been erected on the streams. One power plant is located about eight miles below the lake of Galilee, where a dam, similar to the Roosevelt dam in Arizona, has been built. This reservoir contains about ten billion cubic feet of water for irrigation. After passing through the turbines most of the water is returned to the Jordan. These interesting facts are taken from the British Commission's report. There are upwards of 800,000 Jewish people in Palestine today.
