Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-SIX

The Wentworth Letter

References

D.H.C. Vol. 4:535-541. 567-568. 570.

Topics

a. The request of John Wentworth for a sketch of the rise of the Church.

b. To be forwarded to Mr. Bastow for the New Hampshire history.

c. Written by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

d. A Remarkable document.

e. The account of the First Vision.

f. The Coming forth of the Book of Mormon.

g. The Organization of the Church.

h. Historical narrative.

a. An epitome of leading doctrines.

b. Revelation concerning God.

c. Adam's transgression and man's individual responsibility.

d. The plan of salvation.

e. Ministers of the Gospel must be called of God.

f. The true organization of the Church.

g. Divine Scriptures.

h. Gathering of Israel.

i. Man's free agency.

j. Obedience to governments and law required.

k. The admonition of Paul.

Notes

The Prophet was inspired in the preparation of this sketch of the rise of the Church. This is the first article, as far as we know, ever furnished by request of an outside publication portraying the rise and progress of the Church. In the year 1838, the Prophet commenced preparing his history which was written in the manuscript record of the Church. This Wentworth article was published in the "Times and Seasons" in Nauvoo, in the issue of March 1, 1842. It is a remarkable document for its breadth and the thoroughness of its contents in compact form. Elder B. H. Roberts in his footnote in the Documentary History (Vol. 4:535) has said: "Referring again to this Wentworth Letter, I may say that for combining conciseness of statement with comprehensiveness of treatment of the subject with which it deals, it has few equals among historical documents, and certainly none that excell it in our Church literature. In it one has a few pages (less than six of these pages) a remarkably full history of the leading events in the Church, and an epitome of her doctrines, from the beginning (the birth of the Prophet, 1805) up to the date of publication, March, 1841, a period of thirty-six years. The epitome of the doctrines of the Church, since called "The Articles of Faith," and published by millions, has been carried to all the nations of the earth and tribes of men where the gospel has been preached. These Articles of Faith were not produced by the labored efforts and harmonized contentions of scholastics, but were struck off by one inspired mind at a single effort to make a declaration of that which is most assuredly believed by the Church, for one making earnest inquiry about the truth. The combined directness, perspicuity, simplicity and comprehensiveness of this statement of the principles of our religion may be relied upon as strong evidence of a divine inspiration resting upon the Prophet Joseph Smith." (D.H.C. 4:535)

The Prophet commences his story by stating where he was born, and his removal to Manchester where he engaged in farming which he was taught by his father. When he was about fourteen years of age he began to reflect upon the importance of "being prepared for a future state," and therefore sought among the ministers, for knowledge concerning the plan of salvation. He found them in hopeless confusion, "each one pointing to his own particular creed as the summum bonum of perfection." He reached the conclusion, which all men of reasoning ability should be able to reach, that they could not all be right for God could not be the author of confusion. The story is a familiar one to all members of the Church, how he sought for light and after reading the counsel of James, received the inspiration to put that prophet's words to the test. The vision of the Father and the Son which came in answer to his earnest pleading filled his soul with the deepest joy. He told it to an unbelieving world thinking that such great knowledge so essentially beneficial to all men, would be received gladly; instead it brought down persecution on his head. Then followed the coming of Moroni with divine instruction and to reveal the plates of the Book of Mormon. In a straight-forward manner, this story was also told how, after several years of preparation while he was being tutored by this heavenly messenger, this sacred record was placed in his hands and he translated it by the "gift and power of God." This angel showed to him in vision the aboriginal inhabitants of the American continent and made known how they at certain times had the Gospel. They were led by prophets and under command of God wrote and preserved their history to come forth in these latter days as from the dust, after the inhabitants of the land had departed from the teachings of their Redeemer. The Prophet told in this story how the angel declared to him that he was to be an instrument in the hands of the Lord to re-establish the fulness of the Gospel and the Church of Jesus Christ, for these had been taken away through the wickedness of men and their perversion of the scriptures.

He related the fact that his telling of this story met with misrepresentation and abuse, and that he was slandered and beset by mobs. He was shot at several times by those who resented his story, and every diabolical scheme was thought out by which the plates could be taken from his hands. Then came the visitation of other heavenly messengers, John, who is called the Baptist and Peter, James and John, apostles of the Lord, under whose hands he received the holy priesthood and was commanded to organize the Church. A few humble followers came into the Church, and thus it got its start.

The story of the drivings, murdering of members of the Church, and their final expulsion from Missouri under the exterminating order of the governor of that state, is tersely and graphically told. This is a story of one of the most brutal and diabolical episodes ever recorded in the history of mankind. Finally there came a period of peace and safety when the exiles reached the borders of the State of Illinois. Here they commenced the building of a city, a temple, schools, and without fear once more began to be industrious without being molested by enemies who constantly sought their lives. At this point the history ends, for the year 1842 had opened with bright prospects that peace and prosperity were to be continued for this downtrodden and persecuted people. The Prophet closes this narrative in these words:

"Persecution has not stopped the progress of truth, but has only added fuel to the flame, it has spread with increased rapidity. Proud of the cause which they have espoused, and conscious of our innocence, and of the truth of their system, amidst calumny and reproach, have the Elders of this Church gone forth, and planted the Gospel in almost every state in the Union; it has penetrated our cities, it has spread over our villages, and has caused thousands of our intelligent, noble, and patriotic citizens to obey its divine mandates, and be governed by its sacred truths. It has also spread into England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales, where, in the year 1840, a few of our missionaries were sent, and over five thousand joined the Standard of Truth; there are numbers now joining in every land.

"Our missionaries are going forth to different nations, and in Germany, Palestine, New Holland, Australia, the East Indies, and other places, the Standard of Truth has been erected; no unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing; persecution may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent, till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done."

Then follows an epitome of the outstanding doctrines of the Church which distinguishes it from all other churches. They were given by the spirit of revelation and have an appeal to all honest and earnest seekers after truth. As previously stated, they have been translated in to many tongues and have been circulated in all parts of the world. They have been accepted by the uplifted hands of the members of the Church in conference assembled, as standards in the doctrines of the Church. They set forth tersely, clearly and positively the differences between the doctrines of our Savior as taught by him and his disciples, and the teachings of the present world.

THE ARTICLES OF FAITH

"We believe in God the eternal Father, and in His Son Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost."

Here is taught the great truth discovered in the Prophet's first great vision. How strange it is that the doctrine of God could become so grossly and miserably changed from the truth as declared in the Scriptures, to the present foolish doctrine which destroys the identity and substance of the body of the Son of God and absorbs him into a meaningless being without body or parts and lacking substance! It was time for a new revelation on this doctrine to start men back again to a proper belief in their eternal Father and in their Redeemer, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost. [^1]

"We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression." [^2]

All those who believe that man, yes, even newly born infants, are tainted with "original sin," (in other words the transgression of Adam,) deny the mercies of the atoning blood of Jesus Christ. The Bible (as well as our modern scripture) teaches that Jesus Christ is in very deed, the Redeemer of mankind from the fall. He paid the debt that mankind became heir to through Adam's transgression. The mortgage upon our souls was fully paid. It left no hangover penalty which required some act by, or in behalf of, any living creature, to free him from "original sin." The doctrine that infants come into this world under the curse of "original sin," is an abominable doctrine in the sight of God, and denies the greatness and mercy of the atonement. (See Moroni Chapter 8.)

"We believe that through the atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel."

Here is a clear statement that belief alone in Jesus Christ does not save, but there is also required a faithful adherence to and practice of, every commandment that proceeds forth from the mouth of God, and the endurance in this obedience to the end of the mortal life. This is clearly taught in the Bible and other scriptures.

"We believe that the first principles and ordinances of the Gospel are: (1) Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; (2) Repentance; (3) Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; (4) Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost."

Faith is the foundation principle, the "moving cause in all action." Without it mankind could not believe in or worship God. Repentance is a glorious principle which permits those who humble themselves and have contrite spirits to be forgiven of and have their sins remitted through the atonement of our Savior, Jesus Christ. (See D. & C. 19:15-19. John 5:24.) Baptism is by immersion by one having authority. The very meaning of the word indicates a burial in the water. There is no other kind of baptism for the remission of sins spoken of in the Bible, except going down into the water. The laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, is also a fundamental principle taught in the scriptures.

"We believe that a man must be called of God by prophecy and by the laying on of hands, by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof."

This is scriptural doctrine. Not only is it scriptural, but common sense teaches us that no man has the right to assume divine authority and to act in the name of the Lord without first being called and appointed to that duty by someone who is officially authorized to commission him. The excuse and claim for such authority by ministers of churches is that they get authority from the Bible, for the Lord said: "Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature." (Mark 16:15.) Such a claim is extremely absurd. A man might just as well steal a commission given to an ambassador, and claim it as his own. This command was given by the Lord to his appointed and authorized servants in the days of his ministry. No man has a right to apply this to himself and should he do so, he will have to give an account in the day of judgment.

"We believe in the same organization that existed in the primitive Church, viz: apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists, etc."

The world has discarded their belief in the need of living apostles and prophets, contrary to reason and all that is written in the scriptures. At no time or place did the Lord declare that apostles should cease in his Church; to the contrary the Church in former times ordained apostles beyond the original twelve as the occasion required. Paul is an authority for the doctrine that apostles were to continue in the Church. (Eph. 4:11-16. 1 Cor. 12.) The fact that the order in present day churches is to assume authority and deny the need of apostles, is evidence of their departure from the faith once delivered to the saints.

"We believe the Bible to be the word of God, as far as it is translated correctly; we also believe the Book of Mormon to be the word of God."

Scholars in the present day, realizing that there are errors in the Bible, have endeavored to retranslate them from the best sources available, so that we find many editions of the Bible, and these translations do not in many parts and interpretations agree. Anyone reading the history of the Bible and learning how it has come down to us in this present day will know that through the numerous translations and copies that were made of the Holy Scriptures, mistakes were made, and that men who were uninspired gave their interpretations according to their views and not by the inspiration of the Lord. No well informed person will maintain the infallibility of the Bible, and declare that it is without error. The Book of Mormon was translated by the gift of God and is, therefore, free from errors which would otherwise occur if it had come to us through numerous translations in the past 1800 years. While many ridicule this article, yet they cannot, if they will consult sound reason, help knowing that it is true.

"We believe all that God has revealed, all that he does now reveal, and we believe that he will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the kingdom of God."

This is a declaration to the world that the Church believes in continued revelation; that the heavens are not sealed and that the Lord can, when he desires, speak to his servants and give them revelation. All of this the present Christian world denies. The unanimous doctrine of the churches is that the canon of Scripture is complete, and there will be no more revelation. This view teaches us that the Lord has not spoken to man for nearly two thousand years, or since the death of the ancient apostles. The world, therefore, is left to grope in the dark and every man is left to make his own interpretation. The Bible definitely declares in many places that there will come other revelation of the most sacred and important kind in these latter days.

"We believe in the literal gathering of Israel and in the restoration of the Ten Tribes; that Zion will be built upon this [the American] continent; that Christ will reign personally upon the earth; and that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory."

The literal gathering of Israel is taught all through the Bible, yet it is a discarded doctrine in the religious world. It took modern revelation to point out the places where the City Zion would be built; without this revelation no one could have known this important truth. There are some good religious people who believe that our Lord will reign personally on the earth, but they know nothing about the earth being renewed, or restored to its primitive condition before the fall, at the time when the Lord shall come. Yet this is stated in the Bible. We are living in the great day promised by the prophets of the restoration of all things.

"We claim the privilege of worshiping Almighty God according to the dictates of our own conscience, and allow all men the same privilege, let them worship how, where, or what they may."

This is the reiteration of the gospel of free agency. It was upon this foundation that the American Government was formed. There is no compulsion, or coercion in the kingdom of God.

"We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers and magistrates, in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law."

This doctrine the members of the Church have always observed. It is the doctrine taught the ancient saints by Peter. (1 Peter 2:12-15.)

"We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men; indeed we may say that we follow the admonition of Paul; 'We believe all things, we hope all things, we have endured many things, and hope to be able to endure all things. If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report, or praiseworthy, we seek after these things!'"

If the Latter-day Saints would live up to these principles, we would be ready in a short time to meet the saints of the City of Enoch.

In other parts of the scriptures there is written definite information declaring that the Lord appeared to the ancient prophets, to Enoch, Abraham, Moses and others. (See Numbers 12:1-8.) Then, since Jesus Christ is God, definitely he did appear to men both before and after his resurrection. These passages, according to the revelations of the Lord to the Church have been mistranslated and should read as follows:

"And no man has seen God at any time, except he hath borne record of the Son; for except it is through him no man can be saved."—John 1:18.

The Wentworth Letter—Notes

These notions are based upon a few passages of scripture as they have been improperly translated and come down to us in the Bible.

"Catholic theologians are unanimous consequently, in declaring that infants dying without baptism, are excluded from the beatific vision; but as to the exact state of these souls in the next world they are not agreed. In speaking of souls who have failed to attain salvation, theologians distinguish the pain of loss (paena Damni) or privation of the beatific vision and the pain of sense (paena Sensus). While it is certain that unbaptized infants must endure the pain of loss, it is not at all certain that they are subject to the pain of sense. St. Augustine (De Pece. at Mer., Ixvi) held that they would not be exempt from the pain of sense, but at the same time he thought it would be of the mildest form. On the other hand, St. Gregory, Nazianzen (Or, in S. bap.) expresses the belief that such infants would suffer only the pain of loss.***"

"Since the twelfth century, the opinion of the majority of theologians has been that unbaptized infants are immune from all pain of sense. This was taught by St. Thomas Aquinas, Scotus, St. Bonaventure, Peter Lombard, and others, and is now the common teaching in the schools. It accords with the wording of a decree of Pope Innocent III (III Decr., xiii, 3): 'The punishment of original sin is the deprivation of the vision of God; of actual sin, the eternal pains of hell—Infants, of course, cannot be guilty of actual sin. As to the theory of some writers that infants may be saved also from the pain of loss by the faith of their parents, it is sufficiently evident that it is not in accord with the mind of the Church." ("The Catholic Encyclopedia," Art Baptism, Vol. 2:265.)

"St. Augustine (Serm, xi De Verb Apost.) says of infant baptism; 'This the church always had, always held; this she received from the faith of our ancestors; this she perseveringly guards even to the end.' St. Cyprian (Ep. ad Fidum) writes: 'From baptism and from grace . . . must not be kept the infant who, because recently born has committed no sin, except, inasmuch as it was born carnally from Adam, it has contracted the contagion of the ancient death in its first nativity; and it comes to receive the remission of sins more easily on this very account that not its own, but another's sins are forgiven it."—"The Catholic Encyclopedia"—Art, Baptism, Vol. 2:270.

The Presbyterians: "Elect infants, dying in infancy are regenerated and saved by Christ through the Spirit, who worketh when, and where, and how he pleaseth. So also are all other elect persons, who are incapable of being outwardly called by the ministry of the Lord.***."

"How is original sin conveyed from our first parents unto their posterity?

"A. Original sin is conveyed from our first parents unto their posterity by natural generation, so as all that proceed from them in that way, are conceived and born in sin."

The Episcopal Church: On "the ministration of public baptism of infants," the Episcopal prayer book (1893 ed.) says:

"Dearly Beloved, forasmuch as all men are conceived and born in sin; and our Savior Christ saith, None can enter into the kingdom of God, except he be regenerated and born again, of Water and of the Holy Ghost; I beseech you to call upon God the Father through our Lord Jesus Christ; that if his bounteous mercy he will grant to this child that which by nature he cannot have; that he may be baptized with Water and the Holy Ghost; and be made a living member of the same."

The Lord has said: "But, behold, I say unto you, that little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten; wherefore they cannot sin, for power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children, until they begin to become accountable before me." (D. & C. 29:46-47.)

---
Notas:
[^1] The Prophet's Discourse on Life and Death. Note 1. On Sunday, March 20, 1842, the Prophet Joseph Smith preached to a large gathering at the funeral held for the small child of Windsor P. Lyon. This was a remarkable discourse and we have lost much of its strength, power and wisdom for lack of a stenographic report. However Elder Wilford Woodruff, who was wonderfully talented in taking notes has preserved for us many important principles taken from that discourse. The Prophet began by reading the Fourteenth chapter of Revelation out of which came the thoughts for this wonderful talk. This revelation deals with John's vision of the Lamb standing with the 144,000 on Mount Zion; the restoration of the Gospel by an angel; the fall of Babylon; the blessing of the resurrection pronounced and the reaping of the earth when the harvest is ripe, and the treading of the winepress. All of this is to come by the voice of the angels from the heavens.
[^2] A Wicked World. Note 2. After reading this chapter in Revelation (Chapter 14) the prophet said: "We have again the warning voice sounded in our midst, which shows the uncertainty of human life; and in my leisure moments I have meditated upon the subject, and asked the question, why it is that infants, innocent children, are taken away from us, especially those that seem to be the most intelligent and interesting. The strongest reasons that present themselves to my mind are these: This world is a very wicked world; and it is a proverb that the 'world grows weaker and wiser;' if that is the case, the world grows more wicked and corrupt. In the earlier ages of the world a righteous man, and a man of God and of intelligence, had a better chance to do good, to be believed and received than at the present day: but in these days such a man is much opposed and persecuted by most of the inhabitants of the earth, and he has much sorrow to pass through here. The Lord takes many away, even in infancy, that they may escape the envy of man, and the sorrows and evils of this present world; they were too pure, too lovely, to live on earth; therefore, if rightly considered, instead of mourning we have reason to rejoice as they are delivered from evil, and we shall soon have them again." (D.H.C. 4:553.)
