Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-SEVEN

The Prophet's Discourse—The Resurrection—Salvation of Little Children

References

D.H.C. Vol. 4:553-557.

D. & C. 133.

Topics

a. The Fourteenth Chapter of Revelation.

b. The Message of the angels.

c. The restoration of the Gospel.

d. "Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord."

e. The treading of the winepress of the wrath of God.

a. The world grows weaker and wiser.

b. Why many infants are taken away.

c. No chance for infidelity.

d. Death-bed repentance.

e. Baptism of infants an abominable doctrine.

a. Many signs set in the earth.

b. Baptism the only way for men to enter the kingdom.

c. Baptism a sign that we will do the will of God.

d. Key words belong to the Priesthood.

a. Difference between the Holy Ghost and the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

b. The case of Cornelius.

c. Men to be damned who reject the Lord's plan.

a. Men to come forth as they are laid down.

b. Redemption of children.

c. Resurrected beings are quickened by spirit, not by blood.

d. Children to receive the fulness of blessings.

e. The body does not grow in the grave.

f. Children to grow to maturity after the resurrection.

g. All to receive the resurrection.

Notes

This chapter reveals the vision given to John which concerns the day in which we live. It begins with the vision of the Savior with the 144,000 who were redeemed on Mount Zion, which according to the word of the Lord, is on this American continent. They sang a new song. They were undefiled and without guile as they sang before the throne. It appears that the singing of the new song by the host of 144,000 who were sanctified by the Lamb of God, was one of rejoicing because the time had come for the restoration of the Gospel. For immediately following their singing there went forth an angel flying through the "midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. Saying with a loud voice, Fear God and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters." What we read is symbolical, of course. But this represents the restoration of the Gospel in this dispensation, and the voice of the angel has been heard figuratively through the servants of the Lord in all parts of the earth, in fulfillment of this scripture.

Then follows the proclamation of the fall of Babylon which was to take place after the Gospel was restored, and against those who reject the truth and worship the beast, and the promise that the dead who die in the Lord henceforth should have their work follow them and they would rest in the Lord.

Then comes the sound of the trumpet declaring the time for the harvest of souls, for the harvest of the earth is ripe and the angel who is the Son of Man is called upon to thrust in his sickle and gather the vine of the earth which will be cast into the great winepress of the wrath of God. This harmonizes with the vision of Isaiah, Chapter 63:1-6, and in D. & C. Section 133:37-51.

"And this gospel shall be preached unto every nation, and kindred, and tongue and people.

"And the servants of God shall go forth, saying with a loud voice: "Fear God and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come;

"And worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters—

"Calling upon the name of the Lord day and night, saying: O that thou wouldst rend the heavens, that thou wouldst come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence.

"And it shall be answered upon their heads; for the presence of the Lord shall be as the melting fire that burneth, and as the fire which causeth the waters to boil. * * *

"And it shall be said: Who is this that cometh down from God in heaven with dyed garments; yea, from the regions which are not known, clothed in his glorious apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength?

"And he shall say: I am he who spake in righteousness, mighty to save.

"And the Lord shall be red in his apparel, and his garments like him that treadeth in the wine-vat.

"And so great shall be the glory of his presence that the sun shall hide his face in shame, and the moon shall withhold its light, and the stars shall be hurled from their places.

"And his voice shall be heard: I have trodden the winepress alone, and have brought judgment upon all people; and none were with me.

"And I have trampled them in my fury, and I did tread upon them in mine anger, and their blood have I sprinkled upon my garments, and stained all my raiment; for this was the day of vengeance which was in my heart."

This thought is certainly comforting to those who have laid away their infants and small children in death. Among the Latter-day Saints the assurance that what the Prophet said is true, and that parents shall have their children again if they are faithful, is a wonderful comfort which the world does not possess.

The Prophet then declares that there is no chance for infidelity when we see our friends and dear ones passing almost daily. The infidel may boast of his unbelief, but when death stares him in the face, his infidelity departs and he will grasp at any straw, "for the realities of the eternal world are resting upon him in mighty power; and when every earthly support and prop fails him, he then sensibly feels the eternal truths of the immortality of the soul." Men should not wait until near death to repent, but when we see death taking away not only the aged, but the middle aged and infants, it should cause deep reflection, and bring a warning to all not to procrastinate the day of repentance until the death-bed, "for it is the will of God that man should repent and serve Him in health, and in the strength and power of his mind, in order to secure His blessing, and not wait until he is called to die." An ancient Prophet stated this doctrine most emphatically in these words, to every soul who has opportunity to know and receive the truth:

"For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors.

"And now, as I said unto you before, as ye have had so many witnesses, therefore, I beseech of you that ye do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end; for after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed." (Alma 34:32-33.)

In relation to the false doctrine of "baptizing" infants, the Prophet said: "The doctrine of baptizing children, or sprinkling them, or they must welter in hell, is a doctrine not true, nor supported in Holy Writ, and is not consistent with the character of God. All children are redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ, and the moment that children leave this world, they are taken to the bosom of Abraham. The only difference between the old and young dying is, one lives longer in heaven and eternal light and glory than the other, and is freed a little sooner from this miserable, wicked world. Notwithstanding all this glory, we for a moment lose sight of it, and mourn the loss, but we do not mourn as those without hope." (D.H.C. 4:554.)

*Italics mine J.F.S.

Man, in his worldly wisdom, sets aside the decrees of the Lord and sets up his own puny views as being superior. The wisdom of the wise teaches that the decrees of the Almighty can be changed. Man's theories concerning the universe are counter-wise to the revelations of God. This worldly wisdom teaches that the sun, moon, earth and planets will eventually come to an end; that the sun will grow cold in a long course of time; That these heavenly bodies came without design and are moving according to laws of nature merely by chance. The wisdom of the world declares that "the oak of the forest, the fruit of the tree, the herb of the field," while bearing seed in themselves of their kind, came to this condition through ages of change, and that they will probably change again. Here the Prophet informs us that it is the decree of the Lord, that "every tree, plant, and herb bearing seed should bring forth of its kind, and cannot come forth after any other law or principle." So it has been from the beginning.

"Baptism is a sign to God, to angels and to heaven that we do the will of God, and there is no other way beneath the heavens whereby God hath ordained for man to come to him to be saved, and enter into the kingdom of God, except faith in Jesus Christ, repentance, and baptism for the remission of sins, and any other course is in vain; then you have the promise of the gift of the Holy Ghost." (D.H.C. 4:553-557.)

The world holds to the strange belief, due to the taking away of many of the plain and precious things from the scriptures, that previous to the days of John the Baptist, the Lord had some other way for men to obtain remission of their sins rather than baptism; that when our Lord came He gave us a new order of things to replace the old, and introduced different principles for the salvation of mankind. We have learned, however, that his laws are immutable and the same plan of salvation has been given by which men are saved since the fall of Adam. It required modern revelation to reveal this to benighted man in this dispensation. Since the Lord is eternal, so are his laws; they do not change.

Another sign is for the healing of the sick by the laying on of hands; also for the gift of the Holy Ghost and for the obtaining of divine authority in the Priesthood. The gift of the Holy Ghost cannot be received contrary to the signs which the Lord has given and appointed. There are certain key words which belong to the Priesthood which must be observed in order to obtain the blessing. "The sign of Peter was to repent and be baptized for the remission of sins, with the promise of the the gift of the Holy Ghost; and in no other way is the gift of the Holy Ghost obtained."

The Holy Ghost is the third member of the Godhead. The gift of the Holy Ghost, is the bestowal of the power by which one becomes the companion of the Holy Ghost. One who receives the gift has the right, through faithfulness, to the guidance of the Holy Ghost in all things. While a man who sincerely seeks the truth may have a manifestation of the Holy Ghost, he has no claim to a continued guidance by that Holy Spirit, unless he is baptized and has the gift bestowed upon him by the laying on of hands. None but members of the Church can obtain this gift, for the Lord has said that the world cannot receive it. (John 14:17.)

"All men will come from the grave as they lie down, whether old or young; there will not be 'added unto their stature one cubit,' neither taken from it; all will be raised by the power of God, having spirit in their bodies, and not blood."

The question is frequently discussed in our classes in Sunday School, Mutual and Priesthood quorums, whether or not a body will come forth deformed, if deformed in this mortal life; or with some part missing, such as if a limb, or other part was lost while in mortal life. The answer has been given in the most emphatic and positive manner in the scriptures. The mortal body will not grow in the grave, for that is contrary to nature. So each body will come forth the same stature as when laid in the earth. Children will rise as they were laid away, but after the resurrection their bodies will grow to the full stature of their spirits. Deformities will be erased and in the resurrection will be made whole. We read in Alma, the words of Amulek:

"Now, this restoration shall come to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the righteous; and even there shall not as much as a hair of their heads be lost; but everything shall be restored to its perfect frame, as it is now, or in the body, and shall be brought and be arraigned before the bar of Christ the Son, and God the Father, and the Holy Spirit; which is one Eternal God, to be judged according to their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil." (Alma 11:44.)
