Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-EIGHT

Restoration of the Ancient Order of Things—Organization of the Relief Society—Perfidy of John C. Bennett

References

D.H.C. 2:308-309, 379. D.H.C. Vol. 4: Chapter 2, 3, 4. D.H.C. Vol. 4:567-568. D.H.C. Vol. 5:102; 5:4-5, 11, 13. D. & C. 38:32. 39:15. 43:16. 95:8. 105:11.

Topics

a. The solemn meeting on May 4, 1842. Note 1.

b. Purpose of the meeting.

c. The ancient order of the endowment restored.

d. Those who were present and were endowed.

e. In fulfillment of the promise given in the revelation of Janaury 19, 1841.

a. Elders called to the Ohio to be endowed.

b. The endowment to be in the Kirtland Temple.

c. This was not the complete endowment.

d. Importance of the endowment in its fulness.

a. Why the Society was organized.

b. The Prophet's instruction to the sisters.

a. Bennett's correspondence with the Prophet.

b. He joins the Church.

c. Helps obtain Nauvoo City charter.

d. He is elected mayor.

e. His plot against the Prophet's life.

f. His transgressions exposed.

g. He resigns as mayor.

h. Aids Missouri enemies of the Prophet.

Notes

The Prophet then said that in this council, "was instituted the ancient order of things for the first time in these last days." The ordinances are essential to the exaltation in the celestial kingdom. The keys and authorities for the establishing of these ordinances, and the granting of them are to be bestowed "upon all those who are just and true." The keys that Elijah restored made this great revelation and restoration possible, in the turning of "the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse." All the communications made known on this occasion, the Prophet said, "were of things spiritual, and to be received only by the spiritual minded; and there was nothing made known to these men but what will be made known to all the Saints of the last days, so soon as they are prepared to receive and a proper place is prepared to communicate them, even to the weakest of the saints; therefore let the saints be diligent in building the Temple, and all houses which they have been, or shall hereafter be, commanded of God to build; and wait their time with patience in all meekness, faith, perseverance unto the end, knowing assuredly that all these things referred to in this council are always governed by the principle of revelation."

Those present who were endowed on this memorable occasion were: General James Adams of Springfield, Patriarch Hyrum Smith, Bishops Newel K. Whitney and George Miller, and President Brigham Young, Elders Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards. These ordinances given to this group of men are now offered to every member of the Church who will be true and faithful to every commandment and principle which the Lord has revealed. These ordinances are now received in the temples of the Lord.

In Kirtland, November 12, 1835, in a council meeting with the apostles, the Prophet said: "You need an endowment, brethren, in order that you may be prepared and able to overcome all things; and those that reject your testimony will be damned." (D.H.C. Vol. 2:309.) January 20, 1836, a council meeting was held in the Kirtland Temple in which the endowment was given, consisting of washing, anointing with oil, washing of feet and other ordinances. It was on this occasion that the Prophet had the heavens opened to his view in which he saw the glory of the celestial kingdom, and the redemption of little children in the kingdom of God. (D.H.C. Vol. 2:379-381.)

This was the first organization of women in the world, so far as history records. This is in perfect harmony with the plan of the Lord, for he intends that the women as well as the men in the Church should be occupied, and this call to the sisters to look after the temporal needs, as well as to give spiritual comfort, is a part of the Gospel plan.

Because of his untiring work in obtaining the charter, for he had influence in Illinois at that time, he was honored by being elected the first mayor of Nauvoo. He also rose to prominence in the councils of the Church, and appeared to be a firm believer in the Gospel, and a staunch friend to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Not many months later, however, he fell into temptation and became guilty of immoral conduct and lost the spirit of the Gospel and his love for President Joseph Smith. He refused to repent and his soul became filled with bitterness. He was forced to resign as mayor. The first intimation that all was not well with him was made manifest to the Prophet May 7, 1842, after a drill and sham battle by the Nauvoo Legion. This event had been under preparation since the previous January. Dr. Bennett was the major general of the legion, and President Joseph Smith was lieutenant-general. On the day mentioned, in the forenoon there was a parade of the legion, of some twenty-six companies, comprising about two thousand troops. Judge Stephen A. Douglas, who was holding court at Carthage, adjourned his court and with some leading attorneys went to Nauvoo to be present at the military maneuvers of the legion. While there they were guests of President Joseph Smith. The day passed peacefully without confusion. A large company of spectators and distinguished strangers had assembled to witness the sham battle. John C. Bennett, as major general arranged for the Prophet to take command of the first cohort during the battle, but this the Prophet declined to do. Next Bennett requested him to take his station in the rear of the cavalry without his staff, while the engagement was going on; but Captain Albert P. Rockwood, of the Prophet's body guard, would not consent for some reason and kept close by the Prophet's side, who chose his own position during the battle. The Spirit of the Lord whispered to the Prophet that all was not well, and after the day's celebration was over he said: "And if General Bennett's true feelings toward me are not made manifest to the world in a very short time, then it may be possible that the gentle breathings of that Spirit, which whispered to me on parade that there was mischief concealed in that sham battle, were false; a short time will determine the point. Let John C. Bennett answer at the day of judgment, 'Why did you request me to command one of the cohorts, and also to take my position without my staff, during the sham battle, on the 7th of May, 1842, where my life might have been the forfeit, and no man have known who did the deed?" (D.H.C. 5:4)

In the Documentary History, Volume 5, page 5, the Prophet shows the positions of the field during the battle, and the positions designated by John C. Bennett for the Prophet to take. It was only ten days after this sham battle that Bennett resigned his office as mayor of Nauvoo having been confronted with his immorality. That same day he went before alderman Daniel H. Wells, and gave an affidavit in which he said he had never been taught anything in the least contrary to the principles of strict morality and the principles of the Gospel, by the Prophet Joseph Smith. This statement was volunteered. On the 19th of that same month the council of the city met and elected Joseph Smith to fill the unexpired term as mayor of Nauvoo. Bennett was accused before the council on this occasion with having said Joseph Smith taught him to practice immorality. He, Bennett, answered that those who said such a thing were "infernal liars," for Joseph Smith had always taught him to be virtuous. He then plead to be forgiven of his wrong doing, and said he hoped yet to prove by repentance his worthiness to fellowship in the Church. For the sake of his mother, he prayed that his evil practices might not be exposed. In this apparently repentant attitude he appeared before nearly one hundred brethren and cried like a child, saying, "that he was worthy of the severest chastisement." The brethren gave him the benefit of being sincere, and the Prophet plead in his behalf for leniency. His repentance however did not prove to be genuine, for it was not long afterwards when he was circulating the same reports and teaching others to be like himself, declaring that such doctrines came from the Prophet Joseph Smith. There were others, because of these falsehoods, who were led into transgression and had to be handled. Chauncey L. Higbee was excommunicated and others confessing their wrong doing were forgiven.

The brethren were merciful and longsuffering with John C. Bennett, but it did no good. In June 1842, he left Nauvoo, breathing out threatenings against the Prophet and the Church. He said he had withdrawn from the fellowship of the saints "because they were not worthy of his society." He then entered into correspondence with the enemies of the Church in Missouri, and did all in his power to stir them up to renew their attacks on the Prophet. Because of this a public statement was made in regard to the immoral practices of John C. Bennett while in Nauvoo and this was signed by the mayor, Joseph Smith, the aldermen and counselors of the city of Nauvoo. While in Missouri he wrote to Sidney Rigdon and Orson Pratt, trying to get them to assist him in his perfidy, but failed in this. Orson Pratt turned the correspondence over to the Prophet. Later when the Missourians made further demands for the surrender of the Prophet, John C. Bennett was doing all in his power to urge them on to accomplish their hellish purpose. He later published a book, "The History of the Saints," which was put out as an exposure of the corruption of the Latter-day Saints. [^1]

---
Notas:
[^1] The Attempted Assassination of Ex-Governor Boggs. Note 1. Ex-Governor Lilburn W. Boggs was shot while sitting in a room of his residence in Independence, Missouri, May 6, 1842. He was badly wounded and for several days his life hung in the balance, but he soon recovered. Following his recovery, he and others in his class of bitter enemies against the Church, and who were more particularly filled with insane hatred against the Prophet Joseph Smith, conceived the diabolical plot to have the Prophet accused as an accessory before the fact. They knew, of course, that Joseph Smith was not in Missouri on that day so they had to seek for a victim upon whom they could lay the charge of the actual attempted assassination. They found this victim in the person of Orrin Porter Rockwell, without any evidence that he was in Missouri on that date, but that did not deter them from bringing the charge. July 20, 1842, Boggs went before Samuel Weston, Justice of the peace in Independence, and made the following affidavit: (D.H.C. 5:67.)
