Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-NINE

Ex-governor Boggs' Accusation against Joseph Smith as an Accessory to the Shooting of Boggs

References

D.H.C. Vol. 5:67.

Topics

a. Attempt to place the crime on Orrin P. Rockwell.

b. The Prophet Joseph Smith accused as an accessory before the fact.

c. Bogg's affidavits accusing the brethren.

d. Governor Thomas Reynolds' requisition for their arrest.

e. The article in the "Quincy Whig."

a. Governor Carlin's bitterness towards the Prophet.

b. He accepts the requisition from Reynolds of Missouri.

c. Sends officers to arrest the Prophet and Rockwell.

d. They are taken before the court of Nauvoo.

e. Confusion of the deputy sheriff.

f. The Prophet's comment on his arrest.

a. Anger of the officers on their return.

b. The Prophet goes into seclusion.

c. Appeals to the governor go unheeded.

d. The governor's hypocritical reply.

e. Threats of Missourians to come in mob force.

f. Rewards offered for the arrests.

a. The advice of Justin Butterfield and Major Warren.

b. Governor Thomas Ford succeeds Governor Carlin.

c. He refuses to interfere with the action of his predecessor.

d. Judge James Adams' advice.

e. The trial at Springfield.

f. The Prophet discharged.

Notes

"State of Missouri, county of Jackson: This day personally appeared before me, Samuel Weston, a justice of the peace, within and for the county of Jackson, the subscriber, Lilburn W. Boggs, who being duly sworn doth depose and say that on the night of the 6th day of May, while sitting in his dwelling, in the town of Independence, in the county of Jackson, he was shot with intent to kill, and that his life was despaired of for several days, and that he believes and has good reason to believe from evidence and information now in his possession that O. P. Rockwell, a citizen or resident of the state of Illinois, is the person who shot him on the night aforesaid, and the said deponent hereby applies to the Governor of the State of Illinois, to deliver the said O. P. Rockwell to some person authorized to receive him and convey him to the county aforesaid, there to be dealt with according to law."

"Lilburn W. Boggs."

"Sworn to and subscribed before me this 20th day of July, 1842."

"Samuel Weston, J. P."

Boggs later made another affidavit in which he said he had "good reason to believe, from evidence and information now in his possession, that Joseph Smith, commonly called 'the Mormon Prophet,' was accessory before the fact of the intended murder, and that the said Joseph Smith is a citizen or resident of the State of Illinois." He applied to Govenor Thomas Reynolds of Missouri, for a demand on Governor Carlin of Illinois, to deliver up Joseph Smith, to be dealt with according to law. This man Reynolds, who had been one of the most bitter persecutors of the Prophet and the members of the Church in Missouri, readily granted this request. Another mobocrat, Edward R. Ford was appointed agent to receive Joseph Smith and Orrin P. Rockwell. In the requisition, Governor Reynolds stated, "Joseph Smith is a fugitive from Justice, charged with being accessory before the fact, to an assault with the intent to kill, made by one, O. P. Rockwell, on Lilburn W. Boggs, in this state (Missouri) and is represented to the executive department of this state as having fled to the state of Illinois." He demanded the surrender of Joseph Smith on these grounds, although in his affidavit, Boggs had not accused Joseph Smith of being a fugitive, or with fleeing from Missouri; this charge Reynolds added to his requisition on his own account. He, Reynolds, knew very well that the state of Missouri could have no claim upon Joseph Smith without making it appear that he had committed the alleged crime within Missouri and fled from her borders. Another step in this evil plan was the publishing in the Quincy Whig, of a saying that Joseph Smith had prophesied that Governor Boggs would die a violent death. In this way the plot was set. The Prophet promptly denied that he had ever said that Boggs would die a violent death, but this publication added color to the claim coming from Missouri.

The Prophet and Orrin Porter Rockwell were taken into custody by the deputy sheriff of Adams County. The prisoners demanded that their right of habeas corpus be granted, and the court of Nauvoo issued a writ demanding that the bodies of the two men be brought before that court. The deputy sheriff and his aids refused to recognize the jurisdiction of the court at Nauvoo, which by the power given by the State, had full legal right to try the case. These officers then returned to Governor Carlin for further instructions, leaving Joseph Smith and O. P. Rockwell in the hands of the marshal of Nauvoo. The marshal had no papers by which they could be held, so permitted them to go about their business.

Commenting on his arrest the Prophet said:

"I have yet to learn by what rule of right I was arrested to be transported to Missouri for a trial of the kind stated. 'An accessory to an assault with intent to kill,' does not come under the provision of the fugitive act, when the person charged has not been out of Illinois, etc. An accessory before the fact to manslaughter is something of an anomaly. The isolated affidavit of ex-Governor Boggs is no more than any other man's, and the constitution says, 'that no person shall be liable to be transported out of the state for an offense committed within the same.' The whole is another Missouri farce." (D.H.C. 5:87.)

When the Missouri officers failed to find the accused brethren they were enraged and threatened to return with sufficient force to search every house in Nauvoo. The officer from Missouri, Edward R. Ford, declared that he would come with a mob and take the Prophet by force. Of course mob rule in Missouri was considered highly legal and proper in that day. The Prophet wrote to Wilson Law, major general of the Nauvoo Legion, advising him to take necessary steps to protect the citizens of Nauvoo against such an attack. He said that he would never suffer himself to fall into the hands of the Missourians alive, if he could help it. To surrender to the Illinois officers meant the same thing, since Governor Carlin had joined hands with the Missourians in the unlawful steps to send him to that state. "I am determined to keep out of their hands, and thwart their designs, if possible," the Prophet said.

Appeals were made to Governor Carlin, and Emma Smith wrote him a pathetic letter pleading the cause of the Prophet and the saints, pointing out the danger and that it was contrary to law. The governor's reply to all these petitions was that he could not conceive of an attack by violence upon the citizens, and there was "no excitement anywhere but in Nauvoo amongst the 'Mormons' themselves." Judge Ralston, who was with the governor when he read Emma Smith's letter, asked him how he thought Mr. Smith could go through the midst of his enemies, without violence being used towards him, and if acquitted, how was he to get back? To this there was no reply.

The governor said in answer to the letter that he had been prompted by a strict sense of duty, and in discharge of that duty, had studiously pursued that course least likely to produce excitement and alarm. He said the Constitution and the laws of the United States, required him to take the course he did in regard to Joseph Smith as a fugitive from justice, and said if "he is innocent of any crime, and the proceedings are illegal, it would be the more easy for him to procure an acquittal." He felt that Missouri would grant the "utmost latitude" in his defense. All of this he surely knew to be false.

President Smith returned to Nauvoo and at a special conference August 29th, he addressed the saints. October 2, 1843, word came that Governor Carlin had offered a reward of two hundred dollars for the capture of Joseph Smith and the same amount for O. P. Rockwell. The "Quincy Whig" also printed a statement to the effect that Governor Reynolds of Missouri had offered a reward of three hundred dollars for the arrest of each of the brethren. President Sidney Rigdon, in conversation with Judge Stephen A. Douglas at Carthage, learned that Governor Carlin had purposely issued an illegal writ, expecting President Smith would be drawn by it to Carthage to be acquitted before Judge Douglas on habeas corpus proceedings. As soon as this was done a legal writ would be served and he would be carried away to Missouri. Elder Elias Higbee confirmed President Rigdon's report, adding that many Missourians were coming to unite with the militia of Illinois, voluntarily at their own expense. If President Smith should fail to go to Carthage, then they would come in force to Nauvoo. Learning this, the Prophet felt it wisdom to again leave home for a short time, and thus defeat the governor's plan.

Governor Carlin's attitude being unfavorable, no further action was taken until December, when the term of Governor Carlin as governor expired. On the 8th of December Thomas Ford was inaugurated as the chief executive of Illinois. Affidavits were then obtained to prove beyond controversy that Joseph Smith was in the state of Illinois on the 6th day of May when Boggs was shot. Governor Ford refused to interfere in the action of his predecessor. The supreme court being in session, he passed the case with all the papers up to that court for a decision. The judges held that the writ was illegal, but were divided as to whether or not Ford should interfere. The governor there-upon addressed President Joseph Smith, December 17, 1842, stating that he had submitted the case to the supreme court of Illinois, in which he said:

"I can only advise that you submit to the laws and have a judicial investigation of your rights. If it should become necessary, for this purpose, to repair to Springfield, I do not believe that there will be a disposition to use illegal violence towards you; and I would feel it my duty in your case, as in the case of any other person, to protect you with any necessary amount of force from mob violence whilst asserting your rights before the courts, going and returning." (D.H.C. 5:206.)

Justin Butterfield advised the Prophet to accept the governor's suggestion, and said he was sure the judges of the supreme court were unanimous in their opinion that he would be entitled to a discharge under a habeas corpus writ. The judge said, "I will stand by you and see you safely delivered from your arrest." Judge James Adams, who previously had joined the Church, and who loved the Prophet, also wrote to him and said:

"My son: It is useless for me to detail facts that the bearer can tell. But I will say that it appears to my judgment that you had best make no delay in coming before the court at this place for a discharge under a habeas corpus." (D.H.C. 5:206.)

Acting on this advice, President Smith prepared to go to Springfield. By arrangement he was arrested December 26, 1842, by General Wilson Law on the writ of Governor Carlin. The next day, in the custody of Wilson Law and a number of his closest friends, he started for Springfield. On the way he obtained a writ of habeas corpus from the master in chancery at Carthage. On the 30th, he arrived at the home of Judge James Adams, in Springfield. The next day, to save delay and possible legal complications, Governor Ford was petitioned for another writ that the case might be tried thereon and it was issued. The Prophet then went before Judge Pope, where Mr. Butterfield presented all the papers in the case and asked for habeas corpus, because the accusation was false, which was granted. President Smith was then placed under bail in the sum of four thousand dollars. Judge Adams and Wilson Law went bail for him, and his case was set for Monday morning, January 2, 1843. Monday came and the trial was postponed until Wednesday when the case came before the court. Joshua Lambourne, moved to dismiss the proceedings, objecting to the jurisdiction of the court. He was overruled and the trial proceeded on the 5th of January, 1843. Judge Pope rendered a lengthy decision, discharging the Prophet on the grounds that he was entitled to his discharge for defect in the affidavit on which the demand for his surrender to Missouri was made. "To authorize the arrest in this case, the affidavit should have stated clearly—1st. that Smith had committed a crime; 2nd., that he committed it in Missouri. It must appear that he fled from Missouri to authorize the governor of Missouri to demand him, as none other than the governor of the state from which he fled can make the demand. He could not have fled from justice unless he committed a crime, which does not appear. It must appear that the crime was committed in Missouri, to warrant the governor of Illinois in ordering him to be sent to Missouri for trial." So read the decision of the judge.
