Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED FORTY

The Government of God

References

D.H.C. Vol. 5:61-66.

D. & C. 58:21-23. 60:8. 84:49-53.

Topics

a. An editorial written by the Prophet.

b. Need of this instruction today.

c. Man has always departed from the government of God.

d. Satan's influence on mankind.

e. We are commanded to obey the laws of nations.

f. Until he comes whose right it is to reign.

g. The words of Peter and Isaiah and the Lord to the Church.

h. The government of God promotes happiness.

a. The greatest acts in the government of man has brought unhappiness.

b. Peoples have been oppressed and murdered by ambitious rulers.

c. The government of the Lord brings happiness and peace.

d. Nations have risen to power and glory only to fall.

e. This is the result of corruption.

f. The summary by Lord Byron.

a. In matters of government man has not increased.

b. Distress among the nations today.

c. Man has shown he cannot successfully govern himself.

d. Selfishness and greed manifest today.

e. Immorality prevalent and laws of God are broken.

a. The Lord designs to take command.

b. Everything good comes from the Lord.

c. Man has proved that he cannot govern himself in righteousness.

d. The design of Jehovah.

e. Government to be established by the Lord.

f. Universal peace to come When the Lord brings it.

g. The earth now groaning under corruption.

h. It behooves us to be wise.

i. Saints subject to divine counsel.

Notes

"Let no man break the laws of the land, for he that keepeth the law of God hath no need to break the laws of the land.

"Wherefore, be subject to the powers that be, until he reigns whose right it is to reign, and subdues all enemies under his feet." (D. & C. 58:21-22.)

Peter also gave the same kind of counsel:

"Submit yourselves to every ordinance of men for the Lord's sake; whether it be to the king, as supreme;

"Or unto governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.

"For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men; * *.

"Honor all men, Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the king." (1 Peter 2:13-17.)

When will men learn that it is the right of Jesus Christ, the Prince of Peace, to reign and hold dominion upon the earth? And in his absence to be subject to his commandments and the revelations of his servants the prophets? The hour is drawing near when all earthly, man-made, governments will pass away. Satan's dominion is drawing to its close. Today he has dominion over his own (D. & C. 1:35) and that dominion embraces every nation on the face of the earth. This is soon to change and the Son of God will come in the clouds of glory, before many years have passed away, and take his rightful place as King of kings.

The Prophet says, "God's government promotes happiness." It has always been "very dissimilar to the governments of men, whether we refer to his religious government, or to the government of nations. The government of God has always tended to promote peace, unity, harmony, strength and happiness; while that of man has been productive of confusion, disorder, weakness and misery."

"Egypt, Babylon, Greece, Persia, Carthage, Rome—each was raised to dignity amidst the clash of arms and the din of war; and whilst their triumphant leaders led forth their victorious armies to glory and victory, their ears were saluted with the groans of the dying and the misery and distress of the human family; before them the earth was a paradise, and behind them a desolate wilderness; their kingdoms were founded in carnage and bloodshed, and sustained by oppression, tyranny and despotism. The designs of God, on the other hand, have been to promote the universal good of the universal world; to establish peace and good will among men; to promote the principles of eternal truth; to bring about a state of things that shall unite man to his fellow man; cause the world to 'beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks'; make the nations of the earth dwell in peace, and to bring about the millennial glory, when 'the earth shall yield its increase, resume its paradisean glory, and become as the garden of the Lord.' "

"The great and the wise of ancient days have failed in all their attempts to promote eternal power, peace and happiness. Their nations have crumbled to pieces; their thrones have been cast down in their turn, and their cities, and their mightiest works of art have been annihilated; or their dilapidated towers, of time-worn monuments have left us but feeble traces of their former magnificence and ancient grandeur. They proclaim as with a voice of thunder, those imperishable truths—that man's strength is weakness, his wisdom is folly, his glory is his shame."

The editorial continues to say that Monarchial, aristocratical and republican governments of all kinds, have been raised to dignity only to be thrown down and prostrated in the dust. The schemes of the greatest politicians, and their wisest men and rulers and most profound statesmen have come to naught and this simply because they have forsaken ways of righteousness. They have not been willing to hearken to the voice of the servants of the Lord who have, from time to time, been sent among them crying repentance. It is strange, indeed, that men will not learn wisdom through the experiences of the past. History has recorded the rise and fall of nations. Today others are following the same course and are rapidly approaching their end. The Lord has decreed, as he must decree, the downfall of all nations, (D. & C. 87), for they have all usurped authority which must be replaced when the rightful Ruler comes to reign. Lord Byron has told the story in this beautiful verse:

"There is the Moral of all human tales; 'Tis but the same rehearsal of the past. First freedom, and then Glory—when that fails, Wealth, vice, corruption—barbarism at last. And History, with all her volumes vast, Hath but one page" —"Child Harold." Canto 4.

This was written in 1842. Today we find the same conditions confronting us. Our nation is living and doing business on borrowed money. The national debt is appalling and increasing in the number of billions of dollars, unwisely and extravagantly used. Our young men, who should be home peacefully in school or attending to their divinely-given rights, are drafted to be trained for war. The rumors of impending war and disaster are filling the printed pages of the press. The leaders in our government are jockying with other nations for positions of advantage in a great world struggle which has to this date nearly destroyed the world, and which is still threatening its utter destruction. We are in the midst of constant struggle in the labor world because of men's unrighteous greed. There is a tendency to seek greater pay for less work, and an honest day's labor is not given. Men have bound themselves in bundles preparatory to the burning. Selfishness is supreme, immorality universal, and the laws of God are thrown with abandon into the discard. Surely the "cup of iniquity" is nearly full. Instruments for destruction of humanity, wickedly and cunningly, have been invented and prepared to be used in warfare and the words of the Lord are fulfilled. Nation has risen against nation, kingdom against kingdom, and notwithstanding all the bloodshed, misery and destruction that has been brought upon the world because of its wickedness, still the rulers of nations will not learn and are this very day preparing for another and greater struggle. So we see man is not able to govern himself.

"What is the matter? Are we alone in this thing? Verily no. With all our evils we are better situated than any other nation. Let Egypt, Turkey, Spain, France, Italy, Portugal, Germany, England, China, or any other nation, speak and tell the tale of their trouble, their perplexity, and distress, and we should find that their cup was full, and that they were preparing to drink the dregs of sorrow."***

"The world itself presents one great theatre of misery, woe, and 'distress of nations with perplexity.' All, all, speak with a voice of thunder, that man is not able to govern himself, to legislate for himself, to protect himself, to promote his own good, nor the good of the world."

"If there was anything great or good in the world, it came from God. The construction of the first vessel was given to Noah, by revelation. The design of the ark was given by God 'a pattern of heavenly things.' The learning of the Egyptians, and the knowledge of astronomy was no doubt taught them by Abraham and Joseph, as their records testify, who received it from the Lord. The art of working in brass, silver, gold, and precious stones, was taught by revelation, in the wilderness. The architectural designs of the Temple at Jerusalem, together with its ornaments and beauty, were given of God. Wisdom to govern the house of Israel was given to Solomon, and to the judges of Israel; and if he had always been their king, and they subject to his mandate, and obedient to his laws, they would still have been a great and mighty people—the rulers of the universe, and the wonder of the world.

"If Nebuchadnezzar, or Darius, or Cyrus, or any other king possessed knowledge or power, it was from the same source, as the Scriptures abundantly testify. If, then, God puts up one, and sets down another at His pleasure, and made instruments of kings, unknown to themselves, to fulfill His prophecies, how much more was he able, if man would have been subject to his mandate to regulate the affairs of this world, and promote peace and happiness among the human family!

"The Lord has at various times commenced this kind of government, and tendered His services to the human family. He selected Enoch, whom He directed, and gave His law unto, and to the people who were with him; and when the world in general would not obey the commands of God, after walking with God, He translated Enoch and His church, and the Priesthood or government of heaven was taken away.

"Abraham was guided in all his family affairs by the Lord; was conversed with by angels, and by the Lord; was told where to go, and when to stop; and prepared exceedingly in all that he put his hand unto; it was because he and his family obeyed the counsel of the Lord." (D.H.C. 5:62-66.)

When universal peace shall come it will be from God. "This is the only thing that can bring about the 'restoration of all things spoken of by all the Holy prophets since the world was'—the dispensation of the fulness of times, when God shall gather together all things in one." The Prophet states that all other efforts to establish universal peace and happiness have proved abortive and every plan and design of men has fallen to the ground. Paul said when speaking of the last days: "For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape." (1 Thess. 5:3.) Isaiah also by prophecy said "Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate: and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it." (Isa. 13:9.) The attempted "League of Nations" was doomed to failure because it was man-made without the Lord being taken into the confidence of those who attempted it. The attempt to unite the nations, which at this writing is under way, shall fail in like manner, and for the same reason. The word of the Prophet Joseph Smith is verily true: "The world has had a fair trial for six thousand years; the Lord will try the seventh thousand himself. He whose right it is, will possess the kingdom, and reign until He has put all things under his feet; iniquity will hide its hoary head, Satan will be bound, and the works of darkness destroyed; righteousness will be put to the line, and judgment to the plummet, and 'he that fears the Lord will alone be exalted in that day.' " Then he adds that to bring about this condition there is bound to be great confusion among the nations.

"The earth is now groaning under corruption, oppression, tyranny and bloodshed; and God is coming out of his hiding place, as he said he would do, to vex the nations of the earth." Daniel saw this day, when thrones were cast down; the Ancient of Days came and the great conference of the righteous was held and the Son of Man was crowned as King of kings. The kingdom was given to the saints and their rightful King ruled over them.
