Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED FORTY-ONE

Prophecy that the Saints Would Be Driven to the Rocky Mountains

References

D. H. C. Vol. 5:85, 542-549.

D.H.C. Vol. 6:222-225, 255-261.

Topics

a. The gathering at Montrose.

b. The saints to suffer persecution, affliction and death.

c. Many would apostatize.

d. Saints would build cities and become mighty in the mountains.

e. Isaiah's Prophecy.

f. Testimony of Anson Call.

a. His trip to the Missouri.

b. His Indian guides.

c. His mingling with Indian tribes.

d. Probable reason for his journey.

a. Reason for the call.

b. The Prophet's counsel to those appointed to go.

c. The Apostles charged with the preparation for the journey.

d. The special council.

e. Names of volunteers.

f. Lyman Wight's propositions.

g. Why the expedition did not go.

Notes

"I prophesied that the Saints would continue to suffer much affliction and would be driven to the Rocky Mountains, many would apostatize, others would be put to death by our persecutors or lose their lives in consequence of exposure or disease, and some of you will live to go and assist in making settlements and building cities and see the Saints become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains." (D.H.C. 5:85.)

This was not the first intimation given to the Church that there would be settlements of the saints in the mountains. As early as 1831, the Lord said in a revelation (D. & C. 49:25) "Zion shall flourish upon the hills and rejoice upon the mountains, and shall be assembled together unto the place which I have appointed." The ancient prophets saw that day and clearly wrote about it. We are familiar with the words of Isaiah:

"And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.

"And many people will go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Isa. 2:2-3. Compare Micah 4:1-3.)

This prophecy by Joseph Smith given to a large group in the shade of the building at Montrose, has been disputed by enemies of the Church. The testimony of those who were present fully confirms the Prophet's story. One of these brethren who was present and heard this remarkable prediction was Anson Call. He wrote the following in his journal:

"On the 14th of July [1842] in company with about 50 or 100 of the brethren, we crossed the river to Montrose, to be present at the installment of a lodge of the Masonic order, viz. 'The Rising Sun,' Whilst together Joseph, who was with us, told us of many things that would transpire in the mountains. After drinking a draught of ice water, he said, 'brethren this water tastes much like the crystal streams that are running in the Rocky Mountains which some of you will participate of. There are some of those standing here that will perform a great work in that land'—pointing to Shadrack Roundy and a number of others whom I have forgotten. 'There is Anson, he shall go and assist in building cities from one end of the country to the other, and shall perform as great work as has ever been done by man so that the nations of the earth shall be astonished, and many of them will be gathered in that land and assisting in building cities and temples and Israel shall be made to rejoice; but before you see this day you will pass through the scenes that are but little understood by you. This people shall be made to mourn. Multitudes will die, many will apostatize." (Prophecies of Joseph Smith—Morris, p. 152.)

Elder Anson Call wrote this some considerable time after the event, and therefore should be excused for the discrepancy in the date. It was not the 14th that this took place, but on the sixth of August. In the main, his story agrees perfectly with that given by the Prophet. Other brethren who were there on that occasion have also testified to this wonderful prediction. It cannot be successfully disputed, for all that the Prophet said would come to pass has been fulfilled. The history of the continued persecution heaped upon the members of the Church while sojourning in Illinois is too well known to be called into question. Among those who were persecuted and went to martyrdom were the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother the Patriarch Hyrum. Then to this list of martyrs within the family of Joseph Smith, Sen., we may add the names of Samuel, and Father Joseph Smith himself. There were many who turned away and forsook the Church during these dark days of trial. Graves were made all along the pioneer route where loved ones were laid away because of the hardships and persecutions. The members of the Church did come to the Rocky Mountains and they were driven there by their enemies. The many cities and villages scattered up and down the valleys of the Rocky Mountains bear living testimony to the words of Joseph Smith that such would be the case. Moreover, the saints while counted as few in number among the great multitudes upon this continent have become great; their labors were great, and they have accomplished wonders in the unfertile and barren places which they have made to blossom as the rose.

On the 23rd of that month the Prophet met with the twelve in the assembly room and considered the Oregon and California exploration expedition his counselors Sidney Rigdon and Hyrum Smith were with him. The Prophet said: "I told them I wanted an exploration of all the mountain country. Perhaps it would be best to go direct to Santa Fe. Send twenty-five men; let them preach the Gospel wherever they go. Let that man go that can raise $500., a good horse and mule, a double barrel gun, one barrel rifle, and the other smooth bore, a saddle and bridle, a pair of revolving pistols, bowie-knife, and a good saber. Appoint a leader, and let them beat up for volunteers. I want every man that goes to be a king and a priest. When he gets on the mountains he may want to talk with his God; when with the savage nations have power to govern, etc. If we don't get volunteers, wait until after the election." George D. Watt said, 'Gentlemen, I shall go.' Samuel Bent, Joseph A. Kelting, David Fullmer, James Emmett, Daniel Spencer, Samuel Rolfe, Daniel Avery and Samuel W. Richards, volunteered to go. The next day Seth Palmer, Amos Fielding, Charles Shumway and John S. Fullmer, volunteered to go to Oregon and California. In the evening of February 25th, the Prophet said at a prayer meeting: "I gave some important instructions, and prophesied that within five years we should be out of the power of our old enemies, whether they were apostates or of the world; and told the brethren to record it, that when it comes to pass they need not say they had forgotten the saying." (D.H.C. 6:224-225.)

Sunday, March 10, 1844, the Prophet met with the apostles, Bishop Miller and the Temple committee to consider two letters he had received from Lyman Wight. George Miller, Phineas R. Bird, Pierce Hawley and John Young, written from Black River Falls, Wisconsin. The nature of these communications was the consideration, among other things, of the removal of the members of the Church. They pointed out what they thought to be advantages of a migration to "the south and western portion of North America, together with the Floridas, Texas, West India Islands, and the adjacent islands to the Gulf of Mexico." Lyman Wight had in mind as the most suitable place, the table lands of Texas, which at that time was not part of the United States. (D.H.C. 6:258.)

The Prophet called a special meeting for Monday, March 11, 1844, which was attended by himself, Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, John Taylor, George A. Smith, William W. Phelps, John M. Bernhisel, Lucian Woodworth, George Miller, Alexander Badlam, Peter Haws, Erastus Snow, Reynolds Cahoon, Amos Fielding, Alpheus Cutler, Levi Richards, Newel K. Whitney, Lorenzo D. Wasson and William Clayton. These brethren the Prophet said he recognized as a "special council, to take into consideration the subject matter contained in the above letters, and also the best policy for the people to adopt to obtain their rights from the nation and insure protection for themselves and children; and to secure a resting place in the mountains, or some uninhabited region, where we can enjoy the liberty of conscience guaranteed to us by the Constitution of our country, rendered doubly sacred by the precious blood of our fathers, and denied to us by the present authorities, who have smuggled themselves into power in the states and nation." (D. H. C. Vol. 6:260-261.)

It should be remembered that the declaration of the Prophet that this company should explore Oregon and California, did not mean that they were to go into the territory that is now known as the states of Oregon and California. In that day the Rocky Mountain region, which included Utah, was known as "Upper California," and was also referred to as California. Oregon also extended to the south and east hundreds of miles beyond the borders of the present state of Oregon. The fact that the Prophet repeatedly spoke of the Rocky Mountains is evidence enough that he was not looking towards the Pacific coast.

This expedition was never completed because of the increased difficulties arising in the few short months intervening between this call and the martyrdom of the Prophet and Patriarch in June 1844. It is a fact that on the evening of June 22, 1844, the Prophet started himself with a few friends for the west to escape his enemies and protect the saints. False friends insisted on his return and accused him of fleeing from the sheep when the wolves appeared; cut to the heart, he sadly returned and went to his death as he knew he would. His prophetic utterances, however, were fulfilled. Within five years the saints were beyond the power of their enemies in Illinois and Missouri, and they were establishing cities within the Rocky Mountains.
