Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED FORTY-TWO

Salvation for the Dead

References

D. H. C. Vol. 5:142-144; 148-158.

D. & C. Sections 127, 128

Topics

a. Joseph Smith in hiding because of enemies.

b. The saints encouraged to rejoice because of favor of the Lord.

c. The work on the Temple and all other things to be continued.

d. Eyewitnesses to record all ordinances for the dead.

e. This commandment is from before the foundation of the earth.

f. The books to be opened and men to be judged out of them.

a. Whatever is bound on earth is bound in heaven. Note 2. Sec. 128:8-9.) Matt. 16:19; 17:1-9.

b. This authority was given to Peter, James and John. (Sec. 128:10.) D.H.C. Vol. 3:385.

c. The power of the Priesthood. (See 128:11-12.)

a. Why ordinances for the dead are required. (Compare John 3:17.)

b. The baptismal font a symbol of the grave. (Sec. 128:15-16.) Note 4.

c. Sacredness and importance of these ordinances. (Sec. 128:15-16.)

d. Things to be revealed which have been kept hid from the foundation of the earth. (Sec. 128:18.)

e. The restoration of keys from Adam to Peter, James and John. (Sec. 128:19-23.)

f. The great day of the Lord is near at hand. (Sec. 128:24-25.)

Notes

We have considered the matter of record keeping in a previous lesson, so it is not necessary to go into the details here in relation to that subject generally; it is enough to say that all ordinances should be recorded in the proper records of the Church, and this is by commandment. There should be eye witnesses, and as far as possible for all ordinances, but in the Temple this is imperative, especially for the dead.

"And to bring about his eternal purposes in the end of man, after he had created our first parents, and the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and in fine, all things which are created, it must needs be that there was an opposition; even the forbidden fruit in opposition to the tree of life; the one being sweet and the other bitter.

"Wherefore, the Lord God gave unto man that he should act for himself. Wherefore, man could not act for himself save it should be that he was enticed by the one or the other." (2 Nephi 2:15-16.)

We know that all of the ordinances of the Gospel are required of all men if they desire eternal exaltation. No man having sound judgment and knowledge of good and evil can escape the penalties of the law which the Gospel places upon him. Thousands of men and women have died without knowing of Jesus Christ, or having an understanding of the nature of the laws of God; but they have not been without law. They have been instructed in much that pertains to salvation. They have been taught the difference between sin and righteousness, right and wrong, justice and injustice and many other principles; but they never had the opportunity of repentance and the knowledge of the saving ordinances of the Gospel. They have had before them the written word of the Lord, although the spirit of interpretation has been lacking and therefore in many things they have stumbled. The Lord has raised up unto them teachers of their own people to give to them as much knowledge as they were prepared, or permitted, to receive at the time they lived on the earth. This knowledge is revealed by Alma. (Alma 29:7-8.) All of these people are under the necessity of repentance and the Gospel will be taught to them in the world of spirits in its fulness. If they accept it there will be given to them the right of the essential ordinances administered vicariously in the Temples of the Lord, and they will become heirs in the celestial kingdom. This was one of the first truths in relation to the salvation of the dead made known to the Prophet Joseph Smith, and this was given in the Kirtland Temple, January 21, 1836. It will not be out of place to repeat this here:

"All who have died without a knowledge of this Gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts.

"And I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven. (D.H.C. 2:380-381.)

Speaking of this class, President Brigham Young once said:

"All who have lived on the earth according to the best light they had, and would have received the fulness of the Gospel had it been preached to them, are worthy of a glorious resurrection, and will attain to this by being administered for in the flesh by those who have the authority. All others will have a resurrection, and receive a glory except those who have sinned against the Holy Ghost. (J. of D. 15:136-7.)

This language certainly is plain enough, yet there are so many members of the Church who fail to grasp the significance of it. Salvation in the celestial kingdom is not offered to those who reject the truth and who fight it when they are living on this earth. It is not the intention, nor the promise of the Lord, that we shall do the work in the Temples for such as these. The revelations are perfectly clear on this point.

The Lord made it very plain to Nicodemus that all men who are under the bondage of sin, must be born of the water and of the Spirit if they would be saved, and in Section 20 of the Doctrine and Covenants, this truth is again stated emphatically. The Lord has promised to take care through his atonement of all who are not subject to law; they are heirs of the terrestrial kingdom. (See Mosiah 3, Moroni 8 and D. & C. 29 and 76.)

The ordinances pertaining to salvation which we perform here in mortality are all ordinances which must be performed in this life. They cannot be performed by those who have passed from this mortal sphere of action. There is no difference between the ordinances for the living and for the dead, except that in the case of the dead they cannot act, as the Prophet has said, in their own propria persona. There must be a substitute, or proxy, to act for them vicariously in the Temples. This work is done now according to divine decree before the earth was formed. Those who act in behalf of the dead become, to that extent, saviors of the dead. It should be understood that all of the ordinances of the Gospel pertain to the celestial kingdom, which is the kingdom of God referred to in the scriptures.

The first complete endowments in this dispensation were given in Nauvoo, May 4, 1842. These of course could not be given in the Temple, and were given elsewhere. In the time of poverty and when necessity requires the giving of blessings which belong to the House of the Lord, and there is no such house, they may be given in the wilderness, on a mountain or some other spot, consecrated to that purpose. The Savior had to give an endowment to Peter, James and John, on the Mount of Transfiguration. The Saints of that dispensation had to be baptized for the dead and give other ordinances for the dead in the wilderness, for the temple in Jerusalem was closed to them and had been desecrated, therefore the wilderness, mountain tops and rivers, had to be utilized for the temple work for their dead in that dispensation.
