Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED FORTY-THREE

Doctrinal Teachings and Prophecy

References

D.H.C. Vol. 5:256-259; 260-262; 267; 290; 323-325; 336-345.

D. & C. Sections 129; 130; 131.

Topics

a. The kingdom of God on the earth from days of Adam, whenever the Priesthood was on the earth.

b. Where the kingdom is not there is no salvation.

c. The kingdom not a thing of mystery that you can get in your heart.

a. A common belief that no one is authorized to receive revelations.

b. Those who believe such doctrine will be damned.

c. John's authority came from God.

d. A man who is born of the water and the Spirit is in the kingdom of God.

e. Where there is a legal administrator, there is the kingdom.

a. The Savior's words regarding John explained—No greater prophet than John.

b. Reasons given for John's greatness.

a. Angels and spirits of just men.

b. Keys by which messengers may be known.

c. The Savior will appear as a Man in glory.

d. The promise of the visit of the Father and the Son a personal visit.

a. The reckoning of time according to the planet on which beings reside.

b. A Urim and Thummim where God dwells.

c. The earth when celestialized will be a Urim and Thummim.

d. The white stone.

e. Intelligence gained here will rise with us in the resurrection.

f. Blessings are obtained on principle of obedience.

g. The Father and the Son have bodies of flesh and bones; the Holy Ghost is a Spirit.

Notes

The Prophet's answers are as follows: "Some say the kingdom of God was not set up on the earth until the day of Pentecost, and that John did not preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins; but I say, in the name of the Lord, that the Kingdom of God was set up on the earth from the days of Adam to the present time. Whenever there has been a righteous man on earth unto whom God revealed his word and gave power and authority to administer in his name, and when there is a priest of God—a minister who has power and authority from God to administer in the ordinances of the Gospel and officiate in the Priesthood of God, there is the kingdom of God; and, in consequence of rejecting the Gospel of Jesus Christ and the Prophets whom God hath sent, the judgments of God have rested upon people, cities, and nations, in various ages of the world, which was the case with the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, that were destroyed by rejecting the Prophets.

"Now I will give my testimony. I care not for man. I speak boldly and faithfully and with authority. How is it with the kingdom of God? where did the kingdom of God begin? Where there is no kingdom of God, there is not salvation. What constitutes the kingdom of God? Where there is a prophet, a priest, or a righteous man unto whom God gives his oracles, there is the kingdom of God; and where the oracles of God are not, there the kingdom of God is not." (D.H.C. 5:256-257.)

It is reasonable to believe that where ever a servant of the Lord can be found with authority to administer in the ordinances for the salvation of men, there the kingdom must be, and those who receive the ordinances surely become members of that kingdom. There is a prevailing sectarian notion that the kingdom of God is not a literal kingdom, but a thing of mystery that you can get in your heart. This idea is based upon the conversation the Lord had with the Pharisees, when they demanded of him to tell them when the kingdom of God should come. According to the Bible He answered them and said: "The Kingdom of God cometh not with observation: Neither shall they say, Lord here! or, Lo there! for, behold, the kingdom of God is within you." This should be translated properly, "among you," for the power of salvation was there, and the Author of it stood before them, with the invitation to bring them into the kingdom if they would repent and obey its laws; but this they would not do. In the marginal notes in the Bible this proper translation is given and this is confirmed by the revision which was made by the Prophet Joseph Smith. (Luke 17:20-21.)

Speaking of John and his authority, the Prophet said that John had his authority from God to preach the Gospel for the remission of sins, and the oracles of the Lord were with him. John was a descendant of Aaron with the right to the Priesthood. Zacharias was a priest of God, officiating in the Temple, and John was also a priest after the order of his father and he held the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood, which is clearly revealed in Section 84 in the Doctrine and Covenants. It has been said that the kingdom of God could not be set up in the days of John, for he said the kingdom was at hand. The people did not have to wait until the days of Pentecost, for it was with John. He was a legal administrator, and all who accepted his baptism became subject to the King and the laws and oracles of God. The Savior himself submitted to that authority, as administered by John, by being baptized by him.

There is a difference between the kingdom of God and the fruits and blessings that flow from it. The fact that there were more miracles and blessings during the ministry of Jesus than that of John does not prove that John had not the kingdom and the power to administer in its ordinances. John was a priest after the order of Aaron, and held the keys of that Priesthood and the power to preach repentance and to baptize for the remission of sins. The Savior came after John, according to the words of John, holding the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood also in the kingdom of God. It was upon the rock of revelation that our Lord built his Church, "and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." (D.H.C. 5:258.) "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he can not enter into the kingdom of God." It is evident the kingdom of God was on the earth, and John prepared subjects for the kingdom, by preaching the Gospel to them and baptizing them, and he prepared the way before the Savior, or came as a forerunner, and prepared subjects for the preaching of Christ.

"Whenever men can find out the will of God and find an administrator legally authorized from God, there is the kingdom of God; but where these are not, the kingdom of God is not. All the ordinances, systems, and administrations on the earth are of no use to the children of men, unless they are ordained and authorized of God; for nothing will save a man but a legal administrator; for none other will be acknowledged either by God or angels." ("Teachings," p. 274.)

Here we have the Prophet declaring that when a man is born of the water and of the Spirit he can get into the kingdom of God. It seems strange that there are members of the Church who fail to understand the significance of baptism by water and the Holy Ghost. Frequently the question is raised whether a person can obtain entrance into the kingdom of God—the celestial kingdom, which is the kingdom of God—without endowment and the Priesthood. If they would study the words of the Savior to Nicodemus they would find the answer to this question. Baptism by water and the Spirit constitute the door into that kingdom. Little children enter there, if they die in infancy or early childhood. (D.H.C. Vol. 2:381.) There is a difference between entrance into that kingdom and exaltation in the kingdom; for exaltation ordinances and covenants must be kept.

"First. He was entrusted with a divine mission of preparing the way before the face of the Lord. Whoever had such a trust committed to him before or since? No man.

"Secondly. He was entrusted with the important mission, and it was required at his hands, to baptize the Son of Man. Whoever had the honor of doing that? Whoever had so great a privilege and glory? Whoever led the Son of God into the waters of baptism, and had the privilege of beholding the Holy Ghost descend in the form of a dove, or rather in the sign of the dove, in witness of that administration? The sign of the dove was instituted before the creation of the world, a witness for the Holy Ghost, and the devil cannot come in the sign of the dove. The Holy Ghost is a personage, and is in the form of a personage. It does not confine itself to the form of the dove, but is the sign of the dove. The Holy Ghost cannot be transformed into a dove; but the sign of a dove was given to John to signify the truth of the deed, as the dove is an emblem or token of truth and innocence.

"Thirdly. John, at that time, was the only legal administrator in the affairs of the kingdom there was then on the earth, and holding the keys of power. The Jews had to obey his instructions or be damned, by their own law; and Christ himself fulfilled all righteousness in becoming obedient to the law which he had given to Moses on the mount, and thereby magnified it and made it honorable, instead of destroying it. The son of Zacharias wrested the keys, the kingdom, the power, the glory from the Jews, by the holy anointing and decree of heaven, and these three reasons constitute him the greatest prophet born of a woman."

"Second Question: How was the least in the kingdom of heaven greater than he?" [John] In reply I asked—Whom did Jesus have reference to as being the least? Jesus was looked upon as having the least claim in God's kingdom, and [seemingly] was least entitled to their credulity as a prophet; as though he had said. "He that is considered the least among you is greater than John—that is I myself." (D.H.C. 5:261.)

"There are two kinds of beings in heaven, namely: Angels, who are resurrected personages, having bodies of flesh and bones—

"For instance, Jesus said: Handle me and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

"Secondly: The spirits of just men made perfect, they who are not resurrected, but inherit the same glory.

"When a messenger comes saying he has a message from God, offer him your hand and request him to shake hands with you.

"If he be an angel he will do so, and you will feel his hand.

"If he be the spirit of a just man made perfect he will come in his glory; for that is the only way he can appear—

"Ask him to shake hands with you, but he will not move, because it is contrary to the order of heaven for a just man to deceive; but he will still deliver the message.

"If it be the devil as an angel of light, when you ask him to shake hands he will offer you his hand, and you will not feel anything; you may therefore detect him.

"These are three grand keys whereby you may know whether any administration is from God." (D.H.C. 5:267. D. & C. Sec. 129.)

April 2, 1843, the Prophet gave the following instruction at Ramus, Illinois: "When the Savior shall appear, we shall see him as he is: We shall see that he is a man like ourselves and that same sociality which exists among us here will exist among us there, only it will be coupled with eternal glory, which glory we do not now enjoy." Speaking of John 14:23, he said: "The appearing of the Father and the Son, in that verse, is a personal appearance; and the idea that the Father and the Son dwell in a man's heart is an old sectarian notion, and is false."

"Then the white stone mentioned in Revelation 2:17, will become a Urim and Thummim to each individual who receives one, whereby things pertaining to a higher order of kingdoms will be made known."

Again, he taught that all principles of intelligence we attain unto in this life, will rise with us in the resurrection, "and if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come. There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated. The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us." (D.H.C. Vol. 5:323, 324, 325, D. & C. Sec. 130.)
