Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED FORTY-FOUR

The Stephen A. Douglas Prophecy

References

D.H.C. Vol. 5:393-394.

Topics

a. Friendly attitude of Judge Douglas.

b. The Prophet's recital of Missouri persecutions.

c. Judge Douglas' sympathy aroused.

d. The prophecy that he would aspire to the presidency of the United States.

a. Circulation of numerous falsehoods throughout the nation.

b. The acceptance of these false rumors by Mr. Douglas.

c. His three declarations.

d. His suggestions for drastic punishment for the "Mormons."

a. The hypocrisy of Mr. Douglas exposed.

b. The personal reminder of the prophecy.

c. The fulfillment of the prophecy.

d. Untimely death of Mr. Douglas.

Notes

"Dined with Judge Stephen A. Douglas, who is presiding at court. After dinner Judge Douglas requested President Smith to give him a history of the Missouri persecution, which he did in a very minute manner, for about three hours. He also gave a relation of his journey to Washington city, and his application in behalf of the Saints to Mr. Van Buren, the President of the United States, for redress and Mr. Van Buren's pusillanimous reply, 'Gentlemen, your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you;' and the cold, unfeeling manner in which he was treated by most of the senators and representatives in relation to the subject, Clay saying, 'You had better go to Oregon,' and Calhoun shaking his head solemnly, saying, 'It's a nice question—a critical question, but it will not do to agitate it.'

"The judge listened with the greatest attention and spoke warmly in depreciation of the conduct of Governor Boggs and the authorities of Missouri, who had taken part in the extermination, and said that any people that would do as the mobs of Missouri had done ought to be brought to judgment: they ought to be punished.

"President Smith, in concluding his remarks, said that if the government, which received into its coffers the money of citizens for its public lands, while its officials are rolling in luxury at the expense of its public treasury, cannot protect such citizens in their lives and property, it is an old granny anyhow; and 'I prophesy in the name of the Lord God of Israel, unless the United States redress the wrongs committed upon the Saints in the state of Missouri and punish the crimes committed by her officers that in a few years the government will be utterly overthrown and wasted, and there will not be so much as a potsherd left, for their wickedness in permitting the murder of men, women and children, and the wholesale plunder and extermination of thousands of her citizens to go unpunished, thereby perpetrating a foul and corroding blot upon the fair fame of this great republic, the very thought of which would have caused the highminded and patriotic framers of the Constitution of the United States to hide their faces with shame. Judge, you will aspire to the presidency of the United States; and if ever you turn your hand against me or the Latter-day Saints, you will feel the weight of the hand of the Almighty upon you; and you will live to see and know that I have testified the truth to you; for the conversation of this day will stick to you through life.'

"He appeared very friendly, and acknowledged the truth and propriety of President Smith's remarks."

*1. Mr. James W. Sheahan in "The Life of Stephen A. Douglas" published by Harper and Brothers in 1860, while the Presidential Campaign was on, closed his history with the following:

"At this day he [Douglas] occupies the most extraordinary position of being the only man in his own party whose nomination for Presidency is deemed equivalent to an election. Friends of other statesmen claim that other men, if nominated, may be elected—a claim that admits of strong and well supported controversy; but friend and foe—all Democrats, unite in the opinion that Douglas' nomination will place success beyond all doubt."

The "Mormon" question during the years preceding the nomination was second only, in the comments of the press and the attitude of politicians, to the question of slavery in the United States. It was popular on the part of candidates to strike at the Church for it was thought that such an attitude would help to secure votes, for the Latter-day Saints and the Church were extremely unpopular at that particular time. On the 12th day of June, 1857, Mr. Douglas delivered a speech in his quest of the presidency, in the state house in Springfield, Illinois. In the course of his remarks he lent endorsement to the many falsehoods then current against the Church. He grouped his charges against the Church, then passing comment, in the following manner:

"First, that nine-tenths of the inhabitants [of Utah] are aliens by birth who have refused to become naturalized, or to take the oath of allegiance, or do any other act recognizing the government of the United States as the paramount authority in that territory.

"Second, that the inhabitants, whether native or alien born, known as Mormons (and they constitute the whole people of the territory) are bound by horrible oaths and terrible penalties, to recognize and maintain the authority of Brigham Young, and the government of which he is head, as paramount to that of the United States, in civil as well as religious affairs; and they will in due time and under the direction of their leaders, use all the means in their power to subvert the government of the United States, and resist its authority.

"Third, that the Mormon government, with Brigham Young at its head, is now forming alliance with Indian tribes in Utah and adjoining territories—stimulating the Indians to acts of hostility—and organizing bands of his own followers under the name of Danites or destroying angels, to prosecute a system of robbery and murder upon American citizens who support the authority of the United States, and denounce the infamous and disgusting practices and institutions of the Mormon government."

Having made these statements on rumors which had been circulated, this renowned gentleman said:

"Let us have these facts in official shape before the President and Congress, and the country will learn that in the performance of the high and solemn duty devolving upon the Executive and Congress, there will be no vacillating or hesitating policy. It will be as prompt as the peal that follows the flash—as stern and unyielding as death. Should such a state of things actually exist as we are led to infer from the reports—and such information comes in an official shape—the knife must be applied to this pestiferous, disgusting cancer which is gnawing into the very vitals of the body politic. It must be cut out by the roots, and seared over by the red hot iron of stern, unflinching law."

Much more he said in like strain, advocating the repeal of the organic law of the territory on the ground that the members of the Church were alien enemies, outlaws, unfit to be citizens. "To protect them," he said, "further in their treasonable, disgusting and bestial practices would be a disgrace to the country—a disgrace to humanity—a disgrace to civilization, and a disgrace to the spirit of the age. Blot it out of the organized territories of the United States."

In the Deseret News of September 2, 1857, there appeared a review of the Douglas speech, and at the conclusion of the review the editor of the News printed the following directly addressed to Mr. Douglas:

"In your last paragraph you say: 'I have thus presented to you plainly and fairly my views of the Utah question.' With at least equal plainness and with far more fairness have your views now been commented upon. And inasmuch as you were well acquainted with Joseph Smith, and this people, also with the character of our maligners, and did know their allegations were false, but must bark with the dogs who were snapping at our heels, to let them know that you were a dog with them; and also that you may have a testimony of the truth of the assertion that you did know Joseph and his people and the character of their enemies (and neither class has changed, only as the Saints have grown better and their enemies worse); and also that you may thoroughly understand that you have voluntarily, knowingly and of choice sealed your damnation, and by your own chosen course have closed your chances for the presidential chair, through disobeying the counsel of Joseph which you formerly sought and prospered by following, and that you in common with us, may testify to all the world that Joseph was a true prophet, the following extract from the History of Joseph Smith is again printed for your benefit, and is kindly recommended to your careful perusal and most candid consideration." (D.H.C. Vol. 5:395-398.)

Then was printed the prophetic charge by Joseph Smith to Stephen A. Douglas which was delivered in the home of Mr. Douglas on the 18th day of May in the year 1843. The Prophet had declared that the words of that day should remain with Mr. Douglas all his life. When his attention was called to them through the publication in the Deseret News, it evidently was, to him, very disturbing. He was at the time of his speech the leading democratic candidate for the presidency. His nomination and election appeared to be secure. The hand of the Lord was laid upon him from the very hour when he turned traitor to Joseph Smith. The Democratic party which had won the election in the previous campaign by an overwhelming majority commenced to develop internal strife. A division between the Democrats of the North and of the South was pending. The congress was torn with constant strife. Garner and Lodge in their "History of the United States" declare that "The Southern members taunted their Northern colleagues with being cowards for refusing to accept challenges, while the latter retorted with the assertion that the Southerners were but blustering bullies and their threats gasconade. Commercial relations between the two sections were well-nigh broken off, travel and social intercourse were likewise almost at an end, while the air was filled with threats of secession.** The first of the national conventions to assemble for the nomination of its candidate for President and Vice President was that of the Democratic party, which met at Charleston, April 23, (1860). The selection of Charleston for the place of meeting proved to be unfortunate for the Northern Democrats, between whom and those of the South a breach now seemed inevitable. The delegates from North and West were strongly for Douglas, but the latter's opposition to the administration's Kansas policy had alienated the Southern Democrats, so that at last the party had divided on the slavery question. Jefferson Davis, the leader of the Southern Democracy, early in February had introduced into the Senate a series of resolutions declaring that any citizen had the right to emigrate to the Territories with his slaves, and that it was the duty of the national government to protect such slaves just as other property from the unfriendly legislation of Congress or of the Territories.** After wrangling several days and nights over the slavery question the committee reported that it was unable to agree upon a declaration of principles." The majority from the South declared for a platform prepared by Jefferson Davis, the minority from the North reported a provision to abide by the decisions of the Supreme Court so far as rights of property in the Territories were concerned. The historians declare that the difference was so shadowy that all should have agreed if reasonable men might have prevailed. The minority report received the majority of votes of the convention, whereupon the delegates from Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, South Carolina, Florida, Texas and Arkansas withdrew. On the tenth day of the convention the remaining delegates adjourned to meet at Baltimore on June 18th. The Southern delegates who withdrew also agreed to meet on the same day in Richmond. On May 9th a convention calling itself the representatives of the Constitutional Union Party met at Baltimore and nominated John Bell of Tennessee for President and Edward Everett of Massachusetts for Vice President. The Republicans in convention in Chicago nominated Abraham Lincoln of Illinois for President and Hannibal Hamlin of Maine for Vice President. On the day of election Lincoln received 180 electoral votes, Brekinridge who was nominated by the Southern Democrats, received 72, Bell 39 and Douglas 12. Douglas received a very large popular vote, but was able to carry but two states, Missouri and New Jersey.

Stephen A. Douglas less than one year after the election died a broken and disappointed man at the age of 48. The Prophecy of Joseph Smith had been literally fulfilled.
