Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED FORTY-FIVE

Missouri's Third Attempt to Capture Joseph Smith

References

D.H.C. Vol. 5:250, 422; 431.

Topics

a. Bennett's conniving to destroy Joseph Smith.

b. He endeavors to get Sidney Rigdon and Orson Pratt to join him.

c. Orson Pratt delivers the letter to Joseph Smith.

d. Letter of Sam. C. Owens.

a. Sheriff Joseph H. Reynolds sent to arrest Joseph Smith.

b. Sheriff Harmon T. Wilson of Illinois appointed to assist him.

c. Joseph Smith's journey to Dixon.

d. Judge James Adams sends word to the Prophet warning him.

e. Journey of Markham and Clayton to Dixon.

f. Reynolds and Wilson go to Dixon.

g. Arrest of the Prophet.

a. Joseph Smith seeks council.

b. His request denied by the officers.

c. They are forced to grant the Prophet's request.

d. Several lawyers are retained.

e. Markham obtains warrant for arrest of the officers.

f. In turn they are made prisoners of Sheriff Campbell.

g. The meeting at Pawpaw Grove.

h. Parties to the rescue.

a. Arrival in Nauvoo.

b. Humane treatment of the sheriffs by the Prophet.

c. Trial before the municipal court.

d. Joseph Smith released.

e. Governor Ford's refusal to call out militia.

f. Porter Rockwell's arrival in Nauvoo.

Notes

"Mr. Sidney Rigdon and Orson Pratt.

"DEAR FRIENDS :—It is a long time since I have written to you, and I should now much desire to see you; but I leave tonight for Missouri, to meet the messenger charged with the arrest of Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Lyman Wight, and others, for murder, burglary, treason, etc. etc., who will be demanded, in a few days, on new indictments found by the grand jury of a called court on the original evidence, and in relation to which a nolle prosequi was entered by the District Attorney.

"New proceedings have been gotten up on the old charges, and no habeas corpus can save them. We shall try Smith on the Boggs case, when we get him into Missouri. The war goes bravely on; and, although Smith thinks he is now safe, the enemy is near, even at the door. He has awoke the wrong passenger. The governor will relinquish Joe up at once on the new requisition. There is but one opinion in the case, and that is, nothing can save Joe on a new requisition and demand predicated on the old charges on the institution of new writs. He must go to Missouri; but he shall not be harmed, if he is not guilty; but he is a murderer, and must suffer the penalty of the law. Enough on this subject.

"I hope that both of your kind and amiable families are well, and you will please to give them all my best respects. I hope to see you all soon. When the officer arrives, I shall be at hand. I shall see you all again. Please to write me at Independence immediately."

"Yours respectfully,

"JOHN C. BENNETT."

"P.S. Will Mr. Rigdon please to hand this letter to Mr. Pratt, after reading it?"

Sidney Rigdon did as Bennett requested and did hand the letter to Orson Pratt who, immediately after reading it took it to the Prophet Joseph Smith. (D.H.C. 5:250.)

It is apparent that Bennett had received some assurance from Governor Ford that he would acknowledge the new requisition. The governors of Illinois, Thomas Ford, and of Missouri, Thomas Reynolds, had entered into this conspiracy, which fact is made clear in a communication from Sam. C. Owens, former leader of Missouri mobs, to Governor Ford, dated June 10, 1843. (D.H.C. 5:422.) In this communication Owens states that for several months he has been in correspondence with John C. Bennett in relation to Joseph Smith. Reynolds then informs Governor Ford that at the sitting of the circuit court of Daviess County the grand jury had brought an indictment against Joseph Smith on the old charges of 1838, and that Mr. Joseph Reynolds was on the way to attend to the business, and he adds, "I am in hopes that, so soon as the proper papers come to hand, you will take the course that will secure this imposter and have him delivered over to Mr. Reynolds." He also said that Bennett had made arrangements with Harmon T. Wilson, of Hancock County, into whose hands the conspirators wished the writ to be put. "From the tenor of his letters I am induced to believe that he has made the same suggestion to you. The only wish of the people of this state is that this man, Joseph Smith, may be brought to that justice which the magnitude of his crime merits." This man Owens was one of the most bitter enemies of the Prophet when he was held prisoner in Missouri, and became a ready tool in carrying out this wicked conspiracy.

Reynolds and Wilson had learned that the Prophet had gone to Dixon and they went there with all speed. On the way they passed William Clayton, who had been asked to spy out the land, but the conspirators were disguised and Brother Clayton did not recognize them. When they arrived at their destination the conspirators represented themselves as "Mormon" Elders and were directed to the Wasson home. The family were at dinner when the fiends knocked on the door. They said they were Mormon elders and wanted to see "Brother Joseph." The Prophet happened to be in the back yard where Wilson spied him and suddenly they ceased to be Mormon Elders and sprang upon the Prophet like fiends. They showed no writ, but with cocked pistols and with vile oaths, threatened to shoot him if he stirred. They repeatedly jabbed the muzzle of their pistols in his ribs, and were for hurrying him out of Dixon without the chance to say farewell to his family and friends, or even to obtain his hat and coat. Stephen Markham who saw what was going on grabbed the horses of these men by the bits and held them saying: "There is no law on earth that required a sheriff to take a prisoner without his clothes." They then threatened to shoot Markham, but he paid no heed to their threats, and Emma Smith brought her husband his hat and coat. As the wagon rolled away, Joseph called to Markham to go to Dixon and secure a writ of habeas corpus. On the way the officers repeatedly thrust their pistols in the Prophet's sides with accompanying oaths of blasphemy. Markham who had followed them upbraided them for their cowardice and brutal treatment of their prisoner, who was defenseless.

Sunday night, June 24, 1843, they arrived at Pawpaw Grove, thirty-two miles from Dixon. The following morning the people assembled at the hotel and requested that the Prophet preach. Reynolds objected, saying that Joseph Smith was his prisoner, and the people must disperse. The people had witnessed his abuse of his prisoner, and a Mr. David Town, an aged gentleman, who was lame, advanced and gave Reynolds to understand that he could not interrupt gentlemen. Bringing his heavy walking stick down with a loud thud, he said:

"You—infernal puke, we'll learn you to come here and interrupt gentlemen. Sit down there (pointing to a very low chair), and sit still. Don't open your head till General Smith gets through talking. If you never learned manners in Missouri, we'll teach you that gentlemen are not to be imposed upon by nigger-drivers. You cannot kidnap men here, if you do in Missouri; and if you attempt it here, there's a committee in this grove that will sit on your case; and, sir, it is the highest tribunal in the United States, as from its decision there is no appeal!"

Reynolds meekly took the seat and President Smith addressed the people for one hour and a half. It was learned that Judge Caton was in New York, so they all returned to Dixon, where new writs were obtained, made returnable before the nearest tribunal in the fifth judicial district, at Markham's request. The company thereupon made ready to go to Quincy, where Judge Stephen A. Douglas was holding court. On the way Reynolds and Wilson engaged in plots to raise mobs and carry Joseph Smith to the mouth of Rock River where a company of Missourians awaited them; but every time their plans were discovered and defeated. On the way President Smith convinced Sheriff Campbell and the attorneys that the court of Nauvoo was nearer than that of Quincy, and had full power to try his case, and hither they went their way. Reynolds and Wilson tried to get Sheriff Campbell, who had them in custody, to go by Rock River to Quincy, not knowing that their plots were known, claiming that they could not go through Nauvoo alive. The Prophet pledged his word of honor that they would not be molested, and the journey was directed towards Nauvoo.

William Clayton, in the meantime, had hastened back to Nauvoo and raised a company of about one hundred and seventy-five men, who on horseback left to meet the Prophet. President Brigham Young raised about seven hundred dollars by subscription for the expense of this company. Part of this company went on the "Maid of Iowa" down the Mississippi to the mouth of the Illinois River to examine all steamboats, fearing that the officers had placed the Prophet on a boat and were taking him down the river. Others went overland, and one company of nine in advance met the officers and the Prophet near Geneseo on the 27th. When they appeared Reynolds and Wilson began to tremble fearing for their lives. Reynolds asked if 'Jim' Flack was in the crowd. When he was informed that Flack was on the way and would arrive the next day, Reynolds said, "Then I am a dead man; for I know him of old." When Stephen Markham returned after going out to locate some of the brethren from Nauvoo, Reynolds said, "Do I meet you as a friend? I expected to be a dead man when I met you again." Markham assured him that he would not be hurt. When "Jim" Flack arrived the Prophet asked him to pledge himself that he would do Reynolds no harm.

The trial was held before the municipal court in Nauvoo. A requisition was made on Reynolds to return the writ, which he refused to do, whereupon the Prophet petitioned the court for a writ of habeas corpus to be directed to Reynolds, commanding him to bring his prisoner before the court. The summons was issued and Reynolds complied with the attachment and delivered the prisoner into the hands of the marshal at Nauvoo. That afternoon Joseph Smith addressed the people at great length, declaring that he would not peacefully submit again to such ill-treatment. While he was speaking Reynolds and Wilson with a lawyer named Davis of Carthage, left for that place threatening to raise the militia and come again and take Joseph Smith out of Nauvoo.

The court convened Saturday, July 1, 1843, to examine the writ of habeas corpus. Attorneys Cyrus Walker, Shepherd G. Patrick, Edward Southwick and Mr. Backman, defended Joseph Smith, while Attorney Mason was counselor for Reynolds. Witnesses were examined and the case tried on its merits. Hyrum Smith, Parley P. Pratt, Brigham Young, George W. Pitkin, Lyman Wight and Sidney Rigdon gave testimony, at the conclusion of which the prisoner was discharged. (For testimony of witnesses, legal documents, etc., see D.H.C. Vol. 5: Chapters 24, 25.)

The proceedings before the court in Nauvoo were forwarded to Governor Ford with the affidavits of the attorneys and others bearing upon the case and the kindly treatment the sheriffs had received in Nauvoo. Judge Adams came from Carthage and stated that Reynolds and Wilson were there exciting the people to mobocracy, and petitioning the governor for a posse to forcibly take Joseph Smith on the grounds that he had been unlawfully taken out of their hands. A remonstrance against such proceedings was prepared by Messrs. Southwick and Patrick, and a petition was sent to Governor Ford praying him not to issue any more writs. Governor Ford refused to heed the request of Reynolds that, he, the governor, call out the militia after the fashion followed in Missouri. Governor Ford stated that Joseph Smith had been tried and discharged, and he, as governor, had executed his full duty as the law imposed, and had not been "resisted either in the writ issued, for the arrest of Smith or in the person of the officer appointed to apprehend him," moreover he said that the constitution would not permit him to take such action as the Missourian mobocrat proposed.

Orrin Porter Rockwell, who was accused of the shooting of Boggs, went into retirement when the governor issued papers for his extradition. He went east to New Jersey and remained for some time. Following the discharge of President Smith by Judge Pope, Rockwell concluded to return to Nauvoo by going down the Ohio and Mississippi rivers. He reached St. Louis where he was recognized by Elias Parker who had him placed under arrest, March 4, 1843. He was carried to Independence in chains and was placed under bonds in the sum of five thousand dollars, which, of course, they knew he could not raise, as no person outside of Missouri would be acceptable as a bondsman. He was placed in the custody of the same malicious Joseph H. Reynolds, sheriff of Jackson County and was imprisoned for eight months, receiving the worst kind of inhuman treatment. The enemies of the Church knew they had no grounds against him, therefore no trial was held. Instead they who had him in charge treated him brutally while he was in their hands. March 15, 1843, the Prophet wrote: "I prophesied in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that Orrin Porter Rockwell would get away honorably from the Missourians."

On Christmas day, 1843, a large party assembled at the Prophet's home, spending the time in music and a social visit. During the festivities a man with long shaggy hair, apparently drunk, came in and was taken for a Missourian. A scuffle ensued and the Prophet beheld the stranger's face. To his great surprise and joy he recognized that this long-haired, disheveled man was his long-tried and true friend, Orrin Porter Rockwell. When the confusion ceased, Brother Rockwell related his experiences. When he arrived in Independence the crowd suggested that he be hanged, but he was placed in jail. In a few days he went through a mock trial. The magistrate said he found no evidence against him, but placed him back in prison, where Sheriff Reynolds bound him hand and foot with chains. Once he escaped, but was captured and through the help of the Lord, was not hanged. When Bennett's scheme was put into effect to get the Prophet, Reynolds came to Rockwell and said he had discovered from letters that Joseph Smith had unlimited confidence in Rockwell, and if Rockwell would only "tote him out by riding or any other way, so that the Missourians might apprehend him, Rockwell might please himself whether he stayed in Missouri or return to Illinois; they would protect him, and any "pile" that he might name, the citizens of Jackson County would raise. "You only deliver Joe Smith into our hands, and name your pile." Rockwell replied: "I will see you all damned first, and then I won't." On the 13th of December he was taken before the court and was tried, not for the shooting of Boggs, but for breaking jail! He was found guilty and sentenced to "five minutes" imprisonment in the county jail. He was kept five hours, while his enemies tried to think of some other charge to make against him, and then he was released. He had to use caution in getting away from Missouri because of the unfriendly spirit there, but after much difficulty finally arrived in Nauvoo on Christmas night, where the party at the home of the Prophet was gathered. (D.H.C. Vol. 6:134-13-142.)
