Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED FORTY-SIX

The New and Everlasting Covenant—Eternity of the Marriage Covenant

References

D.H.C. Vol. 5:391-392; 501-507.

D. & C. Sec. 132.

Topics

a. Definition of covenant. Note 1.

b. Each ordinance of the Gospel received by covenant. Note 2.

c. The New and Everlasting Covenant defined. (D. & C. 132:4-7.) Note 3.

d. All offerings and covenants must be of the Lord to be eternal. (D. & C. 132:8-14.)

e. All man-made covenants must come to an end. (D. & C. 132:13-14.)

a. Joseph Smith's Instruction to William Clayton.

b. Marriage which is not of the Lord to come to an end at death. (D. & C. 132:15-17.)

c. Marriage according to the law of God is eternal. (D. & C. 132:18-19.)

d. Only those married for eternity will become sons and daughters of God. (D. & C. 132:20.)

a. "Except ye abide my law, ye cannot attain to this glory." Note 5.

b. Eternal lives is to know God and be like him. (D. & C. 132:23-24. John 17:1-2.)

c. Broad is the gate that leads to "the death." (D. & C. 132:25.)

Notes

"Among these covenants are these, that they will cease from sin and from all unrighteousness; that they will work righteousness in their lives; that they will abstain from the use of intoxicants, from the use of strong drinks of every description, from the use of tobacco, from every vile thing, and from extremes in every phase of life; that they will not take the name of God in vain; that they will not bear false witness against their neighbor, that they will seek to love their neighbors as themselves; to carry out the golden rule of the Lord, do unto others as they would that others should do unto them. These principles are involved in the covenants that the people have made in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and it is expected that the officers and presiding authorities of the Church shall see to it that the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will keep these covenants that they have made with the Lord, and that they will observe these principles and adapt them to their lives and carry them out, that they may be indeed the salt of the earth." (Gospel Doctrine, page 132.)

There are some members of the Church who seem to think that the new and everlasting covenant is the covenant of celestial marriage, or marriage for eternity, but this is not so. Marriage for eternity is an everlasting covenant, and like the Lord said of baptism, we may say of marriage, it is a new as well as an everlasting covenant because it was from the beginning. It will be, if properly performed according to the law of the Lord, eternal. In the opening verses of Section 132, the Lord draws a distinction between a new and everlasting covenant and the new and everlasting covenant. While the definition is given in the negative form, it is plainly discernible that the new and everlasting covenant is the fulness of the Gospel. In the words of the Lord, "All covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations, that are not made and entered into and sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, of him who is anointed, both as well for time and for all eternity, and that too most holy, by revelation and commandment through the medium of mine anointed, whom I have appointed on the earth to hold this power (and I have appointed unto my servant Joseph to hold this power in the last days, and there is never but one on the earth at a time on whom this power and the keys of this priesthood are conferred), are of no efficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection from the dead; for all contracts that are not made unto this end have an end when men are dead." (D. & C. 132:7.)

If members of the Church would keep this clearly in mind it would save them from difficulties. We have already discussed in some detail the fact that the President of the Church, who is the President of the High Priesthood, is the only one who holds the keys of this sealing power, but he may, and frequently does, delegate authority to others.

"Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion. Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name? Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed? And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was? I am the Lord thy God; and I give unto you this commandment—that no man shall come unto the Father but by me or by my word, which is my law, saith the Lord. And everything that is in the world, whether it be ordained of men, by thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may be, that are not by me or by my word, saith the Lord, shall be thrown down, and shall not remain after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection, saith the Lord God." (D. & C. 132:8-13.)

This is logical and surely will appeal to the understanding of every reasonable man. Yet we see universally men making contracts and entering into agreements, and covenants, which the Lord has not authorized. These foolish people seem to think that the Lord is bound by their man-made covenants and performances; but nothing is farther from the truth. All the baptisms, sprinklings of infants or others, marriages and ordinations not according to the Lord's commandment, will come to an end.

While at Ramus May 16, 1843, the Prophet gave one of the first explanations in relation to the eternity of the marriage covenant. He was at the home of Elder Benjamin F. Johnson, and in the presence of Brother Johnson, his wife and others, the Prophet said, addressing himself to Elder William Clayton:

"Except a man and his wife enter into an everlasting covenant and be married for eternity, while in this probation, by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood, they will cease to increase when they die; that is, they will not have any children after the resurrection. But those who are married by the power and authority of the Priesthood in this life, and continue without committing the sin against the Holy Ghost, will continue to increase and have children in the celestial glory. The unpardonable sin is to shed innocent blood, or be accessory thereto. All other sins will be visited with judgment in the flesh, and the spirit being delivered to the buffetings of Satan until the day of the Lord Jesus.** In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees; and in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the Priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage] and if he does not, he cannot obtain it. "He may enter into the other, but that is the end of his kingdom: he cannot have an increase." (D.H.C. Vol. 5:391-392.)

The doctrine of the eternity of the marriage covenant, and the "continuation of the seeds forever and ever," is one of the most glorious principles of the Gospel. It is, in fact, the crowning principle which brings the fulness of exaltation to men and women who are willing to accept this eternal, holy and sacred ordinance. It is only in the celestial kingdom that the privilege of marriage and eternal increase will be found. Even in that kingdom there will be servants who are denied this privilege and glory. (D. & C. Sections 131 and 132:16-17.) All who refuse to accept this principle and live in accordance with this covenant cannot be enlarged, but must remain separately and singly through all eternity. They cannot become sons and daughters of God. This great truth cannot be impressed upon the young people of the Church with too much emphasis and care. It is a sad thing to see the young people throw away their birthright and be content with a civil contract in marriage. Parents are largely at fault in this because of the neglect in teaching their children and stamping upon their minds the glories of eternal life, and the sorrow which shall come if this glory is not attained. No member of the Church should be satisfied with a marriage which falls short of the law of God. No member of the Church should be content with a marriage with one not of the Church. No member who values his standing and who has the desire to receive exaltation will be guilty of such an offense—for it is an offense in the sight of God. In this day when modern thought and "liberal mindedness" take hold of the people, as it did in the days of Noah before the flood, the sacredness of marriage has largely been lost, if not entirely lost.

Marriage is looked upon by many as a mere contract which may be broken at will, or when the contracting parties tire of each other, but they never tire where they are living righteous lives. Due to the wicked, or unrighteous, lives, and where faith and obedience to the Gospel does not abound, many families are broken up. Marriage in the world has become a mockery in the sight of the Lord. Children have been caused to suffer by these broken vows of parents, and this suffering, when the covenanting husband and wife are members of the Church, should never be enforced upon children. No marriage should be entered into only in the spirit of prayer and with the holy desire to serve the Lord. When the proper perspective is had divorce cannot come. It was never intended that divorce should be, and the Lord said it was only because of the hardness of the hearts of the people that it did occur. When a young couple is married for time and for all eternity, and each loves the other, there is an incentive to serve the Lord and there comes an abiding love for offspring which should carry them through all the difficulties and differences peculiar to mortal life. The husband should religiously respect the rights and wishes of the wife, and the wife, likewise, the husband. Marriage should be considered a sacred covenant, not a convenience or something merely to satisfy lust under legal protection.

There are times when a man and a woman who have been sealed in the Temple for time and all eternity feel that they cannot live together. This is frequently due to some insignificant, trifling, disagreement; it may be due to some peculiar characteristic which is not in itself a sin, but something which creates some annoyance or unpleasantness which with proper patience could be overcome. Such feelings—and we all have our faults—are often not discovered until after marriage and are tolerated until children are born, and sometimes raised, then this couple seeks a separation. The result is that the children are denied their rights of proper parenthood, given them by the Lord when they were born under the covenant. Thus the covenant is broken; sorrow is the result, not only in this life, but for eternity. Separations of this kind are due to mortal weaknesses and lack of faith. Husbands and wives, who have full fellowship in the Church, should endeavor to overcome these weaknesses, and help each other in love to do so. It is a far more serious matter for a husband and wife to seek a separation than many seem to think. The words of the Lord as recorded in Matthew 19:3-9, should be carefully considered. I am convinced that the Lord will force some couples who separate, without justification after they have been sealed in the House of the Lord, back again to each other, or else they will lose their reward. President Brigham Young has given some excellent counsel to husbands and wives which is here presented:

"Those who attain to the blessing of the first or celestial resurrection will be pure and holy, and perfect in body. Every man and woman that reaches to this unspeakable attainment will be as beautiful as the angels that surround the throne of God. If you can by faithfulness in this life obtain the right to come up in the morning of the resurrection, you need entertain no fears that the wife will be dissatisfied with her husband, or the husband with the wife; for those of the first resurrection will be free from sin and from the consequences and power of sin. This body is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body.*** As we have borne the image of the earthly, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly." (Contributor Vol. 9:240.)

Again he said: "When a man and woman have received their endowments and sealings, and then had children born to them afterwards, those children are legal heirs to the kingdom and to all its blessings and promises, and they are the only ones that are on this earth. There is not a young man in our community who would not be willing to travel from here to England to be married right, if he understood things as they are; there is not a young woman in our community who loves the Gospel and wishes its blessings that would be married in any other way; they would live unmarried until they could be married as they should be, if they lived until they were as old as Sarah before she had Isaac born to her. Many of our brethren have married off their children without taking this into consideration, and thinking it a matter of little importance. I wish we all understood this in the light in which heaven understands it." (Discourses, pp. 302-303.)

It is frequently the case that young people wish to be married outside of the Temple because they love the glamor and lure of the world, and then immediately following they wish to go to the temple to be sealed for time and all eternity. This attitude shows a lack of faith and integrity to the truth. President Joseph F. Smith has said that such actions, when young people had ready access and were worthy to go to the Temple, were showing contempt for and an insult to the sacred covenant of marriage for time and all eternity.

No man can know the Father and the Son who does not dwell in their presence. Those who do dwell in their presence and have partaken of the fulness of the covenants and who have proved themselves worthy, shall be like God for they are the sons and daughters of God, and numbered as the members of his grand family. The fulness of eternity is theirs.

"And now we desire with holy zeal to emphasize the enormity of sexual sins. Though often regarded as insignificant by those not knowing the will of God, they are, in his eyes, an abomination, and if we are to remain his favored people they must be shunned as the gates of hell. The evil results of these sins are so patent in vice, crime, misery and disease that it would appear that all, young and old, must perceive and sense them. They are destroying the world. If we are to be preserved we must abhor them, shun them, not practice the least of them, for they weaken and enervate, they kill man spiritually, they make him unfit for the company of the righteous and the presence of God." (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 345-346.)

"Those who have taken upon themselves the responsibility of wedded life should see to it that they do not abuse the course of nature; that they do not destroy the principle of life within them, nor violate any of the commandments of God. The command which he gave in the beginning to multiply and replenish the earth is still in force upon the children of men. Possibly no greater sin could be committed by the people who have embraced this Gospel than to prevent or to destroy life in the manner indicated. We are born into the world that we may have life, and we live that we may have a fulness of joy, and if we will obtain a fulness of joy, we must obey the law of our creation and the law by which we may obtain the consummation of our righteous hopes and desires—eternal life." (Gospel Doctrine, p. 347.)
