Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED FORTY-SEVEN

The Mob Spirit in Illinois

References

D.H.C. Vol. 5:492; 495; 496; 532; 534; 537. Vol. 6:4-8; 108.

Topics

a. Missouri asks Ford to use militia to capture Joseph Smith.

b. Governor Ford refuses on legal grounds.

a. People stirred by falsehoods of Wilson and Reynolds.

b. Bitter resolutions against the Church adopted.

c. Threats of violence and unlawful action against the Church.

d. Committee appointed to arouse hatred and opposition to the Church.

a. Daniel Avery and his son kidnapped and abused.

b. Attempted seizure of Nelson Judd.

c. The governor threatened if he should attempt to aid the saints.

d. Apostates add to the flame of persecution.

Notes

"Another objection to ordering a detachment of militia, arises out of the militia laws of this state, the forty-third section of which is as follows:" (D.H.C. 5:534-555.)

Then appears a lengthy quotation from the laws of the state of Illinois on this point, and Ford further called attention to the fact that there had been no warlike array in the proceedings of Joseph Smith and his friends, exhibition of arms, and no actual force of an illegal character. Of course this turn to the appeal was very displeasing to the Missourian mobocrats and made them more determined than ever to destroy Joseph Smith. If it could not be done in Missouri, then it could be done in Illinois. They combined, therefore, with enemies of the Prophet in Illinois, and stirred the people up by false reports circulating the falsehood that Joseph Smith had been forcibly taken from the hands of the sheriffs who had him in charge, and that the officers had been grossly abused and their lives threatened. There were far too many, some of them respectable persons, who were deceived by these tales, and who were made to feel that the "Mormons" were in rebellion against the peace and laws of the state.

(1.) That the Latter-day Saints were unwilling to submit to the ordinary restraints of law and therefore their enemies were forced, or compelled, to assert their rights in some way.

(2.) That while they deprecated lawlessness and violence, yet they pledged themselves to resist all wrongs which may be perpetrated hereafter, "peaceably, if we can, but forcibly, if we must."

(3.) That in the event of their being forced into collusion, they pledged themselves to stand by and support each other in every emergency up to the death.

(4.) That they believed it was in the interest of their friends in the neighboring counties and neighboring states to begin to take a firm and decided stand, "against the high pretentious and base designs of this latter-day would-be-Mohamet."

(5.) That provided they must necessarily protect their dearest rights, and preserve their institutions, they resolved to adopt measures "to humble the pride and arrogance of the audacious despot." They therefore called upon all good and honest men, without distinction of party or place, "to come to the rescue."

(6.) That they pledged themselves in the most determined manner in case that the authorities of the state of Missouri should make another demand for the body of Joseph Smith, and the governor of Illinois should issue another warrant, that they stood ready to serve the officer as a posse (mob), "in order that it may not be said of us, in future, that the most outrageous culprits have been suffered 'to go unwhipped of justice.' "

(7.) That a corresponding committee be appointed to communicate with the different parts of the county (Hancock), and with other counties to have them interchange mutual views in regard to the subject embraced in the proceedings.

(8.) That it has been "too common" for years for politicians of both parties, "to go to Nauvoo and truckle to the heads of the Mormon clan for their influence," and therefore they pledged themselves to oppose all who thus debased themselves.

(9.) That if the Mormons carry out the threats they have made against the lives of some of the citizens, they would, if failing to receive relief from the laws, "take summary and signal vengeance upon them as a people."

(10.) "That when the government ceases to afford protection, the citizens of course fall back upon their original inherent rights of self-defense."

Following these resolutions some of the most bitter enemies of the Church in Illinois, were appointed a committee to correspond with other committees and counties, to get their plan operating in the state. These men were Captain Robert F. Smith, Major T. B. Bartlet, Harmon T. Wilson, Frank A. Worrel, and Walter Bagby. Other committees were also appointed, and before the meeting adjourned it was resolved that the president of the meeting, Edson Whitney, correspond with the governor of Missouri requesting him to make another demand upon the authorities in Illinois for the body of Joseph Smith, "commonly called the Mormon Prophet; and in the event of a requisition and an order for his arrest and delivery to the proper officers of the state of Missouri, we offer our services to enforce said order, and pledge ourselves to sustain the supremacy of the law at all hazards and under all circumstances."

Copies of the proceedings were ordered published in the "Warsaw Message," "Quincy Whig," and "Quincy Herald," with the request that these papers "add a note, soliciting all editors friendly to our cause in this state, Missouri, and Iowa Territory, to copy."

Thursday, January 18, 1844, Nelson Judd was visited by a man who said he wanted to sell him some wood. Brother Judd went with the man to the woods. When they reached a place just below Hibbard's two men on horseback came upon Brother Judd's and said they had a warrant for his arrest, but they did not wait to serve a warrant but each of them shot at him and missed. Then Brother Judd said, "Now 'tis my turn;" and making a move as though he had a pistol in his pocket, the men turned and fled. (D.H.C. 6:179-180.) A mob party went to the home of David Holman, near Ramus, and in his absence plundered it of provisions and then burned it to the ground, leaving him and his family without shelter in the winter time.

The anti-Mormon citizens of Hancock and surrounding counties were constantly making threats against the inhabitants of Nauvoo. This required vigilant action on the part of the citizens that they might be in readiness in case of such an attack. Amos S. Chase in an affidavit before the mayor, Joseph Smith, in Nauvoo, testified that on the 18th day of December, 1843, near Warsaw, in Hancock County, shortly after the arrest of John Elliot for his part in the kidnapping of the Averys, he, Chase, saw the men gathering with their arms, bent on retaking Elliott and heard their conversation. When the question was raised, "What would the governor do, if the governor did not sanction such unlawful acts," several of them replied, "Damn the governor! If he opens his head, we will punch a hole through him! He dare not open his head! We will serve him the same sauce we will the Mormons." (D.H.C. 6:122.)

When the Latter-day Saints were driven from Missouri the people of western Illinois manifested considerable sympathy for them and gave them some aid in their extreme distress. By the year 1843, the condition had greatly changed. There were many reasons for this change of attitude. It should be remembered that Western Illinois was, like Missouri, on the frontier. Disreputable characters had settled there, these at all times were unfriendly to the Church. The religion of the Latter-day Saints was always unpopular and that condition has continued to this day. The members of the Church were industrious. They were building a great city. It was in 1844, perhaps, the largest and best managed city in the state of Illinois. The surrounding towns had not progressed and there was jealousy created against this more prosperous city. The city had arisen from a swamp and wilderness, its people were frugal and law abiding. Factories had been established and steps had been taken to build a dam in the Mississippi and make a canal around the Des Moines rapids, to admit the passage of boats for commercial purposes. Years later this dream of the Prophet, which he endeavored to get the government to see, was realized. The fact that the saints voted largely as a unit for candidates, was one factor which led to the bitter spirit which grew against them. Beyond all of this we cannot discount as, perhaps the leading factor, the work of John C. Bennett, the traitor, and his activity in stirring up the hate which had not died and was still smoking in Missouri against Joseph Smith and the members of the Church. The constant appeals by Missourians found helping hands in the baser element in Illinois and by this means the falsehoods spread and hate was engendered against the Prophet and the saints. On top of all of this, there came the aid of apostates who joined forces with the baser element in bringing to death the Prophet and Patriarch. It seems that it was destined that traitors of this kind should rise from the councils of the Church, just as traitors arose against the Son of God. This was true in Missouri, and gave great aid to our enemies, and so it proved in Illinois. For further details in relation to this matter, attention is called to the Introductory Notes in Vol. 6, of the Documentary History of the Church.
