Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED FORTY-EIGHT

Joseph Smith's Candidacy for the Presidency

References

D.H.C. Vol. 6:39; 63-69; 107; 125; 274-275.

Topics

a. Reasons for the Prophet's action.

b. The Times and Season's article.

c. Petition to congress for help.

d. Petition for privilege of possessing California and Oregon.

a. The Prophet's desire to know policy of candidates.

b. To discover if one could be trusted to protect the saints.

c. Answer of Mr. Calhoun and Mr. Clay.

d. The Prophet's reply.

a. The Convention in Nauvoo.

b. The Prophet's views.

Notes

In the "Times and Seasons" of October 1, 1843, there appeared an article entitled, "Who Shall Be Our Next President?" In the article attention was called to the persecutions and mobbings the saints had endured, and how appeals made by the Church for justice were ignored and officers who were sworn to uphold the Constitution and administer justice had miserably failed and had joined with mobs in the persecutions of the saints. This article closed with these words:

"We make these remarks for the purpose of drawing the attention of our brethren to this subject, both at home and abroad, that we may fix upon the man who will be the most likely to render assistance in obtaining redress for our grievances; and not only give our own votes, but use our influence to obtain others; and if the voice of suffering innocence will not sufficiently arouse the rulers of our nation to investigate our cause, perhaps a vote of from fifty to one hundred thousand may arouse them from their lethargy. We shall fix upon the man of our choice, and notify our friends duly."

December 8, 1843, the Prophet wrote, "I suggested to the Council the idea of petitioning Congress to receive the City Nauvoo under the protection of the United States Government, to acknowledge the Nauvoo Legion as U. S. Troops, and to assist in fortifications and other purposes, and that a messenger be sent to Congress for this purpose at the expense of the city." It was natural for the Prophet to seek protection from the government. The experience in Missouri had shown, and the attitude of the governor in Illinois indicated, that it was useless to appeal to the officers within the states. It could be seen that there was little hope for justice where officers were intimidated by the unlawful element which was very strong. If Congress would take a hand in the matter, there would be peace because a restriction could be placed upon the activities of the lawless element. Later in March, a memorial to Congress was prepared by the Prophet petitioning for certain rights and privileges in the raising of a company of one hundred thousand men, volunteers, at such times and places as he might find necessary for the protection of citizens of the United States emigrating to the indefinite country known as California and Oregon. This vast territory at that time was disputed territory, unsettled, and held by the United States and Great Britain jointly by treaty. The Prophet called attention to the fact that this was a land devoid of government which was in danger of foreign invasion, but which territory rightfully belonged to the United States. The preamble of this memorial was a lengthy one, and sets forth in detail the conditions which prevailed in that territory, which was in a disorganized and unprotected condition. It was not incorporated into any acknowledged national government. Orson Pratt, John E. Page and Orson Hyde were sent to Washington to urge the consideration of the proposal. Many in the Illinois delegation favored it. No action was taken, for the politicians were fearful of such an undertaking. Texas was petitioning to come into the United States Union, but the officials in Washington were doubtful as to the wisdom of accepting this proposal. We can understand that the Prophet was fully aware of the fact that the time would come when the Church would be driven from the borders of civilization, so-called. He had months before prophesied that the Saints would be driven to the Rocky Mountains. The threatening clouds were thickly gathering and he knew the storm would break. To receive assistance from the Government to move to the far west, would be, if his proposition was approved, a benefit to the government in securing the disputed and unclaimed territory, and at the same time an advantage to the Latter-day Saints, for they could peaceably and advantageously be placed beyond the violence of their enemies.

"Hon. John C. Calhoun:

DEAR SIR:—As we understand you are a candidate for the Presidency at the next election; and the Latter-day Saints (sometimes called 'Mormons,' who now constitute a numerous class in the school politic of this vast republic), have been robbed of an immense amount of property, and endured nameless sufferings by the State of Missouri, and from her borders have been driven by force of arms, contrary to our national covenants; and as in vain we have sought redress by all constitutional, legal, and honorable means, in her courts, her executive councils, and her legislative halls; and as we have petitioned Congress to take cognizance of our sufferings without effect, we have judged it wisdom to address you this communication, and solicit an immediate, specific, and candid, reply to 'What will be your rule of action relative to us as a people,' should fortune favor your ascension to the chief magistracy?"

To the letter sent Mr. Martin Van Buren, the following postscript was added:

"Also whether your views or feelings have changed since the subject matter of this communication was presented you in your then official capacity at Washington, in the year 1841, and by you treated with a coldness, indifference, and neglect, bordering on contempt." (D.H.C. 6:63-65.)

Only two of the five candidates condescended to make answer to the Prophets question. They were Henry Clay and John C. Calhoun. Their answers were evasive and far from satisfactory. Henry Clay answered that if he entered that high office he must go into it free and unfettered, with no guarantees but such as were to be drawn from his whole life, character and conduct, although he had sympathized with the Latter-day Saints in their sufferings and injustice. Mr. Calhoun's letter is as follows:

"Sir: You ask me what would be my rule of action relative to the Mormons or Latter-day Saints, should I be elected President; to which I answer, that if I should be elected, I would strive to administer the government according to the Constitution and the laws of the union; and that as they make no distinction between citizens of different religious creeds I would make none. As far as it depends on the Executive department, all should have the full benefit of both, and none should be exempt from their operation.

"But as you refer to the case of Missouri, candor compels me to repeat what I said to you at Washington, that, according to my views, the case does not come within the jurisdiction of the Federal Government, which is one of limited and specific powers."

This reply called forth from the Prophet a scathing reply. In part he said: "Your second paragraph leaves you naked before yourself, like a likeness in a mirror, when you say, that according to your view, the Federal Government is 'one of limited and specific powers,' and has no jurisdiction in the case of the 'Mormons.' So then a State can at any time expel any portion of her citizens with impunity: and, in the language of Mr. Van Buren, frosted over with your gracious, 'views of the case,' though the cause is ever so just, Government can do nothing for them because it has no power."

"Go on, then, Missouri, after another set of inhabitants (as the Latter-day Saints did,) have entered some two or three hundred thousand dollars' worth of land, and made extensive improvements thereon; go on, then, I say, banish the occupants or owners, or kill them, as the mobbers did many of the Latter-day Saints, and take their land and property as a spoil; and let the legislature, as in the case of the 'Mormons,' appropriate a couple of hundred thousand dollars to pay the mob for doing that job; for the renowned Senator from South Carolina, Mr. J. C. Calhoun, says the powers of the Federal Government are so specific and limited that it has no jurisdiction of the case." (See D.H.C. 6:155-160, and for Clay's answer, see pages 376-377, in the same volume.)

In February, 1844, Joseph Smith published to the world his views on the "Powers and Policy of the Government of the United States." He spoke of the glory and greatness of the United States under its early administrations, but "since the fathers have fallen asleep," he said, "wicked men have unrobed the government of its glory." He advocated the reduction of the number of Congressmen by two-thirds; the pardoning of prisoners in state prisons; the making of laws to provide for useful employment of prisoners on roads, public works or elsewhere, where they may be taught more wisdom and more virtue, and only murderers should be confined or put to death. He would turn the prisons into seminaries of learning; and petition the inhabitants of the slave states to abolish slavery by 1850, or before "and save the abolitionist from reproach and ruin, infamy and shame." This should be done by Congress paying every man a reasonable price for his slaves out of the revenue from the sale of public lands, and deducted pay from members of Congress, that liberty might be granted to all men. He would abolish the practice of trying men by court martial for desertion, and if a man deserts send him his pay with instruction that his country will never trust him more and that he has forfeited his honor. Make honor the standard with all men; render good for evil, "And the whole nation, like a kingdom of kings and priests, will rise up in righteousness." He advocated more economy; less taxes; greater equality, and less distinction among the people. The establishment of a national bank, with branches in each state and territory, the net revenue therefrom to be applied to government interests. The President should have full power to send an army to suppress mobs, and there should be a repeal of the requirement for governors to petition the president for troops in case of invasion or rebellion. A governor himself may be a mobber and power should be given the president to protect citizens in such an event. Oregon, by right, and with the consent of the Indians, should belong to the United States, and he would invite Texas, Canada, Mexico, to join the sons of liberty, and let the Union spread.

When this platform was circulated throughout the United States, it created much commotion and favorable comment for its direct and fearless advocacy of principles which other candidates shied from. Favorable comments appeared in papers in various parts of the United States. Had the Prophet lived the vote he might have received could have very easily surprised the world.
