Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED FORTY-NINE

Traitors within the Church

References

D.H.C. Vol. 5:531-532; 538; 553. Vol. 6:58.

Topics

a. The Prophet's dissatisfaction with Sidney Rigdon.

b. Action at conference in October 1843.

a. The Prophet's address before the militia.

b. Prophecy of judgments to come.

c. "The little dough-head."

a. The great discourse by the Prophet.

b. The Judas spirit in Nauvoo.

c. Preparations for the western exploration.

d. Alarm of William Law and William Marks.

Notes

At the conference of the Church held in October, 1843, the matter of Sidney Rigdon's loyalty again came up. The Prophet expressed his dissatisfaction with Sidney Rigdon and said he had never magnified his office as a counselor since his escape from Missouri. Sidney Rigdon spoke in his own defense as did also Elder Almon B. Babbitt and William Law. On motion by William Marks, president of the Nauvoo Stake of Zion, seconded by Patriarch Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon was permitted to retain his standing as a counselor to President Joseph Smith in the First Presidency. After this action was taken, the Prophet arose and said, "I have thrown him off my shoulders, and you have again put him on me. You may carry him, but I will not."

In a discourse delivered October 15, 1843, the Prophet said: "I prophesy, in the name of the Lord God of Israel, anguish and wrath and tribulation and the withdrawing of the Spirit of God from the earth await this generation, until they are visited with utter desolation. This generation is as corrupt as the generation of the Jews that crucified Christ; and if He were here today, and should preach the same doctrine He did then, they would put him to death. I defy all the world to destroy the work of God; and I prophesy they never will have the power to kill me till my work is accomplished, and I am ready to die." (D.H.C. 6:58.) By the time the new year (1844) arrived, it was deemed necessary to increase the police force in Nauvoo as the violence had so greatly increased. In appointing these men, the mayor, Joseph Smith, addressed them as follows:

"There are speculators in this State who are wanting to sell revolving pistols to us, in order to fight the Missourians, and at the same time inciting the Missourians to fight us. Don't buy: it would be better to buy ploughshares and raise corn with them.

"My life is more in danger from some little dough-head of a fool in this city than from all my murderous and inveterate enemies abroad. I am exposed to far greater danger from traitors among ourselves than from enemies without, although my life has been sought for many years by the civil and military authorities, priests, and people of Missouri; and if I can escape from the ungrateful treachery of assassins, I can live as Caesar might have lived were it not for a right-hand Brutus. I have had pretended friends betray me. All the enemies upon the face of the earth may roar and exert all their power to bring about my death, but they can accomplish nothing, unless some who are among us and enjoy our society, have been with us in our councils, participated in our confidence, taken us by the hand, called us brother, saluted us with a kiss, join with our enemies, turn our virtues into faults, and, by falsehood and deceit, stir up their wrath and indignation against us, and bring their united vengeance upon our heads. All the hue-and-cry of the chief priests and elders against the Savior, could not bring down the wrath of the Jewish nation upon His head, and thereby cause the crucifixion of the Son of God, until Judas said unto him, 'Whomsoever I shall kiss, he is the man; hold him fast. Judas was one of the Twelve Apostles, even their treasurer, and dipped with their Master in the dish, and through his treachery the crucifixion was brought about; and we have a Judas in our midst." (D.H.C. 6:152.)

"Joseph had endeavored by every means in his power to create pacific feelings between the Saints and the other citizens of Illinois. He addressed many communications to the public in which he counseled for good sense and good order.

"One of his appeals for peace was written on the 17th of February, 1844. That same day an anti-Mormon convention was held at Carthage, the object being to devise ways and means for expelling the Saints from the state as they had been driven from Missouri. Among the resolutions adopted by the meeting was one appointing the 9th day of March following as a day of fasting and prayer, whereupon the pious of all the sectarians were to supplicate heaven to aid their efforts against the Prophet and his people. The inciters of this convention purposed that it should inaugurate a massacre; and yet they were so blasphemous as to pretend to ask the aid of the Almighty! Their real supplication, however, was addressed—not to the realms of light, but to the prince of darkness.

"On Sunday, the 25th day of February, in a meeting at the assembly room of the Saints in Nauvoo, Joseph prophesied that within five years the saints would be out of the power of their old enemies, whether apostates or of the world; and he asked the brethren to record the prediction.

"About this time he was inspired to direct the glance of the Apostles to the Western slope where he said the people of God might establish themselves anew, worship after their own sincere convictions, and work out the grand social problems of modern life. This subject was present in his mind and often upon his lips during the brief remainder of his earthly existence. Frequent councils were held and he directed the organization of an exploring expedition to venture beyond the Rocky Mountains to seek a home for a righteous people denied every right of citizenship within the boundaries of the United States then existing. His purpose was not to sever the Saints from this sublime republic by any emigration; he saw that this country's domain must soon stretch from ocean to ocean. The entire land of North and South America was the Zion of the Lord, and the people might settle in any spot where peace could be enjoyed, always remembering that in the due time of the Almighty the center stake must be built up.***.

"A special conference was held beginning on the 6th day of April, 1844, at which Joseph addressed a congregation of twenty thousand people. He chose for his subject the death of Elder King Follett who died a few days before, and he uplifted the soul of the congregation to a higher comprehension of the glory which comes after death to the faithful. His address ceased to be a mere eulogy of an individual and became a revelation of eternal truths concerning the glories of immortality. The address occupied three hours and a half in delivery and the multitude were spell-bound by his power. The Prophet seemed to rise above the world. It was as if the light of heaven already encircled his physical being. In a few weeks he was to pass through the portals of the tomb into the radiance beyond and he wanted his brethren to grasp some of the sublimities comprehended by his own inspired soul. Those who heard the sermon never forgot the power. Those who survived think of it today as an exhibition of superhuman power and eloquence.

"The Judas spirit manifested itself in Nauvoo in the spring of 1844. Alarmed by the Prophet's declaration that there was a right hand Brutus near him, some of the men who were willing to betray him feared that their machinations were discovered and that vengeance might be wreaked upon them. William Law and William Marks both feared or affected to fear for their lives. They made complaint which reached the ears of the Prophet, and he ordered an investigation in which they were allowed the fullest license to examine witneses. The result was to show to them how utterly groundless was their fear; but further it showed to all the Saints that those men were not faithful. The people said:

"'Is it possible that Brother Law or Brother Marks is a traitor and would deliver Joseph into the hands of his enemies in Missouri? If not, what can be the meaning of this? The righteous are bold as a lion.'

"Joseph merely quoted:

"'The wicked flee when no man pursueth.'

"But from this time on he knew from what quarter to expect the kiss of Judas. Jealousy of the Prophet and their personal impurity led several leading men to apostasy and to thirst for Joseph's blood. Among them were William Law, Wilson Law, Chauncey L. Higbee, Francis M. Higbee and Robert D. Foster. They became his avowed enemies; but in secret sympathy with them were Sidney Rigdon, William Marks and Austin A. Cowles.

"William Law was the leader of the movement. He declared that Joseph was a fallen Prophet, and he attempted to set up a church of his own. These apostates sought by every means in their power to precipitate bloodshed in Nauvoo. They flagrantly violated the law; insulted, abused and threatened the officers; usurped official prerogatives; attempted to shoot Joseph; and spread throughout the country, and even beyond its confines, the most wicked misrepresentations and complaints concerning Joseph and the municipal administration of Nauvoo.

"The Prophet had long known of their treachery and had warned the Saints that Judases were in their midst, without naming the individuals. He knew that in a little time the traitors would betray themselves. When this expectation of the Prophet's was realized and the Saints were enabled to see the perfidy of these men they were excommunicated.

"After this it seemed as if Satan was turned loose in their souls. Having no longer any profit in concealment they blazoned forth their hatred for the Prophet and their own iniquities. Some of them confessed that they knew that their sins were finding them out and that they would soon have no reputation to lose anyhow, and therefore they would persecute the Prophet and try to drag him down with them. At this time anonymous letters threatening the lives of Joseph and Hyrum were received and every conceivable annoyance was perpetrated upon them." ("Life of Joseph Smith, pp.447-450.)
