Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED FIFTY

The Nauvoo Conspiracy

References:

D.H.C. Vol. 5:

Topics

a. The Laws, Fosters and Higbees Turn From the Church.

b. Their pledges of loyalty broken.

c. Cause of their apostasy.

d. Joseph H. Jackson's wickedness.

a. Jackson's effort to have Williams and Eaton join conspiracy.

b. Affidavits before Justice Daniel H. Wells.

a. Scott and Harris invited to attend meeting of conspirators.

b. They are instructed by the Prophet to go and report.

c. On third visit their lives threatened.

d. They report to Joseph Smith.

Notes

Wilson Law had been honored by being elected as major general of the Nauvoo Legion. When the Prophet was accused as an accessory in the shooting of Boggs, Wilson Law stood by him and when the Prophet was advised to go to Springfield to be tried, Wilson Law by appointment arrested him on the warrant and took him to Springfield. While there he also went the Prophet's bail with General James Adams. When threatening remarks were made against the Prophet, one enemy said, speaking of the Prophet that he was "a ——— rascal and so was every one who took his part." Wilson Law bravely replied, "I am the man, and I'll take his part." (D.H.C. 5:209-213.) When the Prophet was arrested near Dixon, Wilson Law, as an officer in the legion, went to his rescue and his defense. (D.H.C. 5:447-448.) Before a session of the city council, when an investigation of police activities was in progress, Wilson Law declared, "I am Joseph's friend; he has no better friend in the world: I am ready to lay down my life for him." He and the Prophet shook hands. (D.H.C. 6:169-170.) These were brave words soon to be broken.

The Higbee brothers, sons of a very faithful man, Judge Elias Higbee, were influenced by the Laws and Fosters. They lost the Spirit of the Lord, as did the others, through immorality and other sin. Francis M. Higbee manifested the most intense hatred towards the Prophet in the months preceding the martyrdom, in which his brother Chauncey L., fully shared. Dr. Robert D. Foster, had partaken of the confidence of Joseph Smith and had been greatly honored. At a party and dinner at the Mansion House given by the Prophet October 3, 1843, Dr. Foster was appointed chairman of a committee to draft resolutions in various matters of importance to the Church and Nauvoo. In his report he spoke of the Prophet in the highest praise. Col. Francis M. Higbee also made kindly and suitable remarks of fellowship. (D.H.C. 6:43-44.) Charles Foster followed the lead of his brother. Another conspirator who joined their ranks was Joseph H. Jackson. He was an adventurer who came to Nauvoo in 1843. He called on the Prophet May 18, 1843, for an interview. He claimed to be a Catholic priest and apparently was seeking to learn something about the Church. (D.H.C. 5:394.) On a second interview, Friday, December 29, 1843, the Prophet related to him some history pertaining to the coming forth of the work. Jackson said he was almost persuaded to join the Church. The Prophet replied that he would not only almost, but altogether. (D.H.C. 6:149.) It was only a few weeks later, however, when this man was busy plotting with the Laws and Fosters in their thirst for the destruction of Joseph Smith and the Church. Jackson was a stranger in Nauvoo. Where he came from was not known and in Nauvoo with others he engaged in counterfeiting and leading others of his breed in the same unlawful business. There were others connected with this group of apostates including Austin Cowles and Augustine Spencer who came from a noble family as did the Higbee brothers.

Mr. M. G. Eaton also went before Daniel H. Wells on the same day and testified. He said that Jackson had approached him several times to go with him on the hill. He finally consented to meet Jackson and the meetings were held in the Keystone Store, in Nauvoo. Dr. Foster, Jackson and Chauncey Higbee went into a back room and entered into private council. Later Jackson invited him into the room where they were sitting. Chauncey L. Higbee commenced talking about the "spiritual wife system." He said that some of the elders had ten or twelve apiece. These marriages were recorded in a large book which was sealed up and would not be opened for a long time—"probably not till many of the husbands of those who were thus married were dead. This book was kept by Hyrum Smith. Eaton was informed that Foster, Higbee and Jackson were about to hold a secret meeting to oppose and try to put a stop to such things. Jackson stated if anyone attempted to arrest him, he would cut them up. Foster said he was afraid of his life and dared not go out nights. Higbee said he had no doubt about men being killed in Missouri who had secrets that they were afraid they would divulge. He said he was afraid of his life. Joseph H. Jackson said "he should not be surprised if there should be a real muss and an insurrection in the city in less than two months; and that if a disturbance should take place, the Carthagenians and others would come and help them." Higbee said if he was ever "brought before the Mayor's court again, and the mayor told him to hold his tongue, he should get up and tell him he had a right to speak and should do so; and if any man attempted to put him out of court, he would shoot him through." These affidavits show the lying, vicious spirit these men possessed. (D.H.C. 6:279-280.)

"You solemnly swear, before God and all holy angels, and these your brethren by whom you are surrounded that you will give your life, your liberty, your influence, your all, for the destruction of Joseph Smith and his party, so help you God!"

The person taking this oath would then say, "I do," after which he would lay down the Bible on which the oath was taken, and sign his name to a written copy of the oath in a book, which would then be acknowledged by the justice of the peace.

No doubt the amazed boys were frightened, and wondered how these men, formerly faithful members in the councils of the Church who had pledged their faith and their loyalty to the Prophet only a few months before, could stoop so low as they found them at these secret meetings. Like members of the Gadianton secret band these conspirators had lost all sense of honor. This oath was administered to each of those present, among them three women who were heavily veiled.

At the last the turn came for the two boys to take the pledge, but this they resolutely and manfully refused to do, stating that Joseph Smith had done them no harm and they were too young to understand these things. The anger of the leaders of this secret band was aroused. They first coaxed and then argued and when this failed, they threatened them with death. "Come, boys," they said, "do as we have done. You are young, and will not have anything to do in the affair, but we want you should keep it a secret, and act with us; that is all." "No," they replied, "we cannot take an oath like that against any man who has never done us any injury." They tried to pass out of the place, but were stopped by one of the guards who said, "No! not by a —— ——! You know all our plans and arrangements, and we don't propose that you should leave in that style. You've got to take the oath, or you'll never leave here alive. They were then surrounded by these fiends of the bottomless pit, who with drawn swords and knives, were determined to take their lives. The leaders finally concluded that the deed of blood could not be committed there, as the house was too near the street. So the young men were taken to the cellar and preparations were made for the execution. At this point someone called attention to the fact that the parents of the boys evidently knew where they were, and if they did not return a search would be put on foot that might prove to be very dangerous for the plotters. After some more arguing and consultation the conspirators reluctantly released the boys with a threat if they ever divulged the actions of these secret meetings, they would be killed. Under a guard they were escorted from the place. Wisely they took their departure leaving the impression that they would hold their tongues. They immediately took their course towards the river in the opposite direction from their homes, conveying the impression to their enemies by word and act, that they would keep their secret. On the river bank they met the Prophet and an elder brother of Robert Scott, who were waiting for them. To the Prophet these two boys told their harrowing story. (Contributor Vol. 5:25.)

How true it is that when the light goes out of a man's soul and darkness takes its place it becomes intense; there is no darkness equal to it.

"The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light.

"But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness; If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness!" (Matt. 6:22-23.)
