Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED FIFTY-ONE

False Charges against Joseph Smith

References

D.H.C. Vol. 6.

Topics

a. Slanderous falsehoods of R. D. Foster.

b. He is charged with unchristian-like conduct.

c. Excommunication of Francis M. Higbee and others.

d. Augustine Spencer's assault on Orson Spencer.

e. Marshal hindered in making an arrest.

f. Higbee and Foster make threats.

g. Excerpt from letter of Brigham Young and Willard Richards.

a. Warrant issued for arrest of Joseph Smith.

b. Trial before the municipal court.

c. Higbee's character exposed.

d. William Law's false charges.

a. Joseph Smith decides to meet charges in court.

b. Charles Foster's false show of repentance.

c. Plot against life of Joseph Smith.

d. Case in court postponed.

Notes

In a letter written by Elders Brigham Young and Willard Richards to Reuben Hedlock in England, May 2, 1844, the brethren said, speaking of the activities of these apostates:

"William and Wilson Law, Robert D. Foster, Chauncey and Francis Higbee, Father Cowles, etc., have organized a new church (Laws and Fosters were first cut off). William Law is prophet; James Blakesley and Cowles, counselors; Higbee and Foster of the twelve. Cannot learn all particulars, Charles Ivins, bishop; old Dr. Green and John Stott, his counselors. They are talking of sending a mission to England, but it will probably be after this when they come among you. 'Tis the same old story over again—The doctrine is right, but Joseph is a fallen prophet.'" (D.H.C. 6:354.)

This same day a printing press arrived in Nauvoo, purchased by these conspirators. They were preparing to publish their slanders and circulate them broadcast among the people in their opposition to the Prophet, and in their endeavor to bring the growing wrath in Hancock and surrounding counties to a head and bring Joseph Smith to his death. (D.H.C. 6:357.)

May 8, 1844, the case brought against the Prophet by Francis M. Higbee came before the municipal court of Nauvoo. Alderman Newel K. Whitney sat as presiding justice with Daniel H. Wells, William Marks, Orson Spencer, George W. Harris, Gustave Hills, George A. Smith and Samuel Bennett as associates. George P. Stiles and Sidney Rigdon acted as counsel for Joseph Smith. This man, Stiles, was a recent convert to the Church, but he did not remain long a member as he was excommunicated for immoral conduct. This is the same Judge Stiles who was sent to Utah in 1855, by the President of the United States, and who came as an enemy of the Latter-day Saints. He, it was, who with the notorious Judge William W. Drummond made accusations against President Brigham Young and the Church, which formed the foundation for the sending of Johnston's Army to Utah in 1857. In May, 1844, we find him as a member of the Church defending the Prophet against the Nauvoo conspirators.

At the trial brought by Higbee many witnesses were called and the evidence was clear that Francis M. Higbee had brought the suit without any legal cause and that he had been actuated by "no other motive than a desire to persecute and harass" the Prophet. The bad moral character of Higbee was also exposed. In the course of his testimony the Prophet Joseph said: "The only sin I ever committed was in exercising sympathy and covering up their (the Higbees', Fosters' and Dr. Bennett's) iniquities, on their solemn promise to reform, and of this I am ashamed, and will never do so again." After hearing the witnesses the presiding judge gave the decision and said: "It is considered and ordained by the court—

"1st. That the said Joseph Smith, Senior, be discharged from the said arrest and imprisonment complained of in said petition, on the illegality of the writ upon which he was arrested, as well as upon the writ of the case, and that he go hence without delay.

"2nd. Francis M. Higbee's character having been so fully shown as infamous, the court is convinced that this suit was instituted through malice, private pique, and corruption, and ought not to be countenanced; and it is ordained by the court that the said Francis M. Higbee, pay the costs." (D.H.C. 256-361.)

Monday, May 20, 1844, the circuit court commenced its sitting in Carthage with Judge Jesse B. Thomas, presiding. Some of the brethren from Nauvoo went to Carthage, one or two of them being on the grand jury. Elder William W. Phelps, who was one of those present in Carthage, returned and in the evening of the 10th he said that a summons was supposed to be issued for the arrest of Joseph Smith and to have him tried again on the complaint made by Francis M. Higbee, but the lawyers agreed to move an abatement, evidently knowing the flimsy nature of the complaint and perhaps having knowledge that other complaints would be issued against the Prophet. That night an officer came with a summons and an attachment to take the Prophet to Carthage, but could not find him. On the 22nd, he was at home watching as officers from Carthage were still after him. (D.H.C. 398-401.) On the 23rd A. A. Lathrop came to Williard Richards, the Prophet's clerk, and told him an officer was on his way with an attachment for Willard Richards and that the grand jury had found a bill against the Prophet for adultery, on the testimony of the lying William Law. Lathrop had come from Carthage in haste covering the distance in two hours and thirty minutes, to bring the news. Dr. Richards immediately went to the home of Joseph Smith to notify him of the events and remained all night. Aaron Johnson also reported that Dr. Foster had been swearing falsehoods against the Prophet in Carthage and seeking his arrest. The Prophet instructed Orrin P. Rockwell and Aaron Johnson to return to Carthage the next day and have Foster arrested for perjury. Obedient to this call they returned, but before they arrived the grand jury had risen. It was also reported by the brethren that there were complaints out for John D. Parker, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and William Clayton. The Prophet spent the next few days keeping out of the way of the officers from Carthage. On Saturday, May 25th, Edward Hunter, William Marks, John P. Green and Almon W. Babbitt who had come from Carthage, informed the Prophet that there were two indictments found against him, one charging him with false swearing on the testimony of Joseph H. Jackson and Robert D. Foster, and one charging him with polygamy on the testimony of William Law, but these brethren could not give the details. It is recorded that these men did much false swearing and Francis M. Higbee, "swore so hard," that the Prophet had received stolen property, that his testimony was rejected. When Jackson returned to Nauvoo the Prophet instructed the officers to arrest him for threatening his life.

While in Carthage the Prophet had an interview with Judge Jesse B. Thomas and was treated with the utmost courtesy. The judge gained the respect of the Prophet who said he was a great man and a gentleman.

The Prophet had his lawyers, Richardson, Babbitt and Skinner use all reasonable means to bring forward his trial on the charge of perjury; but the prosecution were not ready, claiming that one Withers, a material witness was absent. The case was deferred till the next term of court and Joseph Smith was left to give bail to the sheriff at his option. The sheriff who was friendly, told him to go home, where he would call and take bail at his own convenience. With this turn of affairs the Prophet and his party called for their horses and prepared to return home. Chauncey L. Higbee came to the Prophet and requested him to remain long enough to testify for him in a case he had before the court, but this Joseph Smith refused to do, saying that he had no recollection of the case. It appeared that the Prophet suspected this to be a ruse to lure him from his company.

As they left the tavern in Carthage, and passed the Court House they saw many people standing in small groups. Jackson stood on the green with one or two men some distance away. While in Hamilton's hotel, Chauncey L. Higbee offered an insulting remark concerning the Prophet, which Orrin P. Rockwell vigorously resented. The proprietor of the hotel seeing the attitude of Rockwell ordered him from the place. It was reported to the Prophet by James Flack, after the return home, that Robert D. Foster, Charles A. Foster, William H. Rollinson and the Higbees were stationed on a hill as the Prophet passed on the way to Carthage where they arrived ahead of the Prophet and his party; all except Charles A. Foster who joined with Joseph Smith and went into Carthage with him and his party. From persons in Carthage who oveheard the plottings it was learned that it was the intention of these conspirators to kill the Prophet. Evidently this charge against him was intended to bring about his end. The time, however, for that great tragedy had not arrived; the scene was not properly set. (D.H C. 6:398-414.)
