Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 4 ( 1949)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED FIFTY-TWO

The Martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith

References

D.H.C. Vol. 6:19-23.

Topics

a. Purpose of the Expositor.

b. By whom published.

c. Action of the city council.

d. Revenge of the conspirators.

a. Inflammatory speeches and mob gatherings.

b. Threats against church members.

c. Joseph Smith's attempt to allay excitement.

a. Appeal to President Tyler.

b. The Prophet's address to the Nauvoo Legion.

c. Governor Ford's perfidy.

a. Refusal of Hyrum Smith to leave the Prophet.

b. No mercy from the governor.

c. Crossing the river.

d. Accusations of false brethren.

a. Demand for arms of the Legion.

b. "A Lamb to the slaughter."

c. Ford's promise broken.

d. His promise to the Militia kept.

e. His inflammatory speech.

f. False trial and imprisonment.

g. Loyalty of friends.

h. "A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief."

i. The Martyrdom.

Notes

Naturally this action by the city council caused the conspirators to rage, and maddened with hate they set fire to the Exposition building and hastened to Carthage, stating that their lives were in danger and they had been driven from their homes. The fire was discovered and extinguished before any great damage had been done, but the falsehoods circulated aroused the people of Carthage and other towns, and indignation meetings were hastily held and mobs commenced to gather under arms. June 11, 1844, Francis M. Higbee went before Thomas Morrison, a justice of the peace at Carthage, and charged Joseph Smith and the members of the city council of Nauvoo with riot committed in the destruction of the Expositor. The warrant was served by Constable David Bettisworth the following day. It summoned the accused to go before the justice issuing the warrant, "or some other justice of the peace, for trial." Joseph Smith expressed his willingness to go before some other justice, which was his legal right, but was not willing to be taken to Carthage to be tried for he knew that would be before his mobocratic enemies. Bettisworth became angered and declared he would take the Prophet to Carthage. He was informed that such action was contrary to law and Joseph Smith obtained a writ of habeas corpus and appeared before the municipal court in Nauvoo and was discharged. Each of the accused brethren did the same and were also discharged.

The members of the Church were warned to leave the townships in which they resided on pain of instant vengeance. A deputation was sent by them to the governor in which it was stated that Joseph Smith and others had refused to obey the mandate of the writ, and with other falsehoods they attempted to prejudice him in their favor. The minutes of this gathering were published in the "Warsaw Signal" and other papers in the state of Illinois. In their own defense the saints also sent messengers to the governor stating the facts and asking for protection. The mobbers did not wait for any reply from the governor, but commenced burning property and brutally attacking residents living outside of Nauvoo and threatening them with destruction unless they immediately accepted one of the following propositions: Deny Joseph Smith as a prophet of God and join their band of mobbers in securing the arrest of the Prophet; gather up their effects and move to Nauvoo; or give up their arms and remain quiet until the affair was over. These vicious men sent runners to Missouri asking for aid and they stirred the whole country into a flame by their diabolical falsehoods.

In the midst of all of this commotion the Prophet did all in his power to allay excitement and kept the governor posted with numbers of affidavits and documents regarding the state of affairs in Nauvoo. Judge Jesse N. Thomas, who had befriended the Prophet before, advised him to go before some other justice of the peace, who was not controlled by the mob, and have an examination on the writ issued by Morrison. It was Judge Thomas' opinion that such a move would take away all excuses of the mob, and then they could be bound to keep the peace. When this was learned Judge Thomas was threatened by the Prophet's enemies. Acting on this advice Joseph Smith went before Justice Daniel H. Wells, and had a full investigation and was discharged. His enemies were angered by this action for they knew it was a legal trial and they did not intend that this should thwart their wicked purpose. They were determined to destroy Joseph Smith, and were set upon dragging him to Carthage, for they knew that in Carthage this could be done. A mass meeting of protest was held in Nauvoo, and messengers were sent out in the surrounding country to declare the truth and allay the excitement, but the hatred engendered was too great to overcome.

"It is thought by some that our enemies would be satisfied by my destruction, but I tell you as soon as they have shed my blood, they will thirst for the blood of every man in whose heart dwells a single spark of the spirit of the fulness of the Gospel. The opposition of these men is moved by the spirit of the adversary of all righteousness. It is not only to destroy me, but every man and woman who dares believe the doctrines that God hath inspired me to teach to this generation." (D.H.C. 6:498.)

Attention of the governor was called to the unlawful meetings held in Carthage and Warsaw and the threats of extermination of the saints. The governor was plead with to come to Nauvoo and investigate conditions for himself, but instead the governor went to Carthage and sent word to Nauvoo that he was there in the interest of peace, and asked that some well informed persons be sent to him. Elders John Taylor and John M. Bernhisel were immediately sent to Carthage to meet the governor. To their disappointment they found him surrounded by some of their most wicked enemies, the Laws, Fosters, Higbees and Jackson publishers of the Expositor, and some of their closest friends. An interview by the governor was not granted except in the presence of these vicious, blood-thirsty enemies of Joseph Smith and the saints. The governor treated these two men very rudely and he stated that Joseph Smith and the members of the city council should come to Carthage to be tried, notwithstanding the two trials that had previously been held. In this he knew he was wrong, but he feared the mob. The representatives of the Church protested and pointed out the danger of such a thing in the midst of the enemies of the Prophet, and the governor gave his solemn pledge that he would protect them should they come—a pledge he never intended to keep. He declared that, notwithstanding the former trials, the accused should submit to arrest "by the same constable, by virtue of the same warrant, and be tried before the same magistrate whose authority had heretofore been resisted. Nothing short of this can vindicate the dignity of violated law and allay the just excitement of the people." In this manner he violated his solemn oath, evidently with full knowledge, but to find favor with the mob. "You know the excitement of the public mind, do not tempt it too far. A very little matter may do a very great injury; and if you are disposed to continue the causes of excitement and render a force necessary to coerce submission, I would say that your city was built, as it were, upon a keg of powder which a very little spark may explode." "And I will," the governor said, "also guarantee the safety of all such persons as may thus be brought to this place from Nauvoo, either for trial or as witnesses for the accused." (D.H.C. 6:536-537.) The remark that if the wishes of the mob were not complied with and the Prophet was not delivered to the judge in Carthage the city of Nauvoo stood in danger of destruction, proves definitely that the governor of Illinois sensed the peril that the Prophet would be in if delivered to Carthage, and his willingness, that the city of Nauvoo be destroyed. This is the nature of the "protection" which they received by appealing to the pusillanimous governor.

June 22, 1844, the Prophet answered in a respectful manner the cravenly written communication from Governor Ford, in which he defended his course. The Prophet called attention to the promises made in Missouri by officers of the law, but when the witnesses responded to the subpoenas issued these witnesses were cast into prison so they could not testify. Under similar conditions which now prevailed these accused brethren could not be blamed for refusing to place themselves in the hands of a mob that designedly and openly had threatened to take the lives of those accused. Joseph Smith informed the governor he was willing to go before any other justice in the state, except at Carthage, or before the circuit court, which was a right which justice could not have denied him. He did not, however, feel legally bound to go to Carthage to be murdered. Ford knew the facts without the Prophet's reminding him and that the petition was a just and reasonable one, but this weak, timid and wicked man, was determined to see that the brethren should be delivered to the mercy of their enemies.

That night these brethren assembled on the river bank and about midnight Joseph, Hyrum and Willard Richards were taken across the river by Orrin P. Rockwell, the latter returning with instructions to obtain horses and pass them over the river the next night and be ready for the start for the Rocky Mountains.

At ten o'clock on the morning of the 23rd, the governor's posse arrived in Nauvoo to arrest the Prophet, but they did not find him and returned, leaving one of their number there to watch for him. This posse said if Joseph and Hyrum Smith were not given up the governor was determined to send his troops into the city and guard it till they were found, if it took three years.

At one P.M. Emma Smith sent Orrin P. Rockwell to entreat the Prophet to return. Reynolds Cahoon accompanied Rockwell with a letter to the same effect. Reynolds Cahoon, Lorenzo D. Wasson and Hiram Kimball accused the Prophet of cowardice for wishing to leave the people. These men and a few others declared that Joseph Smith, like in the fable, was fleeing from the sheep when the wolves arrived, and their property in Nauvoo would be destroyed if the brethren did not return. This accusation cut the Prophet to the heart. It was bad enough to be accused by enemies, but when those supposed to be his friends and the person nearest to him, felt that he was fleeing to save his life and in doing so was leaving the people to the mercy of the mob, was more than he could stand. His answer to these accusers was: "If my life is of no value to my friends, it is of none to myself." Turning to Rockwell he said: "What shall I do?" Rockwell answered, "You are the oldest and ought to know best; and as you make your bed, I will lie with you." Turning to Hyrum the Prophet said, "Brother Hyrum, you are the oldest, what shall we do?" Hyrum replied, "Let us go back and give ourselves up, and see the thing out." The Prophet remained in deep reflection for some moments and then said, "If you go back I will go with you, but we shall be butchered." Hyrum said, "No, no; let us go back and put our trust in God, and we shall not be harmed. The Lord is in it. If we live or have to die, we will be reconciled to our fate." So they returned and Joseph Smith notified Governor Ford that he would be ready to go to Carthage the next day. The governor promised to send a posse to protect him on the way, but this brought opposition from the Prophet's accusers so the governor changed his mind and ordered Joseph and Hyrum Smith to come to Carthage without escort.

When the Prophet met Captain Dunn he said: "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter, but I am as calm as a summer's morning. I have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward all men. If they take my life I shall die an innocent man, and it shall be said of me, 'He was murdered in cold blood!' "

It was midnight when the little band of persecuted brethren arrived in Carthage. While passing the public square many of the troops of the Carthage Greys made murderous threats. "Stand away, you McDonough boys," they yelled, "and let us shoot the damned 'Mormons' —— —— you, old Joe, we've got you now. Clear the way and let us have a view of Joe Smith, the prophet of God. He has seen the last of Nauvoo. We'll use him up now, and kill all the damned 'Mormons.' " Governor Ford heard these threats and put his head out of his window and said, "I know your anxiety to see Mr. Smith, which is natural enough, but it is quite too late tonight for you to have the opportunity; but I assure you, gentlemen, you shall have that privilege tomorrow morning, as I will cause him to pass before the troops upon the square, and I now wish you, with this assurance, quietly and peaceably to return to your quarters." This was followed by a "Hurrah for Tom Ford."

Early on the morning of the 25th, the prisoners voluntarily placed themselves in the hands of Constable Bettisworth. Seemingly the complaint by Francis M. Higbee which brought the prisoners to Carthage was not enough, therefore they were again arrested by Bettisworth on the complaint of Augustine Spencer and Henry O. Norton who charged Joseph and Hyrum Smith with "treason" against the state of Illinois. The Governor kept his promise to the mob-militia and at eight o'clock he called the troops together and formed them in a hollow square and then addressed them in an inflammatory manner, speaking evil of the Prophet and his brother Hyrum. At the close of his speech he took Joseph and Hyrum Smith past the troops who stood in file, and in the spirit of ridicule introduced them as Generals Joseph and Hyrum Smith. The Carthage Greys, bitter enemies, refused to receive them with this title, and made threats against these brethren to which the governor paid no heed.

Contrary to law and justice, Joseph and Hyrum Smith were taken before Justice Robert F. Smith, captain of the Carthage Greys, and a most bitter mobocrat, although the governor had emphatically declared that they would have to be tried before Justice Morrison, the one who had issued the writ. His hypocrisy in this was brazenly apparent. The accused brethren were then bound over to appear at the next term of the circuit court and Magistrate Smith intended to place their bail at a figure which he felt could not be met, so that they could be kept in jail, but the bond was given. In the shuffle the complaint by Spencer and Norton seemed to have been lost. Justice Smith left the court room and the prisoners should have been turned free. Bettisworth, however appeared at their lodgings in the Hamilton Hotel and insisted on Joseph and Hyrum going to jail. They demanded to see the copy of the mittimus, which was refused. Their counsel, Messrs. H. T. Reid and J. W. Woods, informed the constable that they were entitled to a hearing before a justice, whereupon the constable produced a mittimus which falsely stated that they had been brought before Justice Robert F. Smith and the trial had been postponed by reason of the absence of material witnesses. When Justice Smith asked the governor what to do, since the mittimus was illegal, the answer was, "You have the Carthage Greys at your command!" So the Prophet and Patriarch were illegally thrust into jail in defiance of the law. Elder John Taylor protested to the governor, but he answered that he had no power to interfere, and the law must take its course.

In the afternoon of the 26th Frank Worrell appeared before the jail and demanded that the prisoners be delivered up and taken before Justice Robert F. Smith for trial. The jailor protested, but Worrell with his Greys forced him to surrender the prisoners. Before Robert F. Smith the trial was postponed until the following day. The prisoners were again committed to prison, and without any consultation the trial was changed until the 29th.

The night of June 26, 1844, was spent by the prisoners and a number of their friends, namely John Taylor, Willard Richards, John S. Fullmer, Stephen Markham and Dan Jones in conversing on the scriptures. They all retired late, except Willard Richards who sat up writing until his last candle was out. The report of a gun caused the Prophet to arise and going over to the bed on the floor where Dan Jones and John S. Fullmer were, he conversed with John S. Fullmer for some time, and expressed the presentment he had from the beginning that he was to die. He said, "I would like to see my family again" and expressed the feeling that he would like to preach to the saints once more. After all seemed quiet again, he turned to Dan Jones and said: "Are you afraid to die?" Brother Jones said, "Has that time come, think you? Engaged in such a cause I do not think that death would have many terrors." The Prophet replied, "You will yet see Wales and fulfill the mission appointed you before you die."

On the morning of the 27th, there was great commotion in the militia. Frank Worrell of the Carthage Greys said to Dan Jones, who had been sent out to inquire about the firing in the night, "We have had too much trouble to bring Old Joe here to let him ever escape alive, and unless you want to die with him you had better leave before sundown; and you are not a damned bit better than him for taking his part. And you'll see that I can prophesy better than Old Joe, for neither he nor his brother, nor anyone who will remain with them will see the sunset today. This, Dan Jones reported to the Prophet, who directed him to go to the governor and tell him. On his way he heard an officer making a speech, in which he said, "Our troops will be discharged this morning in obedience to orders, and for a sham we will leave the town; but when the governor and the McDonough troops have left for Nauvoo this afternoon we will return and kill these men, if we have to tear the jail down." This was greeted with cheers from the troops.

These threats were reported to the governor, but he paid no heed to them. He informed Dan Jones that he was unnecessarily alarmed and that the people were not that cruel. Brother Jones replied: "The Messers. Smith are American citizens, and have surrendered themselves to your excellency upon your pledging your honor for their safety; they are also Master Masons, and as such I demand of you protection of their lives. If you do not do this, I have but one more desire, and that is, if you leave their lives in the hands of those men to be sacrificed."—"What is that, sir?" Ford hurriedly asked. "It is," said Jones, "that the Almighty will preserve my life to a proper time and place, that I may testify that you have been timely warned of their danger." Brother Jones, Fullmer and Markham, who had all been sent out on errands were refused admittance when they returned to the jail. John Taylor and Willard Richards were the only brethren remaining that afternoon with the Prophet and Patriarch. Their hearts were filled with forebodings and were heavy. These prisoners spent the time in bearing testimony, in writing to their friends and in the spirit of prayer. Almon W. Babbitt came to the jail in the afternoon and delivered a letter to the Prophet from Oliver Cowdery. Because of the excitement and the tragedy which followed, the contents of this letter were lost. Presumably it was a reply to one previously sent to Oliver Cowdery by the Prophet, inviting him to come back to the Church, for he had eaten "husks" long enough.

Shortly after three o'clock there was excitement among the guards. At the request of the brethren, John Taylor sang the hymn, "A POOR WAYFARING MAN OF GRIEF." When he had finished the Prophet asked him to sing it again. At four o'clock the guard, which had become somewhat less harsh in their feelings, was changed. At five o'clock the jailor, Mr. Stigall, suggested that the prisoners retire to the cell below, where they would be safer, but this was not done. Shortly after five o'clock there was a rustling at the outer door of the jail, a cry of surrender to the guards, the discharge of firearms, and then followed the rush of the maddened, and hatred-drunken disorganized mobbers of the militia upon the jail. The tragedy which followed is vividly told in the History of the Church. The men the Almighty sent to bless the world in the restoration of the Gospel, sealed their testimony in their blood as a witness against a wicked world.
