Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

FOREWORD

The Apostle Peter wrote in his first general epistle to the Saints in the Meridian of Time, "But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts: and be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness and fear." (1 Peter 3:15.)

The Apostle Paul gave similar advice in his epistle to the Colossian Saints wherein he wrote: "Let your speech be alway with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer every man." (Colossians 4:6.)

As members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints the Lord has admonished us to gain knowledge and understanding of gospel principles that we, too, may "be ready always to give an answer to every man" for our faith in the restored gospel. We have been commanded to "seek learning, even by study and also by faith." (D. & C. 88:118.)

No other organization on the face of this earth has offered so much opportunity to gain knowledge of God and his gospel as has The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Inspired prophets, revelation, the standard works, and also priesthood and auxiliary organizations for all ages have afforded us opportunity to learn all that God has revealed.

Through years of experience, President Joseph Fielding Smith is one of those who has benefited from these sources of knowledge and prepared himself to give ready answers to every man. From his own testimony the following is quoted:

"Among these things I remember that one thing I did from the time I learned to read and write was to study the gospel. I read and committed to memory the children's catechism and primary books on the gospel. Later I read the History of the Church as recorded in the Millennial Star. I also read the Bible, the Book of Mormon, Pearl of Great Price, and the Doctrine and Covenants, and other literature which fell into my hands. . . . I learned at a very early day that God lives; he gave me a testimony when I was a child, and I have tried to be obedient always with some measure of success." (Excerpt from letter to Joseph Fielding Smith, Jr., while serving as a missionary in Great Britain.)

Calling upon President Smith's vast knowledge and experience, this fourth volume of Answers to Gospel Questions has been prepared and published with a desire that others may enhance their knowledge through a careful study of questions and answers contained therein.

Appreciation is expressed to The Improvement Era for permission to use articles that have appeared in their regular monthly feature entitled, "Your Question." Additional answers to questions have been added by President Smith for publication in this volume.

—JOSEPH FIELDING SMITH, JR.
