Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

INTRODUCTION

Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.

To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne. (Revelation 3:20-21.)

Each member of the Church was blessed and received the gift of the Holy Ghost after baptism. It seems, however, that there are some among us who expect the Lord to enlighten their minds and give them knowledge without their putting forth any effort by study and by faith. They evidently received a testimony after they were confirmed, but from that time forth they never did any thing to keep that testimony alive. Therefore they have ceased to grow spiritually and the light which was first given has become dimmed through their inactivity.

We have been warned by the prophets of old and also by the Son of God that the Spirit will not always strive with men. Unless we exercise faith and seek through prayer and study to know the truth and to walk in spiritual light, the inspiration that once was ours becomes dimmed and may go out altogether. If we thus permit the light we once received to die then we are likely to become a prey to the sorcerer and the cunning deceiver. When this condition prevails the time may come when the person forgets that he ever had the light. Peter has expressed this condition in forceful language as follows:

For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the beginning.

For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them. (2 Peter 2:20-21. )

It is the duty of every member of the Church, male and female alike, to search and obtain knowledge of the revealed truth. This will come through obedience to the commandments the Lord has given us. One of those commandments is that we should inform our minds and in the spirit of humility, obedience and faith, seek to know the will of the Lord, and to walk in spiritual light by obedience to every divine commandment.

Let us remember human nature has not changed since the day that men were first born into this mortal world. There have been down the corridor of time a few who were willing to keep the commandments of the Lord and who sought for light and truth. The great majority, however, followed the inclinations of the flesh as did the sons of Adam and Eve in the beginning. The enticements of a fallen world and the yielding to the weakness of the flesh have been powerful forces to lead mankind away from the divinely revealed truth. How true are the words recorded in the Book of Moses:

And Adam and Eve blessed the name of God, and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters.

And Satan came among them, saying: I am also a son of God; and he commanded them, saying: Believe it not, and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish. (Moses 5:12-13.)

How greatly blessed the Latter-day Saints really are! We are living in the greatest dispensation of all time because it is the last for mortal souls. This dispensation is rapidly drawing to its close. Without question we are living as Elder Orson F. Whitney has written, in the Saturday evening of time.

This is a momentous period in this world's history because we are rapidly approaching the close of the Saturday night. Therefore it behooves members of the Church to watch and pray and through obedience prepare themselves for the glorious day which is soon to come when the cry will go forth: "Go Ye Out To Meet Him."

—JOSEPH FIELDING SMITH
