Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

1

This Life Is the Time for Men to Prepare to Meet God

Question: In Alma 34:31-34, we find the following: 'Yea, I would that ye would come forth and harden not your hearts any longer; for behold, now is the time and the day of your salvation; and therefore, if ye will repent and harden not your hearts, immediately shall the great plan of redemption be brought about unto you.

" 'For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors.

" 'And now, as I said unto you before, as ye have had so many witnesses, therefore, I beseech of you that ye do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end; for after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed.

" 'Ye cannot say, when ye are brought to that awful crisis, that I will repent, that I will return to my God. Nay, ye cannot say this; for that same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world.'

"We have been discussing this statement, and we wonder how it can be reconciled with the doctrine of salvation for the dead? It appears that those who have failed in this life are thus barred from any hope of salvation in the life to come. Why then, do we do temple work for the dead?"

Answer: This question presents a good illustration of the frequent difficulty into which so many fall when they have not carefully considered all the factors belonging to a subject. In the first place these people in the land of Antionum, known as Zoramites, had formerly been members of the Church and were dissenters from the Nephites. Amulek's remarks were intended as a plea for them to return to the Church and observe its covenants. He called their attention to the "many witnesses" that they had received and to forsake their evil ways before it was too late. They had departed from the commandments of the Lord and had violated his statutes, which they formerly believed, for a false system which denied the atonement of Jesus Christ. Therefore, the words of Amulek were timely. There was still hope for them if they would repent and turn back to the true faith and follow our Redeemer.

WORTHY ENTITLED TO RECEIVE THE BLESSINGS

A word here in relation to those who are worthy to receive the blessings of the gospel but who died without the privilege, is necessary. Through the mercies of our Eternal Father and his Son Jesus Christ, it is decreed that every soul may have the privilege of hearing and embracing the truth. This is one of the glorious principles of the gospel, and one which the religious world has ignored. In giving his preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord said:

For verily the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; and there is no eye that shall not see, neither ear that shall not hear, neither heart that shall not be penetrated.

And the rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow; for their iniquities shall be spoken upon the housetops, and their secret acts shall be revealed. (D. & C. 1:2-3.)

Therefore the promise is unto all who repent whether living or dead, that they shall not be deprived of the opportunity of hearing and accepting the truth. Therefore there must be a time for teaching the dead who died without the privilege of hearing and receiving the gospel when they were on the earth. This wonderful doctrine was revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, and he was given the divine authority to have the ordinances performed for the dead in the temples built for that purpose. This is a just principle filled with the spirit of mercy, love, and justice.

EVERY SOUL SHALL HAVE HIS CHANCE

That every soul shall have his chance is one of the greatest principles of the gospel. It is merciful and it is just, but these Zoramites could not see it because they had rebelled against the truth and had turned to the worship of false gods and thus had placed themselves on the border where there would be no hope if they continued in their evil course. So we see that there is no conflict between Amulek's teachings and the doctrine of the loss of salvation for the dead who turn away in this life and place themselves beyond hope of their redemption. This condition which the Zoramites were in is in conformity to the condition of the apostates which Peter and Paul mention in their epistles as follows:

For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandments delivered unto them. (2 Peter 2:21. )

For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost,

And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,

If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to open shame. (Hebrews 6:4-6.)

STATUS OF MANY WHO REJECT THE GOSPEL

The Lord has not consigned all those who have rejected or may yet reject the gospel to the torments of the damned. He has decreed that every soul may have the opportunity of salvation in his kingdom if they will repent and keep his commandments. This applies as herein stated to all who died without any opportunity to repent and accept the gospel. According to that which is written, many of the honorable men who, when living, rejected the message of salvation who later in the world of spirits repented, will receive some degree of salvation. Of these the Lord has said:

And also they who are the spirits of men kept in prison, whom the Son visited, and preached the gospel unto them, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh;

Who received not the testimony of Jesus in the flesh, but afterwards received it.

These are they who are honorable men of the earth, who were blinded by the craftiness of men.

These are they who receive of his glory, but not of his fulness.

These are they who receive of the presence of the Son, but not of the fulness of the Father.

Wherefore, they are bodies terrestrial, and not bodies celestial, and differ in glory as the moon differs from the sun. (D. & C. 76:73-78.)
