Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

2

Prophets—Keys—Priesthood

Question: "We have been discussing the coming of the Prophet Elijah, and a book we have states that he came because he holds the keys of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the priesthood; and without that authority given, the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness.

"One of the members referred to the Doctrine and Covenants and 'The Way To Perfection,' page 75, where it states that Moses and the Melchizedek Priesthood were taken from Israel, and yet we know that Samuel, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Elijah, all held the Melchizedek Priesthood.

"How do we reconcile these two statements, and where do we get the scripture to prove that Elijah held all the keys of this authority to administer in all of the ordinances? If he held the keys of all the ordinances, then what about the ordinances of baptism and confirmation before he came? We understand that Christ instructed John to ordain Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, and by that authority they baptized, but how does this conform to the statement made by the Prophet?"

Answer: The authority given to Elijah was that authority which pertains to the sealing ordinances of the gospel, such as we obtain in the temples of the Lord. Baptism was an ordinance introduced to Adam after he was driven out of the Garden of Eden and which could be performed by the authority of the Aaronic Priesthood, down through the ages. This authority was never taken away only through apostasy. Ordinances such as the Prophet mentioned were such as were received in sacred places which pertain to the Higher or Melchizedek Priesthood. The baptism by John was accepted by the Jews because they were familiar with this ordinance, notwithstanding the Bible, as it has come down to us, is so vague in relation to baptism for the remission of sin. The keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood were held by ancient prophets and by Israel's prophets until the time of Moses. When the Lord took these keys away from Israel and left them the Aaronic Priesthood, there was still the necessity for the Lord to maintain prophets who held the Melchizedek Priesthood, but they were especially called and ordained in each instance by the direct edict from the Lord.

ALL PRIESTHOOD IS MELCHIZEDEK

The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote:

All Priesthood is Melchizedek, but there are different portions or degrees of it. That portion which brought Moses to speak with God face to face was taken away; but that which brought the ministry of angels remained. All the prophets had the Melchizedek Priesthood and were ordained by God himself. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 180-81.)

We discover that all the ordinances which could be performed by the Aaronic Priesthood remained with Israel in the dark days of her disobedience. It was necessary, under these conditions, that there be someone with authority to perform ordinances, such as confirmation, for we know that the prophets of old had the gift of the Holy Ghost. (2 Peter 1:21.)

We read in 2 Kings, Chapter 17, that power had been given to Elijah to close the heavens that there would be no rain except by his word. He had power given him to bless the widow's oil and meal and to bring down fire from heaven to consume his offering and destroy the false doctrines of the priests of Baal. The fact that Elijah had this great power and authority did not prevent other prophets from also holding some divine authority in the Melchizedek Priesthood which was essential to the faithful in the House of Israel. We should also remember the fact that in the days of the Savior's ministry this authority held by Elijah was bestowed by Elijah, and the authority held by Moses was restored by Moses to Peter, James, and John. In reference to this we have again the word of the Prophet Joseph Smith as follows:

THE PRIESTHOOD IS EVERLASTING

The Priesthood is everlasting. The Savior, Moses and Elias, gave the keys to Peter, James, and John, on the mount, when they were transfigured before him. The Priesthood is everlasting—without beginning of days or end of years; without father, mother, etc. If there is no change of ordinances, there is no change of priesthood. Wherever the ordinances of the Gospel are administered, there is the Priesthood. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 158.)

Therefore, we discover that in the days of the Savior, he honored the prophets who held the keys of the priesthood in ancient times and called upon them to come and bestow upon Peter, James, and John their keys, notwithstanding the fact that he held all the authority whence came the authority given to Moses and Elijah. It was also Moses and Elias (who lived in the days of Abraham) and Elijah who came to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple and again revealed their keys to be exercised in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times.

It was Moses who held the keys of the gathering of Israel, and Elijah who held the keys of the turning of the hearts of the fathers to their children and the hearts of the children to their fathers, lest the Lord come and find the way unprepared.

Not only did these prophets come with their keys, but all of the prophets who held keys from Adam to Peter, James, and John, and John the Baptist also came with their keys and restored them that the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times might be complete preparatory to the coming of the Son of God as King of kings and Lord of lords, to take his place to rule and reign upon the earth according to the promise. (See D. & C. 128:18-21.)
