Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

8

How Extensive Was the Scattering of Israel?

Question: "My companion and I were discussing the lineage of the Israelites. I am a full blood Chinese, and have thought much of my lineage as mentioned in my patriarchal blessing. When I told my companion that my blessing said 'You are of the lineage of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Ephraim,' he commented that I must not be pure Chinese. Since he has made such a statement, I have thought much about what is mentioned in the blessing. I will be grateful if you will inform me as to the relationship between races: Chinese, French, German, and others. I am particularly interested in this because I interpret the lineage literally and not as an adoption."

Answer: Evidently the patriarch had the right interpretation. The great mission that was given to Abraham was that he would be a blessing to the generations coming after him, and through him all nations would be blessed. In Genesis we find the following:

And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing:

And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. (Genesis 12:2-3.)

Again the Lord said:

. . . Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do;

Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him? (Genesis 18:17-18.)

GREAT BLESSINGS PROMISED ABRAHAM'S SEED

This wonderful promise is made in more detail in the writings of Abraham as we find them in the Pearl of Great Price:

My name is Jehovah, and I know the end from the beginning; therefore my hand shall be over thee.

And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations;

And I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father;

And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee; and in thee (that is, in thy Priesthood) and in thy seed (that is, the Priesthood), for I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal. (Abraham 2:8-11.)

When Israel entered the promised land, the Lord gave them strict commandment that they should serve him and keep his commandments. If they would obey, they were to be greatly blessed and prospered in the land the Lord had given to them. If they should reject his commandments and turn to evil, he would punish them and take them out of the land, and scatter them to all parts of the earth, where they would serve other gods, "which neither thou nor thy fathers have known, even wood and stone." (Deuteronomy 28:64.)

All of this was to come on Israel as a punishment for their wickedness. However, the Lord never punishes his people without turning that punishment into some blessing in the end. The scattering of Israel became a blessing to the Gentile peoples among whom they were dispersed, for the Israelites mixed with the people thus bringing the Gentiles into the benefits of the blessings that had been promised to Abraham and his seed after him.

MOST LATTER-DAY SAINTS ARE OF GENTILE ANCESTRY

Nearly all of the Latter-day Saints are of Gentile ancestry as well as being of the house of Israel. In the days of our Savior's ministry, he went only to the Israelites in Palestine, and when he sent his disciples out in the beginning, he commanded them not to go to the Gentiles but confine their labors to the Israelites in Palestine, and they obeyed this commandment.

We are all familiar with the difficulty Peter had accepting the pleadings of Cornelius to come into the Church, and in the first few years the preaching of the gospel was confined to the Jews. It was only when the Jews rejected the message that Paul and his companions turned to the Gentiles.

A SIGNIFICANT STATEMENT FROM THE BOOK OF MORMON

In this Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, the gospel came first to the Gentiles and then is to go to the Jews. (See D. & C. 19:27.) However, the Gentiles who receive the gospel are in the greater part, Gentiles who have the blood of Israel in their veins. There is a very significant statement in the words of Moroni as recorded on the title page of the Book of Mormon that it was: " . . . To come forth by the gift and power of God unto the interpretation thereof—Sealed by the hand of Moroni, and hid up unto the Lord, to come forth in due time by way of the Gentile—The interpretation thereof by the gift of God."

How did the Book of Mormon come forth? By the hand of Joseph Smith. Yet we read in the Book of Mormon (See 2 Nephi 3:7-15.) that Joseph Smith is the descendant of Joseph who was sold into Egypt by his brethren, nevertheless he came by "way of the Gentile," according to Moroni's prediction.

In the Book of Jacob, chapter five, in the Book of Mormon, we have one of the most remarkable parables ever written. It is the teaching of the Prophet Zenos and is related by Jacob. In this parable the house of Israel is represented as a tame olive tree which the Lord planted in his vineyard. The time came when the tree began to decay and the Lord pruned and nourished it, but the top began to perish. Then the Lord said,

It grieveth me that I should lose this tree; wherefore, go and pluck the branches from a wild olive-tree and bring them hither unto me; and we will pluck off those main branches which are beginning to wither away, and we will cast them into the fire that they may be burned.

And behold, saith the Lord of the vineyard, I take away many of these young and tender branches, and I will graft them whithersoever I will; and it mattereth not that if it so be that the root of this tree will perish, I may preserve the fruit thereof unto myself; wherefore, I will take these young and tender branches, and I will graft them whithersoever I will.

Take thou the branches of the wild olive-tree, and graft them in, in the stead thereof; and these which I have plucked off I will cast into the fire and burn them, that they may not cumber the ground of my vineyard. . . .

And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard went his way, and hid the natural branches of the tame olive-tree in the nethermost parts of the vineyard, some in one and some in another, according to his will and pleasure. . . .

And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard looked and beheld the tree in the which the wild olive branches had been grafted; and it had sprung forth and begun to bear fruit. And he beheld that it was good; and the fruit thereof was like unto the natural fruit. (Jacob 5:7-9, 14, 17.)

THE INTERPRETATION OF THE PARABLE

This is a very interesting parable, but what is here written will suffice. It reveals to us the fact that the Lord in scattering Israel to all parts of the world caused the branches of the tame olive tree and the wild olive tree, that had been grafted to bring forth fruit, while the main branches of the original olive tree had withered away.

The interpretation of this parable, and we have presented only a fragment of it, is a story of the scattering of Israel and the mixing of the blood of Israel with the wild olive trees, or Gentile peoples, in all parts of the world. Therefore we find in China, Japan, India, and in all other countries that are inhabited by the Gentiles that the blood of Israel was scattered, or "grafted," among them. Therefore in this day of gathering the Lord is fulfilling his purposes and is calling back into the fold of the True Shepherd, the children of Abraham. They are largely of the tribe of Ephraim, for Ephraim was given the blessing of standing at the head in the last days:

And they, [that is, returning Israel,] shall bring forth their rich treasures unto the children of Ephraim, my servants.

And the boundaries of the everlasting hills, shall tremble at their presence.

And there shall they fall down and be crowned with glory, even in Zion, by the hands of the servants of the Lord, even the children of Ephraim. (D. & C. 133:31-33.)

Therefore there is reason to believe the patriarch had the correct inspiration.
