Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

10

What Was the Nature of Paul's Sin at the Stoning of Stephen?

Question: "In our Sunday School the question of the nature and scope of Paul's sin at the martyrdom of Stephen was discussed. There was a wide divergence of opinion in the class. Some felt that he was justified by the teachings and policies of Jewish law. However some felt that it was in defiance of Roman law which was supreme at the time. Will you please help us to reach a proper conclusion?"

Answer: Paul informs us that he was brought up in strict compliance with Israelitish law. He had been taught by the renowned Gamaliel who was known for his great wisdom and knowledge of Hebrew law. It is well for us to remember as far as we know that Paul took no part in making the decision that condemned Stephen and fortunately took no part in the stoning which cost Stephen his life. That he was in full sympathy with what was done we may well believe and therefore was willing to protect the clothes of those who engaged in the awful tragedy. It is likely true that he sanctioned the action. It is also true that in his misplaced zeal he was determined to bring all believers in Jesus to trial and have them punished perhaps to lose their lives by the violation of what he truly believed to be in full accord with the commandment of the Lord which had been given to Moses in relation to those who forsook the truth and turned to the worship of other gods.

COMMANDMENTS GIVEN TO ANCIENT ISRAEL CONSIDERED

In considering this let us refer to one or two passages in the commandments given to Israel when they entered the land of promise to inherit it.

And the Lord spake to Moses, saying,

Bring forth him that hath cursed without the camp; and let all that heard him lay their hands upon his head, and let all the congregation stone him. . . .

And he that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, he shall surely be put to death, and all the congregation shall certainly stone him: as well the stranger, as he that is born in the land, when he blasphemeth the name of the Lord, shall be put to death. (Leviticus 24:13-14, 16.)

If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which thou has not known, thou, nor thy fathers;

Namely, of the gods of the people which are round about you, nigh unto thee, or far off from thee, from the one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth;

Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him; neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou spare, neither shalt thou conceal him:

But thou shalt surely kill him; thine hands shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterwards the hand of all the people. (Deuteronomy 13:6-9.)

When we stop to consider that Paul was brought up in this atmosphere and that he was a very strict and devout Pharisee, we can understand how, in his ignorance, he was willing to take charge of the clothes of those who stoned Stephen. To him evidently it was a command from the Lord.

HEBREW LAW ENFORCED AGAINST STEPHEN

While it is true that the Romans were in control and enforced their law, yet they did not always interfere with the Hebrew law and the carrying out of its provisions as understood by the Jews. In fact it is to be remembered that Pilate washed his hands and turned Jesus over to what he considered to be Hebrew law. Moreover let us not lose sight of the fact that Stephen was on trial before a council of the Jews. (Acts 6:12.) The consigning him to death was not necessarily the work of a mob, but the action of the council, and Stephen, as was our Lord, supposedly, turned over to be dealt with according to Hebrew law.

At this condemnation of Stephen, as with Jesus, false witnesses were brought and were sworn who said that Stephen had, spoken" . . . blasphemous words against Moses, and against God," (Acts 6:11.) and when Stephen emphatically declared in their presence that he had seen the heavens opened and the Son of Man or Jesus standing on the right hand of God, it was more than these wicked judges could endure, and they pronounced sentence upon him, and the multitude cried out against him and cast him out of the city and stoned him.

Fortunately Paul took no part in this, only to take charge of the clothes of the guilty murderers. That he was sympathetic with them is true. Following this murderous assault he sought papers so that he could go forth arresting any who professed the name of Jesus and drag them to what he felt was justice. We must concede that in all that he did, Paul felt that he was doing what the Lord had commanded Moses in the law.

PAUL CONSIDERED HIS ACTIONS WERE JUSTIFIED

Under all the circumstances he was acting in righteous zeal, as he supposed, to bring to an end an uprising contrary to the commandment given by the Lord to Moses. In this mistaken zeal he went forth and " . . . made havock of the church, entering into every house, and haling men and women committed them to prison." (Acts 8:3.)

To carry his labor to a complete conclusion, he sought papers so that he could go forth into other parts of the world, and on his way to Damascus received his great vision of the Son of God, which turned him from his bitterness and mistaken zeal to an equal zeal and determination henceforth to bring souls unto Christ.

Considering all the elements in connection with his life, we must say of Paul, what he did he did honestly in this work of destruction, feeling that he was doing the will of the Eternal Father. It was wrong, and it took a drastic measure to stop him in his mad course and turn him to the defense of the truth. Whatever evil was at his door, he fully paid the price through his greater zeal and perseverance to undo all that he had formerly done and bring souls unto Christ. Eventually it was required of him that he too lay down his life in martyrdom in defense of the Son of God whom previously he had persecuted.

Surely Paul is worthy of our sympathy for the things he did which were wrong, and our love for his life of zeal which was intensified without question because of his evil labors ignorantly performed.
