Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

11

Our Responsibility to Warn the World

Question: "A discussion came up in our seminary class yesterday. Just what is the responsibility of the Church in 'warning the world'?"

Answer: Shortly before the betrayal of our Savior, he went out and sat on the Mount of Olives and his disciples came unto him privately and questioned him in regard to the destruction of the temple, the fate of the Jews, and his second coming and the end of the world, or the destruction of the wicked. Complying with their request the Lord revealed to them by prophecy all of these things. He told them they would go forth into the world and would be afflicted and hated by all nations for his name's sake. He told them how many who had professed his name would wax cold and would betray one another, but that he who remained steadfast and is not overcome, the same shall be saved.

In the course of his teaching he gave them some instruction concerning his second coming and said unto them:

And again this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come, or the destruction of the wicked;

And again shall the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, be fulfilled.

And immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken.

Verily, I say unto you, this generation, in which these things shall be shown forth, shall not pass away until all I have told you shall be fulfilled.

I have not taken this quotation from the Bible, but from the revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith as given in the Pearl of Great Price. (Writings of Joseph Smith, 1:32-34.) In the account given in Matthew and Luke the instruction reads as follows:

Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled. (Matthew 24:34; Luke 21:32.)

PROTESTANT MINISTER'S DILEMMA

This verse caused one minister in Chicago to write to other ministers in that great city, wherein he said he had no interpretation to give to this passage of scripture, for the generation in which our Lord lived passed away centuries ago, and yet this promise had not been fulfilled, and said he, "If we have no solution or sufficient answer to this statement, we might as well retire from the ministry for Christianity has failed."

One of these letters fell into my hands. What a wonderful difference a correct translation of the Savior's words can make, and how the members of the Church should rejoice and treasure the revelations coming through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

From the revelation given to the Prophet, Latter-day Saints should be grateful, nevertheless we should take heed, for we are now living in the generation when these signs and warnings are made known. Therefore according to the words of the Savior's prophecy the time of his coming draws near. This truth all Latter-day Saints should realize, and we should be putting forth every effort to bring to pass the purposes of the Lord, one of the greatest being our responsibility to preach the gospel to the world.

In the discharge of this duty every member of the Church should be a missionary; not necessarily to go forth into the world, but to preach the gospel to our neighbors and friends who are not in the Church. Moreover, by our example and our faithfulness to every commandment the Lord has given us to show our friends and the strangers within our gates the way to eternal life through our actions as well as through our words, that is, to be humble missionaries and advocates of the truth in our daily acts and conversations.

MISSIONARIES ARE FULFILLING COMMANDMENT

Today the missionaries of the Church are fulfilling this commandment by going forth in all countries where the doors are open, preaching the gospel, and crying repentance to the people, and bearing testimony of the restoration of the gospel. In doing so there are certain commandments missionaries should remember. First, that they are sent not only to preach and bear testimony and bring people to repentance preparatory to the second coming of the Lord and the establishment of his kingdom to rule and reign in the earth, but to warn all men by virtue of that divine authority which is in them. Those who heed their teachings and repent will come into the Church and be numbered among those who have received the covenants of the gospel. Those who refuse to hear are to be left without excuse, for the Lord has declared it in the following words:

Behold, I sent you out to testify and warn the people, and it becometh every man who has been warned to warn his neighbor.

Therefore, they are left without excuse, and their sins are upon their own heads. (D. & C. 88:81-82.)

And again, by way of commandment to the church concerning the manner of baptism—All those who humble themselves before God, and desire to be baptized, and come forth with broken hearts and contrite spirits, and witness before the church that they have truly repented of all their sins, and are willing to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end, and truly manifest by their works that they have received of the Spirit of Christ unto the remission of their sins, shall be received by baptism into his church. (D. & C. 20:37.)

Missionaries should also remember that before a person is baptized he or she should subscribe to the covenant of baptism as the Lord has given it by revelation.
