Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

14

In Obeying God, Is Personal Liberty Curtailed?

Question: "Our class recently discussed the subject of obedience in all things, and in the course of the discussion these words of Seneca were considered:

" 'We are born subjects, and to obey God is perfect liberty. He that does this shall be free, safe, and happy.'

"We disagreed with the phrase, 'perfect liberty.' We seek your advice on this question. How could there be perfect liberty if we are compelled to accept the same view, and individuality and freedom of expression are denied? We ask you to answer in terms of Church philosophy. Is not this an interference with personal freedom and the right of a person to express his own thoughts on many subjects? Will you give us an answer based in terms of gospel philosophy?"

Answer: Seneca (Lucius Annaeus) was a Roman writer and philosopher who lived in the first century of the Christian era. It is unlikely that he ever saw the Lord, but there is a tradition that he had some acquaintance with Paul and from him may have absorbed some gospel truth. Whether this is true or not cannot be definitely stated. This expression which is here called in question by members of the class is one of considerable importance.

We have all been taught the doctrine of personal free agency and that no individual is ever compelled by force or other means to comply with divine edicts and philosophy. We have been informed that a long time ago in the pre-existence there was a rebellion in heaven, and because one notable character, who had been entrusted with great authority, rebelled and led many away with him, he had to be cast out of the kingdom. However we should remember that every principle and law existing in the celestial kingdom has been proved to be perfect through the eternities through which they have come. If any individual proves himself worthy for the exaltation in that kingdom, it will be by strict obedience to every principle and covenant here existing. Therefore we may be assured that every law and principle thereunto pertaining is perfect and cannot be amended or discarded because of its perfection. However there is no reason to believe that under such conditions there could arise differences of judgment or opinion in relation to any principle or commandment, for everything has reached the stage of perfection.

ALL DIVINE LAWS HAVE BEEN THOROUGHLY TESTED

We may well believe that since our Eternal Father has been building worlds, peopling them, and having them go on to perfection through countless ages, that every divine law and commandment has been so thoroughly tested that there could not come at any time a condition where an individual who reaches the exaltation could discover wherein any principle or commandment could be discarded or in any way amended to improve the conditions of that kingdom.

One of the most glorious principles or truths ever revealed to mortal man was given to the Prophet Joseph Smith in Kirtland, Ohio, in May 1831. This truth, for some reason which is difficult to explain, has been criticized by many who ought to know better, but it stamps Joseph Smith as a prophet and a revelator who has made known to the world perhaps one of the greatest truths that was ever revealed. Yet the world will not receive it! Unfortunately many who profess membership in the Church have questioned the validity of it. It is as follows:

And that which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness.

That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day. (D. & C. 50:23-24.) (Italics added. )

There is another revelation similar to this, which points to the time when all who find that divine light and truth will be exalted. It is as follows:

The Spirit of truth is of God. I am the Spirit of truth, and John bore record of me, saying: He received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth.

And no man receiveth a fulness unless he keepeth his commandments.

He that keepeth his commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things. (D. & C. 93:26-28.)

WORTHY TO BE BLESSED IN KNOWLEDGE AND WISDOM

Here we are informed that those who are worthy of the exaltation will be blessed in knowledge, wisdom, truth, and light, so that they will, like our Lord, eventually know all things and be bathed in light and truth. When this time comes there could not arise any differences of opinion. There could be no ambitious souls who would be dissatisfied, or who would wish to introduce any individual notions or wish to change the laws by which all things in perfection are governed. Since the joy of all who dwell there is perfect there could arise no occasion for a difference of opinion or a conflict of ideas. The weakness and imperfections of mortality will all be brushed aside, and those who receive this exaltation will be bathed in wisdom, light, and truth in their perfection.

Should there arise a person or persons who wish to change the order, then the perfect order would cease to exist. Neither could any person or group discover any principle or commandment that would need to be modified, for the eternal state of perfection has been reached.

True freedom can only come through obedience to divine law. This is true in this mortal world; how much more so in the celestial kingdom. There is no compulsion there. Every soul who reaches this exaltation will realize that there could be no disharmony, and when the inhabitants of that kingdom see clearly, and not "through a glass darkly," there will arise no contention. Personal ambitions are due to mortal desires. In the kingdom of God those who enter will have learned the great lessons of humility, obedience, and divine love, for all the weaknesses and ambitions of the flesh will have perished with the grave.

IT IS POSSIBLE TO ATTAIN PERFECTION

The Savior's words in the Sermon on the Mount, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect," (Matthew 5:48.) evidently have been by many misapplied or limited in their application. The Savior knew that mortal man could not reach the great goal of perfection like his Heavenly Father, but here in mortality is the place where that foundation should be laid. Then we should continue on from grace to grace, not only in this life but also in the eternities to come, and it is within the possibility of any faithful soul eventually to attain to that perfection.

Again:

Then said Jesus to those Jews who believed on him, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed:

And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. (John 8:31-32.)

True freedom can come only through obedience to divine law. There is no compulsion in the kingdom of God. Wisdom, love of truth, and obedience make us free. The moment a person turns from the path of truth and observance of divine law, he becomes subject to sin and a slave to sin. There is more truth in the words of James than many think:

For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. (James 2:10.)

What is the true meaning of this remark? It is that only by obedience to the full law, can the promised blessings come.

The purpose of our mortal existence is that each individual may be tried and tested to see if, through the temptations, trials, and tribulations of mortality, he can maintain a faithful demeanor and prove himself worthy of the exaltation in the kingdom of God. This is the goal we are seeking or should seek, and it is this integrity and perseverance which brings the fulness of life which Lehi has defined as joy.
