Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

16

Was the Fall of Adam Necessary?

Question: "In our discussion of the fall of Adam the question arose: the first commandment given to Adam and Eve was to multiply and the second that they should not eat the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil or they would die. The discussion presented the fact that the two commandments were in conflict, and by breaking the commandment not to eat the fruit, Adam and Eve had to die. The thought was also expressed that we could all be in a state of innocence but for the fall. We would like to have a clear explanation of this. Surely the Lord would not permit his plan to be destroyed."

Answer: It is evident that if we were dependent solely on the account of the fall as it is presented in the Book of Genesis, we would be led astray and reach a very erroneous conclusion. The Bible has come to us through many translations, and there is no original known to man. In the copying of the ancient records and the translations by uninspired men, many errors crept into the ancient writings. The Book of Mormon makes this clear. This has led Bible commentators to speak of Adam and Eve as having frustrated and defeated the original plan of the Father, and they have spoken of the partaking of the fruit as "Man's Shameful Fall." Therefore there is a prevalent notion that if Adam and Eve had not partaken of this fruit, they and their posterity would have dwelt upon the earth in perfect peace and happiness without the trials and temptations that have become so prevalent through the generations of time, and there would have been no death.

THE FALL WAS ESSENTIAL TO THE DIVINE PLAN

The simple fact is, as explained in the Book of Mormon and the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the fall was a very essential part of the divine plan. Adam and Eve therefore did the very thing that the Lord intended them to do. If we had the original record, we would see the purpose of the fall clearly stated and its necessity explained. We do have this knowledge in the Book of Moses as it was revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith as follows:

And I, the Lord God, commanded the man, saying: Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat,

But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it, nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee; but, remember that I forbid it, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die. (Moses 3:16-17.)

We learn from this that Adam had the privilege of making a choice, with the penalty of death awaiting him if he ate the fruit of the tree. We may assume that Adam would not have eaten if Eve had not partaken. When she did, Adam realized that he had to partake or he and Eve would have been separated forever. Therefore there was nothing left for Adam to do but to follow Eve's example and partake.

We read also in the scriptures that Jesus was the "Lamb slain from the foundation of the world," meaning that our Savior was chosen before the foundations of the world to come and be the sacrifice for the redemption of man and all the creatures who partook of death through Adam's fall.

ORIGINAL ACCOUNT FOUND IN BOOK OF MOSES

Just why the Lord would say to Adam that he forbade him to partake of the fruit of that tree is not made clear in the Bible account, but in the original as it comes to us in the Book of Moses it is made definitely clear. It is that the Lord said to Adam that if he wished to remain as he was in the garden, then he was not to eat the fruit, but if he desired to eat it and partake of death he was at liberty to do so. So really it was not in the true sense a transgression of a divine commandment. Adam made the wise decision, in fact the only decision that he could make.

It was the divine plan from the very beginning that man should be placed on the earth and be subject to mortal conditions and pass through a probationary state as explained in the Book of Mormon where he and his posterity would be subject to all mortal conditions. It was part of the divine plan that man should have this period of mortality where he would be shut out of the presence of God and be subject to all the vicissitudes of mortality, the temptations and trials of the flesh, thus gaining experience and being placed in a position of trial, temptation, and be purified by passing through the trials and tribulations of the flesh, or mortality, as Paul has described it. This life is a very brief part of our existence, but is the most critical, for it is in mortality where we are tried and figuratively placed in the fire and tested, proved to see what kind of material we are made of, whether we will be worthy of an exaltation in the kingdom of God or be assigned to some other kingdom.

ADAM'S TRANSGRESSION EXPLAINED BY PROPHET LEHI

Lehi, in instructing his son Jacob, made this very clear wherein he said:

And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end.

And they would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin.

But behold, all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things.

Adam fell that man might be; and men are, that they might have joy.

And the Messiah cometh in the fulness of time, that he may redeem the children of men from the fall. And because that they are redeemed from the fall they have become free forever, knowing good from evil; to act for themselves and not to be acted upon, save it be by the punishment of the law at the great and last day, according to the commandments which God hath given. (2 Nephi 2:22-26.)

Mother Eve has given us the clearest statement in relation to the fall in the following words:

. . . Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient. ( Moses 5:11.)
