Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

17

What Is the Sin against the Holy Ghost?

Question: "What I am asking may not be of any importance, but perhaps you can inform me as to where I may find information on the subject. I am puzzled in my mind about the word 'blasphemy' as stated in Matthew 12:31-33. It tells us that to blaspheme against the Son of Man can be forgiven, but to blaspheme against the Holy Ghost can never be forgiven. Through what kind of action or means would one go about to blaspheme against the Holy Ghost? Perhaps if I could read a good article on this subject I could form a conclusion."

Answer: You have asked a very important question, which may be difficult to explain to a person who is not a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints or to one who has been inactive and indifferent to the teachings of the Church.

In order to have the question clearly before us it is well to quote the passage in question.

Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.

And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.

Either make the tree good, and his fruit good; or else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt: for the tree is known by his fruit. (Matthew 12:31-33.)

THE GIFT OF THE HOLY GHOST

When John the Baptist was preaching in the wilderness he said to the people:

I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance: but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire. (Matthew 3:11.)

On several occasions the Savior spoke to his disciples about the gift of the Holy Ghost. This gift is spoken of frequently in the Bible, particularly in the New Testament.

When Nicodemus came to the Savior seeking light, the Lord said to him:

Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. (John 3:5.)

This was a strange saying to Nicodemus, so he asked how could a man be born again, and the Lord answered:

Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit.

Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again.

The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit. (John 3:5-7.)

THE BIRTH OF WATER IS BAPTISM BY IMMERSION

The birth of water is of course baptism by immersion for the remission of sins. This is an essential ordinance for entrance into the kingdom of God. The baptism of the Spirit is by the laying on of hands by one who holds the priesthood.

No man is authorized to perform these ordinances unless he holds the priesthood. An ordinance performed by one who has not received authority would be only a mockery in the sight of the Lord. Likewise the gift of the Holy Ghost is conferred by the laying on of hands by one who has been officially invested with divine authority. Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery received this authority from Peter, James, and John who were sent to confer upon them the Melchizedek Priesthood. The Lord said to Joseph Smith in a revelation given in October 1830:

Yea, repent and be baptized, every one of you, for a remission of your sins; yea, be baptized even by water, and then cometh the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost.

Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel; and remember that they shall have faith in me or they can in nowise be saved;

And upon this rock I will build my church; yea, upon this rock ye are built, and if ye continue, the gates of hell shall not prevail against you.

And ye shall remember the church articles and covenants to keep them.

And whoso having faith you shall confirm in my church, by the laying on of the hands, and I will bestow the gift of the Holy Ghost upon them. (D. & C. 33:11-15.)

PAUL QUESTIONS VALIDITY OF EPHESIAN BAPTISMS

Paul realized that something was wrong when certain converts at Ephesus claimed to have been baptized, and he asked them if they had received the Holy Ghost since being baptized. They replied, "We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost."

From this answer Paul had grave doubts concerning the validity of their baptism, and he asked them, "Unto what then were ye baptized?" They answered, "Unto John's baptism." Then Paul said, "John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus." When they heard this, they were baptized in the proper manner, for Paul knew that their baptism had been without divine authority. Paul then laid his hands upon them and gave them the gift of the Holy Ghost, and the power thereof came upon them, "and they spake with tongues and prophesied." (See Acts 19:1-6.)

This gift was held by all the prophets of old as Peter informs us wherein he said:

Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation.

For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. (2 Peter 1:20-21.)

Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, through their faithfulness and integrity, are entitled to the same guidance and divine knowledge which was given to the Saints in other dispensations from the days of Adam down. However, no person can have this gift and exercise faith, unless he or she is humbly keeping the commandments the Lord has given. The Holy Ghost will not dwell in unclean tabernacles nor strive with people unless they keep their minds as well as their bodies clean, and they are diligent before the Lord.

When the Savior met with his apostles in solemn assembly shortly before his betrayal he said to them:

If ye love me, keep my commandments.

And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever;

Even the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you. (John 14:15-17.)

Nevertheless I tell you the truth; It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you.

And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment:

Of sin, because they believe not on me;

Of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more;

Of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged.

I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.

Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear that shall he speak: and he will shew you things to come.

He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you. (John 16:7-14.)

THE WORLD IS BEREFT OF THE HOLY GHOST

The world today does not have this great gift because men have forsaken the way of the Lord, have discarded his ordinances, and teach the philosophies of men.

The Lord will grant to any honest person who earnestly seeks to know the truth one manifestation by the Holy Ghost; but he is not entitled to repeated manifestations. After such a revelation is given, he is to act, for the Holy Ghost cannot be appealed to for continued manifestations until after baptism and the gift has been bestowed. Cornelius is a good example of this. Peter was holding strictly to the traditions of Israel that the fulness of the gospel was for Israel only and not for the Gentiles. The Lord gave him a strange vision before he was convinced that the gospel was for the Gentiles as well as for the Jews.

We learn from the inspired teachings of Moroni the following:

Behold, I would exhort you that when ye shall read these things, [i.e., the Book of Mormon] if it be wisdom in God that ye should read them, that ye would remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down until the time that ye shall receive these things, and ponder it in your hearts.

And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things. (Moroni 10:3-5.)

THE CONSTANT COMPANIONSHIP OF THE HOLY GHOST

So important is the gift of the Holy Ghost that through righteous, humble obedience to the gospel a person will have the constant companionship of the Holy Ghost. The discernment of spirits and the power to understand and clearly comprehend the revelations of the Lord will be given him. What a glorious privilege this is to be guided constantly by the Holy Ghost and to have the mysteries of the kingdom of God made manifest.

How can one read the epistles of Paul or Peter or any of the prophets of old and not understand how these men were in possession of divine authority and that their minds were enlightened by the teachings and revelations of the Holy Ghost? It is because of this glorious contact that a person may receive and know with all his soul that Jesus is the Christ and that his prophets have spoken the truth; also by his inward testimony which the Spirit has given.

After this revelation is given should a man turn away and deny the truth? It would be with his eyes open and the knowledge that the Holy Ghost had given him of divine truth. Hence he would prove himself to be a liar and unworthy of a place of salvation in the kingdom of God. The testimony that comes of the truth is so great through the teachings of the Holy Ghost that the punishment for a rebellion or sin against the Holy Ghost merits a punishment where there is no forgiveness.

Paul, in writing to the Hebrews gave this warning:

For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost,

And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,

If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. (Hebrews 6:4-6.)

PETER ALSO BEARS HIS TESTIMONY

Peter also bears his testimony to the truth that there is no forgiveness for the man who sins against the Holy Ghost.

For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the beginning.

For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them.

But it is happened unto them according to the true proverb, the dog is turned to his own vomit again; and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire. (2 Peter 2:20-22. )

The testimony of the Spirit is so great, and the impressions and revelations of divine truth so forcefully revealed that there comes to the recipient a conviction of the truth that he cannot forget. Therefore, when a person once enlightened by the Spirit so that he receives knowledge that Jesus Christ is the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh, then turns away and fights the Lord and his work, he does so against the light and testimony he has received by the power of God. Therefore, he has resigned himself to evil knowingly. Therefore Jesus said there is no forgiveness for such a person.

The testimony of the Holy Ghost is the strongest testimony that a man can receive.
