Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

19

Why Was Not Paul Ordained by Peter to the Apostleship?

Question: "Why was not Paul ordained to the apostleship by Peter, James, and John, who were apostles? In reading the first chapter of Paul's epistle to the Galatians, we find this: 'Paul, an apostle, not of man, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him from the dead.'

"In verses 15 and 16, Paul points out that when God called him he did not confer with flesh and blood, neither did he go up to Jerusalem to them that were apostles before him, but he went into Arabia. It was three years before he went to Jerusalem, and then the only apostles he saw were Peter and James, the Lord's brother. Leaving Jerusalem he went to Syria and Cilicia, and the Churches of Judea not having seen him by face, only heard that he now preached the faith which once he destroyed.

"Fourteen years later Paul and Barnabas (who was an apostle) and Titus went to Jerusalem, and Paul communicated with them in a conference. But when they saw that the gospel of the circumcision was committed to Peter, then James, Cephas, and John gave Paul and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship and agreed that Paul and Barnabas would go to the heathen. Now we are wondering if a new dispensation of the gospel was committed to Paul. There are scriptures that seem to support this thought."

Answer: Unfortunately the records that have come down to us are extremely fragmentary. We have no continuous story. Paul became an eyewitness to the mission of the Lord when he received the great vision which turned him from his mistaken course. This, however, did not constitute the qualification for the apostleship. There were a number of things that had to be done. First, he had to be baptized for the remission of his sins and confirmed; then he went into retirement in Arabia, no doubt for a period of study and preparation and prayer. He then returned to enter the ministry with humility and zeal, surpassing the efforts of many of the brethren. There is no doubt that he spent some time with the brethren in which he convinced them of his integrity and his complete conversion to the mission of the Son of God.

HISTORICAL DETAILS ONLY FRAGMENTARY

We are extremely lacking in information in relation to many important details that failed to seep through the ages to our day, and we are left in darkness to know when and where Paul was ordained. But this is not strange when we think of the fragmentary information that has been received.

There is no written record as to when Barnabas became an apostle, or James, the brother of the Lord.

If it had not been for the faithful recording by Luke, the chances are that we would have as little about the activities of Paul as we have about Peter and John and the other original members of the council of apostles. The fact may be correctly surmised that Paul did find time to mingle with his brethren and that through the divine inspiration the apostleship was conferred on him by their action. It is evidently true also that Barnabas likewise was by them ordained; also James, the Lord's brother, and others if we had the record. We have no reason to believe that Paul received his ordination independent of the action of the other apostles.

NOTHING STRANGE IN PAUL'S STATEMENT

There is nothing strange in his statement in the introduction in his epistle to the Galatians, or to the Corinthians, Ephesians, Colossians, and Timothy, that his call was not of man, but of God. Just when and how he was ordained is not revealed, but this is true of Barnabas. What does matter is the fact that Paul, like Peter, James, and John, and the other apostles, received authority by a divine call. Not one of them obtained the authority by the will of man! We all could wish that more had been revealed, but the Lord has sanctioned their ministry, and we know it is true.

James, the brother of John, we know was cut down in martyrdom after a very brief ministry. Our knowledge of the activities of others of the original twelve is clouded in mystery; that they were faithful is true, and indications point to the fact that all of the original twelve and also Paul, laid down their lives in martyrdom, except John the Revelator, and he was spared to continue his ministry until the second coming of our Lord, according to the revelation given to Nephi six hundred years before John's birth.

IT IS EASY FOR ONE TO BE MISLED

It is very easy for one to be misled and reach a false conclusion in relation to these apostles and their ministry because of the lack of authentic information. We learn more of the journeying and ministry of Paul because he had an excellent scribe with him in his missionary labors. It is evident that the original twelve had but few occasions, during their ministry, to meet in council. Conditions were vastly different in that day from the conditions which prevail today. When Paul and Barnabas, or Silas and other brethren, went forth among the nations they had to go on foot, occasionally by donkey and when crossing the Mediterranean, by ship, but whatever means, it was a laborious and tedious journey. They had no means of communication except by letter, usually carried by a friend. Paul on several occasions writes of sending in the care of friends information and greetings to others. Peter refers to Paul's ministry in the following words:

Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless.

And account that the longsuffering of our Lord is salvation; even as our beloved brother Paul also according to the wisdom given unto him hath written unto you;

As also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these things; in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other scriptures, unto their own destruction. (See 2 Peter 3:14-17.)
