Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

22

What Is Meant by the Waters above the Firmament?

Question: In the Book of Moses, chapter 2, verses seven and eight, it says: 'And I, God, made the firmament and divided the waters, yea, the great waters under the firmament from the waters which are above the firmament, and it was so even as I spake.'

" 'And I, God, called the firmament Heaven; and the evening and the morning were the second day.'

"My question is this: What is meant by the waters above the firmament? None of the members of the class have the answer!"

Answer: The waters above the firmament is a reference to the clouds and the waters which exist in the atmosphere above the earth.

The meaning of the "firmament" as we find it in Genesis, chapter two, verse eight as given in the Standard Dictionary, is "The expanse of heaven; the sky." The word "firmament" according to its original meaning connotes something compact, solid, or firm, and at one time there was the belief that the earth was the center of the universe, that the sun, moon, and stars revolved around the earth. However this was not the belief in the beginning. The ancient inhabitants of the earth, from the days of Adam down, for centuries understood that this earth is a globe, or a world, revolving in space around the sun. We read in the Book of Moses that the ancient inhabitants of the earth had a perfect understanding in relation to this earth and other earths which the Lord created. We are informed that Methuselah was an astronomer and was well acquainted with the stars. Dr. D. E. E. Hart-Davies, in an article published in the Journal of Transactions (Victoria Institute) in discussing this question has this to say:

COMMENT BY DR. HART-DAVIES

But, as a matter of fact, the idea expressed by the English word, "firmament" from the Latin firmamentum, which does denote something strong and solid, is not found in the original Hebrew. The word there is (raqia), which means that which is stretched out, attenuated, or extended. The verbal form of the root was used to describe the beating-out of gold into thin wires or threads fine enough to be sewn into the priestly garment. The extremely thin gold-leaf which remains after the goldsmith has finished his task represents the raqia of the piece of pure metal which he began. The noun, therefore, denotes extension. Hence the R. V. rendering is "expanse" which is correct. The Hebrew is a strictly accurate term. The word, "firmament" is a mistranslation due to the false astronomy of Alexandria in the third century B.C. The Greeks believed that the sky was a solid crystalline sphere. Hence the raqia of the Hebrew was rendered in the Greek Septuagint version by the word steroma, which was again translated into the Latin Vulgate by Firmamentum, from which the A. V. word "Firmament" was derived.

TEACHINGS FROM THE BOOK OF ABRAHAM

We read in the Book of Abraham that the Lord revealed to the ancient worthies many things pertaining to his kingdom, and how he had created worlds without number, and that they have passed through the same course of development that we are going through today and have gone on to their glory. The ancient prophets wrote and sang about the stars. They were well acquainted with them. The shepherds out with their flocks at night sang and wrote about the stars. What is there more beautiful than the words of David that perhaps he sang while tending his flocks in the clear shining of the stars on a beautiful spring evening:

When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou has ordained;

What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?

For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour.

Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou hast put all things under his feet: . . .

O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth. (Psalm 8:3-6, 9.)

It is a foolish notion to think that the ancient inhabitants of the earth were ignorant of the heavenly bodies. They were acquainted with many of the constellations and the movements of the planets and sang about them. Thus Deborah and Barak, after their victory over the Canaanites sang a song of triumph in which they said: " . . . the stars in their courses fought against Sisera." (Judges 5:20.) Moreover, we read in the words of Job, that he was evidently an astronomer, at least was well acquainted with the stars: In his defense against the accusations of his tormentors he said:

I know it is so of a truth: but how should man be just with God?

If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand.

Then speaking of the power of the Lord he says:

Which removeth the mountains, and they know not: which overturneth them in his anger.

Which shaketh the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof tremble.

Which commandeth the sun, and it riseth not; and sealeth up the stars.

Which alone spreadeth out the heavens. and treadeth upon the waves of the sea.

Which maketh Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the chambers of the south.

Which doeth great things past finding out; yea, and wonders without number. (Job 9:2-3, 5-10.)

ANCIENT PEOPLES UNDERSTOOD NATURE OF THIS EARTH

From these passages written anciently we learn that the people of the Lord from the beginning knew the nature of this earth, the course it is pursuing which is the same that has been covered by other worlds throughout the eternities. They were not ignorant of the planets circling our sun in their established courses.

It was not until a later age, when men had fully departed from the teachings of the prophets, that mankind lost touch with the heavens and began to look upon the earth as the great center around which everything revolved. It was at this period of time when the word firmamentum was substituted in the writings of Moses. Should we endeavor to change it? The natural answer to this question is no! We have become so accustomed to speaking of the firmament of heaven that the meaning of the word when so expressed has a far different connotation from what it did perhaps when the translators first employed it. Today everyone knows what is meant by the firmament of heaven. That it is not a solid dome but the open expanse of heaven.

The question naturally has been asked, why did not Joseph Smith change the word back to its original connotation? Why should he have done so when the whole world had become familiar with the interpretation as the word firmament is applied to the expanse of heaven?

NEPHITES HAD PERFECT UNDERSTANDING OF THE HEAVENS

In the Book of Mormon we discover that the Nephites had a perfect understanding of the heavens. The Aztec calendar stone, seen in many places in Mexico, is a remarkable manifestation of the wisdom and scientific knowledge of the ancient inhabitants of the American continent. They were not ignorant people when they were keeping the commandments of the Lord, and they understood the heavens as well as people do today.

Even my days go back to the time when the astronomers were speaking of the great galaxies scattered throughout the universe as great masses of cloud dust out of which worlds are created. Today with their more nearly perfect methods and instruments for discovery and measurement they have now come to the truth which the Lord revealed to Moses, that these great clusters—galaxies—of stars are separate and distinct universes; moreover, that space is filled with them—some of them so far away from us that it has taken hundreds, yes, in some cases thousands of light years for the light which reaches us to come to us from these wonderful galaxies. What a great and wonderful thing this is! It all confirms the words of the Lord to Moses:

. . . The heavens, they are many, and they cannot be numbered unto man; but they are numbered unto me, for they are mine.

And as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof even so shall another come; and there is no end to my works, neither to my words.

For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. (Moses 1:37-39.)
