Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

25

Is Euthanasia, or Mercy Killing, Ever Justifiable?

Question: "In our study class the question was raised whether or not there was ever a time when mercy killing would be justifiable? For instance here is an elderly person very ill with a disease which the doctors state cannot be cured. The doctor states that he can prolong the life and thus continue the suffering, but death inevitably would finally result. Would he be justified in taking steps to hasten death and end the physical torment of the patient? If consent was given for the doctor to take such a step to hasten death, would he and those who sanctioned it be guilty and have to answer at the time of the judgment?"

Answer: The answer to this question is a simple one. The taking of life was condemned when Cain slew Abel, and for his dreadful sin Cain was punished far worse than to have been put to death. After Noah and his family came out of the ark, the Lord renewed this commandment and said:

Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made he man. (Genesis 9:6.)

WHO HAS THE WISDOM TO MAKE DECISION?

Who has the wisdom to say that in case of extreme sickness and suffering, there is ever a time when the hope of recovery is past? There have been cases reported many times of persons who were apparently at the point of death and who were in severe pain, who eventually recovered. The answer to this question in brief is, that to presume that the time has come when the person who is ill cannot recover and it would be justifiable to end the suffering by a painless death is a presumptuous conclusion. The commandment given to Noah is still in force and will be a part of the divine law as long as mortality endures.

This question of "mercy" killing, or euthanasia, constantly arises in the case of individuals who are in severe pain and afflicted with apparently no hope of recovery. It has also been considered in the case of children who are afflicted with some serious deformity which would make them a burden not only to themselves but also to others all the days of their lives. However, there is the matter of conscience which would haunt those who were guilty so that they would live with a feeling of having committed an offense which is unforgivable, and it seems that they would have no peace.

The discussions on this question apparently will never cease. In the year 1936, this question of "mercy" deaths was presented in a bill before the British House of Lords. This bill was for the purpose of permitting science to decide whether persons should be granted their desire for painless death and was introduced by Lord Ponsonby, Labor leader. Commenting on this The Deseret News gave the following:

COMMENT FROM THE DESERET NEWS

In England as in other countries, recent years have seen a growing movement to legalize "mercy killings" for incurables. Great Britain's several "mercy trials" have served to arouse interest in the movement, and for more than a year the Euthanasia Legalization Society, supported by prominent physicians and church leaders, has been campaigning for what is termed "easy death" in certain cases.

Since an English doctor confessed to taking the lives of five "incurables," doctors and laymen have been debating the right and wrong of ending the suffering of people who are doomed to life-long torture and do not wish to live.

According to the terms of the bill, under debate in the British Parliament, the law would be operated under a referee who would be appointed by the Minister of Health. Permission of the referee would be necessary before a life could be taken. The act would be restricted specifically to "illness involving severe pain or an incurable and fatal character."

The petitioner for "mercy death" would have to be over 21 years of age, and of sound mind. His application would have to be in his own writing and witnessed by two physicians. If granted, the proposed "easy death" might be administered only by a specially licensed physician in the presence of an official witness.

It appears that civilization has already answered this question without having realized it. The common conscience of mankind declares it a sin and a crime for any private person to take the life of another. But it also recognizes that the law, whether it be the will of the king or the will of the people, is the only human agency that has the right to take the life of a human being.

Killing by the state, by an officer of the law, or by a soldier in battle is the only killing now considered justifiable and not wrong. Therefore, homicide is blameless if sanctioned by law. But we still face the Sinai law—Thou Shalt Not Kill—which in its broad interpretation would place a ban upon any taking of human life.

While this discussion was going on in relation to the question of euthanasia in Great Britain, the Salt Lake Tribune also joined in condemnation of such a principle and the following is taken from an editorial in that paper of March 12, 1935:

COMMENT FROM THE SALT LAKE TRIBUNE

The taboo against murder is so strong and deep-seated in our culture that the question of its rightness or wrongness seldom comes up for consideration. Unlike the more controversial issues upon which public sentiment is more or less evenly divided, the universal belief in the justifiability of murder tends to keep the subject beyond the realm of controversy.

When border-line cases arise, however, it becomes not only a matter of news; it is also the occasion of the grounds for our belief. Much publicity has, therefore, attached to the case of the 62-year-old woman in England who deliberately put her imbecile son "to sleep." The woman was tried, convicted, and sentenced to hang for the murder of her invalid son, whom she had nursed for 30 years. In response to the widespread demand of the British public, the home secretary, however, recently reprieved the woman.

Many people will justify the act of the well-intentioned old lady on the ground that the painless extermination of a helpless defective is a justifiable, nay humane, act. Such an argument, however, loses sight entirely of the social consequences involved. Under such a precedent, anyone, not merely a parent, might assume the right to decide that a given person—not alone a defective—would be better off dead. In a spirit of vengeance, or with a paranoid belief in his own superior judgment, a person might thus administer a death potion entirely without authority and wholly without justification.

In a civilization that has achieved a measure of success in compensating for many of nature's deficiencies, and in a society that has only just learned the art of prolonging life, it seems a bit premature to encourage the practice of deliberate killing. Moreover, the question of whether a specific disease or a given defect is incurable is not easy to decide; for it is not always a matter of fact. Even with our present limited knowledge of endocrinology, for instance, many imbeciles such as the one Mrs. Brownhill mercifully put "to sleep" might be cured, provided, of course, the deficiency is not an inherited one. Many conditions which a few years ago were regarded as incurable are now turning out to be within the range of improvement, if not a cure. Until the discovery of insulin, for instance, diabetes was considered hopeless. Pernicious anemia was, until very recently, likewise regarded fatal. The prognosis for general paralysis of the insane, was everywhere considered poor until an Austrian psychiatrist discovered a treatment which has made it one of the most hopeful of all the various forms of insanity.

There are cases, we admit, in which it would seem humane to painlessly exterminate a futile life. But the practical question is, "who shall say?" Public sentiment is apparently not yet ready to allow even a well-trained, high-minded physician to exercise this discretion on such a point.

Given our limited knowledge and the frailty of human nature it would seem, therefore, that the lives of a few hopeless defectives are not to be weighed against the possible subversive consequences of allowing a parent, or even a "board of exterminators" to decide such issues of life and death.

THE LIFE OF EVERY PERSON IS IN THE HANDS OF THE LORD

Let us remember that the life of every person is in the hands of the Lord. A mortal man has not been given the right to judge whether or not a defective soul should remain or be taken from this mortal life. Neither is it within our province to say when a person has completed his mortal course. No other person ever suffered as intensely as did the Son of God, which suffering, as he said, " . . . caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—

"Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men." (D. & C. 19:18-19.)

We must come to the conclusion, after a careful consideration of this question, that the conscience of any normal person would trouble that person all the days of mortal life, if guilty of such an act. As far as suffering any penalty is concerned that would be a matter deferred to the final judgment.
