Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

26

Who Were the Prophets Zenos and Zenock?

Question: "In our study of the Book of Mormon and the Book of Moses, it seems to us that Zenos and Zenock, spoken of in the Book of Mormon could have been Enos, the third from Adam, and Enoch, the son of Jared and father of Methuselah. The Bible states, however, that Enoch was translated rather than to have been stoned to death. How else could the Nephites be a remnant of their seed? This may not be important, but we would like the matter cleared for the benefit of our thinking."

Answer: Outside of what is written in the Book of Mormon, we have no record of either of these ancient prophets. Therefore there is no stated time as to when they lived. The fact is, however, that there were many prophets in Israel and even before the time of Israel whose records we have not obtained. These two prophets lived sometime preceding the coming of Lehi and his family from Jerusalem. Their writings must have been recorded on the plates which Nephi secured from Laban. They proved to be of great worth to the children of Lehi, having contained a great deal of information concerning the future destiny of Israel.

PROPHETS OF OLD TESTAMENT TIMES

Elder George Reynolds, who was one of the most careful and thorough students of the Book of Mormon, has given us this information in his book, A Dictionary of the Book of Mormon:

Zenoch or Zenock. A prophet of Israel, of whose personal history, or to what age he belonged, we know nothing. His writings were familiar to the Nephites, as he is quoted by Nephi (1 Nephi 19:10), Alma (Alma 33:15), Amulek (Alma 34:7), Nephi (Helaman 8:20), and Mormon (3 Nephi 10:16).

Zenos. A Hebrew prophet, often quoted by the Nephite servants of God. All we are told of his personal history is that he was slain because he testified boldly of what God revealed to him. That he was a man greatly blessed of the Lord with the spirit of prophecy is shown by that wonderful and almost incomparable parable of the vineyard given at length by Jacob (Jacob 5). His prophecies are also quoted by Nephi (1 Nephi 19:10, 12, 16), Alma (Alma 33:3, 13, 15), Amulek (Alma 34:7), Samuel, the Lamanite (Helaman 15:11), and Mormon (3 Nephi 10:16). (A Dictionary of the Book of Mormon, 1954 ed. p. 272.)

THE LESSER PART OF THINGS JESUS TAUGHT

When the Savior visited the Nephites, he permitted them to receive only the lesser things which he taught the people and withheld the greater things because he knew that the people of that generation were not sufficiently humble and obedient and therefore not ready to receive and abide in the covenants. These are Mormon's words:

And these things have I written, which are a lesser part of the things which he taught the people; and I have written them to the intent that they may be brought again unto this people, from the Gentiles, according to the words which Jesus hath spoken.

And when they shall have received this, which is expedient that they should have first, to try their faith, and if it shall so be that they shall believe these things then shall the greater things be made manifest unto them.

And if it so be that they will not believe these things, then shall the greater things be withheld from them, unto their condemnation.

Behold, I was about to write them, all which were engraven upon the plates of Nephi, but the Lord forbade it, saying: I will try the faith of my people.

Therefore I, Mormon, do write the things which have been commanded me of the Lord. And now I, Mormon, make an end of my sayings, and proceed to write the things which have been commanded me. (3 Nephi 26:8-12.)

Again the Lord revealed to Mormon the following significant edict because he knew the frailty and disobedience of the children of men, and even members of the Church who would live in these latter days:

For the Lord said unto me: They shall not go forth unto the Gentiles until the day that they shall repent of their iniquity, and become clean before the Lord.

And in that day that they shall exercise faith in me, saith the Lord, even as the brother of Jared did, that they may become sanctified in me, then will I manifest unto them the things which the brother of Jared saw, even to the unfolding unto them all my revelations, saith Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of the heavens and of the earth, and all things that in them are.

And he that will contend against the word of the Lord, let him be accursed; and he that shall deny these things, let him be accursed; for unto them will I show no greater things, saith Jesus Christ; for I am he who speaketh. (Ether 4:6-8.)

INDIFFERENCE IS A SAD REFLECTION

What a sad reflection it is that the Lord, knowing the end from the beginning, predicted that even after the Book of Mormon was published and presented to the world, many of those who had entered into covenant with him in the waters of baptism would think so little of the Book of Mormon, that they would pay no heed to its teachings, and by their indifference and lack of faith, the great blessings which the Lord has in store for the faithful have to be withheld because there is so much lack of faith and obedience among his people.

The parable of Zenos, recorded by Jacob in chapter five of his book, is one of the greatest parables ever recorded. This parable in and of itself stamps the Book of Mormon with convincing truth. No mortal man, without the inspiration of the Lord, could have written such a parable. It is a pity that too many of those who read the Book of Mormon pass over and slight the truths which it conveys in relation to the history, scattering, and final gathering of Israel. Such members of the Church unto whom attention has been called to the great significance of this parable have said they fail to comprehend it. It is simple and very clear to the minds of those who earnestly seek to know the truth. No man without divine inspiration could have written such a parable as this.

In brief, it records the history of Israel down through the ages, the scattering of the tribes to all parts of the earth; their mingling with, or being grafted in, the wild olive trees, or in other words the mixing of the blood of Israel among the Gentiles by which the great blessings and promises of the Lord to Abraham are fulfilled. After Abraham had been proved even to the extent of being willing to offer Isaac as a sacrifice, the Lord blessed him with the greatest of blessings, and said to him:

. . . By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son:

That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies;

And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice. (Genesis 22:16-18.)

A REMARKABLE PARABLE

This remarkable parable portrays how, as branches of the olive tree (Israelites) were carried to all parts of the earth (the Lord's vineyard) and grafted into the wild olive trees (the Gentile nations). Thus they are fulfilling the promise that the Lord had made.

Today Latter-day Saints are going to all parts of the world as servants in the vineyard to gather this fruit and lay it in store for the time of the coming of the Master. This parable is one of the most enlightening and interesting in the Book of Mormon. How can any person read it without feeling the inspiration of this ancient prophet?
