Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

27

The Eternal Marriage Covenant

Question: "The doctrine of eternal marriage and marriage by proxy for the dead is a principal teaching of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, yet it is written in Luke 20:35 that 'they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage.' Is there not reason to believe there is no marriage beyond this world?"

Answer: One of the most glorious principles of the gospel is the eternal marriage covenant. When the Sadducees came to the Savior and presented the case of a woman who had had seven husbands and asked him which of these husbands she would have in the next world, it was presumably for the purpose of trapping him if they could. The Savior answered them and said:

. . . The children of this world marry, and are given in marriage:

But they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage:

Neither can they die any more: for they are equal unto the angels; and are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection. (Luke 20:34-36.)

DOCTRINE MISUNDERSTOOD BY CHRISTIAN WORLD

From this answer given to these Sadducees, the Christian world reached the conclusion that there is no marriage beyond this mortal life. Therefore marriages, whether performed by ministers of religion or by officers of the law who are duly authorized, are performed until death separates the contracting husband and wife. This form of marriage, however, was not from the beginning.

In giving instruction to the Pharisees, the Savior set forth a very different doctrine. They came to him and questioned him on divorce. In the answer which he gave to them he taught the doctrine of the eternal marriage covenant.

And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he which made them in the beginning made them male and female,

And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh?

Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder. (Matthew 19:4-6.)

Here we have in the words of Jesus the declaration that the marriage covenant is intended to be eternal.

TRUE DOCTRINE REVEALED TO PROPHET JOSEPH SMITH

This doctrine of the eternal nature of the marriage covenant was revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith. It is very significant history that has come down to us in relation to the first marriage on this earth. Before there was any mortal death, the Lord declared:

. . . It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him. (Genesis 2:18.)

Therefore Eve was given to Adam, and it is clear from this scripture that the intention was that marriage between the man and his wife was to endure forever, for death had not at that time come upon the earth. This thought must have been in the mind of Paul when he declared to the Corinthian Saints:

Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord. (1 Corinthians 11:11.)

Moreover, Paul when writing to the Ephesian members of the Church wrote as follows:

For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,

Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named, . . . (Ephesians 3:14-15.)

There is then a family of God in heaven as well as on earth, and who will be the rightful heirs in that family? Naturally it will be composed of those who were married for time and all eternity in the temple of the Lord, for the Lord has written:

Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion.

Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name?

Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed?

And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was?

I am the Lord thy God; and I give unto you this commandment—that no man shall come unto the Father but by me or by my word, which is my law, saith the Lord.

And everything that is in the world, whether it be ordained of men, by thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may be, that are not by me or by my word, saith the Lord, shall be thrown down, and shall not remain after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection, saith the Lord your God. (D. & C. 132:8-13.)

THE BLESSINGS OF ETERNAL INCREASE

Naturally, if men and women, when they marry become members of the family of God, and are entitled to the blessings of eternal increase after the resurrection, the ordinance and covenant of marriage must be by divine authority. The privilege to perform such marriages cannot be promiscuously assumed by any individual or minister. There is but one at a time who holds these divine keys. He has the authority to delegate authority to others to perform marriages for time and for all eternity, and unless this authority is granted, marriages for time and eternity would not be binding beyond this mortal life. Naturally those who wish to marry must subscribe to the laws of the state. No minister or even elder of the Church has the authority to perform marriages and seal for time and all eternity except those who have been duly delegated the authority from the one who holds these divine keys—the President of the Church.
