Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

28

What Did Paul Mean by Being Predestinated?

Question: "During a recent discussion the question arose as to the full meaning of the remark by the Apostle Paul: 'For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren.' (Romans 8:29.) And again in Ephesians 1:5, 'Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, . . . '

"As we stress education so much, it would appear to me that those who lack education or ability are indeed already assigned to a lesser degree of glory because of this, and those who do not have the advanced education of many, and I think of the pioneers in some respects, have already completed their earth life, and thus regardless of their faith and testimony are destined for something less than what they strived for. To have a talent and not be able to use it seems to me sufficient justification for excuse, particularly under the present economic system of the world, and yet it seems unfair that environment or any system should prevent a person from qualifying for the best in the hereafter.

"I fully believe in repentance as an essential part of life, also forgiveness, but again we are faced with that predestined end because of our actions, whether right or wrong.

"It would appear, if we consider our pre-existence, that our ultimate end was known from the beginning—and I feel this is strengthened by the fact that whilst I personally do not have the learning of a Von Braun, then I am not going, to make the grade regardless of my efforts, merely because my mental abilities are not as great as those mentioned.

"I would appreciate your comment on this matter."

Answer: The passages in question are recorded in scripture as follows:

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ:

According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love:

Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.

To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved. (Ephesians 1:3-6.)

For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren.

Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified. (Romans 8:29-30.)

GOSPEL OF SALVATION IS BASED ON FAITHFULNESS

It is very evident from a thorough study of the gospel and the plan of salvation that a conclusion that those who accepted the Savior were predestined to be saved no matter what the nature of their lives, must be an error. The gospel of salvation based on faithfulness and obedience to the covenants and laws of the gospel is definitely clear in the doctrines of our Lord and his inspired servants. Surely Paul never intended to convey such a thought that in the pre-existence many were destined by divine decree to be saved no matter what the nature of their mortal lives might be. This might have been one of the passages in Paul's teachings which caused Peter to declare that there are in Paul's writings, "some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable, wrest as they do also the other scriptures, into their own destruction."

We learn from a study of the plan of salvation that every soul was given the gift of free agency. It is a divine law—and a very just law. No man should be forced to choose the course which he may take. Salvation can come to each soul in accordance with absolute freedom of the individual to act. There is no compulsion in the kingdom of God. Human beings are not automatons. They have been given their freedom to believe, to serve, or disbelieve and rebel against the commandments of the Lord. Rewards come based on merit. Salvation is a free gift of God, augmented by the atoning blood of his Beloved Son, but the laws of God are based on merit through faithful adherence to the prescribed laws of God. These divine laws have been in existence through the eternities. They have been tried and tested and proved to be just. No man can obtain salvation without a thorough trial of faith and obedience to the principles of eternal truth which have been established from the beginning for the salvation and exaltation of mankind.

NO EXCEPTIONS IN THE BEGINNING

We may be sure that Paul never intended to convey the thought that there had been exceptions made in the very beginning and that some men were destined to be redeemed and saved in the kingdom of God without complying with the terms on which salvation is established.

All of this being true can we not reach some conclusion that would be justifiable in relation to these statements of Paul? Verily, we can! Let us consider these expressions more closely. Is it not the true meaning that those who were faithful in the pre-existence were "predestined" to be "conformed" to the image of his Son? In the very beginning we are taught that man was "formed" in the image of God. This is the definite statement in the Book of Romans. Then we must not lose sight of the fact that the Father knew the faith and integrity of some of the "great ones" who had been rulers in his kingdom before the world was "formed." They had no doubt proved themselves by trial, and their integrity had been shown in the pre-existent state. Therefore it is possible that Paul, knowing this to be the fact, could with positiveness declare that there were some who were "predestined" because God knew them and had the assurance that they would not fall.

We learn something about the integrity of certain souls in the pre-existence. Through the writings of Abraham we have learned much concerning them, and it is possible that the Lord, knowing their integrity, set them apart to his work with the assurance that they would never fall. Such men were Adam, Enoch, Abraham, Moses, and a great many more through the ages down to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

MANY GREAT AND NOBLE INTELLIGENCES

Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born.

And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever. (Abraham 3:22-26.)

The implication here is very clear that all were capable of keeping their first estate, but that there would be many who would not do so. Therefore they were to receive rewards according to merit. The promise of reward therefore was open to all based on their faithfulness and obedience. Some of them might not be as alert as others, but the same privilege was offered to all. The principal commandments which bring to mankind exaltation in the kingdom of God are obedience to divine law, devotion to principle, and integrity in seeking for light and truth. Therefore the plodder who put forth every effort in faith and obedience was entitled to the same reward as the one who moved forth more readily or skillfully.

TRUTH IS SOMETHING THAT CAN BE LEARNED

Truth is something that can be learned. It may take one soul a longer time, but integrity and perseverance certainly will be rewarded. The soul who refuses to obey divine law, or who is not willing to be taught, naturally will lose the reward. However, the goal of perfection is open to all, according to the divine plan, who are obedient and willing to learn. Therefore any person who is devoted to the truth and who labors with all his soul to obtain perfection will not be barred. Eternity, as we look upon it, is evidently a very long time. The power to advance in knowledge by those who are faithful and true surely cannot be limited to mortal life. Therefore there is hope for all if they are willing to put forth the effort. It should also be remembered that knowledge will be more readily obtained when we have passed beyond the portals of mortality. Eternity is a very long time according to mortal man's reckoning, and there is no reason to believe that our means of gaining knowledge and wisdom and truth and every other principle of advancement will be retarded when we have passed the restrictions of mortality.

Just what Paul might have had in mind may not be too clearly expressed in the translation that has come to us. That he taught that some men are destined to be damned must be rejected; likewise that some were predestined to be saved without a trial of their faith. Those who rejected the truth and rebelled were cast out with Lucifer because of the great gift of free agency.

PRE-MORTAL SPIRITS ENTITLED TO MORTALITY

We have reason to believe that all who were privileged to come to this mortal world came because they were entitled by pre-mortal qualifications. It is absurd to think that Paul would teach that in the beginning before the earth was formed, some souls were destined to come to earth, receive tabernacles and then be consigned to perdition and some to be saved. Such a doctrine is contrary to all that has been revealed. Therefore we must seek for a better interpretation. It seems that such an interpretation is readily discovered in this passage notwithstanding there may have been a faulty translation. We are therefore bold enough to say that such an interpretation may be given which will be in full accord with the doctrines taught by the Son of God. Therefore the passage in question is repeated here:

For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the first born among many brethren. (Romans 8:29. Italics added.)

Does it not appear perfectly clear that those who were consigned to come to this earth and pass through mortality, were predestined to come in the image and likeness of the Son of God? This at least gives sense to the passage, for it is true. Man is created with a mortal body as a tabernacle for his eternal spirit in the likeness of the Son of God. This was fully decreed in the very beginning. Not that some souls were to have the privilege of coming and receiving bodies of flesh and bones and then be cast off as sons of perdition forever and some to be saved by pre-existing decree.
