Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

33

The Name of the Church

Question: "Being a convert to the Church of five years there are perhaps a few things that are more noticeable to me than a person who has grown up as a member. One thing I have found throughout the Church almost without exception the constant use of the nickname 'Mormons,' in preference to the name given by the Lord whereby his Church should be known: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. (Doctrine and Covenants 115:4.)

"Many members of the Church persistently use the name 'Mormon.' When I ask why they do not use the correct name or say that they are Latter-day Saints when speaking to nonmembers, they say it takes too long, or that everyone knows that the real name is 'The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.' It just happens, however, that I myself was unaware of the correct name of the Church while I was a non-member. When I went into the army I was fortunate enough to bunk next to a member. On a chain along with his dog-tags and a picture of the Salt Lake Temple was the inscription, 'The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.' The temple was familiar to me, and so I inquired of the brother about the medallion. For the first time I found out that the 'Mormon Church' really was not the 'Mormon Church' but The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

"At present I am enjoying service in my second stake mission. I find the great majority of people I talk to are not aware that we Latter-day Saints believe that Jesus Christ is the name of the Church and that this is his Church. We, as members, by our constant use of the name 'Mormon' are responsible for the general belief of nonmembers, that we are not in any way followers of the Savior.

"In 3 Nephi, Chapter 27, the Lord tells his disciples that his Church which is built upon his gospel, must bear his name. No wonder people are confused to what we teach and sometimes think that 'Mormons' are not really Christians."

Answer: It is a fact that the term "Mormon" was applied by bitter enemies of the Church in a spirit of derision because of our acceptance of the Book of Mormon. As time advanced the expression became softened and began to be used by friend and foe alike in reference to the name of the Church and its members.

BOOK OF MORMON BEARS RECORD OF JESUS CHRIST

The criticism that is offered that the members of the Church are universally known as "Mormons" and that the Church is the "Mormon Church," comes of course from our belief in and acceptance of the Book of Mormon, which is the greatest and clearest record that we have, bearing testimony to the great mission of Jesus Christ our Lord. Any person who will sincerely read it will be convinced of its truth and be brought nearer to the Son of God than in any other way.

The Nephites believed in Christ; they wrote and prophesied of him and his mission, and while there is no opprobrium that can justly be attached to one who believes in the Book of Mormon, there is no valid reason why Latter-day Saints should speak of themselves as "Mormons" or of the Church as the "Mormon Church." Missionaries should not be engaged in "selling Mormonism," but in the mission of persuading people to believe in Christ, the Son of God, and of becoming members of his Church—The Church of Jesus Christ. The term Latter-day Saints is added to the name merely to distinguish us from the former-day Saints.

MISSION OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS IS TO PREACH GOSPEL

We are living in the latter days—the days when the Lord promised to restore all things. The mission of the Latter-day Saints is to preach the gospel of Jesus Christ as it has been revealed after a long period of apostasy or departure of the peoples of the world from the teachings of our Savior and his disciples. This divine truth has been restored according to the predictions of the ancient prophets and apostles. Joseph Smith was called to stand at the head of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, preparatory to the second advent of the Son of God.

While there can be no disgrace nor condemnation in being called "Mormons," and the Church, the "Mormon Church," the fact remains, and this we should all emphasize, that we belong to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the name the Lord has given by which we are to be known and called.
