Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

35

What is the Meaning of Ecclesiastes Chapter Nine, Verses Four, Five, and Ten?

Question: "Will you please explain the meaning of Ecclesiastes, chapter nine, verses four, five, and ten, which are as follows:

" 'For to him that is joined to all the living there is hope: for a living dog is better than a dead lion.

" 'For the living know that they shall die: but the dead know not anything, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory of them is forgotten. . . .

" 'Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest.' "

Answer: These passages have led some well-meaning people to believe that the mortal body has no spirit. Others believe that the spirit slumbers as well as the body in the grave. How any intelligent person can accept such a belief in the face of so many passages of scripture teaching that the spirit of man is a complete entity which existed before birth, is joined to the body in mortal life, and continues to exist following death, is something very strange and hard to understand. Moreover, we are assured in the scriptures that the spirit and the body will again be united, never to be separated after the resurrection. The Savior made this very clear when he was in his ministry on the earth with his disciples.

THE TRUE MEANING

The true meaning of these passages pertains to a simple fact. That fact is that after a person has passed in death he is soon forgotten. The things of this world about him, its business, pleasures, sorrows are not remembered by loved ones and friends. The world goes on about its business; days come and go as do the seasons; and the earth continues its course through the heavens the same as though the dead had never lived. No matter how great or renowned a person may have been, it is but a short time until he is forgotten. No longer does the dead have any word to give, counsel to impart, and things go on in their natural way without him. Therefore when we look at these passages in their true light, we must agree—the dead are soon forgotten.

DEATH DOES NOT TERMINATE EXISTENCE

That the spirit of the dead ceases to exist, to endure, to think or act is a fallacy. Death does not terminate existence. It does not prove that the immortal spirit has in any sense ceased to function. Nor does it prove that there is no spirit which inhabited the dead body. Evidently these words accredited to Solomon were written in his later life after he had transgressed the divine commandments. Whatever the case may be when looked at and examined naturally, we must admit that Solomon was right, at least in large measure. We are in no position in mortality to discourse on or properly evaluate the privileges and opportunities given to the spirits of the dead, but we can say with Solomon that when death intervenes, the body is laid away in the grave peacefully and that it knows nothing as to the affairs of a busy world. Therefore when we speak of the mortal body as an entity, we can fully agree, but the living spirit which belongs to that body is very much alive.

We have never been informed just how much the departed spirit is permitted to know and understand concerning conditions as they continue on earth after death. That the spirit still exists as an entity of vitality, we have every assurance, for it was created to be eternal. The death of the mortal body does not bring a death of the spirit. It continues, has vitality, and looks forward to the day of the resurrection. The idea therefore that the spirit is dormant, or that there is not an eternal spirit is false and is discredited in all the revelations that the Lord has given to man since the days of Adam.

THE SPIRIT IS AN ENTITY

There are numerous instances recorded in the scriptures which point definitely to the fact that the spirit is an entity; that it endures after death because it is eternal. The Bible reveals incidents where the departed have appeared as spirits to the living. The story of Saul and the witch of Endor is not a fallacy, but a definite fact, not that Samuel was "called up," but to the fact that there were spirits in existence. The story of the Savior in relation to Lazarus and the rich man is an evidence of this truth. Our Redeemer would not present a story of fiction of such wonderful significance, if it was not based on truth. No thinking person would accuse the Son of God of presenting an imaginary story of such import as the story of Lazarus and the rich man unless the background was based in truth.

If the disciples of the Lord at the time of his appearance after his resurrection had possessed a foolish notion, thinking that when the Lord appeared to them they were seeing a spirit and there are no spirits, the Lord would have told them plainly that there are no spirits. What was it that he did say?

Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. (Luke 24:39.)

This statement by our Savior should put an end to all controversy.
