Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

36

Condition of Mankind in the Resurrection

Question: "Is a person resurrected to appear at the same age as that to which he or she had attained when the body was laid down? I realize that children who die will be raised as children for there is no growth in the grave, but will some appear to be thirty years old and some eighty or one hundred, in the resurrection?"

Answer: There is no reason for any person to be concerned as to the appearance of individuals in the resurrection. Death is a purifying process as far as the body is concerned. We have reason to believe that the appearance of old age will disappear and the body will be restored with the full vigor of manhood and womanhood. Children will arise as children, for there is no growth in the grave. Children will continue to grow until they reach the full stature of their spirits. Anything contrary to this would be inconsistent. When our bodies are restored, they will appear to be in the full vigor of manhood and womanhood, for the condition of physical weakness will all be left behind in the grave.

TEACHINGS OF AMULEK

Amulek, when speaking to the people of Ammonihah, presented this matter of the resurrection in clearness in the following words:

And he [Jesus Christ] shall come into the world to redeem his people; and he shall take upon him the transgressions of those who believe on his name; and these are they that shall have eternal life, and salvation cometh to none else.

Therefore the wicked remain as though there had been no redemption made, except it be the loosing of the bands of death; for behold, the day cometh that all shall rise from the dead and stand before God, and be judged according to their works.

Now, there is a death which is called a temporal death; and the death of Christ shall loose the bands of this temporal death, that all shall be raised from this temporal death.

The spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame, even as we now are at this time; and we shall be brought to stand before God, knowing even as we know now, and have a bright recollection of all our guilt.

Now, this restoration shall come to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the righteous; and even there shall not so much as a hair of their heads be lost; but everything shall be restored to its perfect frame, as it is now, or in the body, and shall be brought and be arraigned before the bar of Christ the Son, and God the Father, and the Holy Spirit, which is one Eternal God, to be judged according to their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil.

Now, behold, I have spoken unto you concerning the death of the mortal body, and also concerning the resurrection of the mortal body. I say unto you that this mortal body is raised to an immortal body, that is from death, even from the first death unto life, that they can die no more; their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruption. (Alma 11:40-45.)

A VERY CLEAR AND INFORMATIVE STATEMENT

This is a very clear and informative statement in relation to the restoration of the spirit to the body through the mercy of our Savior Jesus Christ. This great truth should impress every living soul with the need of obedience to all of the commandments of the Lord and impel us to be true to every covenant and obligation contained in the fulness of the gospel. The fact that every soul shall live again should be an incentive to all to live in strict obedience to the divine will of our Eternal Father. To be banished from his presence and to be a partaker of the punishment which is in store for those who wilfully and knowingly transgress the laws of the Eternal Father, should impress every soul and impress all to live lives of righteousness. While there will come the universal resurrection, there are various times appointed for the coming forth of the dead.

One great resurrection has already come to humanity. This was at the resurrection of the Son of God. There will be other resurrections yet to come, and all will not come forth at the same time, but this subject need not be discussed at this time. The great truth that is here emphasized is the fact that all shall come forth eventually. Moreover, that there will be a restoration of the physical body in its proper frame.

President Joseph F. Smith when speaking at the funeral of Sister Rachel Grant, the mother of President Heber J. Grant, had the following to say in relation to deformities in the resurrection:

Deformity will be removed; defects will be eliminated, and men and women shall attain to the perfection of their spirits, to the perfection that God designed in the beginning. It is his purpose that men and women, his children, born to become heirs of God, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ, shall be made perfect, physically as well as spiritually, through obedience to the law by which he has provided the means that perfection shall come to all his children. Therefore, I look for the time to come when our dear Brother William C. Stains, whom we all knew so well, and with whom we were familiar for years—I was familiar with him all my life, just as I was familiar with Aunt Rachel here all my life, and do not remember the time when I did not know her—I look for the time when Brother Staines will be restored. He will not remain the crippled and deformed William C. Staines that we knew, but he will be restored to his perfect frame—every limb, every joint, every part of his physical being will be restored to its perfect frame. This is the law and the word of God to us, as it is contained in the revelations that have come to us through the Prophet Joseph Smith. The point in my mind which I desire to speak of particularly is this: When we shall have the privilege to meet our mother, our aunt, our sister, this noble woman whose mortal remains lie here now, but whose immortal spirit has ascended to God from whence she came, when that spirit shall return to take up this tabernacle again, here will be Aunt Rachel in her perfection. . . . Under the law of restoration that God has provided, she will regain her perfection, the perfection of her youth, the perfection of her glory and of her being, until her resurrected body shall assume the exact stature of the spirit that possessed it here in its perfection, and thus we shall see the glorified, redeemed, exalted, perfected Aunt Rachel, mother, sister, saint and daughter of the living God, her identity being unchanged, as a child may grow to manhood or womanhood and still be the same being. (Gospel Doctrine, President Joseph F. Smith, pp. 23-24.)

RESURRECTED BEINGS TO COME FORTH IN PERFECT FRAME

Salvation would be incomplete if individuals should arise in the resurrection with all the deformities, weaknesses, and imperfections that are found in so many of the human family in this mortal existence. We have every reason to believe that the spirits of mankind and all other creatures were in a perfect form in the spirit world. It would be an awful stretch of the imagination to think that the imperfections found so frequently in mortality were defects which were designed in the creation. Moreover, as the Lord made it clear in relation to the man who was born blind, it was not an immortal condition.

By the great power and faith of the Son of God, he was able to correct deformity, blindness, and give to the deaf the gift of speech, by the word of his power. The question has frequently been asked when a child has been born with some physical defect or deformity, was this a punishment or a condition which was his before he was born? No! All of these ills are ills of the flesh or defects that are due to mortal conditions which may have come upon the body even before birth, but we may be assured that these defects were not conditions which existed in the world of spirits.

It is the will of the Lord that in the restoration of all things there shall come perfection. The physical defects, some of which may have resulted before birth, are defects which are due to some physical and mortal condition and not an inheritance from the spirit world.
