Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

37

Purpose for Temples

Question: "What is the purpose for temples according to Latter-day Saint belief?"

Answer: According to the doctrines of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, a temple is a sacred edifice in which ordinances are performed for both the living and the dead.

The people of the Lord through the ages have been builders of temples. It was impossible for Israel while in bondage and while journeying through the wilderness to build a permanent temple. However, in those days after their departure from Egypt, the Lord commanded Moses to build a temporary temple or sacred edifice which they could set up and take down and carry with them. When they were permanently located in Palestine, they were commanded to replace this portable tabernacle or temple with one that would be permanent. This time came in the reign of Solomon, and in it sacred ordinances were performed.

During the years when a temple could not be built, the servants of the Lord went to the mountaintops to communicate with the Lord. It was on the top of a mountain that Enoch spoke with the Lord. It was on the mountain that Moses did likewise, as did Nephi and the Brother of Jared. When the Latter-day Saints came to the Salt Lake Valley, they performed ordinances of a sacred nature on the mountain north of their city. However they immediately laid plans for the building of temples.

As a boy I used to go to the temple block and watch the brethren cutting the great granite stones—each one numbered and cut to measure, so that it would fit in the exact spot for which it was intended. I can still hear the contact of the chisel upon the stone.

LORD COMMANDS SAINTS TO BUILD TEMPLE

When the Latter-day Saints became settled in a body in Kirtland, one of the first commandments the Lord gave to them was to build a temple. Therefore in their poverty, but with faith, they went to work and built the Kirtland Temple.

My grandfather Hyrum Smith and Reynolds Cahoon commenced the digging of the trench for the foundation of the Kirtland Temple on the fifth day of June 1833. All of the brethren went to work with their might, for they realized the necessity of a sacred house built to the name of the Lord. The most important reason for the building of the Kirtland Temple was that there might be a sacred place dedicated to the name of the Lord to which his ancient servants might come, as the Savior did himself, to restore the covenants and authorities of the Holy Priesthood. It was in that temple that the Savior appeared, and angels were seen by many at the time of the dedication.

First of all came the Savior who accepted the house, and the temple was filled with the glory of the Lord. It was in that temple that Moses came, committing the keys of the gathering of Israel. Elias who lived in the days of Abraham, committed the keys of the dispensation of Abraham; and Elijah came, fulfilling the promise of the Lord through Malachi, turning the hearts of the fathers to the children and the children to their fathers. The evidence of this fulfilment is apparent, for from that day the hearts of thousands of children have turned to their dead fathers, and the great work of research and preparation of the records of the dead has taken hold of the children who are today working in genealogical research, preparing the way for the performance of temple work for the dead.
