Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

38

The Identity of Elijah and Elias

Question: "Who is Elias referred to in Section 110 of the Doctrine and Covenants? It appears that the Elias who visited the apostles on the Mount of Transfiguration was Elijah, but both Elias and Elijah appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple."

Answer: So many questions have been received from those who seem to be in a quandary concerning the identity of Elijah and Elias spoken of in the revelation in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 110, and also in the Bible, ( Matthew, Chapter 17.) that the following explanation has been prepared.

Elijah.—A prophet of Israel, from Gilead, east of the Jordan. He was known as Elijah the Tishbite and lived in the days of Ahab, one of the most wicked kings of Israel. Elijah was one of the greatest of the prophets, and the Lord conferred upon him the sealing power. The Prophet Joseph Smith has said that Elijah was the last of the prophets in old Israel, that is before the coming of our Savior, who held the fulness of divine authority. He had power to seal and bind, and did exercise authority over the elements as well as over the destinies of man. Holding these important keys of the binding and sealing power, the Lord appointed him to come in the last days and restore his authority upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, thus fulfilling the prediction made by Malachi. In the Greek language he is referred to as Elias and in the Catholic edition of the Bible he is referred to as Elias all through the Old Testament as well as in the New. In the New Testament, it having come to us from the Greek, he is given the name of Elias.

Elias.—A name given to the prophet who held the keys of the dispensation in which Abraham lived, spoken of in Section 110 of the Doctrine and Covenants. The scriptures do not reveal to us who this prophet really was, but the Prophet Joseph Smith declared that he was Noah, (See "Elias Is Noah," Answers to Gospel Questions, Vol. 3, pp. 138-41.) who is spoken of as Elias in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 27:7.

ELIAS IS ALSO A TITLE

This name (Elias) is a title which is applied to several prophets, and has reference to their office as messengers sent to prepare the way for a greater work. John the Baptist is spoken of as Elias, because he prepared the way before the ministry of the Lord. Joseph Smith is an Elias because he was sent to prepare the way for the second coming of our Lord.

The Prophet has explained in his teachings the differences in the missions of Elias, Elijah, and Messiah.

The spirit of Elias is first, Elijah second, and Messiah last. Elias is a forerunner to prepare the way, and the spirit and power of Elijah is to come after, holding the keys of power, building the Temple to the capstone, placing the seals of the Melchizedek Priesthood upon the house of Israel, and making all things ready; then Messiah comes to His Temple, which is last of all.

Messiah is above the spirit and power of Elijah, for He made the world, and was that spiritual rock unto Moses in the wilderness. . . . (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 340. Read also pp. 172, 323, 335-41.)
