Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

39

The Importance of Temple Marriage

Question: "What does a young woman or a young man do who marries outside of the temple of the Lord?" (Answer given to question at afternoon session of Ensign Stake Conference, Assembly Hall, October 31, 1954, as reported by Lola E. Meehan.)

Answer: Unless young people who marry outside the temple speedily repent, they cut themselves off from exaltation in the celestial kingdom of God. If they should prove themselves worthy, notwithstanding that great error, to enter into the celestial kingdom, they go in that kingdom as servants.

What does that mean? The revelation tells us they go into that kingdom to be servants to those who are worthy of a more highly exalted position—something with greater glory. They are servants to them. They don't become sons and daughters of God. They are not joint heirs with Jesus Christ. They do not obtain the kingdom, that is, the crown and the glory of the kingdom of God. They who are married in the temple for time and eternity, if they are true and faithful to their covenants, enter into that kingdom. They are heirs of that kingdom, joint heirs with Jesus Christ, sons and daughters of God, entitled to the fulness of the kingdom.

HAVE NO CLAIM UPON EACH OTHER

When they marry outside of the temple, they cut themselves off. If they are content with that kind of marriage outside, when they come forth in the resurrection, they have no claim upon each other, or their children upon them, and there will be weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth.

Those who are married in the temple for all time and eternity obtain the blessing of eternal lives. I put stress on eternal lives. Eternal life is God's life, that is, to be like him. Eternal lives means eternal increase—the continuation, as the revelation says, of the seeds forever. To be married outside of the temple is for time only. Death separates—that is an eternal separation, unless in the meantime they repent and are fortunate enough to go to the temple and make amends.

Children born to them under the covenant—that is, to parents married in the temple—are entitled to blessings which children outside of the covenant are not entitled to receive. The Lord speaks of marriage outside of the temple as "entering into the deaths—eternal deaths." That doesn't mean they are going to die again. Every soul will get the resurrection. But after the resurrection comes the segregation into kingdoms—celestial, terrestrial, telestial, and then to be cast out—which will come to some—with the devil and his angels. Where they go, I don't know. The Lord has spoken of it as outer darkness. So the Lord prepares places for all. Eternal deaths means that they are separately and singly forever. They have no increase. The Lord calls that death. They do not continue—that is, they do not continue through posterity—they come to an end.

INDIVIDUALS MAKE OWN CHOICE

Now, if our young people choose that sort of life, if that's what they want, I leave it for them. My father on many occasions gathered his children together and instructed them. He said he would rather take them to the grave and lay them away in their purity because they would be entitled to the blessings of the kingdom of God, than to see them marry outside of the house of the Lord—unless they repented—or to marry outside of the Church. Some of our parents don't seem to care.

I pick up the evening newspaper sometimes, and I see pictures of very beautiful girls—they don't put the pictures of the handsome boys in the papers—and I discover that those girls—many of them are daughters of parents who are married in the temple and the children were born under the covenant—marry outside of the temple, maybe outside of the Church. . . .

But these parents see to it that the picture is put in the paper, with a fine article telling how the daughter is going to be dressed, whom she is marrying, what kind of reception they are going to have, and they seem to be very happy. They should put on sackcloth and sit in ashes. What are they doing? Of course there is such a thing as repentance. They should pray for that repentance. But they should weep, not rejoice; they should be sorry, not pleased, for they are assisting—if they have never taught their children better—they are assisting in sending those children to the deaths eternally.

WHERE DOES THE BLAME LIE?

Now, did you ever think of this? This is the condition we find in every stake of Zion. Where does the blame lie? Well, it may be a little with all of us, with the teachers who visit the home, with those who talk to the members of the Church in sacrament meetings, the bishops of wards, all who hold the priesthood; but primarily it rests upon the shoulders of the parents for not teaching those children from their infancy, beginning to instruct them as soon as they can understand, what the kingdom of God means, what exaltation in it means, and how it can be obtained.

IMPORTANCE OF TEMPLE MARRIAGE

I tell you, I would weep if I had a child who would marry outside of the temple of the Lord. Fortunately I never had such a thing happen. I am grateful for that. My children have married good companions—all of them active in the Church, all of them happy in their membership. What will happen to the next generation, I don't know. But my children were taught and I am grateful that they have followed the advice of their parents.

Now, if you are at fault, my good brothers and sisters, go to the Lord on your knees and ask for forgiveness and see if you can't amend the evil, repair the broken commandment for which you no doubt are partly, at least, responsible. If you have done all of those—taught your children the best you could and they rebel against you—of course you go before the Lord and tell him that your hands are clean, the children are rebellious. People do have rebellious children. Adam had rebellious children. Evidently the greater part of his family were rebellious. People have an idea that Adam had only three sons, but our Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price tell us differently. He lived a long time—had children for many, many years, had children for hundreds of years until they became numerous upon the face of the earth. And although I am sure he tried to teach them, many of them rebelled. That can't always be avoided, but it can quite generally be avoided if the parents are doing their duty, if they are living as they should live, keeping the commandments of the Lord, being true and faithful to every covenant they make.

THE PROBLEM OF DIVORCE

I would like to say much about divorce. When you go home, you pick up your Bible and turn to the nineteenth chapter of Matthew, read the first nine verses. I get letters sometimes from people who say, "What are we going to do? In Matthew it reads so and so and yet the Church is not following it strictly." Well, I write back and say I have no authority to change the word of the Lord. Read it. There are too many divorces in this Church, too many separations—many of them without proper cause. And I have said before, and I am going to repeat it: There never will be a divorce among those married in the temple if both of the parties, husband and wife, are living their religion; they will never separate. How can they if they keep the commandments of the Lord?

I read this morning to you from the fourth book of Nephi how they were given in marriage and how happy they were, raising large families, multiplying, blessed by the Spirit of the Lord. They didn't have any separations. They were not torn asunder because there wasn't any wickedness among them. That is the way we ought to live.
