Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

40

Why Take the Gospel to Asia?

Question: "Why take the gospel to Asia? Is there any of the blood of Israel in those Oriental countries?" (Address delivered at the "Spotlight on Asia" banquet at Brigham Young University, November 15, 1962.)

Answer: My dear brothers and sisters, and that includes all of you, I was very grateful to go to the Orient and while there [in 1955] to dedicate Korea and the Philippines, Japan having already been dedicated. It was a great opportunity to have this privilege of meeting with some of those good people over there. I found faithful members of the Church in Korea. If time permitted I would tell you a story in regard to one young man that I ordained to the office of a deacon. How grateful he was. A boy, maybe fourteen years of age! He lived up on the hillside in the city of Seoul, among people who were poor, almost, it seemed to me, destitute. I never felt more sorry for anybody in all my life than I did for those people over there. But this young man was so grateful to hold the priesthood. . . .

I had a very enjoyable visit among the people of Korea when I was there.

A QUESTION FREQUENTLY ASKED

Now I have been asked the question a score of times since I returned if I thought there was any of the blood of Israel in those Oriental countries. And some of the people who ask me that question, ask it with sort of a feeling, it seemed to me, that the blood of Israel just could not have penetrated there.

I am going to take a little time on that, by reading the blessing of Abraham.

Now the Lord had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will shew thee:

And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing:

And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee; and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. (Genesis 12:1-3.)

Now there's the answer. I turn over to the twenty-second chapter. I want to read you three verses.

And the angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of heaven the second time,

And said, By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son:

[I will pause in the middle of the sentence. You know what it was, it was the willingness on the part of Abraham to offer his son Isaac on the altar. Now I'll continue the quotation.]

That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies;

And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice. (Genesis 22:15-18.)

Now I think that is a sufficient answer to those people who think that the people of the Orient are not entitled to receive the gospel of Jesus Christ.

BOOK OF MORMON EVIDENCE ON SUBJECT

But we have something in the Book of Mormon that, if we did not have any other truth expressed in it, would be sufficient evidence of the divinity of this book. I have reference to the fifth chapter of Jacob. In this chapter we have a parable that nobody could have written unless he had the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord. It would have been impossible. I think that as many as ninety-nine out of every hundred who read the Book of Mormon, read this parable through without grasping the fulness and meaning of it. And I think this is one of the greatest passages in the Book of Mormon. If I had time I would read all of it to you. But I am going to ask you, no matter how many times you have read the Book of Mormon, to take a few minutes at some convenient time and sit down and just read carefully every word in the fifth chapter of the Book of Jacob. It is a parable. No greater parable was ever recorded. It is a parable of the scattering of Israel. The Lord revealed to Jacob that he would scatter Israel, and in this figure, Israel is a tame olive tree. It is an olive tree that begins to decay. The branches that are dying are cut off. But the gardener takes certain of those branches off that tree that seem to be decaying and plants them in all parts of the Lord's vineyard. And the Lord says, "I will take these branches and plant them in the distant parts of my vineyard. Have my servants attend to them. The old tree seems to be dying and we shall see if we can't take these severed branches and raise fruit."

Not only that, but they took some of the branches and grafted them in to all the wild olive trees. Who were the wild olive trees? The Gentiles. And so the Lord sent his servants to all parts of his vineyard, which is the world, and planted these branches of the tree. As they grew, they bore fruit. In the course of time, some of these branches began to wither and decay. And the Lord nurtured them. He had his servants dig around them, cultivate them, care for them the best they knew how, and yet some of them practically died. Others bore fruit. Then comes the time of the harvest. The Lord says, "I will cultivate my field for the last time. These branches that I have taken to various parts of the world are dying. I'll gather the fruit and do the best I can with them."

THE OLIVE TREE IS THE HOUSE OF ISRAEL

Now that in substance is the revelation given to Jacob. There is not a greater parable in the Bible or anywhere else, and yet we read it through and fail to grasp the meaning of it.

Now in that parable the olive tree is the House of Israel, as I have said. In its native land it began to die. So the Lord took branches like the Nephites, like the lost tribes, and like others that the Lord led off that we do not know anything about, to other parts of the earth. He planted them all over his vineyard, which is the world. No doubt he sent some of these branches into Japan, into Korea, into China. No question about it, because he sent them to all parts of the world.

Time came when in these distant parts the trees began to decay, so the Lord sent out for the last time to gather the fruit into the harvest.

Let me read just a few last verses.

And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard said unto the servant: Let us go to and hew down the trees of the vineyard and cast them into the fire, that they shall not cumber the ground of my vineyard, for I have done all. What could I have done more for my vineyard?

But, behold, the servant said unto the Lord of the vineyard: Spare it a little longer.

And the Lord said: Yea, I will spare it a little longer, for it grieveth me that I should lose the trees of my vineyard.

Wherefore, let us take of the branches of these which I have planted in the nethermost parts of my vineyard, and let us graft them into the tree from whence they came; and let us pluck from the tree those branches whose fruit is most bitter, and graft in the natural branches of the tree in the stead thereof.

And this will I do that the tree may not perish, that, perhaps I may preserve unto myself the roots thereof for mine own purpose.

And, behold, the roots of the natural branches of the tree which I planted whithersoever I would are yet alive; wherefore, that I may preserve them also for mine own purpose, I will take of the branches of this tree, and I will graft them in unto them. Yea, I will graft in unto them the branches of their mother tree, that I may preserve the roots also unto mine own self. . . . (Jacob 5:49-54.)

Now we get to the finish.

For behold, for a long time will I lay up of the fruit of my vineyard unto mine own self against the season, which speedily cometh; and for the last time have I nourished the vineyard, and pruned it, and dug about it, and dunged it; wherefore I will lay up unto mine own self of the fruit, for a long time, according to that which I have spoken.

And when the time cometh that evil fruit shall again come into my vineyard,

[Now that doesn't sound too good because that means there will be some apostasy.]

. . . then will I cause the good and the bad to be gathered; and the good will I preserve unto myself, and the bad will I cast away into its own place. And then cometh the season and the end; and my vineyard will I cause to be burned with fire. (Jacob 5:76-77.)

WRITTEN BY THE INSPIRATION OF THE ALMIGHTY

When you go home, read that chapter through. I tell you, my brothers and sisters, Joseph Smith did not write it. That was written by the inspiration of the Almighty.

Now there is your answer. That is the answer to these people who approach me with the question, what's the use of going out among the Chinese, the Japanese, the Koreans, and the people of the Far East to preach the gospel to them? The answer: because they are branches of the tree, they are of the house of Israel. The Lord took the branches of the tree, grafted them into the wild olives, the Gentiles, and is bringing the Gentiles into the gospel of Jesus Christ.

When you read that chapter through if you cannot say in your soul, "This is absolutely a revelation from God," then there is something wrong with you. That tells you of history. Are we going to preach the gospel in Korea, in Japan, in China? Yes, we are. Why? Because the blood of Israel is there. And the Lord did just what he said he would do with Abraham and his posterity. He scattered them over the whole face of the earth. So now the Gentiles are sanctified by the blood of Abraham.
