Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

41

Temporal Laws of the Gospel

Question: "Are we placing too much stress on temporal laws of the gospel?" (Answer to this question was reported in a sermon delivered in the Salt Lake Eighteenth Ward, August 9, 1959.)

Answer: Brigham Young once said, "In the mind of God there is no such a thing as dividing spiritual from temporal, or temporal from spiritual; for they are one in the Lord." (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 20.)

The Lord has given us certain laws and ordinances that pertain to our salvation. We make some of them temporal laws. For instance, we may look upon the keeping of the Sabbath day holy largely as a temporal law. When you read what the Lord said, that everything should rest—even the cattle, the teams of horses or oxen or whatever they had should have a day of rest as well as man—we might get the idea that this is a temporal law.

The Lord says in Section 29 of the Doctrine and Covenants that at no time has he given a temporal law.

Wherefore, verily I say unto you that all things unto me are spiritual, and not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporal; neither any man, nor the children of men; neither Adam, your father, whom I created. (D. & C. 29:34.)

Now he gave instruction to the brethren in early days more than he has in more recent times on how to build houses. The Lord told them what the dimensions should be. He gave them instructions about building other things, about the people looking after their farms, cattle, etc., by revelation, whether they were to build a fence or printing plant or anything else. Everything the Lord has commanded his people to do has a bearing upon our spiritual and eternal salvation.

THE LORD'S WORDS HAVE SPIRITUAL BACKGROUND

The Lord frequently has given instructions that to many with our mortal minds would appear to be of a temporal character; but nevertheless, everything that he has done for the benefit of man has a spiritual background to it. The keeping of the Sabbath day holy, the building of the Nauvoo House—which was nothing more or less than a hotel which was to take care of strangers—whatever it has been, it has been for the spiritual salvation of the members of the Church.

The Lord gave instructions with regard to schools where our people, both old and young, could go and be educated. Well, those are the temporal commandments. They were commandments to help the people, to prepare them for eternity and everything the Lord has commanded.

In the laying out of cities—now the Lord gave a plan for a city to the Prophet Joseph Smith. It would have been a perfect city. Salt Lake City was laid out in the beginning according to that plan—four-square, ten-acre blocks, wide streets. That's the way the city was to be built. They used to make fun of the Latter-day Saints, Brigham Young in particular, because we had such wide streets. They were too wide. Now in the days of automobiles they don't think they are wide enough. And so some foolish fellows are cutting wider streets for us, destroying property, making it inconvenient for people in order to make wider streets in some places. These modern planners who build have built into this city in such a way that you can't tell where they live according to the number of their homes. They have twisted streets, turned them, built them on angles, made dead ends to some of them and everything else. You ride out in that section of the county, it looks beautiful, but I want to tell you, Brothers and Sisters, the Lord did not have a hand in the building of them—twisting and turning and making alleys, crowded streets with dead ends. That's the way they build in the world.

THE LORD INSPIRED THE PROPHET JOSEPH SMITH

Now I could say a lot about what is in my mind about criticizing those who think they know so much, but that would be all out of order. We come here to worship the Lord, don't we, and keep his commandments? Well, I want to tell you that the Lord inspired the Prophet Joseph Smith when he gave him the plan for the City of Zion. When President Brigham Young and the pioneers came here they followed that instruction. Modern men without inspiration don't have that same spirit.

What does the Sabbath day mean to many of the members of the Church? I don't know, but I suppose there is a baseball game going on tonight—maybe in our city. No doubt there will be thousands of people there if there is being one played. Thousands of people shouting, calling to members of the teams to do this and that and so-forth, entering into a lot of confusion. It is the Sabbath day. If no members of the Church would go to that ball park on the Sabbath day, they would not play there. It would not pay them. The Gentile population would not, in my opinion, be sufficient to support the team on the Sabbath, and there are some people who don't belong to the Church who are as sincere in keeping the Sabbath day as members of the Church—those who do keep it. . . .

Keep the commandments, though temporal or spiritual they may seem. They all have a spiritual purpose.
