Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 4 ( 1963)

42

Is There a Contradiction between Jacob 2:24-27 and D. & C. 132:39?

Questions: "Representatives of the Jehovah's Witnesses called at my home and endeavored to disprove statements in the Book of Mormon. Among other things they claimed there was a discrepancy between Jacob 2:24-27 and Doctrine and Covenants 132:39. It was also their contention that the doctrine of plural marriage was condemned in the Book of Jacob and that the practice of this principle in the early days of the Church was not only a contradiction of Bible doctrine but also of the Book of Mormon. Will you please give answer to this problem?"

Answer: As far as the Book of Mormon is concerned, it requires no defense from me nor anyone else. Moroni has given a challenge to the world in Moroni 10:3-5. Many thousands have accepted it and have proved the Book of Mormon true. This can be proved by anyone else if he will follow Moroni's teachings. I cannot take the time to go into detail about the testimonies of the witnesses. (The Divine Law of Witnesses is explained in detail in Answers to Gospel Questions, Vol. 1, pp. 202-7, and Doctrines of Salvation, Vol. 1, pp. 203-28. See especially pp. 222-28 of the latter volume for a discussion of the testimony of the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon.) It is enough for me to say that under all circumstances not one of these witnesses ever denied his testimony. I have a letter written by Oliver Cowdery in his own handwriting in which he bears testimony, and this only a short time before his death.

The verses in question are as follows:

Behold, David and Solomon truly had many wives and concubines, which thing was abominable before me, saith the Lord.

Wherefore, thus saith the Lord, I have led this people forth out of the land of Jerusalem, by the power of mine arm, that I might raise up unto me a righteous branch from the fruit of the loins of Joseph.

Wherefore, I the Lord God will not suffer that this people shall do like unto them of old.

Wherefore, my brethren, hear me, and hearken to the word of the Lord: For there shall not any man among you have save it be one wife; and concubines he shall have none; (Jacob 2:24-27.)

And from the Doctrine and Covenants:

David's wives and concubines were given unto him of me, by the hand of Nathan, my servant, and others of the prophets who had the keys of this power; and in none of these things did he sin against me save in the case of Uriah and his wife; and, therefore he hath fallen from his exaltation, and received his portion; and he shall not inherit them out of the world, for I gave them unto another, saith the Lord. (D. & C. 132:39.)

THERE IS NO CONTRADICTION

There is no contradiction between Jacob and the Doctrine and Covenants. Jacob, in the Book of Mormon, declared that the Lord prevented the Nephites from practicing plural marriage and called attention to the fact that David and Solomon sinned in taking wives that the Lord did not give them, which is true. However, the key to the situation may be found by reading further the account in Jacob. The Lord said:

For if I will, saith the Lord of Hosts, raise up seed unto me, I will command my people; otherwise they shall hearken unto these things. (Jacob 2:30.)

Is it not strange that the Lord did not condemn Abraham and Jacob (Israel) upon whom he founded the House of Israel; nor did he condemn the parents of Samuel, the great prophet, nor others who had plural wives; nor did he condemn others who had plural families. He did not condemn Solomon and David for having wives which the Lord gave them.

Now turn to 2 Samuel, 12:7-8, and you will find that the Lord gave David wives. In your reading of the Old Testament you will also find that Solomon was blessed and the Lord appeared to him and gave him visions and great blessings when he had plural wives, but later in his life, he took wives that the Lord did not give him. For evidence of this, turn to 1 Kings 11, and read it. You can tell these people that the whole house of Israel was built on the twelve sons of Jacob who had four wives—mothers of the House of Israel.

HISTORY OF A MAN-MADE RELIGION

Now it would be well for you to study the background of the Jehovah's Witnesses, and find out what a shaky foundation they are standing on. I have followed them for many years. This organization was founded by Charles Taze Russell of Allegheny, Pittsburgh in 1872. He was a member of the Congregational Church. This organization is not one revealed from heaven. Russell left the Congregational Church and started an organization which was called Zion's Watchtower Society, then International Bible Students, and now they have presumed to call themselves Jehovah's Witnesses. They have had no revelation from heaven, and claim none, but have assumed to call themselves by this name. It seems that their main purpose is to attack The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Many years ago their battle cry was that "there are millions now living who will never die." For some reason we do not hear this now. It is one of the man-made religions by dissatisfied members of other Christian churches.
