The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the September 2007 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “The Master Served” on pages F4 and F5 of the children’s section in this issue.

1.  Explain that “Go, and do thou likewise” (Luke 10:37) is the last line in a very important story that Jesus told. Show Gospel Art Picture Kit 218 (The Good Samaritan). Use the text on the back of the picture to explain why Jesus told the story. Read Jesus’s words from Luke 10:30–37, and have the children follow along. After the children are familiar with the story, ask four children to dramatize it (see “Dramatization,” Teaching, No Greater Call [1999], 165–66). Have the children represent the priest, the Levite, the Samaritan, and the wounded man. Read the account from the scriptures again while the participants act it out.

    Refer back to “Go, and do thou likewise.” Explain that one purpose of Jesus’s story was to teach people how to be a good neighbor. Ask the children how they can be like the Samaritan. Show the older children the Faith in God booklet. Read the ideas listed under “Serving Others” on pages 8 and 9. Challenge the children to be more like Jesus by serving others.

    For younger children: Point to different parts of the body, and ask the children to think of ways they can serve using that part of their body. For example, for feet, they could say, “I could take something into another room for my mom,” or for ears, “I can listen to and obey my parents.”

    Jesus taught us to serve others by His words and example. Sing “I’m Trying to Be like Jesus” (Children’s Songbook, 78–79; Liahona, Apr. 1990, F6–F7). Divide the children into several groups. Have each group sing one phrase and point to themselves when they sing “I.” Have everyone sing the chorus. Bear testimony of the love that Heavenly Father and Jesus have for us. Jesus showed His great love in giving His life for us. Testify that He is the Son of God.

2.  Display a book made of large pieces of paper with “The M217 Mystery” written on the front. Turn to the first page of the book and read, “What is M217? Hint: It is a scripture about service.” Ask the children to help you solve the mystery by searching for the scripture (Mosiah 2:17). Have half of the children turn to the Bible’s table of contents and identify any books that begin with the letter M. Have the other half turn to the Book of Mormon’s table of contents and do the same thing. Have the children look up the reference 2:17 in each M book (for example, Malachi 2:17). Point out that the reference 2:17 will not exist in some books. Hint again that they are looking for one specific scripture about service.

    When the children correctly identify Mosiah 2:17, invite them to underline it in their scriptures if they choose. Explain that it tells us how to serve the Lord. Display “When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God” on the next page of the book.

    Invite children to turn the pages of your book, which show ways we can serve God. Discuss how the people are serving as you show pictures such as Gospel Art Picture Kit 612 (Missionaries Teach the Gospel of Jesus Christ), 611 (The Bishop), and 607 (Young Girl Speaking at Church). Add various pictures from the Primary picture packets to show helping in the family. Discuss ways the children can serve others and thereby serve Jesus Christ.

    Distribute pieces of paper so the children can make their own books. Have the children fold their papers in half, and ask them to write “The M217 Mystery” on the cover and to copy the scripture on the inside of the cover. Challenge them to draw pictures or write ways they will serve the Lord in the coming week. Invite them to share their books with their families at family home evening. Encourage them to do acts of service throughout the week. Explain that faith in Jesus Christ grows when we serve others.
