“Unless you are fully engaged in living the gospel—living it with all of your ‘heart, might, mind and strength’ (D&C 4:2)—you cannot generate enough spiritual light to push back the darkness.”
Elder Robert D. Hales of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, “Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light,” Liahona, July 2002, 78.

If you are having trouble coming up with topics to write about in your journal, start with these: “The first thing I can remember about my childhood is …” or “My best memory of school is …” or “A spiritual experience I had recently was …”

President Spencer W. Kimball (1895–1985) said: “Get a notebook, my young folks, a journal that will last through all time, and maybe the angels may quote from it for eternity. Begin today and write in it your goings and comings, your deepest thoughts, your achievements and your failures, your associations and your triumphs, your impressions and your testimonies” (“The Angels May Quote from It,” Tambuli, June 1977, 17).

President David O. McKay (1873–1970), the ninth President of the Church, spoke about several traits that characterize a successful leader or teacher:

1.  “Implicit faith in the gospel of Jesus Christ as the light of the world, and a sincere desire to serve him. This condition of the soul will make for companionship and guidance of the Holy Ghost.”

2.  “Unfeigned love for the … members, guided by determination to deal justly and impartially with every member of the Church. Honor the … member, and the … member will honor you.”

3.  “Thorough preparation. The successful leader knows his [or her] duties and responsibilities and also the members under his [or her] direction.”

4.  “Cheerfulness—not forced but natural cheerfulness, springing spontaneously from a hopeful soul.” (In Conference Report, Oct. 1968, 144.)

Spiritual death: Spiritual death is separation from God. There are two sources of spiritual death: the Fall and our own disobedience.

“All mankind, by the fall of Adam being cut off from the presence of the Lord, are considered as dead, both as to things temporal and to things spiritual” (Helaman 14:16). During our life on the earth, we are separated from God’s presence. Through the Atonement, Jesus Christ redeems everyone from this spiritual death. “The resurrection of Christ redeemeth mankind, yea, even all mankind, and bringeth them back into the presence of the Lord” (Helaman 14:17).

Further spiritual death comes as a result of our sins making us unclean and unable to dwell in the presence of God (see Helaman 14:18). The Savior offers redemption from this spiritual death, but only when we exercise faith in Him, repent of our sins, and obey the principles and ordinances of the gospel (see Helaman 14:19). (See True to the Faith [2004], “Death, Spiritual,” 48.)
