Three members of the First Quorum of the Seventy have been called to serve in the Presidency of the Seventy, effective on August 1, 2007. Elder Quentin L. Cook, Elder Claudio R. M. Costa, and Elder Steven E. Snow have been called to succeed Elder Charles Didier, Elder Merrill J. Bateman, and Elder Robert C. Oaks.

Elder Quentin L. Cook was sustained as a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy on April 4, 1998. He served in the Second Quorum of the Seventy from April 1996 through April 1998. As a member of the Presidency of the Seventy, he has supervisory responsibility for the North America Southeast Area.

Elder Cook has served as Executive Director of the Missionary Department and as President of the North America Northwest and Pacific Island Areas. He also served as a counselor in the Philippines/Micronesia Area Presidency.

He received a bachelor’s degree in political science from Utah State University and a doctor of jurisprudence degree from Stanford University. At the time of his call as a General Authority, he was vice chairman of Sutter Health System. He had previously served as president and chief executive officer of California Healthcare System. Prior to that, he was a managing partner of Carr, McClellan, Ingersoll, Thompson and Horn, a San Francisco Bay area law firm.

Elder Cook also served as a full-time missionary in the British Mission and as a bishop, stake president’s counselor, stake president, regional representative, and Area Seventy.

Quentin LaMar Cook was born in Logan, Utah, USA, on September 8, 1940. He married Mary Gaddie in November 1962. Elder and Sister Cook have three children and nine grandchildren.

Elder Claudio R. M. Costa was sustained as a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy on March 31, 2001. He served in the Second Quorum of the Seventy from April 1994 through March 2001. As a member of the Presidency of the Seventy, he has supervisory responsibility for the Idaho Area.

He has served as President of the South America North Area and the Brazil North Area and as a counselor in the Brazil and South America South Area Presidencies.

He studied marketing in São Paulo as a young man and later served for 13 years in various positions in the Church Educational System. At the time of his calling as a General Authority, he was the director of the Church’s institute of religion in São Paulo.

He has served the Church as an institute and seminary teacher, bishop’s counselor, bishop, high councilor, stake president’s counselor, mission president, and regional representative.

Claudio Roberto Mendes Costa was born in Santos, Brazil, on March 25, 1949. He married Margareth Fernandes Morgado in 1978. They are the parents of four children and have one grandson and three granddaughters.

Elder Steven E. Snow was called to serve as a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy on March 31, 2001. As a member of the Presidency of the Seventy, he has supervisory responsibility for the North America Central Area.

Elder Snow has served as Executive Director of the Priesthood Department, as President of the Africa Southeast Area, and as a counselor in the same Area Presidency.

Elder Snow earned a bachelor’s degree in accounting at Utah State University and a juris doctorate degree at Brigham Young University.

Prior to his call to serve as a General Authority, Elder Snow was a senior partner in the law firm of Snow Nuffer. He has actively supported education, having served as a member and president of his local school board, Chairman of the Utah State Board of Regents, and Chairman of the Western States Commission of Higher Education.

Elder Snow also served as a full-time missionary in the Germany North Mission and as a bishop, high councilor, stake president, president of the California San Fernando Mission, and Area Seventy.

Steven Erastus Snow was born in St. George, Utah, USA, on November 23, 1949. He married Phyllis Squire in June 1971. They have four sons and six grandchildren.
