Our final Old Testament event written in the New Testament is the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, characterized by the light of new life that he brings. Jesus said, “I am the true light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world.” He is “the light and the Redeemer of the world; the Spirit of truth, who came into the world, … and in him was the life of men and the light of men” (D&C 93:2, 9).

Christians of many persuasions use light in their worship services. Often this is in the form of candles, whose flames can represent the light of Christ. Following the practice of lighting oil lamps in ancient Israel’s temple, many Christians light candles with ascending flames representing prayers going up from the worshipper to heaven. Darkness represents the absence of divine presence, as light represents God’s nearness.

Perhaps the most remarkable use of flame in Christian worship is found in the celebration of the Miracle of the Holy Fire in Jerusalem each year. On Holy Saturday in the Orthodox Christian calendar, the day before Orthodox Easter, worshippers gather in Jerusalem to participate in this extraordinary celebration of the Resurrection that has been going on for over a thousand years. The ritual is not found in Western—that is, Catholic and Protestant—churches. The celebration of the Holy Fire takes place only in Jerusalem, yet it is loved throughout all of Eastern Christianity and is even broadcast live in some Orthodox countries.

Thousands of worshippers flock to the Holy City on that day. Many are local Palestinian Christians, but pilgrims from Russia, Greece, and other Orthodox lands come to participate in this event. They enter Jerusalem’s Church of the Resurrection (called by Catholics and Protestants the Church of the Holy Sepulcher) with a bundle of candles in hand. The bundles contain thirty-three thin candles, one for each year of the Savior’s life. Thousands of worshippers fill the massive church, and many others line the surrounding streets of the Old City in all directions. All come with their candles unlit and approach the building in a spirit of praise and worship. This is one of the most glorious celebrations in their religious calendar.

Orthodox Christianity’s highest authority in the Holy Land, the Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Jerusalem, presides over the ceremony. He is assisted by bishops of the Armenian and Syriac Orthodox Churches and others. In the church, the traditional site of Jesus’ crucifixion, burial, and resurrection, the annual celebration renews the power and message of Jesus’ life. Inside the church is a structure identified as the tomb of Jesus. It contains two rooms, the outer representing the place where angels announced the Resurrection, and the inner representing the Savior’s burial place. The Patriarch enters alone into the tomb, his own bundle of candles unlit, as others wait in anticipation of his return. Soon fire is seen from within the structure, and the Patriarch emerges, holding his bundle of burning candles. The tradition is that the starting of the Holy Fire on his candles is a miracle unaided by matches or other incendiaries.

The bells of the great church start to peal as the Patriarch’s lighted candles are seen. He extends his candles to those nearest him to ignite theirs. Those in turn are touched to others, and thus the flame spreads rapidly to the candles in the hands of all the worshippers within the church. From there, the flame spreads outside the building to thousands more along the streets, and within mere minutes of hearing the church bells sound, worshippers hundreds of meters from the church receive the flame from others ahead of them. Many take their lighted candles to their homes to keep the flame alive. The fire is even transported to other lands as the celebration continues abroad, and so the light that comes from the place of Jesus’ triumph over darkness spreads all over the world.

In the Old Testament’s praise and worship, God is associated strongly with light. He is its source and provides its sustaining power (see Genesis 1:3; Psalm 74:16). When the tabernacle was built, there was great emphasis on the means of illumination within it (see Exodus 25:31–37; 40:24–25; Numbers 8:1–4). We read in the Psalms, “The Lord is my light and my salvation” (Psalm 27:1). Worshippers pray, “Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us” (Psalm 4:6); “For thou wilt light my candle: the Lord my God will enlighten my darkness” (Psalm 18:28); “For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we see light” (Psalm 36:9). We read that those who will be blessed will be those who walk “in the light of [God’s] countenance” (Psalm 89:15).

The association of God with light also plays a role in prophecies of the future. Isaiah writes that “the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One for a flame” (Isaiah 10:17); “Then shall thy light break forth as the morning” (Isaiah 58:8); “Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee. And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising” (Isaiah 60:1–3).

In Jesus’ own words and in those of the Evangelists, the New Testament connects directly with our Savior these Old Testament images of God as Israel’s light. Jesus was the light that “shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not.” He is “the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world” (John 1:5, 9). The Savior himself taught, “I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life” (John 8:12); “As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world” (John 9:5); and “I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believeth on me should not abide in darkness” (John 12:46).

In making statements like these, Jesus was asserting his identity as Jehovah, God of the Old Testament.
