Lucile C. Tate, LeGrand Richards: Beloved Apostle ( 1982)

1

Child of Promise 1886-1896

LeGrand, my son.... Thou hast not come here upon earth by chance, but in fulfillment of the decrees of the Almighty to accomplish a great labor in the upbuilding of God's kingdom...."

The speaker was George F. Richards, the thirty-two-year-old Tooele Stake patriarch. The boy on whose head his hands were laid was his eight-year-old son. After this indication of the lad's potential, the patriarch continued in more specific terms:

Thou shalt be able to fill a useful mission in the gathering of scattered Israel, the establishment of Zion, and the redemption of the dead.... Many shall seek thy counsels and be benefitted and blessed thereby. The power of God shall be made manifest through thee and thy ministrations.

Under thy hands the sick shall be healed, the bowed down shall be cheered up and comforted, and many shall receive blessings at thy hand, both spiritual and temporal.... friends [shall be raised up] on every hand, whose benediction and blessings shall follow thee through life; and thou shalt be exalted among thy fellows, and if thou shalt live for it, thou shalt preside in the midst of the Lord's people. (Tooele City, Utah, February 12, 1894. Patriarchal Blessings, vol. 411, pp. 82-83, LDS Church Archives.)

Such were the promises pronounced in the patriarchal blessing given to the young LeGrand Richards. In retrospect, as all prophetic utterances must eventually be viewed, the father's choice of words is seen as doubly inspired: LeGrand would be exalted not above but among his fellows; he would preside not over but in the midst of the Lord's people. The wording indicates that George F. Richards "saw" not only the reality of his son'sfuture mission but the congenial, loving, compassionate quality of it as well.

A few years later, LeGrand was on a Tooele dry farm at midday with his father and a cousin, Stephen L Richards, who was visiting from Salt Lake City. The sun beat down from a cloudless sky. No tree or building afforded shade. Even the horses tugged, sweat, and came to a halt. George F. Richards lowered the tines of the hayrake and, with the help of the boys, covered them with newly mown hay and spread more hay on the ground beneath. Hungry and fatigued from the heat and labor of the morning, the three crowded under the improvised canopy and ate their lunch.

Reflecting upon this incident, LeGrand Richards said: "I have since had this thought. There under that hayrake on a dry farm in Tooele were three future apostles: my father, my cousin, and myself, yet a boy." Simple yet remarkable as was the enactment of this little drama, the selection of the participants was not coincidental. It was foreshadowed by and in fulfillment of an earlier promise given to LeGrand's grandmother Nanny Longstroth Richards when she was but a seventeen-year-old girl living in the "City of Joseph" (Nauvoo, Illinois). In a blessing pronounced upon her head on January 27, 1846, the patriarch John Smith (uncle of the Prophet Joseph Smith) declared, "Prophets, seers, and revelators shall proceed forth from thee and thy name shall be had in honorable remembrance in the house of Israel." (Patriarchal Blessings, vol. 10, pp. 105-6, LDS Church Archives.)

The promise was expansively fulfilled, for Nanny Longstroth Richards became mother to George F. and grandmother to Stephen L and LeGrand-the three future apostles who ate lunch together under the tines of a hayrake. (She also became grandmother to Stayner Richards, who served as an Assistant to the Twelve.)

In the formative years before LeGrand's 1894 blessing was given, and in the years then still to come, George F. Richards was a powerful and loving influence in the life and development of this child of promise. And in his own right he forged an indivisible patriarchal link between his faithful fathers and LeGrand. Those fathers were Willard Richards and Franklin D. Richards. Nanny was wife to both.

Nanny Longstroth first became the wife of the apostle Willard Richards, a man who signified his loyalty to the Prophet Joseph Smith in Carthage Jail by offering his own life, if that were possible, in exchange for the other's freedom. After the Prophet's martyrdom, he further demonstrated his devotion to the Church by serving as a counselor to President Brigham Young from December 1847, when the First Presidency was reorganized, until his death at age forty-nine (1854).

After Willard died, his nephew, the apostle Franklin D. Richards, married Nanny Longstroth, fulfilling a promise made to his uncle that he would thus care for her and her three young children and raise up further posterity to Willard. To Franklin D. and Nanny Longstroth Richards was born a daughter, Minerva (1858), and two sons, George F. (1861) and Frederick W. (1866). So it was that these three children were privileged to have two fathers-by birth, Franklin D.; by sealing, Willard Richards. (Letter from Franklin D. Richards to his son, George F., September 5, 1893, soon after the latter became a patriarch.)

Franklin D. Richards was a great father and a faithful servant of the Lord. He had been put to extreme tests and had proven equal to them-the loss of one brother at the Haun's Mill Massacre, of another with the Mormon Battalion at Pueblo, of his son at Mount Pisgah, of his second wife at Winter Quarters, of his little daughter at Cutler's Grove. Long missions, deprivation, persecution, many families to provide for, and many high callings were his lot; yet he could write as a latter-day Job, "Father, I own thy dealings just; thy blessings have been more than my deserts...." (Franklin L. West, Life of Franklin D. Richards [Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1924], pp. 71-72.)

Because of his many families, his missions, and his official Church responsibilities, Franklin D. could spend but little time with his individual wives and children, so the care of Nanny and her six children fell largely upon her two eldest sons Stephen L (Willard's son) and George F. (son of Franklin). (Nanny also raised three of her sister's children after Sarah's death in 1858.)

When Stephen L left on his mission (1876), George F. became head of the home at fifteen. His half-brother had left him a yoke of oxen, a canyon cart, and log chain, and with these he hauled wood from Farmington Canyon to supply the family's needs and for use as a medium of exchange for grist and molasses and for labor to help improve the house. (Life of George F. Richards by his daughters, [Alice] Minerva Richards Tate Robinson, Sarah Richards Cannon, and Mamie Richards Silver [Provo, Utah: J. Grant Stephenson, 1965], p. 4.)

"Want of age is no bar to obtaining the favor of the Lord," George F. wrote. At age fifteen he was ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood, and he received his temple endowment at that early age. When he was seventeen he performed the ordinance of administering to his sick mother and witnessed the power of the Lord in healing her-a blessing which he felt was given "to teach him that the Priesthood in the boy is as sacred and potent as in the man when the boy lives as he should." (George F. Richards, Personal Record, p. 51, LDS Church Archives.)

At age nineteen he attended the University of Deseret, from which he received a certificate of graduation. (George F. Richards Diary, vol. I, p. 2.) He then began work at two dollars a day. This gave him the financial means to marry his Farmington sweetheart, Alice Almira Robinson, on March 9, 1882. Alice's family descended from the Pilgrims John Alden and Priscilla Mullens through one line, and her immediate predecessors were of pioneer stock who had been seasoned by faith and sacrifice. Her grandfathers, Henry William Miller and Joseph Lee Robinson, were early Church leaders and both were faithful friends of Joseph Smith and Brigham Young. Alice's father was Oliver Lee Robinson; her mother, Lucy Miller. (George F.'s distant progenitor, Edward Richards, had a part in America's early history, for by 1634 he was established in Lynn, Massachusetts.)

George F. and Alice had not lived long in Salt Lake City, where he was working, until they were asked to come and live at his mother's home in Farmington because she was ill and needed help. Always solicitous of his mother's needs, George F. took his new bride and went. It was at the Farmington home that Alice gave birth to the first of their fifteen children, a son: George F. Jr. This handsome, dark-haired child was to find a singular place of affection in his father's heart, so that in later years they would say it was "almost as if we grew up as boys together." a daughter, Alice Minerva, was also born (1884) in Nanny Longstroth Richards's home.

George F.'s young married life was one round of clearing, plowing, planting, harvesting, building-all with small material returns. He marked his twenty-third birthday with a lament that he had never been on a foreign mission and that he was four hundred dollars in debt and paying interest on it. His total assets were harness, wagon, six horses, a cow, two calves, and not quite two acres of land.

At the same time (1884), he wrote what became for him a full consecration of his life to the Lord. "While I feel that I am poor, I do not wish to let that stand between me and my duties as a Latter-day Saint. That which I have is upon the altar and subject to the direction of those in authority, as is also my time and life if necessary." (George F. Richards Diary, vol. I, p. 65.)

He labored on. At year's end he fasted, settled his account with the Lord, and freshened his resolves for the year ahead. (This became a sacred ritual for all his years to come, and when his children were old enough to comprehend he made them part of the accounting. LeGrand would later tell of helping to figure pigs, chickens, eggs, garden produce, milk, and the growth of calves, plus the extra "thrown in for good measure.")

By the time LeGrand was born on February 6, 1886, his father had prospered. He had purchased a 160-acre farm in Box Elder County (Plymouth), where he lived with his little family in a nine-by-twelve-foot shack during the summer, returning to Farmington for the cold winter months. There they stayed with George F.'s sister Minerva and her husband, B. F. Knowlton. This home was LeGrand's birthplace. (George F. Richards Diary, vol. I, pp. 99, 102.)

The next eighteen months would prove to be the most disruptive and mobile period in the family's life. It was February 25, 1886, when George F. returned to Plymouth, leaving his family in Farmington until the weather warmed. For the next month it snowed and rained, and he worked in mud and slush. He moved the shack and improved it, dug a well and put a frame over it. When the weather finally broke he again made the seventy-five. mite trip to Farmington and brought his family and their meager furnishings home. He put in thirty-three acres of barley and then began hauling material to make an adobe house.

In the evenings when the day's work was done, the older children were asleep, and baby LeGrand nestled and rocked in his mother's arms, George F. read by light of a coal oil lamp. He read literature, philosophy, and a practical book on etiquette. He made long lists of gospel questions, then searched the scriptures for answers. (George F. Richards Diary, vol. I, pp. 81-86.) These formed the basis for runny gospel discussions when the children were older and worked with him in the fields, sat at table in the evenings, or traveled with him to some assignment.

In May, Alice's father, Oliver Lee Robinson, came to help build an adobe house for them. The next day George F. left Alice and the children to visit with her father for a few days while he joined his parents and other relatives at the Logan Temple to do work for their dead. While there, they received word that Joel Grover, husband of Willard and Nanny's daughter Asenech, had died in Nephi. Nanny and Franklin D. Richards left immediately for Salt Lake City, from which point she continued on to Nephi. George F. returned to Plymouth and worked with Oliver Lee on the house. With two men on the job, it took form rapidly.

Alice and the children watched the progress of the house with lively interest and looked forward to the day they could move in. LeGrand, now less than four months old, was by nature of a pleasant disposition but was suffering from some baby ailment that made him fussy. After several attempts to get the washing done, and with no carriage or play pen to keep him off the floor, Alice finally tied LeGrand to her back, papoose-fashion, and carried him about as she rubbed the clothes, ironed, cooked, or scrubbed. In this position he was comforted an content.

By August the snug two-room adobe house was complete with a kitchen lean-to attached. It seemed luxurious. The family hated to leave it even to take Grandfather home again. Not long after they arrived in Farmington, young George F. Jr. took desperately ill with cholera. Then Oliver Lee came down with the same malady, and within two days he died, on August 18, 1886

When the funeral was over, George F. took Alice and the children back to Plymouth, where the heavy work of harvesting and battening down for winter was immediately upon him. The was no sooner accomplished than an urgent plea for help care from Nanny and Aseneth in Nephi. Never one to shirk a family responsibility, George F. packed the wagon and left on October 26, traveling with his little family the 175 cold miles to Nephi The children were bundled almost to the eyes. LeGrand at nine months was interested in everything he saw, and he enjoyed the warmth and nearness of his mother as they joggled along the rough roads.

For Alice, who was expecting her fourth child, the journey was difficult. They arrived at the Grovers' on November 4. It was April 5, 1887, when Alice's son Joel was born, and May before Alice could travel again. This time they made the journey home in four days, George F. being anxious to get his own crops in after having left Aseneth's affairs in good order.

Summer passed, and the harvest was gathered once more Before the snow began to fall, the couple took up the rugs, shook them free of dust, and put them down again over fresh, sweet smelling straw. On the twenty-third of December (1887) the shopped at the Deweyville store, eighteen miles away, for "Christmas goods." On Christmas Eve the stockings of four litter children-George F. Jr., Minerva, LeGrand, and Joel-we hung up to await Santa's visit.

From our modern vantage point, the two little rooms are lean-to kitchen seem quite inadequate for a family of six, but George F.'s account of their first Christmas by themselves speaks of warm hospitality. Two families came for Christmas dinner with them. Then on New Year's Day he wrote, "Stayed in house all day with the children and Mama. Made molasses candy" (George F. Richards Diary, vol. I, p. 111.)

Shortly before LeGrand's second birthday on February 6, 1888, his father had an offer to take over the operation of the ranch of his uncle, Abraham F. Doremus, in Tooele, Utah. The terms were agreeable and the family moved there knowing that it would yield long-term benefits for them all.

The children considered the Doremus house immense, with endless places to explore-such as porch, lean-to, attic, and dirt cellar. There were sheds, a barn, haystacks, and a large fenced corral. There were orchards at the north and a lucerne patch between house and street. It is from the Doremus Ranch that LeGrand brings his earliest recollections. He remembers when his mother took him out of dresses and put him into boys' pants at age three and a half.

LeGrand also remembers the birth of his second sister, Sarah, on July 13, 1889. The four children were sent to play in the apricot orchard, where people were picking and drying the ripe fruit on shares, the drying racks being furnished by the ranch. As they watched the pickers, played among the trees, and ate fruit from the ground, LeGrand heard his mother's moans and cries and afterwards his father's call to come in and see the new sister, all sleepy and content in her mother's arms.

Although the Doremus Ranch home seemed a mansion to the children after the small adobe house in Plymouth, conditions there were primitive compared to present standards. There was no indoor plumbing, and water had to be carried for table, bath, and laundry use. Washings were put out by hand at first, then by a hand-turned washer when these became available. Weekly baths were taken in a big washtub by the stove, with only a quilt hung to give a measure of privacy. Fruit was bottled in the hundreds of quarts for the large and still growing family, and this on the wood-burning stove. Hard work was the order of life, and even the small children had their share in it. Each was taught to do the tasks which were commensurate with his age and level of understanding. He was then encouraged to take hold and perform his work unfailingly.

LeGrand at the age of three.

Before LeGrand was old enough to do a man's work with his father, Alice requested that "Grandy" help her with the washing. He recalls how she would sometimes stand and rub the clothes on a washboard with big tears rolling down her cheeks from weariness or discomfort when a new baby was on the way. He was able to lighten her work by fetching water, wringing, and hanging the clean things on the line. When George F. purchased one of the first hand-turned washers in Tooele, LeGrand did the turning until Joel was old enough to take over.

But the parents were wise about the children's need for recreation; in fact, George F. and Alice themselves enjoyed breaking the routine of hard work to have a good time. Games, simple refreshments, songs, and stories made up their usual home fun, and work or play was enhanced by the parents' outward show of love and affection for each family member. LeGrand recalls how his mother would draw him near and stroke his hair as she read stories from the Juvenile Instructor about early Church leaders and missionaries whose converts gave up home, family, possessions, and their very lives for the gospel. And he remembers too the thrill he felt while, safe and comfortable at his mother's side, he dreamed of faithful men and the good they do.

In January (1890) George F. was ordained a high priest and set apart as second counselor in the Tooele Stake presidency. He was twenty-nine. From then on the children knew their father as a churchman of note, traveling in all kinds of weather to speak and serve wherever he was assigned. Even so, he kept close contact with his family and made sure that home evenings, games, and outings broke the round of work and responsibility.

Of special significance in LeGrand's early life were three events. First, the Salt Lake Temple became ready for dedication after forty years of labor and sacrifice. The family eagerly awaited the occasion, especially when the children were told they could attend; for the parents took every opportunity to include them in special meetings and conferences so they could become acquainted with Church leaders and experience their influence.

Now as the days drew near, Alice prepared the children. She told them of the leaders who would be there along with their grandfather, Franklin D. Richards. She said that on such a sacred occasion angels might be present. George F. attended the "first service" on Thursday, April 6, 1893, "during which time a hurricane raged, blowing down houses, trees, and fences." (Newspapers for that day confirm his report.) On April 7 he took Alice, her sister Estella, and the two older children George F. Jr. and Minerva, to the "fourth meeting," after which they returned to Tooele. (George F. Richards Diary, vol. 3, p. 115.)

Special sessions for unbaptized children were held two weeks later, and on Saturday, April 22, George F. reports that "Alice took the four small children, LeGrand, Joel, Sarah, and Amy [Amy would die November 10, 1894] to Salt Lake with the Sunday School to see and attend the Temple dedication. I took them to the depot." (George F. Richards Diary, vol. 3, p. 119.)

After the session in the assembly room of the temple, LeGrand, now seven, was taken to greet his grandfather, Franklin D. Richards, as he came down from the stand. This is "the first and only time" LeGrand remembers meeting him, although the apostle had been in George F.'s home when this grandson was yet very small. LeGrand was impressed to see President Wilford Woodruff when he dedicated the temple, and he remembers exactly how he looked. With typical candor he adds, "And I looked around for angels, but I didn't see any." [^1]

The Doremus Ranch home.

The second outstanding event was LeGrand's baptism in Coleman's Pond, Tooele, on June 11, 1894, by Moroni England. He was confirmed the same day by his father. (Tooele LDS Ward Records, bk. 7716A, p. 5, LDS Church Archives.)

The third event, which was of the greatest significance, actually preceded the second. It was occasioned when, on July 23, 1893, George F. Richards was called to be patriarch of Tooele Stake. By the authority of his calling he gave their patriarchal blessings to certain of his family members along with the many to other members of the stake. With a twinkle of humor, LeGrand says, "Father practiced on us four older children." Far from practicing, however, his father gave to George F. Jr., Alice Minerva, and Joel abundant blessings of promise and potential; and upon his second son, LeGrand, he pronounced blessings previously quoted.

In a later blessing (1905), his father prophetically warned LeGrand that "as the Lord designs your salvation and your eternal glory so does the adversary design your destruction." Looking back from the time of that pronouncement, it seems both significant and remarkable that this boy, LeGrand, survived so many accidents and illnesses, any one of which might have maimed or killed him.

On one occasion when LeGrand's father was chopping wood for the stove, his small son drew near him from the rear. The back swing of the ax caught LeGrand on the head and sent him sprawling upon the ground stunned and bleeding. The first recourse at such a time was a priesthood blessing, which was followed by medical aid. As a result, each child came to feel that if Father blessed him he would be all right. It was so with LeGrand and he survived.

Shortly after this accident, LeGrand was standing in the wagon, to which a team was attached, when he was suddenly thrown out by the horses' unexpected motion backward. As he hit the ground, the wagon wheel passed over his head. Before he could be pulled away, a quick forward movement of the team caused the wheel to pass over his head a second time. His frightened father gathered the crying boy up into his arms and blessed him. Again he recovered.

At age eight, LeGrand contracted some type of hip-bone disease. For nine months he wore a plaster cast on his leg from shoe-top to hip and around his waist, during which time he used crutches and missed a year of school. Later that year, and during the time that his parents were attending their dying child Amy in Salt Lake City, LeGrand and his brothers were playing in a neighbor's yard when a vicious ram charged the boys. The others made their getaway, but his cast made LeGrand's escape impossible The animal came at him time and again as he braced against the fence and tried to ward off its attack with his hands. One of the neighbor boys mustered the courage to drive off the enraged animal with LeGrand's crutches. It was the plaster cast around his waist that is thought to have saved LeGrand's life.

Still on crutches at age nine, he was hit by another misfortune. He tells about it.

We sold a lot of hay to different people in the community. The Bowen boys came for a big load one day and I was the only one at the Ranch, so... I loaded the hay for them, and they asked me to drive the team away from the stack so they could scrape up the loose hay. I got the lines mixed and pulled the team toward the stack instead of away from it, which tipped the load over, and I fell underneath. The wheel ran over my arm and broke it. I felt around to find my crutches and then managed to crawl out from under the load. My arm was bent at an awful angle, but I wouldn't let the doctor set it until my father returned from the Basin Pasture to give me a blessing. (Blue Book, p. 26, and interview.)

George F. Jr., who turned twelve that day, was with his father when he returned from the pasture. George had been given a diary for his birthday. Included in his first entry is an account of LeGrand's accident. He wrote: "Both bones were broken above the wrist. We found Dr. F. M. Davis prepared to set the bones. LeGrand suffered...." (George F. Richards Jr. Diary, vol. I, April 23, 1895, LDS Church Archives.)

Once when LeGrand was sleigh riding with companions, he was hit in the eye with a water-hardened snowball. The area from his nose to his temple turned a livid blue, black, and purple. The same year he was stricken with a severe case of scarlet fever and his temperature ran dangerously high for many days.

Finally, at age nineteen, when ready to leave for his mission, LeGrand was again on crutches, this time with a painfully enlarged knee in a cast. He was advised to stay home and take care of himself. Instead he asked for his father to give him a priesthood blessing, and he then left as scheduled with neither cast nor crutch. (On two handwritten pages [Blue Book, p. 20j.], LeGrand's father, George F., chronicled some of these accidents and illnesses.)

From all accidents and maladies except one, LeGrand was spared permanent disability. The exception was the hip trouble, which resulted in one leg remaining an inch and a half shorter than the other, causing him to limp and to have almost constant discomfort and pain. So used to his limp did his friends and family become that they scarcely noticed it.

One daughter, when questioned about it, said, "Why, Daddy didn't limp." Of her remark, he said, "Then why did I have my left shoe built up an inch to minimize it?" He says his limp could be likened to the iron fence in this story he tells:

While attending a conference some years ago, I stood looking at the stake tabernacle grounds with a member of the stake presidency during the interval between the morning and afternoon sessions. There was an iron fence around the grounds with dagger-shaped pickets. One was bent this way and another that, each at a different angle all the way in front and around the corner.

The man to whom I was speaking was a blacksmith. I said, "President, how long would it take you to straighten those pickets?" He looked at the fence and then at me. "I surely owe you an apology," he said. "I come here at least three times a week every week of the world, and this is the first time I've noticed that the pickets were bent."

After his heart attack in 1942, LeGrand Richards found walking more difficult and felt more secure when using a cane. In late years his leg has stiffened, and he vigorously exercises it at night to keep it as limber as possible. When he preaches, the listeners are so caught up in what he says that even many on the stand do not notice that he rests the afflicted leg by placing the toe of one foot upon that of the other and stands that way during his entire speech.

This malady has never slowed him down, nor has it brought forth complaints. (Perhaps that is why his limp went unnoticed until recent years.) It did not prevent him from dancing, leg-wrestling, or doing heavy manual labor, nor has it kept him from full performance during his entire ministry. But it has been with him for life-"a thorn in the flesh" which reminds us of Paul's words:

And lest I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me.... For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness.... (2 Corinthians 12:7-9.)

The Lord's grace has been sufficient also for LeGrand Richards, making it possible for him to live above his infirmity during the nearly ninety years which stretch back from the present to the boyhood era when the difficulty first appeared.

---
Notas:
[^1] Throughout this book, wherever material is quoted without a source reference, it has come from an interview the author had either with Elder LeGrand Richards or with the individual named at that point in the text.
