Lucile C. Tate, LeGrand Richards: Beloved Apostle ( 1982)

2

The Lessons of Youth 1897-1902

From the open windows of the Tooele Ward meetinghouse on a warm summer Sunday could be heard the strains of the familiar hymn, "Ere you left your room this morning, did you think to pray?" Seated with the deacons, young LeGrand Richards raised his lusty voice with the congregation. When he came to the words, "Prayer will change the night to day," he stopped singing. The message of the song penetrated his mind and drove away the melody. He recalls:

We always had our family prayers morning and night. My mother had taught me to say my secret prayers at night but had not taught me to offer them in the morning. I was so impressed with that hymn that I started having my secret prayers in the morning too. I recall working on the farm and reciting to myself often, "Prayer will change the night to day." The fact that prayer would do just that was marvelous to me.

Perhaps no characteristic of his youth is so pronounced as LeGrand's receptiveness to correct teaching. Like a hungry plant taking in essential nutrients, he accepted each good suggestion, useful piece of information, or valuable lesson to which he was exposed. He tried it out promptly, then made it his own so that it was ready for immediate recall or use. As a result, and after over eighty years of constant application, the ideas, principles, and skills he learned are still an integral part of him.

His Primary teacher, Sister Gillespie, taught her boys the courtesy of tipping their hats when they passed a lady on the street. LeGrand's first opportunity to follow her instruction soon came when he met Mrs. Dodds, county treasurer and a non-Mormon, in town. "LeGrand," she said, "you're the first man in this city who has ever tipped his hat to me since I've been here."

Without a doubt George F. Richards was LeGrand's greatest teacher, and all his children bear witness to his influence upon them individually. LeGrand's stories of lessons learned from "Father" have enlivened his talks and writings during his entire adult life. They teach the principles of Sabbath observance, tithing, honesty, virtue, and the Word of Wisdom as no amount of moralizing could ever do, and they are made relevant and new with each telling because they are taken from real life and are part of the teller's first-hand experience.

George F. Richards was no ivory-tower theorist but a practical parent who knew the temptations and evils that existed and to which each child would be exposed. As the fifteen children came along, each one lively and spirited, they were subject to the normal misdemeanors of the growing child. Tempers flared, teasings occurred, and there was an occasional breach of honesty or a challenge to the observance of the Sabbath or the Word of Wisdom. In such cases correction was needed, and it was given lovingly and promptly and with lasting effect.

Undergirt with his early commitment to the Lord, George F. was guided by his own carefully written priorities, which included "raising, providing for, and properly teaching our children," as well as "conquer thyself." (George F. Richards Diary, "Three Grand Divisions of Labor for the Saints," vol. I, p. 277.) George F. functioned as a patriarch on the premise that his children were choice spirits from the Father; that they were innocent of wrongdoing until taught correct principles; that he and his wife were responsible for that instruction (both as examples and as effective teachers); that children learn best if taught with love and understanding; and that if they err, they must be corrected and encouraged to do better. Discipline, though firm, was fair and kind, and it was usually followed with an affectionate kiss or embrace. Beyond this, George F. was unfailingly consistent of word and action in both lessons taught and correction given.

Two stories will illustrate. The experiences occurred twenty-five years apart and under totally different circumstances. One concerns the next-to-eldest son, LeGrand; the other, Ray, the youngest of the fifteen children. The subject of each story is observance of the Word of Wisdom. LeGrand tells the first about himself.

Brother Ebeneezer Beesley, former director of the Tabernacle Choir, came to Tooele and organized a martial band. My brother George played a flute and I played the snare drum. When we were having a band practice one evening, Brother Beesley said that Brother Meiklejohn was celebrating his eightieth birthday, and he suggested that we go and serenade him. [When we did so] we were each served a small glass of wine. [This was a time when many faithful foreign-born Saints still clung to their hot drinks or homemade wine for festive occasions.] I drank my small glass, not knowing it was wrong, and the other boys did, and also my brother. It made me tipsy and they had to hold my drum for me while I played. My brother was afraid to take me home, so he kept me rolling around for some time in the new-mown hay adjoining our home. The next day Brother Beesley came and apologized to my father, who just advised me that if I would drink but milk and water I would never get in trouble. (Blue Book, p. 27.)

That he never forgot this lesson is borne out by an oft-told experience of his youth. When at a dance at Saltair, he was invited by a young lady friend to join her party at dinner. She and LeGrand held hands and "went hopscotching down to the table." He stopped when he saw a bottle of beer at each place. "What's the matter," she asked, "are you too good to drink a little beer?" He did some quick thinking. "I guess I am," he said, "and I thought you were too." He then went up the stairs faster than he had come down.

Ray's story is about Mr. Klink, a non-Mormon who lived near the Richards home in Salt Lake City. He was a homey sort who of an evening would sit before the fire and read the newspaper while he smoked his pipe. Ray sometimes visited him, and he was so impressed with the man's obvious contentment that he approached his father, now a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, and innocently asked the question:

"Father, why don't you sit by the fire and smoke a pipe like Mr. Klink?"

"My son," George F. responded, "I'm glad you asked me that."

He then explained about the effects of tobacco upon the health, adding, "Now, anything you see your mother or me do, you are free to do, and if there are other things you meet with which you do not fully understand, ask me and I will tell you." He then put his arms about his son, kissed him, and assured him of his love. As a result of that lesson, tobacco never tempted Ray.

When LeGrand was ten years old (1896), George F. gave up the Doremus Ranch to open a lumber and implement business near the center of town, where he also built a large brick home. LeGrand remembers helping to haul lime and brick for that project. It took two wagons and six horses to bring the bricks from the railroad station to the building site. On May 29, 1897, George F. wrote in his diary, "Finished moving today, occupying basement, kitchen, bathroom, and upstairs bedrooms."

At age eleven LeGrand was now old enough to do a man's work, and because of his great love for his father he enjoyed working with him and profited from his daily instruction and the gospel discussions that were often part of their conversation. He helped hoe weeds from a forty-acre corn patch, plowed the land, ran his father's twelve-foot header, and hauled hay, lumber, adobe, lime, and wood. Whatever the task that needed doing, winter made it more difficult. LeGrand tells of going into the canyons with his father to get wood, of frozen gloves, tipped-over loads of cedar stumps, and near-runaways. "It was so cold," he recalls, "that Father would try to smile but couldn't because his face was frozen stiff." (Blue Book, p. 26.)

Another winter experience gives a word picture of the difficulties and of family cooperation in the midst of them. LeGrand is narrator:

My brother George and Max Gordon were bringing two loads of lumber from Salt Lake, and I was sent with an extra team to help them up the hill. I stayed with the Yeates family in E. T. [Lake Point] until we heard the lumber clapping as they came along near midnight. We hitched one of my fresh horses onto each wagon. It had been snowing for some time. We hadn't gone far until Father arrived on our riding horse. Mother had gotten to worrying about her sons, so Father let George take the saddle horse and go home, since he had been riding longer in the storm. Father and I stayed with one load of lumber; Max, with the other. By the time we reached home, we couldn't stand to remain in the house. Our hands and faces were frostbitten, so we took a tub of cold water onto the porch until we thawed ourselves out. (Blue Book, p. 26.)

Aged thirteen.

Even with the lumber and implement business, farming still supplied much of the family income and continued to provide work for George F.'s growing sons. Particularly during harvest time, it was necessary to hire outside help. George F. was careful to see that these men were of good character so that their influence upon his boys would be acceptable. Once, a man using bad language and telling dirty stories was summarily dismissed from his employ.

His father's watchcare over his boys so impressed LeGrand that he took responsibility to safeguard his own mind by controlling what he allowed to enter it. "I walked away from the old Co-op corner, where we used to play our first games," he says, "and I resolved that no friend of mine would ever be able to accuse me of befouling his mind with dirty stories like I had heard there." And he has repeated many times the classic statement, "I can go back to the town where I was raised as a boy and can tell parents how to raise their children, and I don't need to worry about old women my age sitting down in the back saying, 'Yes, but you should have known him when we knew him as a boy.'"

In the matter of honesty and integrity too George F. served as an impressive example to his boys. LeGrand tells of an experience which he never forgot:

We used to take our wheat to the grist mill and then draw on it until our credit was gone. A new miller came into Tooele to operate the mill. I went there one day to get grist. We had no credit, so he wouldn't give it to me. I asked him to check with the owner of the mill.

I went back within a few days with a load of wheat and got our grist, and when I asked, "Did you check with the owner of the mill?" he answered yes.

"And what did he say?"

"He said, 'The next time one of those sons of George F. Richards's comes to this mill, if he wants the mill, get out and give it to him.'"

It is wonderful to have a father so honored.

Because of his father's example and his own willing spirit, service came naturally to LeGrand. As deacons quorum president, he served in that office as faithfully as his father served in the stake presidency. In his Blue Book (p. 27), he wrote the following: "We had to sweep our meetinghouse each Saturday; chop wood for our two big stoves, carry it in to the wood box, and then go early Sunday morning and dust and make the fires to warm the building. We had to clean the chimneys of our coal oil lamps and fill them. We also had to take care of our meeting-house grounds."

Tooele meetinghouse.

It is instructive to note LeGrand's use of the word our as he tells how he filled his assignment. This willingness and full participation in Church service became a lifelong attitude. It bears out the truth of a statement by his daughter Nona R. Dyer: "The Lord cannot make an able man willing, but he can make a willing man able."

LeGrand's other Aaronic Priesthood assignments were carried out with the same commitment. As a teacher in his ward, he was assigned to home teach with the mail carrier. They knelt in prayer before going to the homes. After greeting the people, each had a turn to present a prepared message which they gave while standing before family members. Before leaving, they asked, "I guess you have family prayer. Would you like us to pray with you before we go?" In accepting their offer, one widow said, "You are the first home teachers who have offered to pray with us since my children and I came to Zion."

During the time LeGrand was a priest he did not have opportunity to baptize anyone, but he considered blessing the sacrament such a privilege that he would not perform that ordinance until he had memorized the prayers letter-perfect.

The family's life was not all labor and Church activity. As in earlier years, time was. allowed for recreation, which now included skating, sleighing, programs, outings, parties, and dancing. LeGrand tells of the dances above the store owned by Peter (christened Pierre Appolinaire) Droubay. He and his friends danced with the identical Bryan twins. "One would wear a posy, then she would let the other wear it for a while so that we boys never could tell which one was which."

Concerning the dances and parties, LeGrand remembers an incident which shows him to be not just a blind follower of counsel and instruction but a thinking, strong-willed, responsible young man. He and Joel went to a party from which their father expected them to return by ten-thirty. They were late in returning and their father was asleep. They wakened him, and LeGrand said, "Father, I don't want to go to any more parties unless you can trust us to leave at the appropriate time." LeGrand had a fine social sense which forbade him to embarrass a host or cause inconvenience. He notes also that sometimes parents are so restrictive that they breed rebellion or deny normal friendships. He tells of one woman he knew who had three lovely daughters. So strict was she that boy friends stopped coming to see the girls, none of whom married.

As much as was consistent with his parental responsibility, George F. tried to understand his children's viewpoint. Where it seemed wise, he gave them their choice. One story of LeGrand's demonstrates both the father's understanding and his firm direction.

When we were boys, the greatest sport the young people could have on Sunday was to go buggy riding in the afternoon. Father would never let us boys do that, so my younger brother and I went to him one day and decided that we would have it out. Father explained that his children had to set an example to others, yet he did not like to deprive us of the enjoyment we should have. He offered to let us leave one of the teams at home any day during the week, quit our work at noon and come home, and have a fresh team so we could buggy ride. Of course, we thought it would be ridiculous for us to be the only boys out buggy riding during the week when the other boys did it on Sunday, but it taught us a lesson. Father was willing to sacrifice a day's work of the team and a half day's work of his boys in order that we might have the enjoyment we desired, but he taught us that it was not appropriate on the Sabbath. (LeGrand Richards, Just to Illustrate [Bookcraft, 1961], pp. 12-13, and interview.)

Another incident LeGrand remembers shows how George F. allowed himself to be influenced by his sons' combined sense of fairness.

The men used to bring "wild" horses in off the range, put them in the stray-pound, and then auction them off. My brother George had a buckskin riding horse. Joel and I had none. George set his mind upon a little bay mare in the pound, and Father agreed with him to let Lone Gowens go and bid on it for George. Joel and I didn't think it was fair. I had a little temper in those days, so I went to Mother and said, "Those two horses will never live on our place as sure as I'm alive."

That night she told Father what I'd said. He felt bad that Joel and I had feelings about the matter, but he could understand our point of view. The next morning he called off the bid and offered to give Joel and me an old roan horse that he had traded for. (The horse had "a head nearly as big as his body," but Father let us get him shod so he'd be in fit shape to ride, which we did.)

Some time later, Father decided to sell this horse, and he was going to keep the money. Joel and I thought it was our own horse and if it had to be sold we ought to have the money, so with our parents' permission we held a family court. Mother agreed to be the judge and she was all for her boys. She ruled that the proceeds from the sale of the horse should be divided equally between Father, Joel, and me. Father agreed to the terms; Mother was pleased; and we boys felt that justice had been done.

Concerning his temper and the lesson he learned, LeGrand tells how his older brother teased him about a girl that he had no interest in at all. (He does not think that parents should allow one child to tease another.) George F. Jr. says of himself that at the time he was "permitted to be a little bit obstreperous with the other boys." (Oral History Program, George F. Richards Jr. by William Hartley, p. 23, LDS Church Archives.) When this brother left for school in Salt Lake, LeGrand was glad to see him go and said so emphatically. "Father, observing my temper, said, 'LeGrand, I don't blame you, because I had a temper when I was young, but I think you should correct it.' I then thought to myself, 'If Father could break his temper, so could I.'" From then on, LeGrand worked hard to master it.

He came to understand that a temper, unleashed, is a dangerous animal, but controlled, it is a safe mount upon which to ride. So firmly did he take hold of the lesson that he came to feel that even petulance and irascibility are inexcusable. Says he, "An irritable man or woman is about the most objectionable creature there is. They should get down on their knees and ask the Lord to give them strength to overcome it as much as they would the habit of liquor or tobacco. Harsh words cut deeply. It takes a long while for such wounds to heal, if ever they do."

LeGrand graduated from Tooele District School (eighth grade) in 1901. The Richards boys had missed weeks of lessons in spring and fall for seedtime and harvest. In addition, LeGrand had missed the year his hip trouble began, so his brother Joel caught up with him. He states that Joel learned more rapidly than he. "We both got good grades, but I had to work twice as hard." Perhaps the added effort he expended increased his powers of retention, one of his distinguishing characteristics throughout life.

LeGrand's desire for further education was intense, but there were some moments of disappointment when it appeared that no cash was available for that purpose. His father suggested, as an alternative, that he return to the district school for a year and learn whatever he could. "I could not do that, Father," he said. "I would rather stay home and work on the farm." Seeing his disappointment, George F. "hustled around and got the money." So it was that LeGrand left to join his brother George in Salt Lake.

When the brothers, boarding together, became reacquainted as young men, they learned to appreciate each other and became the best of friends. Each would have done anything for the other. George F. Jr. compared them to "David and Jonathan."

George F. Richard's Tooele home, scene of LeGrand's early teenage years.

Salt Lake Business College (top floor of Templeton Building) when LeGrand attended.

(George F. Richards Jr., William Hartley, p. 23.) LeGrand often thought that they were like Joseph Smith and his older brother Hyrum. Their friendship remained close throughout their adult life.

The importance of LeGrand's year and few months at Salt Lake Business College (1902-1903) can scarcely be overemphasized. The school advertised to "educate for a useful life now," and for LeGrand it did just that. He came with an eager spirit, and superior teachers were there to give him what he needed. J. Reuben Clark, Jr., taught him mathematics and English, the latter so effectively that in all of LeGrand's writings and sermons, folksy and people-oriented as they are, his language is not only grammatically correct but clear, precise, and uniquely his own. Ada Bitnet (who would become the mother of Gordon B. Hinckley), taught him typing and shorthand-skills he still uses to excellent advantage. While he claims his penmanship is less perfect than that of his brother George, his handwriting is easy to read and his signature is distinctively clear and graceful.

From Matthew Miller he learned bookkeeping. The college used the mind-stretching, competitive "cabinet" system, which taught in an outstandingly practical way the rudiments of many different businesses-jobbing, grocery, hay and grain, furniture, dry goods, lumber, banking, and corporations. These LeGrand mastered to the degree that upon completion of school he was able always to find good employment, invest, or successfully enter into business on his own. In his education there were no tentative theories, controversial philosophies, or academic frills-only the unadorned basics; but what he learned, he retained and built upon. Though he had less education than his brothers, he was able at various times to help them in business partnerships with him or in ventures of their own. With only this same basic training, seasoned by practical experience, he would become Presiding Bishop of the Church with all of its temporal affairs under his jurisdiction (subject to the direction and approval of the First Presidency), a position he held for fourteen years.

While LeGrand and George F. Jr. were attending business college in Salt Lake, their father came and visited whenever he had business in the city. He often stayed overnight with them, discussing their school affairs and their future prospects. He never left without reaffirming his love for and trust in them. He would say, "I never thought I could let a boy of mine go and live in the city, but I would trust you two to go anywhere I would go myself." Their hearts swelled with love and pride at his words. LeGrand later said, "They put rods of steel in our spines, and we couldn't do anything that would disappoint him."

George F. Jr. left school for Tooele in December 1902 to marry his childhood sweetheart, Edith May Dunn. LeGrand stayed on in Salt Lake, where his brother Joel later joined him. The lessons he had learned at home, coupled with those he was now learning at school, laid such a solid base upon which to build the structure of his life that there would be no need in later years to shore up, remodel, or redo it as his character took on the mature outlines of wholeness. There were many lessons yet to master, many skills yet to acquire. Winds would blow and shake the framework, and shadows would sometimes cover it, but it would endure upon the base which had been so carefully set in place.
