Lucile C. Tate, LeGrand Richards: Beloved Apostle ( 1982)

3

Preparing for a Mission 1900-1905

When I heard Elders Alex Bevan and John E. Isgreen bear their testimonies [1900] and tell of traveling without purse or scrip while on their missions in the Eastern States, I don't know if they said something unusual or not," LeGrand Richards relates. "If they didn't, then the Lord certainly did something unusual to me, because when I went home I felt as if I could walk into any mission field in the world if I had a call." He continues, "I went into the bedroom, got down on my knees, and asked God to help me live worthy to be a missionary when I was old enough to go."

Thus into the mind and heart of this clean, responsible, thinking young man-a fertile seedbed for the missionary spirit to take root-came the distinct inner "call" to declare the restoration of the gospel. The incident happened while he still lived in Tooele, antedating his official mission call by four years.

LeGrand was again touched by the Spirit when he read George Q. Cannon's Life of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Deseret Book Company, 1958, but originally published in 1888). "It so impressed me," he says, "that I found myself wishing I had lived in the days of the Prophet so I might have been one of his helpers and have stood by his side."

Determined to prepare himself for the coming of his mission call, he carried with him a pocket-sized book, A Practical Reference, by Louis A. Kelsch (Chicago, Illinois: Northern States Mission 1897). It was a compilation of scriptural texts arranged by subject. He does not remember where he obtained it, but it became his guide as he studied the scriptures and memorized the referenced passages, a practice that has been lifelong. By this means he helped to make the various parts of the gospel clear to him and he began to see them as they related to a logical and intelligible whole. His study also familiarized him with the prophets so that in a special sense they became his friends. "We can't all have the most learned companions," he later wrote, "but we can have the daily association of the great men of God by becoming acquainted with their lives and labors and teachings, as they have been recorded and handed down to us (Black Book, p. 27.) "From them," he states, "I tried to pattern my life and prepare myself to declare the restoration of the gospel." When he left for school in Salt Lake he took the little Kelsch volume and his scriptures with him and continued to study and memorize at every free moment and on Sundays.

Upon completion of his fifteen months of schooling at Salt Lake Business College, LeGrand worked for a few weeks for Rosenbaum Brothers in the absence of their secretary. After that he was employed by the Consolidated Wagon and Machine Company, where he remained for the next two years (1903-1904). During that time he saved his money, determined to earn the total amount needed for the mission which was now his most urgent goal.

During the summer, LeGrand occasionally went to Tooele to satisfy his home-hunger and to visit with family and friends. He sometimes made the nearly forty-mile trip on a bicycle. He tells that he and Joel had a commercially designed contraption which made it possible to pedal along the railroad tracks. A wheel attachment on the bike fit the track at the side where the rider was seated. h support bar reached from the top of the bicycle, forming a triangle with the axle to the other track, where a matching wheel-fitting was located. By this mechanical means a fairly smooth but very long ride was assured. To build up his endurance for the journey, LeGrand exercised his legs by pedaling many times around the perimeter dirt road at Liberty Park.

In December 1903 LeGrand and Joel planned to go home for Christmas, never having been away from their family for the holidays. LeGrand tells the following story about that trip:

It snowed about a foot the night before we were to go home by train. We took our grips down to the depot, where Joel waited while I went up to about Eighth East [867 First Avenue] to get Grandmother, Nanny Longstroth Richards, who was going to Tooele with us.

The streetcars were tied up and delayed because of the snow, and by the time I arrived at Grandmother's she had become anxious and had left for the station. When I got back to Main Street, I ran the remaining way to the Union Pacific Depot and arrived just in time to wave goodbye to the train carrying Joel and Grandmother.

With no other way to reach home, I went to the Farrington Livery Stables, rented a saddle horse, and started out in that snow for the long, cold ride so that I could be home with my loved ones.

When I reached the Point of the Mountain, about halfway home, I was mighty glad to see George with team and buggy to pick me up. He had no knowledge that I was coming, but he had said, "I know LeGrand; he'll be here." We tied the horse to the side and I rode with him in the buggy. When we arrived at our home, I got cleaned up and went to a dance that night. The next day I had a glorious Christmas with the folks.

LeGrand (nearest camera) as bookkeeper for Consolidated Wagon and Machine Company

The brothers returned to Salt Lake, where Joel resumed his studies and LeGrand went back to work. During this period, the latter came under the tutelage of James E. Talmage, who taught a class on the Articles of Faith. LeGrand was greatly moved by the spiritual power of his teaching. It was from here that he was called to attend the missionary class taught at the LDS University by Benjamin Goddard. LeGrand found it both stimulating and instructive.

When LeGrand's mission call finally came, it was to the Southern States Mission. His bishop, Oscar F. Hunter (Eighth Ward, Liberty Stake), however, was impressed that the young man's place was in Europe. (At that time, a bishop could suggest areas to which his missionaries might be sent.) When the matter came to the attention of Brother George Reynolds in the office of the First Presidency, he was perfectly willing to change the call. He asked LeGrand if he would like to go to Germany. The young man replied, "I want to go where I can preach the gospel, and I understand that the missionaries are being put in prison in Germany." Brother Reynolds said, "We will send you to Holland. They have religious freedom there."

But in this good man's opinion there was a problem. LeGrand was on crutches with a painful "floating kneecap," and his leg was in a plaster cast. Brother Reynolds said, "It looks to me as if you had better go home and take care of yourself."

In saying this, he had not taken into account the faith of this eager young man, who had already challenged his employer and triumphed over one obstacle put in his way. So reluctant had the company officials been to have LeGrand leave, that one had interceded with the Presidency of the Church to have his mission deferred by some months. When he found out about this, LeGrand took a dim view of the proceedings. He had earned all the money needed for his mission and could hardly wait to be on the way, so he persuaded the Church authorities to reactivate his call. Determined to let nothing else interfere, he now said to Brother Reynolds, "You book me, and I will be ready to go." With that, he left for Tooele and asked his father to bless him so he could go on his mission as scheduled.

Benjamin Goddard's missionary training class (LeGrand at extreme left at top row).

And bless him his father did. Not only did George F. promise that he would have strength and vitality and not be over-taken with sickness, but he blessed him that the "spirit of this mission [would] rest mightily" upon him and that his greatest desire would be to warn both the wicked and the honest in heart and to teach them the "principle of eternal life in plainness unto understanding." He stated that LeGrand would desire their salvation and would testify of the "divine mission of the Prophet Joseph and the restoration of the Church."

Again he saw his son as a "leader among men," but counseled him to be submissive in spirit, to control passions, and to be humble and childlike, yet "powerful under influence of the Spirit of God." He promised that as years and experience were added, LeGrand would increase in faith, knowledge, and power for good. If he were cautious and awake to temptation, he would not be overcome by the power of the adversary, who had (as before mentioned) "designed his destruction." (Patriarchal Blessings, April 2, 1905, bk. 411, p. 357, LDS Church Archives.)

On the same day that he blessed LeGrand, George F. ordained his son an elder. Now, in full confidence, LeGrand prepared to leave. Three days later (April 5, 1905) he received his endowment at the Salt Lake Temple. Shortly afterwards he had his leg cast removed, discarded his crutches, and reported that he was "almost well."

On April 15 he was set apart for his mission by President B. H. Roberts of the First Council of the Seventy, assisted by George Reynolds and George F. Richards. In his missionary blessing to the young elder, President Roberts reiterated many of the promises formerly conferred through his father. He further stated that this was but the commencement of LeGrand's ministry; that he should have "mighty intelligence in His work"; and that he would be given a "love of the people so they shall be dear to your heart, and by this token you may know His spirit is resting upon you." Another gift would be "light, intelligence, and every qualification needed to equip you for this great work of the latter days." (Missionary Blessing, LeGrand Richards papers.)

President Anthon H. Lund of the First Presidency counseled the departing missionaries in LeGrand's group to remember two things: First, if they were called upon to speak and found themselves with nothing to say, they should bear their testimonies "that Jesus is the Christ and Joseph Smith is his servant, and He will give you something to say." Second, "The people will love you, but don't be lifted up in the pride of your hearts and think that it is because you are better than other people. They will love you because of what you bring to them." As was his way, LeGrand tucked away this counsel in the file of his memory to recall when experience would bring it back again.

Before his departure, LeGrand's brother George (now a regular diary-keeper) gave him a journal to record the days of his mission. As a beginning entry in it, George had summarized the important events in LeGrand's life to date. The gift pleased the younger brother, and he expressed his appreciation by never missing a day's entry for the next three years.

LeGrand left Salt Lake City for his mission to Holland on Monday, April 17, 1905, in company with four of President Joseph F. Smith's sons, one of whom was his cousin Willard. As he bade his family good-bye, he said, "This is the happiest day of my life!" He had dreamed of it, prepared in every way for it, and now that it was an actuality his heart was filled with joy.

Once aboard the train, LeGrand learned that the Smith boys were riding Pullman, while he was booked for a chaircar. President German E. Ellsworth of the Northern States Mission, who was leaving at the same time for Chicago, caught the situation in a moment and said, "You are my boy, you come with me," and they occupied the same Pullman berth for the two nights en route to Chicago. This was the beginning of a lifelong friendship between the two men. President Ellsworth's kindness to the younger man speaks for itself, but it also partially demonstrates the fulfillment of LeGrand's promise received as a child, that the Lord would raise up "friends on every hand whose benediction and blessings" should follow him through life.

LeGrand proved himself an able observer and journal-keeper, not only describing what he saw but indicating his thoughts and feelings as well. For a young man who had never traveled beyond Utah the sights were wondrous. He described the temple site in Independence, Missouri, and wrote of the stirring Church history events which took place in that area as if he had been part of them. He wrote about the great "hot house" in Chicago's Lincoln Park, where plants and flowers gave him "an idea of what the Garden of Eden might have been," and of Queenstown, Ireland, where "the sun arose out of the eastern water like a great ball of fire" and seemed to fill his soul with joy. (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. I, pp. 5, 12.)

In Liverpool, where the European Mission was headquartered, he wrote about the apostle Heber J. Grant, president of that mission, and of the valuable instructions he gave the new missionaries. (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. I, p. 13.) "He told us how to cure homesickness, and he wanted us to put it down in our books," Elder Richards wrote. "He says, 'Work, work, work, and you won't get homesick? He advised us never to baptize without consent of husband or parents. He taught us the correct way of confirming members in the Church and instructed, 'that in administering to the Saints, we should pray for the healing power of God, and not that the oil should penetrate their systems.' He told us, 'to keep ourselves clean and pure,' and 'never to go any-place where we would be ashamed to take our mother, sister, or sweetheart.'"

Taking down the president's advice and realizing he was actually in the mission field, Elder Richards found that the spirit of his mission "rested mightily" upon him, as his father had prayed that it would. He wrote, "I felt as though I could leap for joy!"
