Lucile C. Tate, LeGrand Richards: Beloved Apostle ( 1982)

4

Holland 1905-1908

I had no difficulty in becoming accustomed to their money, but saw at once that I had a job on my hands to learn their language." So wrote Elder Richards upon his arrival in Rotterdam. (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. I, p. 15.) He and his companions, Stephen D. Markham and Melvin H. Welker, "felt like strangers" in that city of dog-carts, wooden shoes, and speech that sounded like "one long unbroken word." Yet he felt confident that if the dogs, whose barks sounded familiar, could understand Dutch, so in time could he.

There was no one to meet them at the boat that Sunday, May 7, 1905, but fortunately a dienstman (baggageman) recognized them as missionaries and helped them find Boezemsingel 116, the mission home. They found no one there either. Elder Richards then got a young man, Bote Dokter, to take them to the branch meeting, where Mission President Jacob H. Trayner finally welcomed them.

For the few days the president kept them in the city they studied, visited, and observed the quaintly dressed citizens. Elder Richards was sure that if he could get to the people with printed tracts and smiles he could begin to proselyte at once; study and practice would do the rest. Then came the day. On May 10, President Trayner called the elders in and gave out their assignments. Elder Markham would labor in Rotterdam, Elder Welker in Groningen; and Elder Richards would serve as mission secretary. His mind wrestled with the prospects of office routine and confinement. A disappointed yet submissive spirit is reflected in his journal entry that day. "I had felt as though I would prefer to get out and do tracting, and labor among the people, but then I realized that the office work had to be done as well as the other ...so I told him that I would help him all I could." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. I, pp. 15-16.)

Reinforcing to his own resolve was a dream which he felt was given to help him in his disappointment:

In the dream I was keeping books for Father in his lumber and implement business, and I said I was tired of it and wanted to do ordinary work. He agreed to let me seek other employment. I came to Salt Lake and worked with a railroad maintenance crew pushing one of their little carts along the track in company with three other men. One said, "What have you been doing?" "Keeping books," I answered. "What did you earn?" he asked. I told him. "You will never earn that on this job," he said. "Anybody can push these carts, but not everyone can keep books."

Not only did the dream comfort Elder Richards, but he came to appreciate his assignment because it taught him the inner workings of a mission and prepared him for his later call as a mission president.

There was a great need for his help. President Traynet of the Netherlands-Belgium Mission was new to his call, having served under the former president, Willard T. Cannon, until just three weeks before Elder Richards arrived. With five districts and thirty-nine elders under his jurisdiction, his schedule of travel was heavy, and the office work was in arrears. He had prayed for a good man for secretary and he now felt that his prayers had been answered. The president was single, so a Sister d'Hulst took care of the mission home. (It was this Moe [mother] d'Hulst who worried that the new secretary would wear his teeth away from brushing them so often.)

Elder Richards soon began to help with emigrations for German, Belgian, and Dutch Saints bound for the United States. He says: "I'd go down to the hotel, and I'd have a note book where I'd list the money I got from each one to pay for his transportation. I would change their money and give them back what they had coming to them-enough English coin for their crossing and debarkation from England, and the rest in American currency." He learned both Dutch and German words enough to count their baskets, trunks, and boxes and to give instructions. Because he was a member of the Church and represented the mission president, the Saints trusted him as their friend. (In contrast with present Church policy of encouraging the Saints to stay in their own lands and taking the blessings of temples, conferences, and instruction to them, the Church in 1905 was still encouraging as many as could afford it to immigrate to Utah. [The final policy change was announced in 1921. See James B. Allen and Glen M. Leonard, The Story of the Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book Co., 1976, p. 497.])

Another change in general policy and practice was a minor one, but it affected Elder Richards. Near the turn of the century, Church and civil authorities as well as the majority of other men wore beards, and a former mission president, Francis M. Lyman (1901-04), had suggested that beards would give the missionaries a look of greater maturity. Elder Richards complied with the suggestion, since his duties required him to work with banks and emigration officials. (One woman judged the bearded nineteen-year-old to be thirty-nine.)

As with emigrations, so with other aspects of his work; Elder Richards felt the urgent need to learn the language and often felt hampered because of his lack. He pushed to get the office work current so he could study Dutch. Beyond that, the spirit of his mission "rested mightily upon him." He wrote, "I was so anxious to preach the gospel that I found myself arising before 5:00 A.M. to study Dutch and get my office work done so I could go out tracting in the afternoon." (Blue Book, p. 40.) Day after day he recorded that he distributed tracts-50, 92, 110 tracts a day. His return calls to gather them yielded many gospel conversations, halting and incomplete as they no doubt were at first on his part. The kind of effort he was expending as a "part-time" missionary is clear from the fact that, in comparison, an average of only 197 tracts per missionary had been given out for the whole month of January 1905. (Netherlands Mission Historical Record, LDS Archives.)

For what this diligent effort cost him in discomfort and pain we have only one clue-a journal entry in which he mentions his hip trouble. "This evening when I went to bed about 1:00 A.M., it was impossible to get to sleep for quite a while as my leg bothered me again, and I couldn't get in a position so it was

As a nineteen-year-old missionary in Holland.

comfortable.... After thus being troubled... I asked the Lord to cause the pain to cease so that I could sleep, and it left me immediately.... The praise be to the Lord, who is all powerful." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. I, p. 50.)

Elder Richards had another challenge which was with him from the time he arrived in Holland (1905) until he left in 1908 to return home. It was fleas. Neither President Trayner nor Imke Kooyman (editor of the mission paper, De Ster, who also lived at the mission home) was afflicted in this way; but, said Elder Richards, "Fleas seem to have a way of choosing whom they want to bother." He would get up several times a night to fight them off, shake his clothing out the window, bathe with Peneroil and vinegar, but nothing helped. With wry humor, he relates: "When I took care of emigrants, I did their figuring with one hand and fought fleas with the other. When I preached, I used one arm for that and fought fleas with the other."

This constant "fight" afforded him a further tough exercise in endurance in order to rise above another difficult problem and focus upon his priority-a mission. There is no indication that he grumbled about it; in fact, he counseled himself: "Be habitually cheerful. Don't be ever plaintively whining and discontentedly murmuring, and this both for your own sake and those about you. Let your face and general demeanor be like sunshine and not like a cloudy day, east wind, or a damp blanket." (Green Book, p. 8.)

Elder Richards' most pressing need was to master the Dutch language. His method of study was a combination of dictionary use, practice, and common sense. He explains: "The mission office was right across from the cattle market, and I would go along those lanes where the animals walked... and I preached to the trees. When I couldn't get the word I wanted, I'd have a little notebook in my pocket in which to write it down and then go back and look it up." This method of learning was in line with his observation that little children learn to talk by finding words for everything they see.

His self-tutelage was effective, for after seven weeks in the field he blessed the sacrament, prayed, consecrated oil, and baptized "four souls in the Maas River," including Arie Sandman (whom he later helped to emigrate). Of the baptism he wrote: "It was after ten o'clock at night and it had been raining quite hard, but as soon as we got about ready, it cleared off.... It made me shake like a leaf to go in the water, as it was quite cold, but I had already asked the Lord several times to help me as it was my first trial and I had to do it in Dutch The moment I raised my hand to perform the baptism, I felt just as steady as I ever have and I was able to say the words nicely "(LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. I, p. 24.)

Although he did well with memorized prayers, ordinances, and blessings, he was still struggling to gain facility in conversation and preaching. Nevertheless he did well when President Heber J. Grant called upon him to speak at the combined mission conference held in Rotterdam, February 1906 (after President Traynet had assured him he would not be called upon because he was taking the president's talk down in shorthand). Elder Richards bore testimony with such freedom and power that nonmembers in attendance later remembered him for it and one joined the Church.

President Grant too was impressed with the young elder. After the meeting, he dictated fifteen letters to Elder Richards and then n asked how he would like to go to Liverpool with him. In that situation he no doubt could have worked out arrangements for proselyting similar to those he had made in his current position. The young elder admitted that he would be thrilled with the prospects of ending his grueling study of Dutch and his fight with the fleas, and felt it would be an honor to serve under President Grant. The president said he would think it over until morning.

When the two men met again, the president said, "I have decided that if I took you, it would be because I have the authority and would like to, but President Trayner needs you as much as I do, and I think you should remain." His words came as a great disappointment, but in so deciding the president proved himself a great friend. He kept the young elder on course, never forgot him, and played an important role in his later ministry.

Missionaries with European Mission President Heber J. Grant at Delftshaven, Holland (Elder Richards with arm on the President's knee).

Just a month after the conference, Elder Richards spoke in church for twenty-seven minutes. On March 11, 1906, he wrote, "I never felt more like speaking in my life. I was so full of the Spirit, I felt that should the floor slide from under me, I could still stand there and testify to the things of God." It was a significant breakthrough. Increasingly he became master of the language, and he experienced great freedom of expression as he taught the Bible-reading Dutch. His new-found facility coupled with their knowledge of the scriptures made religious discussion both challenging and profitable.

As he labored to obtain in Dutch the doctrinal knowledge he had in English, his comprehension expanded; and as he met questions and explained Church doctrine, his studies made him a keen scripturalist. He added to his store of gospel knowledge by deep study of such subjects as the Holy Ghost, the Gathering of Israel, and the Apostasy. Scripturally, he could prove the Apostasy to a people who accepted the Bible as the word of God, and with the "falling away" clearly shown, he could establish both the need and the promise of a restoration. These two themes were and are central to Elder Richards's preaching. With his own firm conviction and a command of the language with which to share the gospel, he could now teach and preach and be the Lord's instrument in conversions.

Many impressive conversion stories are contained in Elder Richards's journal and his Blue Book. The one that follows comes from the period in which he labored as mission secretary. It serves as an early example of his ability to boldly challenge without giving offense, to retain the lead, to explain the gospel in plain terms, and to bear testimony unto conversion-skills for which Elder Richards later became noted.

He lent his own money for fifteen-year-old Arie Sandman to immigrate to America. (It was arranged that when the lad found work there he would repay it, which he later did.) The boy's uncle, Marinus de Rijke, and his wife, a Sandman, allowed missionaries in their home only if they did not discuss religion. When Arie told his uncle of the emigration loan, the older man said, "I would like to meet this man Richards." He came to the boat to bid his nephew farewell, and Arie introduced the two men to each other.

Mr. de Rijke was somewhat pompous and proud, wore a stovepipe hat, carried a walking stick, and smoked a big cigar. At first Elder Richards paid him little attention, but after seeing Arie off, he asked, "Mr. de Rijke, have you ever attended a Mormon meeting?"

"No!" was the emphatic answer.

"Well," Elder Richards said, "the Mormons are cutting enough of a figure in the world that from an educational standpoint it wouldn't hurt you to know a little about them."

He then added, "A man of your learning and experience couldn't be misled."

"Well, I will come," de Rijke said.

The next Sunday he and his wife were at the sacrament meeting. After the meeting, Elder Richards asked him how he had liked the service. He said, "Tamelijk," which means fairly well. Elder Richards then suggested, "I would like to come to your home next week, and you take your Bible and I will take mine, and I will show you things in your Bible you have never read before."

Marinus asked his wife, "What do you say?"

"Oh, let them come," she answered.

The appointment was kept, and they had a "wonderful evening." As the missionaries took their leave, Elder Richards said, "Now, when your minister hears we've been here, he will tell you we are the most wicked people in the world. I suggest you invite him to your home, at any hour of the day or night that meets his convenience, and then invite us also, and you decide which one has the truth." He continued with a paraphrase of John 10:11-13: "He will refuse to come because 'the hireling fleeth when the wolves come, because he is an hireling, but the good shepherd giveth his life for the flock.' You will determine whether he is a hireling."

Mr. de Rijke was the foreman in a distillery, and when the employees left each day he would say to them, "I have had the Mormon missionaries in my home, and my minister will not meet them. If any of you know a minister who is not afraid of Mormons, I would like to get hold of him-I don't care what church he belongs to." Some fine. discussions resulted, and after one of them Mr. de Rijke said, "Mr. Richards, I would give everything I own if I could prove you wrong." The young elder laid his little Bible before the man and said, "That is all I ask you to do, and then I will never ask the privilege of coming in your home again."

The man replied, "That is what I have been trying to do, and I have failed."

"I want to thank you for bearing your testimony that you have found the truth," Elder Richards said. "Now what are you going to do about it?"

Shortly after this, Mr. de Rijke and his wife were baptized and immigrated to Utah. Although childless in Holland, they had two children in Utah. The son, Harry, became the "best worker with the Aaronic Priesthood" that Elder Richards ever knew in the Church. The daughter, Nellie, filled three missions. (Blue Book, pp. 42-43.)

As capable as this conversion story shows him to be, Elder Richards readily admits that he learned part of the technique from Alex Nibley, who later became the mission president. While Elder Richards yet could not speak Dutch very well but could understand it, he and Elder Nibley made their first visit to the Herman Schilperoort family. Elder Nibley explained to the man what brought them to Holland, and the man spoke up and said, "Well, what about polygamy?"-a "red-hot" subject at that time.

Elder Nibley replied: "Now, that is a good question, and if you hadn't asked, we would have told you all about it in due course. But if you were going to build a house, you wouldn't try to put the roof on before you got the foundation in, would you?" He added, "Write in your little memorandum book, polygamy, so we will not overlook it, and we'll talk about that later."

When the coffee and cookies were served, the missionaries "did justice to the cookies, but refused the coffee." Schilperoort said, "That isn't against your religion, is it?" Elder Nibley said, "Yes, we are taught not to drink coffee." The man responded, "I would never join your church, then. I couldn't live without my coffee."

"Now write that in your book," Elder Nibley said.

Of the experience, Elder Richards comments: "It was worth a lot to me in my future missionary work. How my companion could make polygamy and coffee so interesting on our first visit that we could get back into that home and then convince them that the Lord had restored his Church and kingdom upon the earth-it was a great lesson to me." When Elder Nibley finally said to the man, "Get out your memo book," all his questions had been answered, the missionary had been in command all the way, and the family joined the Church. (Blue Book, pp. 40-41.)

Although his diligent labors preserved him from homesickness, Elder Richards notes in his journal the letters he received from home and something of their contents. Because of the impact it had upon him, the one received from his father on April 9, 1906, is notable. From it he quotes:

Last night, I dreamed of seeing the Savior and embracing him. The feelings I cannot describe, but I think it was a touch of heaven. I never expect anything better hereafter. The love of man for woman cannot compare with it. May we be faithful and make every sacrifice necessary... to live in his presence forever. (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. I, p. 52.)

To this excerpt, Elder Richards adds that which is reminiscent of his father's early commitment to the Lord, and it bound him even more firmly to follow in his father's path. "I resolve that, with the help of the Lord, I will try as nearly as my knowledge goes to serve God and assist in every way possible, that I might obtain the blessings about which my father speaks." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. I, p. 53.)

Two days later, when President Grant and his wife arrived at the Rotterdam railroad station, Elder Richards handed him a telegram that had come to the mission home. It read that three vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve-Taylor, Cowley, and Merrill-had been filled by Richards, Whitney, and McKay. "I wonder who this man Richards is," said the president. He then mentioned two of Elder Richards's uncles, Franklin S. and Charles C., along with his father, George F., and decided that it must be the latter. Elder Richards felt that because of his father's dream it must surely be he, and so it proved to be. Of his father's call Elder Richards wrote, "I do feel to thank the Lord, and hope and pray that I may remain true, virtuous, and industrious in the Lord's work, that my joy may be united with his." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. I, p. 53.) To mark the occasion, President Grant and his wife took Elder Richards sightseeing in a hired carriage.

Concurrently with his new resolve, Elder Richards received an increase in responsibilities. He now handled all emigrations, and in the mission president's absence he assigned new missionaries to their fields of labor. President Trayher went home on April 23, 1906, and Alexander Nibley succeeded him (1906-07). The new president also traveled much on mission business, and while he was in Liege, Belgium, an emergency arose. Elder Welker, who had arrived in Holland with Elder Richards, came down with smallpox in Groningen. All the missionaries fasted for him, and the mission secretary continued his fast until noon of the next day. That night, Elder Welker died.

Alone at the mission office, Elder Richards asked President John P. Lillywhite of the Rotterdam Branch to accompany him to Groningen. They tried to have the burial deferred until it could be done properly, but because of the danger of contagion they were unable to do so, and the missionary was buried "fourth class" in a stacked grave. The elders from Rotterdam and two from Groningen (including Abraham J. Gold, who had nursed the sick elder until he entered the hospital) carried him to his grave. Because there was no marker, they carved the date of his death along with his initials and theirs upon the crude box.

Under the circumstances many would have thought all had been done that could be, but Elder Richards did not feel content. He obtained permission from the mayor to have the elder's body taken up, put in a good casket, and buried "first class," a thing the mayor said had never been done in his time for a case of death by smallpox. The elders then returned to Rotterdam.

Two weeks later Elder Gold died of the same disease. "It is a terrible thing to think of," Elder Richards said, as he left again for Groningen. He arranged for the dead elder to be buried by the side of his companion, Elder Welker. When that sad work was done, he wrote letters to the parents of the young men telling of their work and testimonies and giving words of comfort. (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. I, pp. 56-60.) He never forgot these elders who gave their lives in service to the Lord. On his second mission five years later he raised money through the returned missionaries from Holland for a large stone marker and for a wrought iron fence to place around the graves, and when he returned to Holland in 1959 and 1980 he visited there to pay his respects to them.

Already an effective missionary with a command of the language, and having proven himself a capable administrator, Elder Richards was called on September 18, 1906, to preside over the Rotterdam Branch, where he served for seven months. He worked diligently to reactivate members who had fallen away. Nearly six hundred Saints were listed on the books, but attendance was low. If a member was absent from church, he would call at the home, ask if there was illness or need, and let the person know he had been missed. There seemed to be no limit to his diligence. During one three-and-a-half-month period he made 223 such home visits.

As he worked with his people, he grew in tenderness and love. His journal shows that time and again he gave money to the poor. He later told his mother that he used more of his means for them than for himself. When children were ill, he watched at their bedsides so the parents could rest. (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. I, p. 91.) When Brother de Waal was sick and not able to eat, Elder Richards "bought five pounds of Germade... and made some mush, toasted bread, and left him eating nicely." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. I, p. 93.) He and the elders administered, blessed, and comforted wherever there was need. He sensed the fulfillment of the words of Elder B. H. Roberts in his setting apart blessing-that his love for the Dutch people, and their dearness to his heart, would be the "token" by which he would know that "the Spirit of the Lord was resting upon him."

While the branch business took the major portion of his time, he continued to proselyte, and for the period he served in Rotterdam as mission secretary and then as branch president, conversions resulting from his own contacts numbered forty. In the ensuing years their descendants have multiplied by the hundreds. In the Abraham Seiverts family alone there were 154 direct descendants in the Church in 1970. Thirty-five of these had filled full-time missions and four had been stake missionaries. One of the forty-three family units had kept two Indian children in their home, and one of these was then in the mission field. (Blue Book, p. 45.)

On April 11, 1907, Elder Richards was sent to preside over the Amsterdam Conference (district president). There he initiated an administrative approach to the work which he has used in each local leadership position he has held. The technique (which will be demonstrated more fully in later chapters) consisted of calling in his priesthood leaders, taking inventory of all members -active and inactive alike-and then putting everyone to .work in some capacity or other.

In all administrative positions in the Church, there are negative aspects of the work. Elder Richards dealt with family quarrels, crying women, and contention, including "such a terrible condition of babbling in one branch" that it took two and a half hours to bring it under control. (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. I, p. 186.) Solving these problems gave him experience and wisdom, but far outweighing them were the great spiritual times that brought him joy. Preaching with freedom, sparring with ministers ("Talk about your fun!" he says of these), convincing a stranger that the gospel is true-these were the activities he loved. Of the ordinances he performed-blessing little children, baptizing and confirming new converts, administering to the sick-he writes, "What a joy above words to express is the great privilege of officiating in the name of God the Father and His Son!" (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. I, p. 202.)

This deep sense of gratitude became a keynote in his life. He recalls that while serving in Amsterdam he "used to go over to the little chapel, and kneel down back of the pulpit and thank the Lord for the privilege of being in the mission field, and for the opportunity... to bear witness of the gospel. It seemed such a part of me that my heart would just bubble over." The joy with which he began his mission, and which he labored so faithfully to retain, now found permanent lodging within him, and he knew from this time on that, for him, the Lord's work would take precedence over everything else in his life. It seems that this same joy gave to his spirit its singular and appealing quality of radiance.

He continued to study the scriptures. He drew a great lesson from Luke 10:5-7, wherein the Savior's words read: "And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house. And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it.... Go not from house to house." Elder Richards explains his application of this scripture as follows:

I figured that if I were in a home one night, and the peace of heaven rested there, it was my responsibility to bring the family into the Church. If I didn't, it was because the devil was a better salesman than I. Now, I visited a home in Amsterdam, and on our first evening, tears rolled down the lady's cheeks because of what we said. Upon leaving, I said, "If your minister learns we've been here, he will tell you we are the wickedest people on earth, and if you believe him, you will not want us to return."

That is just what happened. A daughter from that home met one of the Saints on the street and said, "When Mr. Richards comes to see us on Tuesday, Mother and Father will not be home." So we made another appointment for Tuesday, and called at their place on Monday. I put on all the smiles I could and said, "Pardon us, but something came up for Tuesday and we couldn't come. We knew you spend each evening at home, so we didn't think it would make any difference if we came Monday or Tuesday." We were in, and we brought that whole family into the Church.

A month after Elder Richards had begun his work in Amsterdam, Sylvester Q. Cannon succeeded Alexander Nibley as president of the mission, and toward the close of Elder Richards's mission he traveled with President Cannon to Liege for a conference. After the meetings, the elders left for Brussels and there attended the opera with President Cannon, who had with him a book from which he explained what was happening. (In his journals, at various points in his mission Elder Richards notes visits to operas, museums, galleries, and such places of historical interest as Waterloo and Delftshaven.) He came to know and love President Cannon and his wife and family. (In fact, so greatly did the elder admire the president's qualities of refinement, optimism, and pleasantness that he hoped sometime to find and marry a girl who had the same excellent nature in feminine counterpart.)

Elder Richards was released from his mission in January, 1908. As he prepared to leave, he poignantly expressed the two-way love that existed between him and the Saints. His journal entry is dated January 5, 1908:

In the evening meeting I spoke first to give my farewell. As I walked into the pulpit and viewed the faces of the brothers and sisters all sitting with awe to see what was to be said, a feeling came over me that I had never had before. To think how I had preached them the word of the Lord with all the power the Lord had given me.... I had learned to love them, and they in turn placed me far above what I really am.... I never in my life felt happier than under the influence of the Spirit present this evening. (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. II, pp. 149-50.)

Elder Richards now knew fully what President Anthon H. Lund had meant when he said, "The people will love you because of what you bring to them." Before leaving Amsterdam, he visited his friends for a final good-bye. He went to the home of one little woman. She was so short that she had to look way up to him. He had been the first missionary in that home and had brought the whole family into the Church. When he went to leave, tears rolled down her cheeks and she said, "Elder Richards, it was hard to see my daughter leave for Zion a few months ago, but it is much harder to see you go."

He went to bid another convert good-bye, a man who stood erect in the uniform of his country. This friend got down on his knees and took the elder's hand in his, hugged and kissed it, and bathed it with his tears of gratitude for the gospel the missionary had brought. Elder Richards said upon leaving him, "I wept all the way from Amsterdam to Rotterdam, thinking that I might never see those friends of mine again. It was much harder to leave them than it was my own family when I left on my mission."

In Rotterdam he visited thirty or so of his families for a last good-bye, then left Holland on the Batavier ship bound for England. When he arrived in Liverpool he no longer wore his beard. He attended a Sunday meeting, and President Charles W. Penrose, now president of the European Mission, called upon him to speak and include a few words in Dutch. He wrote that he felt like "a prisoner turned loose." English was now his foreign tongue. After the meeting, the president appointed Brigham A. Seare as president of the company, with Elders Richards and Sloan as counselors. They sailed January 23, 1908, in the S.S. Canada of the Dominion Line. There were twenty-six in their company, including an old friend, Stanley F. Kimball.

It proved to be a rough crossing. As they neared the American shore a terrible storm arose. Gigantic waves rolled about, and everything not attached to the deck was thrown around. A sister returning from Scandinavia said, "Brother Richards, you don't seem a bit worried." He answered, "Well, I don't know what's going to happen to you and the rest of the passengers, but I feel just as much at ease as if I were sitting in my mother's parlor. I had a promise that if I filled an honorable mission I'd return home in safety, and I have had the assurance that my mission was acceptable to the Lord, so I am going home." (Blue Book, p. 49, and interview.)

His father met him in Chicago (where his brother George was studying dentistry), and after visiting there they traveled home together. They shared a Pullman on the train. LeGrand recorded: "Of course we had prayer, and Father took the lead. He prayed that the Lord would help me find a companion my equal, so we could become parents of some of the choice spirits of heaven." (Blue Book, p. 50.) They arrived in Salt Lake on February 12, 1908, six days after his twenty-second birthday. Of his homecoming, he wrote: "It was snowing in fine style.... Joel was there to meet us. He had grown so; he is two inches taller than I am. We then took the [street]car to Third [Avenue]. I got off the car first; all were looking from the window. Little Nina ran out to meet me, and oh how strange it did seem to see so many little sisters, and so grown up! I could hardly believe my eyes." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. III, p. 23.)

Elder George F. Richards with his family at time of LeGrand's return from Holland (LeGrand stands behind his father).

One day soon after, as he sat at dinner and saw what his mother had put before him, he wept. She said, "What's the matter, son? Aren't you happy to be home?" LeGrand answered, "Yes, Mother, but I'm looking at what you're feeding me, and I'm thinking what those poor Dutch friends of mine have to live on, and I can't help but weep."

LeGrand not only thought of them and wept for them but continued to serve them. On February 25, two weeks after his arrival home, he and his mother did the temple work for fifteen relatives of his Dutch friends in Holland, people who had died without a knowledge of the gospel. During the ensuing years he lent money for many to immigrate to Utah, prepared and signed their bonds, and then helped them to find work and to make the difficult transition from old to new country after they arrived.

Both his Eighth Ward in Salt Lake and Tooele Ward held homecoming services for him. The latter took place on March 15, 1908, where his parents, his brother Joel, and his sister Nina were present. He spoke with complete freedom as he told of his experiences in Holland. He voiced his deep gratitude for the privilege of serving there. He expressed his great desire never to lose the Spirit he then felt, and he hoped the Lord would send him on a mission often enough so that the Spirit could always remain with him.

Miss Ina Jane Ashton, a former teacher at the Tooele District School, had become acquainted with the Richards family through one of her pupils, Mamie Richards. She was in attendance at the homecoming and was much impressed. In the evening she was among the young people who gathered for a fireside at the home of John W. Tate, where LeGrand and Joel stayed that night. Both she and LeGrand say that it was "love at first sight" when they met.

It was a month later when LeGrand and Joel went to Saltair, and there LeGrand danced with "Miss Ashton." Looking back he recalls, "She was so sweet to me, and those little piercing brown eyes of hers did something to me, and she seemed to respond." When Ina suggested he come to see her and she would bake him a pie, he lost little time in doing so. He recorded in his journal, "I had a talk with Ina that I don't think I shall forget. k has been a happy day for me."

There followed many talks, meetings, canyon and beach parties, and dances. LeGrand says, "We had a very happy courtship."
