Lucile C. Tate, LeGrand Richards: Beloved Apostle ( 1982)

5

The Partnership 1908-1913

When LeGrand Richards proposed to Ina Jane Ashton she ran from him, for his words were not what she had wanted or expected to hear-"There will always be one that will come ahead of you." When he caught her, he had some explaining to do. "Ina," he said, "I had such a wonderful experience in the mission field, I almost feel that I walked and talked with the Lord. My duty to him and his Church will have to come first. If you want second place, it is yours." After his explanation, she wanted that place.

With true understanding she accepted his commitment to the Lord, and with total sincerity she gave her promise to him. Although in later years she would tell her children that he belonged to the Church and they belonged to her, yet they were sweethearts in the finest sense of the word. In this dainty and adorable girl LeGrand had "met his equal," as his father had prayed that he would.

Ina was a "little bundle of sweetness" (standing a mere five-foot-three), with soft black-brown eyes and an abundance of dark brown hair-a perfect complement to LeGrand's bigness and strength. His eyes were blue, his hair rich and dark, and he stood just under six feet tall. Totally feminine, Ina liked pretty things-flowers, jewelry, clothes-and took pride in "always looking nice." Her disposition was cheerful and optimistic, her nature sensitive and refined. She would not laugh at the crude or unseemly, and she tended to block out the negative and the bad. Of a firm, no-nonsense turn of mind, she had a streak of "darling spunk"-high spirits that held no rancor or bite. It was probably this spunk that sent her running from LeGrand when he proposed. She was a creative cook and had already reached his "heart" with her even-then-famous lemon pies. She loved babies, little children, and big families.

Of her inner character, it is said that she was spiritual and capable of deep devotion. In the patriarchal blessing she had recently received (April 19, 1908), she was told, "The Lord is pleased with thine integrity.... thou shalt secure unto thyself the companion of thy choice, and the time is not far distant when thou shalt be called to labor among those upon whom much responsibility rests, therefore, thou shalt reflect often upon the past, present, and future, that you may realize your position, and comprehend the blessings promised unto the faithful." Perhaps it was these last words that inspired her life's motto: "Keep the commandments; it pays good dividends."

The temperament and character which Ina Jane Ashton brought to the future marriage partnership on that warm summer evening of August 9, 1908 (and which would grow and mature in their future lives together) were traits and qualities which had been nurtured in the climate of a great home and fostered by parents of high principle and intrinsic goodness. She was born on September 14, 1886, and was raised in a two-family home environment; her mother Cora Lindsay was the second wife of Edward T. Ashton, prominent contractor-builder and bishop of the Fifteenth Ward.

Cora had come to Salt Lake with her convert family from Bridgewater (near Morgantown), North Carolina, when only seventeen, bringing with her memories of gracious Southern living and its disruption when the Civil War claimed husbands, sons, and sweethearts for the conflict. (Her own father served as an officer throughout the war.) Soon after their arrival in Salt Lake, Cora was asked to help Effie, first wife of Edward T. Ashton, when her first child was born, and it was Effie who suggested and approved (after a full day of prayer and soul-searching) the pretty Southern girl as Edward's second wife. Effie Morris bore him five children; Cora, twelve, of whom Ina was the second. The two wives were mutually loving and helpful to each other and came to be best of friends, a fact which contributed greatly to the harmony and happiness of the two families. They also learned about sharing and sacrifice when Edward served a mission in Wales. His letters from there were treasured by the wives and children alike. Ina remembered them throughout life, although she was still a small child while he was gone.

Edward's mission to Wales was especially significant because the Ashtons were of Welsh descent. They had a great love for music and met often in the evenings to sing. They were a handsome group and were quick of wit and full of fun. Children loved to visit there, where grandfather Ashton "carved beautiful white horses from their mashed potatoes," where cakes were baking in the oven of the black coal range which dominated the big sunny kitchen, and where children must not dance about or tussle lest "the cake should fall." They liked to "lower notes on strings down the long, dark clothes-chute to the basement or venture down it themselves." (Recounted by Edward's granddaughter, Mercedes R. Kiepe.) It was a happy home which, with its harmonious and fun-loving atmosphere, played an important part in developing cheerful, optimistic attitudes in all the children while allowing for high spirits and individual expression and growth.

Ina enjoyed books, sometimes to the exclusion of household chores. She said, "We used to go to the public library and bring home three or four books. Then we'd go into the corn field where we were hidden, so our parents couldn't see us to call or bother us" (As told to Gerry Avant, Church News, Sept. 28, 1974). She read Alcott, Kipling and Stevenson as a youngster and the focus of her reading continued in the field of literature in later life. The English writers were her favorites-Shakespeare, Browning, Ruskin, Carlyle. She also collected quotations and poems from many sources and copied them in a small black book. These reflect her desire to be uplifted, motivated, and inspired.

After elementary school she attended LDS University (actually high school with a teacher's normal course added). She graduated with a teacher's certificate and was interviewed for a position out at the Tooele District School. The superintendent queried her: "What would you do if the children became irritable

LeGrand and his sweetheart, Ina Jane Ashton, about the time of their marriage

or upset, or needed disciplining?" With no hesitation she answered, "I'd throw open the windows and let them exercise." She was hired. Several grades were included in her class, and some of the boys were bigger than she, but she kept them in line and successfully completed the year.

While in Tooele she became acquainted with the George F. Richards family, whose daughter Mamie (as previously mentioned) was in her class. Mamie's recollections of Ina as a teacher are that she was skilled and appealing. She also remembers the Hiawatha costume Ina made for her.

Although the superintendent wanted Ina back for a second year, she did not return. She had been receiving attentions from a non-LDS doctor in the area, and her father therefore thought it best for her to come back to Salt Lake City. This she did. She then worked for him at the Ashton Improvement Company, her father's expanding contractor business which later furnished the exterior stone for the Utah State Capitol (1915), the Church Administration Building (1917), and other important structures. (Deseret News, February 20, 1923, p. B-1.)

During this time LeGrand had been serving his mission in Holland, returning to Salt Lake on February 12, 1908. Shortly after that, Ina and he met and began courting. When Ina accepted LeGrand's proposal it was a time of great joy for him. That night he recorded his entry in shorthand (ordinary words would not suffice). "I asked Ina to be mine," he transcribes, "and she gave me the kind of an answer that has made me the happiest man in the world ever since. It seems too good to be true." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. III, p. 23, and interview.)

It was some time before LeGrand gave Ina a diamond. He wanted it to be just right, it must be carefully selected, and money must be earned to pay cash for it. (He worked temporarily in the Church Tithing Office but soon found steady employment keeping books for Pratt and McBeth Brokerage at sixty dollars a month.) He tells that one of his brothers went to Park Davis Jewelers to see what he had chosen and then said, "Oh, you wouldn't pay that much for an engagement ring!" LeGrand responded, "If I don't have much in the way of house or furniture when I get married, I can add to that, but I'll never be able to add to Ina's engagement ring because I'll only get engaged once." So he paid a lot more for the diamond than his brother thought he should. LeGrand presented the ring to Ina in her parent's home at 138 South Seventh West, and, he says, "She ran to show her mother what she got."

The couple spent the next month talking over plans, looking at lots, apartments, and houses. Hardly able to contain the happiness of sharing their many dreams, LeGrand wrote, "These are times never to be forgotten. How strange it does seem, but oh, how sweet!" (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. III, p. 56.)

It was shortly after the above entry was made that LeGrand discontinued the daily recording of events in his First Mission journals-vols. I, II, and Ill. For the five-year interval before he left for his next mission, he wrote a careful summary of business and investment activities, family happenings, labors with his beloved Dutch people in Utah, and his Church assignments and calls. (Vol. III, end part.) His meeting attendance was regular, he was a faithful ward (home) teacher, he occasionally had speaking engagements, and he continued to meet with his father's prayer circle at the temple, to which he had been an invited member since his return from Holland-a privilege which he valued very highly. George F. Jr. was also a member at various times. [^1]

Another experience that meant a great deal to LeGrand was when his father took him to visit his mother (LeGrand's grandmother), Nanny Longstroth Richards, who, as Willard Richards's wife, had known the Prophet Joseph Smith very well. From her lips LeGrand heard the impressive story: "I was in the meeting following the martyrdom of the Prophet, when Sidney Rigdon spoke and claimed that he should take the Prophet's place as head of the Church." She said that "when Brigham Young spoke, he sounded like the Prophet Joseph and looked like him, so we all knew whom the Lord wanted to lead his people."

On August 16, 1908, LeGrand was sustained as superintendent of the Twenty-seventh Ward Sunday School, succeeding William T. Atkin. He served in that position until he left Salt Lake.

He continued to work for Pratt and McBeth until the first week of April 1909. His wages had increased from $60.00 to $110.00 a month, with another raise promised. He recorded that he made several investments in mining stock and "made considerable gain at first, but had about the same experience as most men who follow that kind of business, and [I] finally quit the [stock investment] game for all time to come.... This makes me about even on all my investments in stock up to date, having made quite a little on Consolidated Wagon and Mach[ine] Co. stock before I left on my first mission." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. III, pp. 57-58.)

That same April he left Salt Lake for Portland, Oregon, to accept a position as assistant secretary of Portland Cement Company, with Aman Moore as manager and Alex Nibley (his former mission president) as secretary. There he prepared to have Ina join him. The following month he returned to Salt Lake, and on Wednesday, May 19, 1909, he and Ina were married. His father records the event in his journal. He had attended a meeting with the First Presidency and two others of the Twelve in the upper room of the temple. "I went downstairs at the conclusion of our meeting, 2:00 P.M., and solemnized the marriage of my Son LeGrand to and with Sister Ina Jane Ashton in the presence of about fifteen of the relatives. I there bid them good-bye as I would not be able to attend the reception, and they would be leaving for Portland, Oregon, before my return." (George F. Richards Diary, vol. 12, p. 109.) George F. left that night for conference assignments in the Uintah Basin. The newly married couple, along with other family members, remained in the temple to do sealings for "our dead, the Longstroths."

The couple were entertained at a family dinner in the Ashton home that evening and left for Portland the next day. With the journey by train and some beautiful walks among the flowering shrubs and trees in the Portland area, their honeymoon was to become a sweet memory to them. Ina carried among her things a plaque which they hung in each of their homes until it was lost in a later move. Its message has been given before each marriage ceremony LeGrand has performed. The words are neatly copied in Ina's Black Book (p. 77).

Whoe'er thou art that entereth here Forget the struggling world

And every trembling fear.

Take from thy heart each evil thought, And all that selfishness

Within thy life has wrought.

For once inside this place thou'lt find No barter, servant's fear,

Nor master's voice unkind.

Here all are kin of God above- Thou, too, dear heart; and here

The rule of life is love.

(Max Ehrmann.)

Again LeGrand came to the notice of a Church leader. He tells that when he first went to Portland, he met Melvin J. Ballard and his wife, Martha. They were on the same train, and were going to Portland for President Ballard to succeed Nephi Pratt as president of the Northwestern States Mission. The mission secretary was Hemming Mortensen. "I audited the mission books, balanced the accounts, and set up a new bookkeeping system for him," LeGrand says. "Monthly thereafter I helped get out the mission financial reports." As in Holland, his secretarial skills made possible some valuable service to a mission office. It is not surprising that shortly afterwards, when President Ballard reorganized the presidency of the Portland Branch, he appointed LeGrand, whom he had come to rely on, as the president. Alex Nibley was called to be first counselor, and Lehi Pratt, second.

Martha Ballard and Ina became good friends, and when the Richardses' first baby, Mercedes, was born on President Ballard's birthday, Martha was there to help Ina. Elder M. Russell Ballard remembers the story and further recalls that his own father, son of Melvin J., was LeGrand's home teaching companion in Portland, an opportunity he greatly valued.

The cement company engaged a bonding firm to float a bond issue for them. LeGrand gave up his secretarial position to sell bonds on a straight commission basis in a two-county territory. He and Alex Nibley were the two top salesmen in the venture until the company stopped construction of the plant to core-drill lime-rock deposits, fearing that there wouldn't be sufficient rock to justify building the plant. As a result, some of the orders LeGrand had taken were cancelled. Disappointed, he accepted stock in settlement of bond commissions due him. He afterwards regretted not holding on to the stock, since the company became very prosperous.

LeGrand was not only successful in selling bonds but was ever alert for opportunities to "sell" Mormonism. In the course of his work he received letters of introduction from some of the prominent bankers in Portland, so he had no difficulty in contacting other important business and professional men. One day he called on a doctor in Oregon City who had been city mayor and president of the Chamber of Commerce. He was just ready to call on some of his patients, and he invited LeGrand to go along in his rubber-tired buggy pulled by a fine team of horses.

As they rode along, LeGrand told of a company directors' meeting that had just been held at which Mr. Charles W. Nibley from Salt Lake City had been present. "Who is this man Nibley -is he a Mormon?" the doctor asked. "Yes," LeGrand replied, "He is the Presiding Bishop of the Mormon Church."

The doctor made some very derogatory statements about the Mormons, then started on the Mormon missionaries. LeGrand let him finish and then said, "Doctor, have you ever met a Mormon.?"

"No," he replied.

"Have you ever read a Mormon book written by a Mormon?"

"No."

"Now, Doctor, I want to tell you something," LeGrand said. "You are sitting right here at the side of a Mormon missionary." The man's face colored. "You need not feel embarrassed," LeGrand went on. "I qualified you. You have never met a Mormon-you have never read a book written by a Mormon. Now, I would like to tell you what the Mormons really are."

When the two men returned to Oregon City, the doctor tossed the lines to LeGrand, asked him to drive his team to the livery stable, and said, "If that is Mormonism, I could be a good Mormon-don't ever come to Oregon City without calling on me." (Blue Book, p. 52.)

When baby Mercedes was old enough to make the journey, Ina took her to Salt Lake to show her off to the families and to visit with her folks. It was a lonely LeGrand who remained in Portland and wrote letters to them every day, then anxiously awaited Ina's answers. In one, dated April 13, 1910, he wrote: "I met the postman at 7:30, but no letter, so I patiently waited for his next trip, and you should have seen the change in [my] expression. Oh, Ina... I do love you both so very, very much." He received a letter from his father and wrote of its contents, "Father says he thinks [Mercedes] is so sweet, but so little and dainty that he can hardly think she is for this world. I didn't like him to say that, but her Daddy certainly believes she is going to remain with us.... "Always solicitous of Ina's comfort and health, he adds, "I have made up my mind, Ina Dear, that as soon as we get straight with the world, I am going to have a girl [help you], and my Darling is going to have her time with Papa and... Mercedes." (April 17, 1910.)

Although he desired to provide help for Ina, there were few times in their lives, except for mission home experiences, when paid help was available; but in lieu of such help, LeGrand provided loving service himself. Of this he says matter-of-factly:

While the children were babies, I don't think my wife ever got up at night unless they were sick. I figured that if she took care of the kiddies in the day (and it is a wrestle to keep them happy), and I just had book work to do, that I could afford to spell her off at night. So, if a baby cried, I'd be out of bed in a hurry; if it was a bottle they needed, I'd get it; or I'd change their pants. As long as they weren't sick, I relieved her of the responsibility of caring for them at night.

Ina with the couple's first child, Mercedes.

Though he claims not to have helped the children when sick, the record is to the contrary, for each child tells of his gentle care in times of illness-how he tucked and soothed them; how he rubbed aching legs; and how he blessed them. His love for them all has been deep, sure, and ever-present.

Some time after Ina returned, Orson Romney called on LeGrand and offered him $125.00 a month to return to Salt Lake and work for his father's firm. The couple discussed where they wanted to raise their children and they decided that for that purpose Salt Lake City, with their families and friends and with the Saints all around them, was preferable to any other locale. Accordingly they returned to Salt Lake in October 1910.

LeGrand began work with the George Romney Lumber Company and also kept books and made collections for several other firms on the side. His transportation from the apartment on Fourth Avenue to work and for calls consisted of a bicycle. While the couple lived there, a second daughter, Effie Norinne, was born on August 18, 1911, a time partly remembered because it was the very day Grandfather George F. shaved off his beard. ("Now Papa can smile," his daughter Edna said.) LeGrand's diligence and hard work made it possible for him to pool funds with his brother George and build a duplex on S Street, his family occupying the lower floor, and George's the upper. They moved in on Ina's birthday, September 14, 1912, and on December 31 their third daughter, Marian Louise, was born.

During that year LeGrand was stricken with the dread disease smallpox. He was quarantined and ran extremely high temperatures. His father was very concerned and recorded LeGrand's progress day by day. Elder James E. Talmage of the Council of the Twelve kept in close touch also, and he instructed Ina in shading the light from LeGrand's face to avoid pitting from the illness. LeGrand finally recovered, and he carries only one small pit mark, on his forehead.

While working at the Lumber Company, he had a number of very successful investment experiences. He was approached by various businessmen with a view to obtaining his services or to begin new companies. Most of these he turned down, but he decided to join with his friend and former employer E. H. McBeth and his present company's yard foreman, Alma Brown, to begin a lumber company of their own. They later admitted a Mr. Dailey "who has lots of money," so they could potentially increase and enlarge their operation and also "handle a coal business if desired." LeGrand recorded: "The four of us together purchased an acre and a quarter of ground situated on the east side of 11th East near 12th South. [He evidently transposed the figures in 21, because the actual address was 1969 South.] We paid $3500.00, $300.00 down and $25.00 per month with 6 percent int[erest] on the deferred payments." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. III, p. 66.) Mr. McBeth had agreed to furnish fifty thousand dollars cash, and they would pay him interest on his investment and divide profits. There was a railroad spur right in front of the property, and there was irrigation water on the place-an ideal location. The prospects for a solid and lucrative business with highly compatible associates were excellent.

At that point, in late August 1913, LeGrand was called as president of the Netherlands Mission.

Business plans were set aside, and with the approval of the other partners LeGrand took over the property and held it until his return from Europe. He sold his share in the S Street duplex to his brother Joel and wife Georgina; then, for the balance LeGrand owed on the duplex, sold Joel's note to the George Romney Lumber Company at 10 percent discount, "receiving $1,000.00 cash, which enabled me to straighten up all my affairs before leaving for my mission." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. III, p. 65.) He was receiving rent from a home on Tenth Avenue which he had purchased by trade of a quarter-section of land near Tooele that his father had given him. (George and Joel received a like amount from George F. at the same time.)

LeGrand had been ordained a seventy on his birthday the year before (February 6, 1912). Now he was released from his positions as ward clerk and parents class teacher, having held the dual jobs for the year before his present mission call. He and Ina then made final preparations to leave for Holland with their three little girls on November 13, 1913. He wrote: "President Joseph F. Smith asked me to go for two or three years, while President Lyman said if I was a good President, they might keep me a long time." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. IV, p. 1.) He and Ina were set apart for the mission by his father, George F. Richards. The Dutch people of Ogden and Salt Lake entertained them and presented them with money gifts. In their combined opinion, Elder Richards was the only possible choice for the position to which he had been called, an expression of confidence which pleased him very much.

The family traveled by train to Chicago in company with Elder Grant M. Romney, who was going to Holland with them. There they visited a missionary, Lutzen Buma, one of LeGrand's Dutch converts. At Niagara, Elder Romney, Ina, and little Mercedes, "went down under the Falls on the Canadian side," while LeGrand tended Norinne and baby Marian. Part of his enjoyment on the journey was in his showing the new places to Ina. On the train from Toronto to Montreal they found that there were only upper berths left on the Pullman cars; sporty male travelers were everywhere; and the children were tired and cross. "We were about to despair," he wrote, but "at this point, the gentleman having [one of] the lower [berths]... proffered to let us have his... we couldn't help but feel that the Lord was helping us out of our trouble." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. IV, pp. 3-4.)

They sailed from Montreal on November 18. The water was rough, and alternately, for the entire voyage, each member of the family was sick and "helping the fishes." LeGrand fared best and gave invaluable help with the children. All were greatly relieved to see land along the western coast of Wales, where the hills were green and beautiful-a sight of great interest to Ina because of her Welsh descent. Three hours later they landed in Liverpool, where they spent the night at the Lord Nelson Hotel. They reported as a family at Durham House, the Mission headquarters, the next morning for their instructions.

One item discussed with President Hyrum M. Smith concerned the release of Acting President Hair of the Netherlands Mission. LeGrand was told that he could release him as soon as he himself was acquainted with mission affairs, but he was sensitive to the situation and suggested that, inasmuch as Brother Hair had been appointed temporary president by the head of the European Mission, he would likely feel better about it if he were released by that same authority. President Smith agreed and said he would await word from President Richards and take care of the matter at the proper time. (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. IV, pp. 6-7.)

After their mission briefing, LeGrand and Ina took the children by train to Hull, England, wired President Hair the estimated time of their arrival, and set sail for Rotterdam.

"It was not uncommon, at the beginning of the century, for some of the apostles to preside over prayer groups that met regularly in the temple. The George F. Richards prayer circle had earlier been presided over by President John Taylor. Meetings took place once a week. Naturally those who belonged to the same prayer circle came to feel a close relationship." (Leonard J. Arrington and Davis Bitton, "Apostle's Life a Link to Pioneer Times," Church News, April 19, 1980, p. 13.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Throughout this book, wherever material is quoted without a source reference, it has come from an interview the author had either with Elder LeGrand Richards or with the individual named at that point in the text.
