Lucile C. Tate, LeGrand Richards: Beloved Apostle ( 1982)

6

Netherlands Mission President 1913-1916

On his arrival in Rotterdam on Friday, November 28, 1913, the new mission president wrote:

Soon after we awakened this morning we saw land and were soon sailing up the River Maas.... I noticed many changes since I was here before... new districts which have been built up, factories, docks, etc. As we neared the dock we saw about a dozen elders waiting, and I waved the first greeting.... As we came closer I learned that I had known President [Thomas C.] Hair in Salt Lake.... I also picked Elder West out, the secretary of the mission, although I had not met him.... The boys had a carriage there for myself and family and a dienstman for all the baggage. We had a pretty ride coming to headquarters and Ina was much delighted with the appearance of her new hometown. We found things pleasant at Crooswijkschesingel 7b, the mission headquarters, although almost destitute of the little touches that would make it appear that a woman had ever lived there. (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. IV, pp. 7-9.)

The mission home was no longer near the cattle market, as on President Richards's first time in Holland, but was in a "nice area of town." In front of the building was a beautiful canal with grass leading down to it and fenced off. To the delight of the children, who stayed out in the cold air to watch, a few straggling ducks and geese waddled about near the icy water.

While Presidents Richards and Hair turned to mission business, Ina followed the non-Mormon girl who cared for the home and together they went from room to room. Ina's homemaking instincts were quickened and she made mental note of all the things she'd like to change-a carpet here, crisp curtains there, homey touches everywhere. And the kitchen! It needed a scouring and color. And how was one to bake pies when the stove had no oven? She looked in the cupboards for such basics as baking powder and spice. There were none.

At this juncture she sensed the girl's disapproval of her presence in the kitchen. The girl even stated her terms for staying on: she must have full responsibility for the kitchen and for all food preparation-terms with which Ina, the born cook, could not agree. So it happened that one of President Richards's first official acts was to hire a replacement in the home. He engaged Cathrine Witteveen from The Hague, a young woman of excellent qualities. She came to the new mission family as one of them. Her work and Ina's meshed harmoniously, and later when Ina wished to travel with her husband, she could leave with confidence that home and children were safe and lovingly cared for.

President Richards searched the stores until he found baking powder and spices for Ina's kitchen. Later, as time would allow, he helped her to shop for "a nice green carpet," material for curtains, and other homey things.

What Cathrine was to Ina, the mission secretary, Richard B. West, was to President Richards-a treasure. The children loved him and called him "Daddy-Brother-West?' He was thoughtful and good to Ina. Capable in the office, he also traveled with the president and studied and memorized with him in the early mornings. Of the latter experience he wrote, "He had me up before the coo-coo (mission clock) had finished its sixth squak[sic]." (Richard B. West Diary, p. 39.) Elder West did not share his president's ability with the language, and he would be so wrought up if required to speak that his insides churned and he became ill. He wrote, "I had considerable difficulty to talk, but Brother Richards made up abundantly for my failures-in other words, I built the skeleton and he put the flesh on it." (Richard B. West Diary, p. 125.)

Within a week after their arrival in Rotterdam the family was settled into a workable routine. On December 3, President Richards arranged for Berand Teimersma to continue editing the mission paper, De Ster (published since 1896). December 5 was St. Nicholas Day for the children, separate from the religious holiday of Christmas. St. Nick came with his helper, Black Peter, and in wooden shoes placed by the fireplace left candies and toys for good girls and boys and coal for the naughty ones. Mercedes recalls the experience. "I'm sure I deserved Swarte Pete's coal in my wooden shoe, and was told so, but there were toys and the letter M in real Dutch chocolate. Even a child can tell that an M has more chocolate than an N, for which I teased Norinne."

From December 6 to 15, Presidents Richards and Hair toured the mission, which no longer included Belgium as formerly. In 1913 there were four mission districts, all in Holland-Rotterdam, Amsterdam, Groningen, and Arnhem. It was to these areas that the two men now went in order to meet the missionaries and the Saints and to assess needs of those under President Richards's jurisdiction. They moved rapidly for an all-over view of people and conditions. President Richards was gratified that his facility with the language had not deserted him. He could converse with the people easily and could preach sermons which instructed and encouraged them. He was quick to praise elders who worked hard to learn the language, as he had done. Of Elder Steve Love, who had been in the field only six weeks, he said he "spoke for eight minutes and hardly made a mistake.... I never saw such a whirlwind with the language before." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. IV, p. 106.)

Although many of the Saints he had known during his first mission had emigrated, he found former acquaintances who remembered him. One such family was that of Jacob Bloem, who asked if President Richards could remember what he had told them on his first stay in Holland. "No," he answered. Jacob said, "You told us to pay our tithing and the Lord would bless us." He then told how he had had many salary advances during the years ever since. "Well, you have had your tithing back again," the president told him, to which Jacob heartily agreed.

When the two presidents returned to Rotterdam, they found Ina's brother Henry there on his way home from the Belgian Mission. President Richards showed him about the city, took him to Amsterdam to purchase a diamond, and after his visit with the family, saw him off for America.

By then Christmas was upon them-the family's first in Holland. Interspersed with his home visits to many families-Tellekamp, Kramer, Van Santen, Grootepass, Wiegel, Romijn-President Richards consulted With President Hair, met and assigned new missionaries, attended meetings, and worked on his correspondence. Still he found time to help Ina. She loved to switch furniture around for variety, "so you were never sure which place you were in." It was December 22 when they "commenced changing things around in the mission home. Moved Ina and babies down stairs so we could have the house below and the office above. This was quite a job cleaning out old closets and destroying accumulated rubbish." It was a strategic move, for it effected a general housecleaning as well, and everything was fresh for Christmas. This penchant for moving furniture about was not merely a whim with Ina but a basic need for change and improvement in her surroundings. The attention she gave to the mission home helped to secure it against President Richards's old enemy-fleas-so that he and his family remained virtually free from that misery.

When the family arose on December 24, they found that President Hair and Elder West had left for a short holiday trip to Berlin, leaving their gifts for the family to enjoy while they were gone-a clock and vases for the mantel, dolls for Mercedes and Norinne, and a ball for Marian. After addressing cards to his fifty or so missionaries, President Richards found two home-hungry ones at his door. Although surprised to see them, he took them along to buy the candy, nuts, and tree, and after Ina's delicious dinner they helped him to trim the tree. The children hung their stockings and went to bed.

Of that Christmas, President Richards wrote: "Christmas in a foreign land, yet bright and happy with thoughts of the day, and the pleasure of our little ones." The candles on the tree were lighted, and "Marian nearly took a fit of joy." There was a sad moment too, when tissue paper caught fire on a candle and scorched the "pretty little silk waist I'd bought for Ina." In the evening all the elders from Rotterdam, along with the two from Breda, joined the family for "old-time sherbet," the sharing of family letters, and Christmas fun.

President Hair and Elder West returned from Berlin and again the two leaders traveled into the districts to further the work of the mission. Plans were made to transfer some elders and to release others. Upon their return to Rotterdam, President Richards learned that Elder Hugh R. Woolley had come to Rotterdam very ill. With Ina and Elder West he "went over to the conference office and found him just steaming from the fever." They immediately moved him to the mission home, made a bed for him in the president's office, called the doctor, and then fed him "more food than he [had] eaten for a week."

For the next three weeks (during which time President Hair left for home), they tenderly cared for him, the president often sitting on the bed, and holding him so he could breathe. This he was doing on the morning of February 7, 1914, when the sick elder asked Brother West also to sit by him. Wrote President Richards, "We held him in our arms until he died. We felt awfully bad about his death. We had done all we could."

As with the missionary deaths on his former mission, the president took charge of every sensitive detail. In order to send Elder Woolley's body home, it was necessary to have it embalmed, a practice not then common in Holland. While this was being done, President Richards and Elder West selected a fine casket and secured the necessary papers. They dressed the body in a "beautiful temple suit that I brought over with me." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. IV, p. 49.) A cablegram, letters, and cards were sent to President Hyrum M. Smith of the European Mission and the parents.

Elder Woolley's cousin Franklin R. Smith, who had nearly completed his mission in Holland, was called to accompany the elder's body home. The Richards family and the missionaries bade him good-bye on February 13 and sent him with not only money from the elders with which to buy flowers for the funeral but also a prepared "Tribute to the Life and Memory of Elder Hugh R. Woolley" from President and Sister Richards to his folks.

The sickness and death of Elder Woolley left a deep impression upon the mission secretary, who wrote: "I don't think [it] will leave me so long as I have power to remember." The "strain

President of Netherlands Mission, 1913 (seated, third from left).

Graves and monuments for Elders Welker and Goul at Groningen (President Richards immediately left of monument).

on nerves, loss of sleep, and close confinement has simply worn me out." (Richard B. West Diary, p. 11.)

During the next months a hard and consistent routine was rarely broken. In Rotterdam, President Richards added a second Sabbath meeting to the one being held in addition to Sunday School, and he was gratified that the change actually improved attendance. When he was present he took names of strangers and made follow-up visits. He supervised the publication of tracts and missionary helps such as Parley P. Pratt's The Voice of Warning-and even Kelsch's A Practical Reference, which had been so helpful in his mission preparation. He obtained permission to purchase property in Amsterdam for a chapel and with an architect considered plans for its erection. Almost every weekend found him traveling to the districts to supervise the missionaries and their work. If he found them hesitant, discouraged, or just lazy, he'd say, "You come along with me," and off they would go tracting, with him in the lead. A powerfully motivated man, he could not abide wasted time that might yield proselyting results. (He could not understand one missionary who let his work go in order to sit and play the piano.)

He counseled his elders to work with people of the middle class; if the branches could have such members, he suggested, the poor would reach up to them, and the more moneyed social class would be more apt to come to their level. It was an approach which he later used in the Southern States Mission. He also counseled the missionaries concerning morality and relationships with women. When he occasionally found local girls trying to get the attention of his elders by pretending to faint, he sent the local brethren to pick them up-an effective method of keeping them on their feet.

Some of the president's trips delayed him past the weekend, and then he missed his family. After one such trip, he wrote: "I had been away just one week and long enough to make me mighty glad that Ina and the babies were in Rotterdam instead of Utah." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. IV, p. 19.)

While the president directed the affairs of the mission and worked with Elder West, Ina and the children were fitting nicely into their new surroundings. From the speech of their playmates and Cathrine, the children took to the language as naturally as the ducklings to the canals. "Kome Kijke Moekje," (Come look, Mommy) they said to Ina with every new thing that came into view from the big living-room window. In winter it had been boys and girls skating to school with book-bags strapped to their backs. Now, in spring, it was a boat on the canal, a cart laden with red balls of Edam cheese jogging over the red brick street, or children rolling large hoops or tossing wooden spindles from sticks held in their hands. Mercedes remembers the custard cart with its tinkling bell, the apothecary, the bakery shop where a ground-level window let the children peek wide-eyed at the baker and his big table of decorated cakes and tarts, and the "heavenly aromas" that drifted out to lure them inside.

Because the children dropped their English and took to Dutch so rapidly, Ina had to work hard to keep up in order to understand them. She was diligent in her studies and did well. President Richards was proud that within months of their arrival, when she traveled to a conference with him, she could "understand and talk quite a lot."

On May 19, 1915, Elder West wrote about the fifth wedding anniversary of the President and Ina. He was twenty-eight and she still twenty-seven. For the occasion, Elders West and Clark had pooled resources and sent two dozen white roses. "I had written a little piece to go with them. When I returned to the house, the roses had just been delivered, and I found Brother and Sister Richards on the couch, one holding the roses and the other reading the letter, and both crying like children." (Richard B. West Diary, pp. 61-62.)

In mid-July 1914, all presidents of missions in Europe came with their respective missionaries for a conference in Rotterdam. European Mission President Hyrum M. Smith, whom Elder West characterized as "a man of such pleasing address and humble manners as to peculiarly fit him for the calling of special witness of the Lord," was the presiding officer. The conference proceedings lasted several days and included short trips, sports events for the elders, testimony meetings and general sessions. Elder West reported that in one of the meetings, Presidents Smith, Christiansen (of the Scandinavian Mission), and Richards talked with such force and effect that a very fine, well-to-do man and his wife expressed a strong desire to join the Church. President Richards too expressed his feelings about the conference. "I certainly feel that my soul has been fed. To me, it has been a genuine feast of fat things. Many of the elders said this was the best meeting they ever attended."

It was only days after this "feast of fat things" that war was declared between Austria-Hungary and Serbia (July 28, 1914), and the whole pattern of existence in Europe abruptly changed.

The small cut from the evening paper, Rotterdamsche Courant, shows the rapidity with which country after country was drawn into the war. Its heading, Wereldoorlog (World War), is followed by the Twintig oorlogsverklaringen (Twenty declarations of war), fourteen of which came within a month.

With Austria-Hungary at her neck, Serbia called upon her ally, Russia, for help. Russia ordered general mobilization. Germany declared war on Russia, and a few days later on France, hoping to bargain for England's neutrality. Germany moved for a rapid victory over France by advancing toward Belgium, where she demanded undisputed passage across that country. The Belgian army resisted. With the aid of their howitzers, the Germans penetrated between the ring-forts of Liege and took the city.

Between the journals of President Richards and the diary of Elder West, there is a day-by-day account of events as they affected life in Holland and the mission. The fifteen brief excerpts which follow represent only a fraction of the entries which, in addition to noting war developments, carry a running account of mission business, but they give a sense of immediacy to what was happening around them.

Richards: Friday 31, 1914 [July].

Germany has ordered mobilization with the view of stopping Russia, and that so implicates the other nations that France, Belgium, Holland and Switzerland have also ordered to mobilize.

Saturday, August 1, 1914.

All horses were called in today for use of the government. Wagons were left in the yards.... The police were hardly able to manage the thousands who swarmed the Savings Banks for their money, and it was impossible to change paper money any place. Prices of everything took a big jump. I cashed money orders, checks, and drafts .... Tried to sell some French money, but could not. All exchanges are closed and the only money that will be accepted is gold and silver....

Sunday, August 2, 1914.

There is a great stir in town today. The Germans took immediate possession of Luxembourg, which has been guaranteed freedom by all nations, and then started the march through Belguim

Wednesday, August 5, 1914.

England declared war on Germany yesterday, which now makes Austria, Hungary and Germany against Serbia, Russia, France, Belgium and England. Holland thus far is remaining neutral. This has every evidence of the commencement of the greatest war the world has ever known. When one stops to think of 20,000,000 or 25,000,000 men arrayed in battle against each other with the present implements of destruction, the end is a terrible thing to contemplate.

Saturday, August 8, 1914.

The fighting around Liege has been terrible.... Went to Dordrecht this afternoon. The train was so full, I had to ride in a box car, and there were also women and children there.

Tuesday, August 11, 1914.

Trains are busy today [taking] soldiers to Southern border. A big battle between the Germans, Belgians, French and English is expected tomorrow. Holland is marshalling in all her volunteers.

West: Saturday, August 22, 1914.

The Germans during the week have steadily gained territory in Belgium and are now in possession of the city of Brussels, the main force of the Belgian army having retreated to Antwerp where the King and Queen and the royal family is, and which is strongly fortified.

Richards: (Communication between the United States and Germany was cut off, so we were receiving cablegrams, sometimes two or three a day, instructing us to try and locate certain missionaries and students from Germany. Most all passed through Rotterdam, and we were able to help them on their way home.) Blue Book, p. 55.

Richards: Thursday, September 3, 1914.

... received a letter from President [Hyrum] Smith this morning confirming his telegram of the 29th to order all elders of the Swiss and German and French Missions released, also those from here who are near the end of missions. Mails are delayed between England and here, everything now passing through the hands of "Censor."

West: Saturday, September 12, 1914.

The elders of the German Mission have been coming in every day this week. The largest number of any one day left here for London today, the number being thirty-two.... [This, of course, put a heavy strain upon those at the mission home who tried to calm, encourage, and feed them. Ina's ability to stretch whatever there was proved a valuable asset during those precarious days.]

Richards: Friday, September 25, 1914.

Left office at 10:30 to post some letters and found boy at door with telegram. I began to tremble when I received it. It read as follows: "Send all your missionaries to Liverpool for Oct. 7th. Retain few capable men. Letter following. Hyrum Smith."

I felt very much grieved to receive this word... but was glad the Brethren had granted my request that in case the elders should have to leave, that I be allowed to remain and to keep two men for each conference so that the Saints would not feel deserted.

West: Friday, October 2, 1914.

The bombardment of Antwerp began today. The office has been a perfect hive for elders. Today, I have done nothing... but settle accounts and give the boys enough money to take them to Liverpool .... This evening we held a three-hour Priesthood meeting at which all elders were in attendance.... [President Richards counseled them to be diligent upon their return home, to serve in smaller jobs as faithfully as if they were bishops or stake presidents, and that then eventually the greater assignments would come.] After the meeting, Sister R. served each of the elders with a piece of lemon pie.

Saturday, October 3, 1914.

The boat carrying thirty-seven of our Holland missionaries. ...should have left... at 4:30 this afternoon, but did not sail until about 7:00 P.M. A large crowd of Saints remained.... and as it left the dock, both those on the boat and those [below] joined in Zingen wij voor scheiding (Sing We Now at Parting), which made the scene even more pathetic.

Richards: Wednesday, October 7, 1914.

Today the people of Antwerp were given until 10:00 P.M. to leave the city, after which there would be no opportunity.

West: Friday, October 9, 1914.

Antwerp fell today into hands of the Germans.... Refugees are coming into Holland from all sides.... During the seige, over 500,000 refugees from Antwerp and its surrounding cities have sought refuge in Holland. Thousands line the roads and byways near the Holland border, being for the most part women and children, without food and with no place of shelter, and whether it rains or not, there are not accommodations to supply the multitude.... Here in Rotterdam, trainload after trainload of these poor unfortunates ... have been coming.

Richards: [Same day, as he watched at the train station.]

One big train was sent right through to Amsterdam ... [another] to Scheidam, and more to other places The good Dutch people had bread and cheese to send with them.... Mothers with little children and no one to look after them ... I suppose the men were in the service-young and old together. All were crying.... It was heart-rending.... ("These poor people were placed in schools and factories all over Holland, and for weeks pictures would appear in newspapers or magazines, trying to locate their parents, husbands, wives... and we could hear the cannon roaring.") (Parenthetical quote comes from interview.)

From that day on, for the duration of the war, Holland "hosted" the refugees. The Dutch families, non-Mormon and Mormon alike, generously shared their homes, bedding, and food. Sister Klopmeijer, a "typical Zeelandsche vrouw in her quaint Zeeland dress," had nine refugees under her roof. Sister Janse of Middelburg, whom President Richards and Elder West visited, had three, yet she hastened to prepare aardopelen en jeu, soup, and a side dish of cabbage for the two, and then insisted they stay with her because all other places in the area were more crowded than hers. She borrowed bedding for herself and husband, then they gave their own bed to the two brethren. Of it Elder West gratefully wrote, "The hole-in-the-wall bed in which we slept was free from fleas, and clean, [though] very short." Thus they traveled to carry on the mission work, finding whatever accommodations they could.

In Rotterdam, Ina's twenty-eighth birthday had been swallowed up in the tumultuous days, but her husband remembered it. He came in from Groningen at 2:00 P.M. on September 14, gave Ina a beautiful cameo brooch, took care of Brother Larkin who was sick at the mission office, sent off another party of elders from Germany, then took Ina and Elder West to a "moving picture show." When they returned, a letter from Hyrum M. Smith awaited with suggested procedures if all elders should have to leave. The president spent most of the night working out the details. This was a rather typical day. His attention to such special occasions as Ina's birthday was also typical. The children, parents, and their respective families at home in Utah were remembered with cards and gifts.

President and Sister Richards.

As it happened, not all elders were required to leave, but the mission, formerly staffed with fifty missionaries, now was left to carry on the work with only eight in the districts, Elder West in the office, and the president. The immediate challenge was to staff all branches with local priesthood bearers and to train the district men to help the president supervise their work. Despite the difficulties, President Richards's intimate acquaintance with the people, his hard work, and his capable leadership made possible a productive period for the Netherlands Mission during the war.

"I spent nearly every Sunday in a different branch," he wrote. "I kept constantly in touch with the few missionaries in the four districts, and in that way I was able to help direct the work with the Saints in an effort to train them in leadership." (Blue Book, p. 56.)

As new branch presidents were called, some demonstrated obvious ability to preside and lead effectively. Elder West, who traveled both with the president and alone, tells of President Aukema in Groningen. He refers to him as "a man of sterling character in the gospel, and in the short time he has presided over the branch, seems to have won the love and support of the Saints." (Richard B. West Diary, pp. 133-34.) President Richards too was confident. "I [am] overjoyed with the success we have had in the various branches since the departure of the missionaries. It certainly is an evidence again that it is the work of God... and that the Lord did inspire us in the appointments of local men." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. IV, p. 237.)

In the four districts he met the local brethren at prearranged meetings and conferences. In a sense, they were like children waiting to be taught. At Amsterdam one opposed tithing, thought it was only for the rich. One held that the Word of Wisdom was only wisdom and not a commandment. In a similar situation at Groningen, the president instructed the branch leaders about keeping their books and about caring for the poor and the sick. He talked about loyalty to the priesthood, and, pouring out his heart and soul under the influence of the Spirit, he bore his testimony. "I thank the Lord that every drop of blood in my body is loyal to the priesthood he has set among men."

Frequently he and the elders were faced with the doctrine of predestination. Old ideas and traditions were hard to replace with the gospel of free agency. A prevalent saying among the Dutch was, Voor dat ik begone to leven, was alles in uwe bock gschrwen. (Before I began to live, everything was written in Your book.) The president asked one brother, "If you were to break the window, was that written in the book?" "Yes," the man said. As President Richards labored to teach the new to replace the old, he wrote, "I have learned the full meaning of the parable of 'putting new wine in old bottles.'" For those "who have been steeped in the false doctrines and traditions of the Christian world, it is a hard thing to get the pure gospel of Jesus Christ running smoothly through their souls so that it does not create friction by rubbing up against the old. They are the... old bottles and old wine of which Jesus speaks." (Black Book, pp. 57-58.)

It was one thing to teach the brethren; it was another to enlighten the sisters. One was disgruntled and "couldn't stand the Word of Wisdom or to hear the local brethren talk when they are learning how." Another, of a little higher class socially, came up to the president after a meeting and gave him an "awful dressing down" because he sat through the service and let a local brother occupy all the time when she had brought a friend along to hear him speak. "Well, sister," he told her, "you don't seem to understand a certain basic thing about Mormonism. There are no preachers in the Church who haven't practiced on somebody, and I don't know that you are better than anyone else that this man shouldn't practice on you." He continued, "Where would I be today if these Dutch people hadn't let me practice on them? Now, someday this man may be one of our best preachers." (The statement proved prophetic, for the man became a popular preacher among the Dutch people and later filled two missions for the Church.)

While the president's schedule took him to the various branches nearly every Sunday, he returned to Rotterdam during the week and visited his investigators "almost every evening." Elder West often accompanied him, sometimes Ina or one of the children. At one point he recorded that he had ten families to teach; at another, he could hardly find time to make the rounds to those who wished to see him. Some names of contacts he had brought from Dutch friends in Utah, many he got from strangers who attended the meetings, and others came from tracting when he could. Occasionally Ina tracted with him. She had memorized a little introduction, "Als bet u bliefth, Vrouw, iets om te lezew, bet kost u niets." (If you please, Lady, here is something to read. It doesn't cost you anything.) She would take one side of the street, the president the other, and if her approach evoked a question, he would be nearby to answer it. From their contacts and those of the elders came some choice converts.

President Richards felt that the conversion of the Teunis Vujk family alone would have been worth his whole mission. It came about as follows: Only one of the family was a member. He taught in Sunday School, and after one of the meetings the president asked him, "Brother Vujk, do you have a family?"

"Yes," he answered, "I have Father, Mother, four sisters, and a brother."

"Can't you get them into the Church?" the president asked. "No," he answered.

"Can't the missionaries get them in?"

"No, they've tried, and my uncle, a local elder, has tried and he can't get them either."

President Richards then said, "You go home and ask if I can have an evening with them, and then if they don't want me to return, I won't bother them further." The family agreed that he could come, then that he could keep coming. He continued every week until they were all baptized.

The Sas family joined the Church; and Jan Neerings, whom the president had taught during his first mission, finally overcame the influence that had held her back. Elder West wrote of her baptism, "She appeared to be filled with joy." Both he and the president were also joyous that evening when Pieter van der Werff, his wife, daughter, and eight others were baptized. They gratefully noted that the harvest had "reached proportions beyond our expectations."

As the work went steadily forward in the mission, the time for Ina's baby came. At 2:30 A.M. on December 8, 1914, President Richards sent Elder West for the nurse, and when they returned the doctor was there. The sleepy elder went back to bed until about 5:30 and then "awoke to find a fine baby girl had been born." He added that the child was "just as plump as can be, and the mother is getting along nicely." (Richard B. West Diary, p. 145.)

For Ina, the baby's birth was associated with a remarkable experience, which she related to her husband and which he recorded that night. Just before the child was born, she had seen

Fourth daughter, Jane, born in Rotterdam 1914.

The four little "Dutchies"-Mercedes, Norinne, Marian, Jane.

with her natural eyes a being in white. The president wrote, "I can't imagine how anyone could be more worthy of the presence of Holy Angels than Ina, and especially at the birth of this Little One, where everything pertaining thereunto has been so sweet and sacred." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. IV, pp. 250-51.)

He remained with his family throughout that day and thoughtfully wrote a letter to Ina's mother expressing his love and gratitude for her daughter, his darling wife. A week later when he blessed the baby and gave her the name Jane, he felt a singular spiritual impression which "was different than with any other of the children."

While the war spread its deadly destruction not far from them, there is no indication in either the president's journals or the West diary that they felt personal fear. They were on the Lord's errand, were safe in his care, and felt his peace with them. Ina's ability to create a haven for her family within the home contributed appreciably to their spiritual as well as physical well-being. So it was that Christmas that year was a warm and grateful one. With little Jane nestled in her mother's arms, their thoughts turned naturally to another mother and Child.

Elder West left for home immediately after New Year's Day, and from then until the end of his mission President Richards performed the duties of mission secretary in addition to his own heavy work load. On three separate occasions his eyes suffered severe strain, and he had to turn from the books until the eyes could tolerate close work again.

As in the contrast between the warmth and peace of Christmas and the catastrophies of war (such as the May 1915 sinking of the Lusitania by German submarine), the forces of good and evil were apparent in the personal experiences of President Richards. One day he was preaching with such intensity and power that he "felt almost carried away in the Spirit." The next, he was challenged by a spirit which possessed a "nice little woman who was so kind to us." When he asked why she had not joined the Church as her daughter had, she stiffened and said in a sneering voice, "Who are you?" "I am a servant of God," the president answered.

Three times the question was put to him; three times the same answer was given. Then she mocked, "So you are a servant of God, then I have nothing to do here." With Elders Clark and Murray who were with him, President Richards laid hands upon the woman's head and rebuked the evil one. The woman fell limp and they placed her on the bed. The president wrote, "I advised her to be obedient unto the gospel, that she might be able to put herself beyond the power of Satan to trouble her in this manner." (Letter to his parents, June 30, 1915, Black Book, pp. 39-40.)

Whether external or self-imposed, challenges came often to President Richards. Although the Presiding Bishopric had approved a chapel for Amsterdam and had sent money for a down payment on the land, when the War came no more building was permitted in Holland. The president was authorized to use the down payment, as well as those funds gathered by the Saints in America, for the relief of the Belgian poor. He tried to get permission from the German Governor General of Belgium to enter that country in order to find and help Church members there. His request was denied in a letter from the German general himself. Accordingly, the only means of reaching the Belgian Saints was through De Ster lists and through Dutch friends of the members there.

In spite of the havoc the German militarists had precipitated in the world, neither the Dutch Saints nor the president felt animosity toward the German people. In fact, as a result of his experiences with German emigrants he had a keen desire to learn their language, which had many similarities to the Dutch he knew so well. As a result he somehow made time for a German tutor to come to the office for an hour each week for eight months and teach him. According to the man, his pupil proved more than apt.

Even though he had struggled so hard to gain facility with Dutch on his first mission, he seems to have had particular linguistic skill. When he visited the Burgemuster (mayor) of Rotterdam to request permission to hold street meetings, the mayor was amazed that his speech was accent-free, and he said, "Well, I never heard an American talk Dutch like you do."

Whether in conversation or preaching, the president was blessed with unusual freedom of expression accompanied by spiritual intensity and power. At one point he wrote, "... since I have considerable freedom in speaking .... I have been wondering if I couldn't develop some ability in writing." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. IV, p. 240.) He lost no time in trying to put down some of his deepest thoughts and ideas in a small black book separate from his journals. While his writings do not have the sweep and flow of his voiced expression, they are very important for their thought content and for their monitoring and recording of significant spiritual development during his second mission. In them he faced such basic questions as the purpose of life, what constitutes true knowledge and success, and the price of total commitment to the Lord.

In True Knowledge and True Success he sees the gospel as "a pearl of great price, for it teaches us first of all the object of man's being." True knowledge and success, he indicates, "come from following the Savior who said, 'I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father,' and later, 'I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do.'" (John 16:28; 17:4.)

President Richards's comment on this epitomizes his longtime desire and his efforts to realize it. "These words of the Savior have always made a great impression. I cannot picture a greater heaven and joy and satisfaction than to be able to stand there in the presence of a loving Father, and be able to say: 'I have finished the work which Thou gavest me to do.'" (Black Book, pp. 45-48.) To him, this was the ultimate success.

Achieving that objective and the accompanying reward has its price. In The Cost of Becoming a Disciple of Christ, he deeply considered the Savior's words in Luke 14:33-"Whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all he hath, he cannot be my disciple." (Italics are his.) He then detailed the price that must be paid: repentance unto purification; preaching the gospel; persecution (sometimes from the closest of friends); building the kingdom; redeeming the dead; building temples and meetinghouses; paying proper tithes and offerings. "When we have considered all these things well," he adds, "then we can ask ourselves.. · whether we have material enough to complete what we undertake to build." (Black Book, pp. 15-20.)

On his first mission a fervent desire for faithfulness was born within him and he made a sincere commitment to a life of service. Now, in his maturity, he not only reckoned the cost of such a life but determined that he was willing to pay the price and would always feel it a joy and privilege to do so. As he labored with the Saints and elders in Holland and "enjoyed such a fine spirit," he wrote one Sunday that he "could gladly devote [his] whole life to such a service." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. V, p. 235.)

Having grown somewhat accustomed to the civil uncertainties in wartime, yet feeling an urgent need to keep the work of the mission moving along, President Richards requested four replacements for the district elders whose missions would soon terminate. It was October 21, 1915, when the first two of them arrived-Elders Rulon J. Sperry and Gerrit van den Berg. From then until the following July, mission affairs were cared for against a background of violent events, changing conditions, and multiple personal challenges, interspersed with moments of satisfaction and joy.

One of those moments of joy had been Ina's twenty-ninth birthday, of which he wrote. She "was never prettier, and not half so sweet. I love her more than I have ever done before. I gave her a little marble statue which I have been saving for three-and-a-half months" since "she fell in love with it in the window." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. V, p. 152.)

In January 1916 high winds broke dikes, and Rotterdam was under water from "Hoogstraat to the river," with more water flooding the streets. A few days later, fierce winds threatened more dikes and blew the ship Rijndam into a mine, killing many of the crew.

Again the president had severe eye trouble and nausea. "Of late," he wrote, "I can hardly stand to use my eyes for reading or writing. I have discovered that my eyes and stomach are connected." Within weeks a painful rash appeared on his face and, unrelatedly, a finger infection required lancing to the bone. As if to encourage him in his distress, he had a dream in which he was preaching to a large congregation. His father and mother were present, and "the look of pride and joy on their faces" gave him the sweet feeling of what it might be like to "meet the reward of a faithful life." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. VI, pp. 40-41.)

Ina also had her physical challenge. She was pregnant with her fifth child, and her beloved Cathrine was no longer with them. (They had lent her money to immigrate to Utah, where she married John Kest, also from Holland.) The four little girls looked to her for their daily needs, and in addition she supported the president in all of his work, even when it so often took him away from them.

It seemed that Holland might be drawn into the conflict when on May 31, 1916, the great Battle of Jutland was fought in the sea north of them. The deadly roar of the cannon could again be heard, and the slaughter went on. Approximately six thousand British and about twenty-five hundred German seamen lost their lives.

Within days of that battle, two communications reached the president. His father, George F., had been called as European Mission President, and would leave Salt Lake in August. The second piece of news reached him in Amsterdam, where he was attending meetings. The telegram read, "Honorably released. John Butterworth your successor. Hyrum Smith." He admits that it would have been hard to express his feelings at that time.

For the next few weeks, in addition to visiting the branches for a last good-bye, President Richards worked with John Butter-worth to effect a smooth turnover of mission affairs. He helped Ina clean and prepare the mission home for its new occupants. He also had to personally appear before the U.S. Legation minister, Henry Van Dyke, at The Hague to obtain an emergency passport so he could get his family out of Holland. There was a tight moment of uncertainty, but when President Richards sent the picture of his family to the minister via his secretary, he was admitted immediately. With the picture in his hand, Mr. Van Dyke said, "I wish there were a thousand such families as this to send back to America." The president received the needed passport. was just emerging from its "crude beginnings" and real estate men still joked about "carrying their six-shooters in self-defense."

It was of these early times that F. Grin Woodbury, a brother-in-law of LeGrand's, wrote: "Being in real estate clothed the participant with an aura of mediocrity, if not disrespect. No state licensing laws existed. The Real Estate Board's code of ethics was ignored too frequently by members, and not respected at all by non-members." (Letter to author, December 29, 1980. Grin Woodbury later joined LeGrand's company and went on to build a distinguished career in real estate and investment.)

With every negative comment concerning the business, LeGrand's affirmative feelings for it strengthened. On Monday, July 31, 1916, he borrowed five hundred dollars from the Merchants National Bank. He rented office space from Ina's father at 1 South West Temple for $7.50 a month plus his share of fuel in winter. He wrote of opening his business on August 5 as follows: "Moved furniture from George's [dental] office to mine....Opened my books, and found I had a Present Worth of $3,521.88." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. VI, p. 78.)

In addition to the equity in his home and the property on Eleventh East, part of his present worth was in the motorcycle his father purchased from George F. Jr. and gave to LeGrand. The gift was to balance, in part, favors and help he had extended to the other sons during LeGrand's absence. Being LeGrand's only means of transportation other than the streetcars, the vehicle was both needed and appreciated.

The day after LeGrand moved into his office, he went to the station to say good-bye to his father, who was leaving to preside over the European Mission. LeGrand's mother was remaining in Salt Lake to care for their young children still at home, but it was hoped she could join George F. later. (LeGrand's brother George F. Jr. and his wife, Edith, and two children were leaving with President George F. Richards for a dual purpose-George to fill a mission in England and Edith to manage domestic affairs at Durham House, the mission home in Liverpool.)

It was a touching scene at the station which George F. Richards described in his diary that night. "The parting of my loved ones caused tears to flow copiously on both sides." (George F. Richards Diary, vol. 19, p. 164.) What the long separation meant to this faithful couple, he had expressed when he received the call from the First Presidency and made it known to his family on June 10. "It broke up my wife's feelings and the children cried with her. ... My true feelings are that I would naturally shrink from such responsibility and having to leave home and loved ones for such a time as this mission will mean, but having put my hand to the plow, there is for me no turning back." (George F. Richards Diary, vol. 19, pp. 119-20.)

LeGrand Richards Realty Company officially opened for business on August 11, when LeGrand mailed out announcements to that effect and placed an ad in the newspaper. Shortly after that his old friend and employer, E. H. McBeth (with whom he had earlier planned to establish a lumber company), came from Pocatello with a proposition. He had purchased an implement and hardware business in that city, and he now offered LeGrand half interest if he would come and manage it. E. H. said he would pay him salary to live on and let his surplus earnings pay for his half of the business. LeGrand thanked him for the generous offer but declined. His commitments were already made, he said.

From the beginning the business prospered, and LeGrand made better than wages. He was able to purchase a new stove and other items for Ina before her baby arrived. On October 28, 1916, their first son, LeGrand Ashton, was born. Of him his father wrote, "We surely are grateful for our boy, and love him to death already." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. VI, p. 80.)

Although he negotiated his first sales traveling by motorcycle, it wasn't long before LeGrand sold it to obtain a down payment for a new Ford. The car he wanted was not immediately available in Salt Lake, but his brother-in-law Orson Rega Card, who lived about eighty-five miles to the north in Logan, located one there and offered to bring it down for LeGrand. When Rega took delivery on it, the agent asked if he had ever driven an automobile. "No," Rega answered, "but I know how to operate my wife's sewing machine."

Ina with the children and the family's first car.

After receiving a few instructions and cautions, Rega and his wife, Lucena, started for Salt Lake by way of Sardine Canyon. What with starting, stopping, pushing, blocking, and hand-turning of stuck wheels, the trip up and down grades took them a full day and until 2:30 A.M. the next day, while an anxious LeGrand waited for a glimpse of his first auto. One of the first uses to which he put the new car was to drive his Dutch friends Cathrine Witteveen and John Kest to the Salt Lake Temple to be married.

The establishment of his real estate business, in fact, gave him the means, the location, and the control of his own time so he could help his Dutch friends in the area. He had been elected president of the Netherlands Mission Association in April 1912, a position he held until April 1914, five months after he arrived in Holland as mission president. (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. III, p. 75.)

After his return to Salt Lake City, he attended their Church meetings and preached in Dutch. He visited with the Dutch people in their homes and at his office. Since the office was downtown, they could easily find him there.

Each day two or three came in, confident of an enthusiastic greeting in their own language and of help with their multiple problems. During the next fourteen years that he remained in Salt Lake he was their anchor, mentor, and friend.

The list of Dutch Saints he helped to immigrate is long. Frequently, telegrams would come that someone's relative was detained in Hoboken, New Jersey, and he in turn would wire Utah Senator Reed Smoot in Washington, D.C. The senator would then have the person released and sent on his way west.

During the fourteen years, there was seldom a time when LeGrand did not have several thousand dollars out in loans to the Dutch people. As his own family needs increased, he worked out a system whereby, if a Dutch Saint needed five hundred dollars to emigrate, LeGrand would have him get four other brethren to sign for a hundred dollars apiece. Usually they would do this when it was known that he himself was signing and the bank would lend the money. He never accepted anything for making out emigration bonds, nor for any other service to the Dutch.

Not only did he help them to come to Utah, but he often assisted them after they arrived. He lent Brother Oeds de Waal money to buy a wagon and horse to peddle vegetables, and when he died and left his wife with five children, LeGrand came to help. She lived in a ward where many poor people needed assistance, so her bishop could only give her twenty-five dollars a month for all her expenses. (This was before the present Church Welfare system.) When LeGrand talked with him and confirmed that that indeed was all the bishop could arrange for, he interceded for the widow through the Presiding Bishop and secured the help she needed.

When John Kest's father was accidently electrocuted while working for the power company, LeGrand served as administrator for the estate. With the help of his cousin Stephen L Richards, an attorney, LeGrand negotiated a settlement with the company which made it possible for John Kest to bring his mother and the other children over from Holland. Of his benefactor, John Kest wrote: "Friend to the unfortunate, loyal, devoted, outspoken, with a rare sense of humor, a humanitarian and outstanding Christian. I can never thank him enough for the help he gave me and my family during [the period of] my father's untimely death." He continued, "I thank him for his concern about my personal welfare, and his kindness to the young lady who cared for his children in the Dutch Mission office from December 1913 to May 1915, and who ... is my wife today." (John Kest History, courtesy of his daughter, Norma K. Ericksson.)

LeGrand heard that a couple of his faithful Saints from Holland were about to get a divorce. As soon as possible he went down to the west side and visited them. "The man couldn't speak English," he wrote. "He was timid and backward and didn't know how to look and ask for work, so I said: 'You come with me,' and I took him up town and didn't let him return home until I had found work for him." (Blue Book, p. 63.) As it had with many others for whom he found jobs, employment solved this couple's problem.

He found the Dutch to be honest and responsible in paying their debts, but even in the face of possible default LeGrand's attitude tended to be lenient and uncritical. He and one of his better-to-do Dutch friends helped another Hollander to set up a little store business. The prosperous friend heard that the storekeeper was trying to sell and "skip the country," and he vowed it would be the last one to whom he would ever lend money. "Well, you feel differently about it than I do," LeGrand told him. "I went to Holland to help them, now if I can do that here and still be working and taking care of my family, it'll be a little easier than going on a mission."

In retrospect he wrote, "When I returned from my first mission, my strongest desire was that I should not lose the spirit I then had." In no other activity of his life was the spirit of his mission more evident than in his continuing work with the Dutch. In his setting-apart blessing to the young missionary Elder B. H. Roberts had promised he would be given a love for the Dutch people, and they would be dear to his heart; and by that token he might know that the Spirit of the Lord was resting upon him and would guide and direct him in his labors. The blessing did not terminate with either mission release, but it has remained with him throughout his life. All the old Dutch friends except Cathrine Kest (eighty-eight in 1981) are gone, but their children and grandchildren seek him out to speak at funerals and to perform marriages.

Closely associated with his and Ina's memories of their mission together was the little Holland-born daughter, Jane, whose birth and blessing still held spiritual overtones for them. LeGrand had been in business a little over a year when suddenly Jane became ill. Ina's teen-age sister, Minnie, was helping her in the house that morning while the girls played in the sandpile. Marian, age five at the time, remembers that Jane stumbled, bumped her hand, and cried as children do in play, an incident which later haunted her thoughts, although it had no apparent association with her sickness. Jane simply did not feel well that afternoon, and when her father came from work in the evening she was worse. Ina was expecting their sixth baby, and thinking to spare her strength, LeGrand took over Jane's care. He described the experience:

She complained of a stomach ache, so I slept with her, and during the night she had a convulsion. I called Dr. S. H. Allen, my neighbor and associate in the Seventies Quorum. He pronounced her condition critical, so we rushed her to the LDS Hospital, and with his approval, I called Dr. Gill Richards, my cousin At 9:00 A.M. the next morning she passed away. (Blue Book, p. 29.)

It was November 6, 1917. Jane was not yet three.

Ina's family rallied round. LeGrand's father, a dependable source of comfort, was in Europe. His mother and the younger girls were in quarantine with Ray, who had scarlet fever. One of his sisters remembers that LeOrand carried the little casket to the front porch window at 1010 Third Avenue so they could look upon the lovely child.

At her funeral, great friends-Bishop David R. Lyon, Hyrum G. Smith, the Patriarch to the Church, Elders Stephen L Richards and Hyrum M. Smith of the Council of the Twelve- spoke words of love and peace. LeGrand had once copied the words, "... And you shall shortly know that lengthened breath is not the sweetest gift God sends his friend.... Be sure a wiser hand than yours or mine pours out this portion for our lips to drink.... "(Self-Control in Adversity, May Riley Smith. Green Book, p. 28.) The words comforted LeGrand and Ina.

Difficult as it was to carry one child and lose another, Ina had many responsibilities to immediately consume her time and energy. Her three remaining girls were seven, six, and five; baby LeGrand was just over a year. Their needs were ever before her, and the time of the new baby's arrival drew near. He was born January 17, 1918, and they named him George LaMont. This was the child whose later perceptive understanding would help to ease his parents' hearts when sorrow came to them again.

As Ina worked to meet the needs of her family, LeGrand turned to the pressing demands of his business, which, F. Orin Woodbury writes, "was geared to brokerage, negotiating sales of residences, farm lands, and occasionally, commercial properties. It also sold fire insurance." In addition, it was keyed to services. "No fees were charged for developing, financing, appraising, investment advice, or managing properties." Although in the early years the sales force was small, Orin states that "commission income generated by LeGrand's personal sales was substantial, adequate to enable the firm to operate profitably." Orin, who proved to be a top salesman and businessman in the company, gives good reasons for the company's success. "LeGrand was a symbol of integrity, a strong force in improving the quality of real estate services, in stimulating membership in real estate boards, and enforcing compliance with a code of ethics." (Letter to author, December 29, 1980.)

Joseph Cutler, who later came into the business, discovered this integrity of LeGrand's through a personal experience. He drove down from Idaho, seeking to trade his farm for some Salt Lake property. He was shown what the firm determined they could reasonably trade. The man asked, "Would you make the deal if you were I?"

Businessman LeGrand Richards flanked by sales and office force of LeGrand Richards Realty Company.

LeGrand replied, "Well, you shouldn't ask me that question, because I've never seen your farm and I don't know what it's really worth, but you do. You've seen both properties, so you ought to make the decision."

Cutler still said, "Well, I want to know if you'd make the deal."

Pressed for an answer in this way, LeGrand said, "Now then, you tell me what would be the lowest cash price you'd take if you were selling instead of trading your farm." When the man gave the figure, LeGrand asked, "You mean it's actually worth that in cash?"

"Yes," said Cutler.

"Then I would not make the trade."

The commission from that transaction would have been an almost-new automobile and several thousand dollars. It made no difference. As LeGrand had earlier told a Dutch friend who questioned whether a man could be honest in real estate, "If I couldn't be as honest dealing in homes as I could selling either the gospel or shoes, I wouldn't be in the business."

His cheerful optimism was another asset to the company, and it was infectious in the office and out. A. former secretary, Evaline Peterson, says there was a congeniality of spirit between him and his employees that made working for him a pleasure. Another employee, Royden Weight, remembers the trust his boss had in him as office manager and how he would work to please him. A low-producing salesman responded to his employer's suggestion that some other line of work might be more beneficial to him. "But I enjoy working with you and I'd like to stay on," he said, and he did.

Clients felt it too. One man came in response to an ad. It was a wet and drizzling day when LeGrand drove him to see a west side property. As luck would have it, a tire went fiat. At that time, a fiat meant a mending job on the spot, so while the man sat under cover in the car, his realtor whistled and sang as he sloshed about in rain and mud to remove the damaged tire, repair it, and replace it. The client was so impressed that he turned a lot of business the company's way.

Underlying and adding strength to his pleasant joviality, however, was a vigorous dynamism that people found hard to resist. He always told his missionaries, "If you go to get turned down, you get turned down." He expected positive results whether in proselyting or in business, and more often than not he got them. When one of his notes fell due, the bank sent word that they didn't wish to renew. "The dickens they don't!" was LeGrand's response. He put on his hat and walked out of the door and into the bank. Courteously but firmly, he said, "I've come over to renew my note." "Just a minute, Mr. Richards," the cashier answered, and he wrote out a new note to be signed.

It was his forceful certainty of how things ought to be done and his ability to see that they were which gave him a preference for managing his business as an individual entrepreneur rather than in partnership with others. This preference is clearly stated in a story he tells of Heber J. Grant's visit to him. The President offered to invest money in his business if LeGrand would take his son-in-law in as a partner. The younger man was faced with something of a dilemma, but he made an honest appeal to his important friend. "Well, President Grant, I'd do most anything for you, but partnerships don't always work out, and I'd be lots happier working alone. As much as I love you, please don't ask me to do that." There was understanding between them, and the matter was dropped.

The success of LeGrand's business was largely due to his unique personality. Central to it were openness, fairness, and a desire to serve. When Orin Woodbury was later president of the Utah Real Estate Board, he told the realtors in a meeting that LeGrand Richards had trained him in the business and had counseled his salesmen that "no deal ought to be made unless it would be of benefit to both parties." In line with his own advice, he always tried to point out any problem or flaw in properties he dealt with. For instance, LeGrand never sold a home in the Forest Dale area (before sewers were in and drainage problems were solved) until he told prospective buyers that during summer irrigating the basement would get water in it. Thus if a client bought from him, it was with full knowledge of the property's bad points as well as its good ones. His willingness to place the other man's interest before his own did not always pay off financially, as one instance shows. A certain man was about to be dispossessed of his home, and LeGrand gave up his total commission to reinstate him. Later on, when the man prospered, he did nothing to repay his debt.

While the war in Europe continued, and occasional reports of it arrived from his father and brother, LeGrand felt most fortunate that his company had grown to the point of necessary expansion. In April 1918 he moved his office to 75 West South Temple, where he joined the Ashton Improvement Company in renting the property where Temple Square Hotel now stands. They remodeled the old blacksmith shop for their offices, subletting the balance so that they cleared their rent and had twenty dollars a month to spare.

In June LeGrand sold his house on Tenth Avenue, moved to 325 K Street until October 1, and then traded for a home at 1064 Hollywood Avenue in Sugar House Ward, near the property he had purchased for the proposed lumber company before his second mission. Within weeks the ban necessitated by the flu epidemic was imposed, and all Church, school, and public meetings were discontinued.

On November 11, 1918, the Armistice was signed, which officially ended the terrible conflict in Europe. Headlines on the front page of the Deseret News read, "Glory to God in the Highest and On Earth, Peace." A holiday was declared, thousands jammed the streets, and the noise was deafening. "The whole town went wild," LeGrand says, "and so did we." In Liverpool, his father recorded that he and his son George F. Jr. took a ride to the pier head and back, witnessing the seething mass of humanity on the streets singing and hollering. The bells rang, guns were fired, flags flew there. In the United States there was jubilation as well as a macabre form of celebration. In towns, cities, and suburbs, straw effigies of "Kaiser Bill" (the German emperor) were burned. Sugar House was no exception, and some of LeGrand's children remember watching the spectacle there.

The flu ban was still in force when President Joseph F. Smith died a few days later, on November 19, and it was announced that only a graveside funeral would be held. The date was set for November 23, the same day that Heber J. Grant was sustained and set apart as President of the Church. He retained the former counselors, Anthon H. Lund and Charles W. Penrose. He also spoke at President Smith's funeral.

LeGrand was there, feeling keenly the personal loss of President Smith's death. This was the uncle in whose home he had been a frequent guest as a youth, and whose sons Willard R. and Hyrum H. were particularly close to him. This was the Church President who had taken him into his arms at the end of LeGrand's mission, the prophet whose spiritual power had often moved him to tears. As he stood on the cold ground with its thin covering of snow and listened to President Grant pay final tribute to the dead leader, using quotes from William George Jordan's The Power of Truth, LeGrand's thoughts were upon President Smith's remarkable life. Son of the martyred Hyrum, he had driven his mother's oxen across the plains when a mere boy, was orphaned at fourteen, was called on a foreign mission at fifteen, and during the course of his life served six other missions. Legislator, apostle, counselor to three Presidents, he succeeded Lorenzo Snow as President on October 17, 1901. LeGrand felt a great affinity for the man and for his mission.

For his own part, since his return from the Netherlands LeGrand had accepted every assignment that came to him. He counseled his elders upon their release from the mission field to serve well in "small jobs," and he had done just that. (He defines "small jobs" as those with a limited sphere of activity or with little or no carry-over or follow-up.) In the two years he lived in Ensign Ward he taught the parents class, was secretary of the 176th Quorum of the Seventy, and supervised one district of ward (now home) teachers, achieving 100 percent of visits for the full time. This of course meant that if others did not make the visits, he did.

His popularity as a speaker had grown steadily from the time of his return in July 1916, when he was invited to occupy all the time in the Sunday afternoon meeting at the Tabernacle, an honor he "little dreamed would ever come" to him. (These Sabbath services were held on a regular basis and featured guest speakers.) There was no public address system then, but LeGrand's resonant and compelling voice was easily heard as he talked about the importance of the Book of Mormon to the restoration of the gospel. He recorded (as he always did when he had been so blessed), "The Lord surely sustained me." Anthony W. Ivins, who conducted the meeting, gave high praise to the young mission president just home from the Netherlands.

From then on he was in constant demand for talks in numerous wards, at funerals, at stake priesthood meetings, and at the Dutch conferences. At one two-month count, he had filled ten ward speaking assignments of various kinds and given a funeral talk and a Christmas talk. Ina once said to him, "I don't think you know how to say no," to which he replied, "How can I, and still be a servant of the people?"

Upon moving into Sugar House Ward he was first called as teacher of a girls' class, then as supervisor of a district of ward teachers. The flu ban was still in effect, and with no meetings being held the ward teachers and the Relief Society helped the bishopric keep in touch with the members. LeGrand tells of his experience during this period.

I went around in the ward and helped administer to a lot of sick people, and then I took the flu. I had it so bad they took me to the hospital. They wrapped me in hot blankets and cared for me according to the current treatment for the disease. I signed papers deeding everything over to my wife, so if I didn't survive, she'd be taken care of. Many of my friends were dying. There were hardly enough coffins to bury them all, but the doctors pulled me through. Ina and the children also had the disease, but not as bad.

Ruth May Fox, general president of the YWMIA, heard of his critical state and volunteered to come and help Ina while he was hospitalized. The flu ban was lifted in February, but in March all the Richards children came down with scarlet fever. Ina was quarantined in with them and LeGrand was quarantined out.

His brother George and family had returned from England on February 20, 1919. Now, while LeGrand's family was in quarantine, his mother left to join her husband in the mission field. After a separation of two years and eight months, her arrival in Liverpool on March 30, 1919, gave them "one of the happiest days of their lives." In May they had the pleasure of touring the Netherlands Mission in company with President John A. Butter-worth, of visiting the places where LeGrand had labored, and of meeting some of the Saints he had known. Shortly after this George Albert Smith was appointed to succeed George F. Richards as European Mission President, and on July 26 the couple was again in Salt Lake.

In the meantime LeGrand's family had survived their serious illnesses, the hardship, and the separation during quarantine, but from then on for a number of years Ina's strength flagged. In addition to his usual help with the children at night, LeGrand took over much of the heavy home work for her-the washing, scrubbing, lifting.

In April his brother George came into the realty business with him. (Because of foot trouble and the difficulty of standing for long hours, he did not return to his dental practice.) In May, F. Orin Woodbury joined them. During that spring LeGrand filled assignments speaking in the wards of Granite Stake as a home missionary, and on June 29 he attended the Dutch conference at the Ogden Tabernacle along with visitors, Rulon S. Wells and Sylvester Q. Cannon, his former Netherlands Mission president. All three spoke. That evening LeGrand was in his home ward to be ordained a high priest and set apart as bishop of Sugar House Ward by President Charles W. Penrose of the First Presidency. The latter gave sound advice to the new bishop: "If we put forth all the effort we can, the Lord will make up the difference of our imperfections."

LeGrand's three years of service in so-called small jobs had given him ever-broadening experience on various levels of Church activity. It hadn't mattered where he served; it was his faithful attention to the work, his totally willing commitment to it, and his faith that the Lord would sustain him, which kept the spirit of testimony bright within him. He once said, "I never aspired to any Church position in my life. As long as I love the Lord and his Church as much as I do, I'll always find someplace to serve." Now, as a bishop at age thirty-three, he wrote, "I believe with the help of the Lord we will be able to fill this appointment acceptably." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. VI, p. 93.)
