Lucile C. Tate, LeGrand Richards: Beloved Apostle ( 1982)

8

Bishop of Sugar House Ward 1919-1925

Bishop Richards sat in his office going over the priesthood rolls with his counselors. Like him, Elliott C. Taylor was a newcomer to the ward. Alexander R. Curtis had lived all his life in Sugar House, so it was mainly to him that the questions were directed.

"What about Brother A---?" the bishop would ask.

"Oh, he's inactive. You can't get him to do anything," would be the answer.

Night after consecutive night they continued to review the alphabetical list, the bishop putting a check mark against all the "can't gets." When they had completed the survey, the bishop said: "Brethren, let's ask the stake president not to send us any home missionaries for a few months (only high councilors to check up on us), and let's ask each of these inactive men to speak in our sacrament meetings. By giving them twelve minutes apiece, we can have four speak every Sunday but fast day."

They visited each man on the list, became acquainted with his family, and invited him to speak, not upon a gospel subject but about what the Church meant to him, his family, and his pioneer ancestors. If the brother said he preferred not to give a talk, the bishop would smile and say, "Well, it's up to you, but on [giving a date about two weeks hence] we will announce you, and if you are not there we will tell the people that we came to your house and personally invited you, so they will know we didn't overlook you."

Almost to a man the inactive brethren responded, and with tears flooding their eyes and voices they would tell at the pulpit that in the twenty or thirty years since their mission reports, this was the first time they had been asked to speak in sacrament meeting. This experience taught Bishop Richards that "you can rehabilitate a man better spiritually by putting him at the pulpit than in any other way." His aim was to apply Granite Stake's motto, "Everybody Working," and this reactivation project was a significant start.

In Sugar House Ward, "everybody" meant approximately eleven hundred members, a large portion of whom were poor. There were many widows and elderly people and a large number of big families that were struggling to keep going. To get the greatest possible number working required considerable motivational and administrative skill. The Sugar House period gave the young bishop experience which further prepared him for later positions of greater responsibility and wider influence.

Another area of experience was in the realignment of ward members in callings, out of which came LeGrand's oft-used phrase, "a round man in a round hole and a square one in a square." Its first application was in the matter of the ward choir. Support for the choir was weak and attendance poor, and it received no invitations to sing at conferences. It became clear that a new director was needed. "You'll break his heart," one counselor said of the present leader. "I don't think so, if we put it to him straight." "Straight" to the bishop meant directness, in the spirit of Paul's words, "Except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into the air." (1 Corinthians 14:9.)

Together, the bishopric called on the brother and asked if he had confidence enough to sustain them in moving the members around like checkers on a board and using them where the bishopric felt they would best serve the ward. The brother said he did, so they put him in charge of entertainments and dances, where he did an excellent work. To lead the choir they called a man who had recently moved into the ward. He was not a better man than the other, only a better musician, and he had ability to draw people to him-even those who did not know they could sing. "What's happened to Sugar House?" people asked when the choir performed at a conference. It was simply that "a round man had been placed in a round hole."

Another aim was to build spirituality through greater attendance at sacrament meetings at a time when, Churchwide, this was markedly low-only 8 to 12 percent. The bishop wrote on the flyleaf of his Bible, "Let's make these meetings as practical as possible so we can take away with us something to do." Just hearing the word would not expand the spirit; only doing could. So the members were constantly encouraged to give, to serve, to sacrifice for the Church. Also, while this is not generally possible in today's vastly expanded Church, Bishop Richards occasionally invited his prominent friends to speak. Among those speakers recorded in the ward minutes are James E. Talmage, Frederick J. Pack, George F. Richards, and Stephen L RichaMs. These of course gave ward meetings almost the stature of a conference and increased attendance notably.

Of the youth with whom he worked, LeGrand says, "They were my friends." The bishop functioned at their level in friendliness but gave concentrated attention to their spiritual development as he groomed them for their missions. Mark B. Garff was a deacon then, and he tells that for outings and conferences the bishop loaded his Allis-Chalmers car so full of Aaronic Priesthood that the wheel spokes broke.

The young men thought he could do anything, yet they were always on the lookout for ways to get the best of him. Mark thought such a moment had come when, at fast meeting, one of them gave him a bottle of oil to be consecrated. k had the old-fashioned tight-fitting cork pressed flush with the bottle top. "All right, bishop," the boys whispered, "let's see what you are going to do now." Matter-of-factly, the bishop whipped out his pocket knife with a fold-down corkscrew and neatly pulled out the cork. "Oh, no," they groaned, "he did it again!" Their pleasure in him was as great as his influence upon them, and in many cases it proved to be lifelong. During the sixty years of his close association with LeGrand, Mark affirms, "his bishop" has never disappointed him.

Bishop of Sugar House Ward with his sons LaMont and LeGrand, Jr., on fathers and sons outing.

Other youth were the distinguished sons of his counselor Alexander R. Curtis, who have been mission and stake presidents and who admit to his powerful influence upon their lives. One was named LeGrand for him. Another, Lindsay R., M.D., wrote to him, "Our early association with you has been a forcible incentive for us to serve the Lord honorably. Our family owes you a deep debt of gratitude for a relationship with which few families are blessed." (Letter, June 15, 1965.)

Not only did he have a solid following among the youth with whom he worked, but he evoked a singular loyalty from their elders. Long before Belle S. Spafford knew him as Presiding Bishop, she heard of him from her sister, Tessie S. Johnston, who served as organist in Sugar House Ward. Tessie resided there in an old home that was left to her and her husband by his mother. A bit impatient, Belle would say to her, "Why don't you move to a newer, more modern home?" "What? And leave my bishop?" came the emphatic answer. "I wouldn't move any place as long as we have LeGrand Richards for our bishop."

Mark Garff's mother believed, and frankly told her children, that someday their bishop was bound to be a General Authority. As adult members of his ward passed on stories about him to their young children, these children grew up feeling that they knew him too. Herman Zobrist, a prominent Las Vegas businessman who received his blessing as a baby at the bishop's hands, says of his father (also Herman), "Had the bishop asked him to jump off a New York skyscraper, he'd have done it and never asked why."

In spite of his strong ward following, there came a time when a block of opposition arose which caused the young bishop and his counselors much heartache. It started soon after the building program was begun. Sugar House was an old parent ward which had cut across the lower part of Salt Lake from State Street to the mountains and which had been divided twenty-three times by 1930-more times than any other original ward in the Salt Lake Valley. The chapel was "an old rattletrap with dirty outside toilets attached to the back of the building." It had been old when LeGrand had attended dances there as a youth. So when Brother Lund, a high councilor who lived in the ward, said to LeGrand about the new meetinghouse, "You can't build it, our people are too poor," the bishop responded, "Then we'll die trying, because if we don't do it the ward will die, and we aren't going to let that happen."

President Frank Y. Taylor of Granite Stake gave his full support to the project, saying, "If you people will go to with your might, it will be accomplished, and you will never feel poorer for your giving." They went ahead with their plans. Three months after LeGrand became bishop, he and his counselors began their campaign for the new building. In September 1919 they presented the priesthood with a plan to sell the present chapel and purchase other property in the area. The bishop asked for their response. The brethren expressed their support, and a Brother Hoare made the motion to sell the present building, buy a lot, and organize a finance committee to begin gathering funds. The motion carried with only one dissenting vote.

The site selected was on Twelfth East near Westminster Avenue, but there was no direct access from the east, where many ward members lived, and these would have to go north to Seventeenth South or south to Twenty-First South and then backtrack. So the bishopric got permission to have an access street opened-actually an extension of Westminster Avenue between Twelfth and Thirteenth East streets-which would provide the people with a more direct route to their meeting-house. This meant, however, that for the city to improve the necessary land, the property owners whose lots were affected must be assessed a moderate sum. Bishop Richards requested that his property be assessed as an example to the others, although it was not part of the affected area and represented a 147-foot frontage compared to the others, whose lots ranged from 25 to 90 feet across.

About twenty-five ward members opposed the action so strenuously that it was taken before the mayor and the city council for a hearing. The mayor, Charles C. Neslen, said, "Bring us a petition signed by those who oppose it." But a councilman openly objected, explaining that the need for the street was obvious and there was no need for the petition; whereupon the mayor upheld the decision to go ahead and the street was cut through.

By spring of 1923 funds had been raised to purchase a well-situated site, different from that first proposed, and the work went forward. Ward members willingly accepted their building assessments of money and labor. Of special note was the contribution of William J. Dean, contractor, and his son, Vernon, who took over the building supervision at no profit to either of them, donated generously in addition, and allowed credit for every hour of labor that ward members could provide.

The plans had been procured from the Church Architect's Office, then under the direction of Brigham Young's sons Colonel Willard and Don Carlos Young. Bishop Richards hoped for a building similar to those now current, in which the chapel opens to the recreation hall for expanded seating. The colonel was adamant for a separate chapel and amusement hall joined by a spacious foyer. As he and the bishop verbally sparred to reach an agreement, the colonel said, "You know, we Youngs have strong minds of our own"; to which the bishop answered, "Well, that's all right, as long as you don't tangle with a Richards." In the end, however, the younger man acquiesced and the work proceeded according to the Church Architect's plan.

As they struggled to raise money they occasionally reached a standstill, and the bishopric solicited additional funds. They called upon a nonmember storekeeper and asked if he would like to help get the work going again. He hesitated, then went to the back of his store and wrote out a check for two hundred dollars. Many years later LeGrand learned that the man had given the last money he had with which to meet his obligations, but that later the same day he had received that exact amount in payment for a bill he had written off as noncollectible.

It was August 1924 when ward members congregated on the site of the new meetinghouse and President Taylor dedicated it. The cornerstone was laid, and into it were placed "A History of the Building Operation," prepared by Bishop LeGrand Richards, several books, and a list of the ward members. By this time the Board of Education had bought the old chapel for ten thousand dollars and stipulated that they were to take possession in September. An extension of time must have been granted, for it was January 1925 when the first event was held in the new amusement hall (a party and a dance), and it was April 12 of that year when the members met in the old chapel for the last time. While the balance of the money was being raised and the building completed, all meetings were held in the amusement hall.

While these events were taking place, there was another interesting development. The street which had been cut through in the face of such strong objections proved to be such a convenience to those who had been assessed that one by one they found their way to the bishop and asked his pardon for their original opposition. From the experience LeGrand learned a lesson in administrative technique. It became his policy from then on to give the opposition time to reconsider first, thus allowing the ripening process to precede the action. This procedure, he notes, tends to foster unity among men. Hence his saying, "It is better to be united on a poor policy than divided on a good one."

While he was proving himself an able administrator on the changing, growing ward scene, changes were taking place in the Richardses' home life. The year after he became bishop, LeGrand engaged the Ashton Improvement Company to build a more spacious firebrick home on his Eleventh East property, and he sold the smaller Hollywood Avenue house to F. Orin Woodbury.

On February 8, 1921, daughter Nona was born. To Ina he wrote the following note: "Of all my joys and happiness at this glorious time, the sweetest joy to me is the preservation of your life. For this priceless gift I thank my Heavenly Father." A year and some months later, on July 5, 1922, their son Alden Ross arrived.

These two children were to complete LeGrand's and Ina's family of eight children. Perhaps no other accomplishment of Ina's was so consistently praised nor so deeply appreciated by her husband as was the bringing into life of their sons and daughters. In each note or letter he wrote to her, that theme is central. One from this period accompanied a money gift with which she was to purchase "a new winter outfit" for her thirty-eighth birthday.

Even though the years of your life that have passed since first we met have been hard indeed, I am sure, when you look upon your accomplishments in that time, you must feel that your life has been rich in works of righteousness. When we have fought the good fight together, and finished our work ... we shall continue to live in the children you have mothered into this world and for which you have given your life's blood and strength. You truly are a noble little mother. (Letter, September 14, 1924.)

Ina, too, had a birthday gift for him. She replaced his well-worn Dutch Bible with a small English copy, bound in fine leather. A constant student of the scriptures, he used it heavily. All of the twenty-seven formerly blank reference pages are filled with his closely written notes on gospel subjects, wherein he gives the reference and follows with a terse summary of its contents. To mention only a few, areas of his research and study include: Judged by the Gospel; Faith and Works from Teachings of Christ; Need of Scriptures; Apostasy; and the Restoration. His studies reveal his ever-growing interest and mastery in "fitting the pieces together" into one vast and comprehensive whole.

The partnership LeGrand and Ina had begun sixteen years previously had held firm through varied and demanding circumstances and experiences-her childbearing, their mission, serious illnesses, a child's death, and consistent, heavy demands in the work of the Lord. Theirs was not, however, a long-faced, grim adherence for duty's sake, but rather a glad, good-humored devotion to Church, family, and each other, in that order. She held true to their original partnership terms and never stood in his way where service to the Lord was concerned. (She also served; now she was teaching Gleaner Girls and working in the PTA.) LeGrand for his part was bound by covenant and promise to place the work of the Lord first in their lives, with Ina and the children running a close second.

From the Sugar House period when their father was bishop, the children have some vivid recollections. One says, "Father began his days with faith, enthusiasm, and gusto. We were awakened by his calling from the stairs, 'Rise and shine. Get up and put on your beautiful garments.'" The sound of water in the shower or from the hose outside was accompanied by his "less-than-melodious voice," one continues. "In true operatic fashion he serenaded us with such songs as 'Nellie Bly Caught a Fly and Tied it to the Sky'; 'She's Only a Bird in a Gilded Cage'; and 'Two Little Girls in Blue.'" He was missed when he was away, and his vibrant zest for life filled the home when he returned at night. He would literally burst in with his "Well, I've finished the Lord's work for the day, now what can I do to make my family happy?" They often called him "Busy Shop" instead of bishop.

At a time when tithes and offerings were paid not often by check but in silver, occasional gold pieces, and "greenbacks," he would gather the children about the kitchen table and let them help him stack and count the coins and bills. They were proud to be included. Many experiences were related and many lessons learned as the money was carefully recorded and placed in bags for delivery to the bank the next morning. One child remembers that "Father always put the bags in the pan cupboard overnight, saying that if anyone tried to take them, at least he would be sure to hear."

The children's inclusion in Church activity was evident in Sunday meetings as well. It was not uncommon to see the bishop with one or two of his little ones seated on the stand beside him, while the others sat with Ina. As the new meetinghouse took form, the children were "permitted" to donate their war bonds to the building fund and thus pay for a bench in the chapel. They carried lemonade to the workmen at the site and delivered Ina's pies to the carnival held to raise money. They were proud of their father's position, but they sometimes chafed at being reminded that they must set good examples as befitted the bishop's children, or in following Ina's injunction, "We owe it to Daddy always to look nice."

Although of a loving and tender nature with his family, the bishop could take a firm stand with the children when it was needed. Once when they coaxed and cried to see a Saturday matinee in Sugar House, he said no. The decision held, but then, unhappy over seeing their vast disappointment, he ordered the same film for a ward show and both they and their friends had the pleasure of viewing it.

He could be firm without relenting, too. One time when Ina was not well, he engaged a young Dutch woman to come into the home and help. In an already full house, it was necessary for one daughter to share a double bed with her, a requirement that displeased the child. She took her blanket, pillow, and sensitive feelings out of the bedroom and settled herself under the dining room table, presumably to spend the night. The incident touched correspondingly sensitive feelings in her father; namely, his compassion for his Dutch friends. The spanking he gave was brief and his direction final-that his daughter return promptly to bed.

The Dutch Saints continued to absorb his attention at the office and even in the ward, where two of his friends from the Netherlands now resided. (Abram Dalebout and B. Teimersma, who had published De Ster during LeGrand's first mission.) During the time he served as bishop, LeGrand continued to meet in their conferences, and he entertained a large group in his own ward

His real estate business adequately supported his family, provided funds with which to help others, and now allowed for investment expansion. Midway in 1921, his counselor Elliott C. Taylor moved from the ward. Upon his release, E. T. Ralphs succeeded him; however, the association between LeGrand and Elliott continued through the years and touched their business lives as well. That fall they combined resources with George F. Richards and Heber C. and Moses Taylor to purchase the old Beverage Ford Agency at 309 East 300 South and to establish the Taylor-Richards Motor Company at 161-165 Social Hall Avenue. The 1922 city directory lists the officers of the firm as George F. Richards, President; George F. Jr., Secretary; and Heber C. Taylor, Treasurer. However, George F. Jr. managed the business, with Elliott's brother Heber C. assisting.

From the time he returned from England in February 1919 until the formation of the new company in September 1921, George F. Jr. worked with his brother in real estate, an experience of which he wrote, "It is glorious to be engaged with LeGrand, and I do appreciate it." (George F. Richards Jr. Diary, March 17, 1919.) George later enumerated in a letter to LeGrand (June 18, 1933) the latter's qualities as observed at close range. He saw him as "by nature a wonderful man, blessed with endowments, admirable tendencies, high aspirations, and almost unlimited ambition for the things worthwhile in life."

In all phases of his ward work the bishop gave tirelessly of himself, always in a spirit of camaraderie. As he gave, others were led to give, and because so many were poor, their giving required the exercise of faith sufficient to make sacrifices. This bound them to the ward, to him, and to each other. Although money was scarce and the building program drained the ward members, a steady flow of missionaries accepted calls and went out to labor. At a time when bishops could suggest where their young people could go, he recommended at least five for the Netherlands. One missionary's call which required sacrifice was that of F. Grin Woodbury. Grin had continued in the real estate business with LeGrand until, as their bishop, the latter sent him on a mission to Germany. His wife, Nina, who was also LeGrand's young sister, was an excellent secretary and she worked in his real estate office until her husband's return. That period for the couple was difficult but rewarding.

It was a sacrifice soon to be matched by the bishop and his family. During the opening session of October conference, 1925, President Grant called for a thousand men-one from each of the "thousand" (985) wards in the Church-saying that he wanted "men of mature years and sound judgment who have had experience in the preaching of the gospel ... who are financially able to go forth and labor in the mission fields of the United States, Canada, and Mexico for at least six months, at their own expense both going and coming." His call was powerfully reiterated by President Charles W. Nibley in the same session, and by Elder Melvin J. Ballard the next day, emphasizing that "bishops and stake presidents will not excuse themselves ... and indeed no one should feel himself exempt." (Conference Report, October 1925, pp. 10-12, 124.)

The call penetrated the heart of Bishop Richards with great force. A visible tremor shook him as he silently committed himself to do the will of the Lord. His counselor E. T. Ralphs, who sat next to him in the Tabernacle, said, "I get it. You're going!"
