Lucile C. Tate, LeGrand Richards: Beloved Apostle ( 1982)

9

Short-Term Mission 1926

Soon after general conference Bishop Richards faced President Frank Y. Taylor of Granite Stake with these words: "You heard what President Grant said. Financially I am as able as any man in my ward to go on such a mission, and I am not the kind of man to pass the buck. So if you want me to go, I am willing to do it."

"I will take up the matter with President Grant," President Taylor responded.

He did, and with no hesitation President Grant said, "Send him." A short-term mission call to the Eastern States soon followed, with instructions to leave on January 6, 1926.

LeGrand set his affairs in order and prepared to leave at the appointed time. He arranged with F. Orin Woodbury to manage the real estate firm in his absence-a wise choice, for Orin kept the business stable so that it provided for Ina and the children, for LeGrand's mission needs, and more.

On November 15 LeGrand was released as bishop and was promptly set apart as an alternate member of the high council in Granite Stake, with the promise that, because of his willing sacrifice, the Lord would bless him, his family, and his business, and that he should have great influence and power for good.

Only he and Ina knew the extent of the sacrifice which was now required of them. It was the first time since their marriage that a call from the Lord would separate them; but by the terms of their partnership it was now required, and they simply submitted to the terms and trusted the Lord to make them equal to the demands imposed.

That winter was cold. Ina was not well, and the thoughts of caring for their seven children without him-her constant support and mainstay-chilled her. Even when he was absent for a day she missed his exuberant, vital presence in the home; now, the six lonely months stretched out even before they had begun. Weighted with apprehension and heavy with reluctance, still she neither complained nor attempted to restrain him, and he loved her all the more. There was a soberness about the children, too, as they faced additional responsibilities and restraints just when their youthful natures were inclined toward greater freedom and more good times. As for LeGrand, he was ever solicitous for Ina's welfare, and he was drawn to her and to each of his children with deep and tender feelings. He knew that he must carry some tangible reminder of them to sustain him during his absence from them, so on December 30 the family posed for a photograph.

On January 6, 1926, LeGrand boarded the train at Salt Lake City's Union Pacific Station at 8:30 P.M. Ina was sick in bed, and LeGrand Jr. stayed at home to care for and comfort her. The other children, with friends and relatives, saw him off in company with five other Eastern States missionaries, among whom was Elder Carroll L. Wadsworth, a twenty-two-year-old from Idaho Falls, who was later assigned as Elder Richards's companion.

After the long train journey to New York City, they reported first to the mission president, B. H. Roberts, a member of the First Council of the Seventy, at 273 Gates Avenue, Brooklyn. He assigned them to the Boston Conference (conference was a term then used for a mission district, and there were ten in this mission) under President Eldon Wittwer. President Roberts's instructions to Elder Richards were "not to get in the way of the members or the full-time missionaries, but just show them how to convert." These words proved to be the mission president's only personal communication to Elder Richards until he approved his release six months later.

Upon their arrival in Boston, President Wittwer assigned Elders Richards and Wadsworth to New Bedford, Massachusetts, the once-famous old whaling center located some fifty miles due south of Boston on the Acushnet River and Buzzards Bay and immortalized by Melville's Moby Dick. Now it was a cotton-mill, glass, and tool-factory town. In winter, storms from the Atlantic blew into the vast inlet with fierce and relentless fury.

The new missionaries found a room to rent, apportioned their housekeeping duties, and went to work. Two lady missionaries were laboring in New Bedford, and soon the two elders visited some of the families with them. They found that the sisters were faithfully making visits but were not proselyting as such. Elder Richards asked them how long it had been since the last convert baptism. "Sister Marchant was the last," they answered. The records showed that to have been five and a half years previously. Yet for most of that period there had been four full-time missionaries working in the area. Part of the reason for the absence of conversions became apparent almost immediately. The region was as spiritually resistant and cold as the bitter weather that assailed it.

Late in January a blizzard hit, with gales "blowing to beat the band." As the elders attempted to tract, literally clinging to doorposts, women would neither stand to talk with them nor invite them in, so they were obliged to find refuge in the public library and pass the time in study. "My, what a life!" LeGrand wrote Ina, "to be transferred from so many cares and responsibilities to where I have to create work to keep busy. I have all my life felt guilty if I were merely studying. I felt that I should be working." [^1]

The following Sunday was a bitter day, and only a handful of the thirty-three branch members attended the sacrament meeting. Elder Richards bore his testimony in the cold building and then took Elder Wadsworth and the lady missionaries out to dinner-an infrequent event, for most of the time the elders ate in their rented rooms, where Elder Wadsworth was cook and Elder Richards "kept house." On a later Sunday evening, he wrote to Ina: "How would you like to have joined us for dinner. We had a can of beans thinned with water and eaten with bread and butter." That meal was saved, however, because of a delicious cake Ina had sent. Throughout his mission she supplemented their plain fare with such treats from home.

On February 4 Elder Richards recorded that there arose that morning "the worst storm I have ever seen. It blew a perfect gale, sending the snow in all directions, and continuing all day." The missionaries were forced to remain in their rooms. The next day they again tried to tract, but the snow was so deep that everyone was busy shoveling out. The next day they got in to talk with a Baptist minister, who listened to their message, was receptive to it, but was afraid to commit himself and jeopardize his pension receipts "even if we had the truth." They talked with another minister who would not listen at all because he was "already saved."

Shortly after the great storm a gracious lady allowed them entrance to her home and listened intently. A Mormon at heart, she said, "If we were in Salt Lake City we'd join your church tomorrow, but we just don't have the faith to do it here. My husband is in business, and should we join so unpopular a religion we would surely lose out."

Day after day, between storms, the elders worked. A common response to their message was, "Well, we are Baptists, but if we were to move to Providence, Rhode Island, and our friends were Presbyterians, we would join that church." "The people here are not religious," Elder Richards recorded, "except as a matter of form and social standing, seeing no relation between religion and the requirements of salvation. They are not hunting after truth." Evidently the attitudes were not peculiar to New Bedford, for in Boston President Wittwer wrote for the Liahona (February 6, 1926), "While people are rather indifferent toward religion, we are getting into a few homes and interesting people." While his statement was only mildly negative, the last convert baptism in Boston had taken place several years previously.

Whether or not spiritual apathy and coldness were widespread in the mission during that period, they presented a powerful deterrent to the work in New Bedford. Capable and seasoned a missionary though LeGrand was, the conditions threatened to dishearten him and make him wonder if, indeed, he could possibly find success and have the "great influence and power for good" which President Taylor had promised in his pre-mission blessing.

One contact who contributed to his wondering was an unmarried teacher of culture and high education, who welcomed the two missionaries often to her home, listened attentively, applauded and approved while they were there, but had no conviction to motivate her to any kind of commitment. Elder Richards wrote of her, "She is like a ship without a rudder. She seems to have no foundation." He added that it was "oh, so hard to make them feel any need of changing. They think if they just try and live a good life, that should be sufficient, and they can do that with their friends without accepting Mormonism."

There were times when he longed to "take a boat to Holland and work with the religious, Bible-reading Dutch strangers again." To Ina he wrote: "Sometimes it is hard to keep from deserting duty and everything else. When I look ahead, it seems a long time.... I just have to take a day at a time." Then as the elders pushed their way though further disappointments and deep snow, Elder Richards worried about Ina. "I can't fancy that you had to shovel snow with so many large children," he wrote, "or didn't you ask them to help? How I wish I could get up nights for you when you are not well." He then made a plea to the children to be their good selves and handle the snow, furnace, and heavy jobs "so things will not be too hard for Mama."

The letters he received from Ina were of inestimable worth to him. While she described the normal tenor of life at home, plus the challenges of carrying on without him, she did not complain but admitted that she didn't "see how he used to do so much before going to work." She reported a child's comment. "Little Alden says, 'You stay too long, he's tired of waiting.'" She sent a Valentine from his "little sweetheart, Nona":

Some folks I like, And some I don't. And some I will, And some I won't. And one I like Enough for two. This favorite one, Of course, is you.

And Ina poured out her love for him. "I tell the children how I love them, but Daddy stands above all and seems like life itself to me."

Her words sustained him as he struggled to gain a foothold in the discouraging and bleak spiritual terrain. Not able to make any headway at all with strangers, the elders worked to reactivate members who had dropped away. One family, the Birdwells, had not been to church for two years, and the conference president said the missionaries need no longer visit them; but not wishing to miss any possible opportunity, Elder Richards and Wadsworth did go out into the country where the family lived, found them, had a fine visit, were brought home in the man's car, and obtained a promise from him that his family would begin attending church again. It was one heartening experience.

They made four attempts before finally contacting the Hadleys. Through them and certain others they tried to set up cottage meetings. No was the answer in every case. After several such answers the elders returned to their rooms feeling how unpopular Mormons really were. Elder Richards placed his family's photograph before him, reread all his letters from home, and wrote to his family: "This is a day when I belong there more than here. I'm loving you all from your picture. My, what a fine little crowd." He then advised Ina in her concern over the fact that boys were hovering about their teen-aged girls: "You must lay down the law to them. Have the boys come in for proper visits, and not expect to see the girls outside." To Norinne he wrote a special letter, saying, "I want you to meet lots of boys and associate with different young people, and then you will be better able to make a good choice. You deserve the very best the land produces, and if you are careful, I am sure that is what you will get." (March 31, 1926.)

1925 family photo Elder Richards took with him on his short-term mission to the Eastern States.

As if acute homesickness and near total discouragement were not enough to try his faith, Elder Richards's eyes went bad on him, as they had in Holland. He could not read at all. He recorded, "The feeling is just like seasickness-severe headache, nausea." As it turned out, however, his eye trouble led him to Dr. Rothwell on Spring Street, who had once practiced in Murray, Utah, and who became a good friend. He and his wife welcomed the elders for meals and visits, although they were of the same spiritual disposition as most of the people and did not receive the gospel even from their friends the elders.

In the hopes of breaking down the spiritual barriers, Elder Richards decided to try another approach. Drawing from his experience as mission president in Holland, where he increased attendance by adding an evening meeting to the existing Sunday School and hour-long sacrament service, he asked President Wittwer for permission and funds to rent a hall to hold such meetings. The matter went to the mission president, who didn't object to the additional meeting but said no funds were available. Accordingly Elder Richards located a hall and paid the rent from his own pocket for the duration of his mission. In this way, formerly inactive members and friends (made through continued tracting) were attracted and began slowly to join some of the most faithful members. The Birdwells were some of the first to respond. Elder Richards reported to Ina: "I have fully made up my mind that I must content myself with the thought that the work here is different than in Holland, but I am satisfied that I am doing considerable good here.... Our Sunday evening meeting is going to help us a good deal."

For the most part, the responsibility to initiate and lead out in the work was upon Elder Richards. Although older than present missionaries when first sent into the field, Elder Wads. worth was inexperienced. Sometimes his older companion conducted sessions in which he let the young man explain the gospel to him. Elder Richards would then correct, suggest, and fill in as needed, so Elder Wadsworth could feel more comfortable in talking with strangers. For all that, the young elder was a fine man, conscientious, totally compatible, and he lent his whole hearted support to whatever his forty-year-old companion initiated. They were both encouraged that on a certain Sunday forty-four people had attended the evening meeting. Elder Richards preached a powerful sermon, and Mr. Marchant, non member husband of the last convert (five and a half years previous) was there and said, "It is a crime. Such an address should go to hundreds, not just to these few."

With these results the elders took heart, although they still felt that much of their efforts were expended in what was virtually a spiritual wasteland. Frequently they met with icy receptions as well as apathetic expressions and even blatant rebuttal to doctrinal persuasions. Upon visiting with a woman who had six bright, healthy children, they were touched by the family' eternal potential, and with characteristic skill Elder Richard explained the principle of celestial marriage as taught by the Church. To this the mother replied, "Well, I've had enough c their father in this life that I wouldn't care to put up with him it the next." For Elder Richards, who cherished his wife and family and was so loved in return, such a view was incomprehensible

With the prevalent atheists there was no base upon which to touch ground. "It is hard where there is no measuring rod," he wrote. And with Catholics there were basic differences in doctrine which made the going most difficult. One day Elder Richards discussed with a woman of that faith the origin, need, and merits of baptism by immersion. Concerning his explanation, she challenged, "What in thunder difference does it make?" He left her door with a heavy heart. "I knew when I was whipped," he said. Then, in that moment of deep disappointment, his fighting spirit surfaced and he saw and felt something he'd never seen or experienced before. "Well, what in thunder difference does it make anyway, unless I can first show the importance of the gospel restoration itself and the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith in it." He recorded, "I decided that I must convince those people that I had the greatest thing in all the world or I should be home with my wife and children and with my business." (Blue Book, p. 67, and interview.)

The light of comprehension which came at that moment illuminated his whole being. Suddenly his years of gospel study, his lifelong committing of scriptures to memory, his preaching of the word, his faithful prayers, his seeking after spiritual excellence, his giving of self, and even his present cold disappointment and struggle-all these fused together in a burst of inspired comprehension and knowing. He had caught brief glimpses of this on his previous missions, when he taught the Apostasy and the Restoration, but now bits and pieces, segments and splinters, merged together in their true perspective and wholeness. Never again would he expect any person to understand and accept the gospel unless he first laid the foundation, built the structure, put on the roof, set windows and doors in place, and furnished the whole to the last detail. After all, could anyone sell a house if the client saw only a hole in the ground, the studs in place, or the window frames? Of course not!

So overpowering and deep were the convictions of those moments that they became both base and star out of which evolved his later great contribution to the missionary effort of the Church-his book A Marvelous Work and a Wonder.

That Easter, in a letter to Ina, he expressed the depth of his feelings:

I have been blessed this day with thoughts of sincerest gratitude to my Heavenly Father for his mercies and blessings unto me. I think I have never before entered so completely into the spirit of the Savior's crucifixion, and the events preceding and following.... And when I realize that the gospel, as we have it, has come to the earth to prepare the way of his coming... I feel that it is a glorious thing to be numbered among those who have given so freely for its establishment upon the earth. I would not want to be unworthy of the companionship, eternally, of those who have borne the burdens in the heat of the day. I pray that whatever else may come to me in life, that my humble efforts may receive his divine acceptance, for I do want to be worthy of his love.... (April 4, 1926.)

From then on the work seemed to be imbued with a special spirit. One of the lady missionaries, Sister Madsen, said, "Missionary life seems entirely different to us now." She realized that she and her companion had neglected their duty by just visiting people rather than diligently teaching them the gospel.

In March, Elder Richards and his companion scoured New Bedford to determine a suitable place to hold street meetings. Finding one, they visited the chief of police and gained permission to hold them, not in the center of town where they would cause congestion on the narrow streets, but out at the South End in a suburb which Elder Richards compared to Sugar House in Salt Lake City. To celebrate their success in obtaining such permission, the elders spent that Saturday afternoon with the sister missionaries going through the famous Bourne Whaling Museum on Johnny Cake Hill.

Hard tracting continued, becoming a little easier as the weather eased off. President Wittwer came down from Boston one weekend to check on the work and to speak in the evening meeting. He was more than pleased with the work and encouraged them to go ahead with the proposed street meetings. Just as he left, a sudden late snowstorm hit which continued for a day and a half. Because of lingering cold weather it was actually April 14 (the nicest day since they had arrived) before the elders and sisters held their first street meeting.

"I didn't know how it would work," LeGrand reported to Ina, "for I didn't know whether I could talk to a moving crowd or not.... After we had sung, and I called them in and prayed, Sister Madsen spoke first, but two dogs kept chasing each other through the crowd, and she had a hard time to keep her thoughts centered, so she turned it over to me. Well, I got warmed up, and got the spirit of it, and held a crowd of about eighty for forty minutes, and at the very best of attention." In his journal he expressed great appreciation for the Lord's sustaining Spirit, and he admitted that he had enjoyed the experience very much. Thus, with his mission two-thirds over, he finally found an effective medium in which to carry on the work.

It proved to be the breakthrough they had been struggling for. The next day they left for Boston to attend a conference priesthood meeting and were met by President Wittwer. While there, Elder Richards helped the Boston elders with their street meetings. Both on Boston Common and at Pemberton Square he spoke to crowds in excess of a hundred, after which the various elders split up with small groups to answer questions, explain the gospel in more detail, distribute tracts, and sell copies of the Book of Mormon until the police cleared them out at 10:00 P.M. "I got quite a thrill out of it," Elder Richards recorded that night.

That Sunday President Wittwer asked him to talk to the missionaries, and the Lord blessed him to speak with great power. Again in Lynn, Massachusetts, he was given all the speaking time in sacrament meeting, and he wrote that he "enjoyed the Spirit in such an abundance" that he lost all track of time, "as did the audience." Greatly pleased, he recorded that "more than ever before, my labors are appreciated."

By no means, however, had he and his companion seen the end of opposition, for when they returned to New Bedford and held their next street meeting with a good crowd listening, the Gospel Hall people (a noisy, extreme sect) dismissed their meeting up the street and came to heckle the missionaries. Elder Richards took over for the younger elder and said to the disturbers, "Now, you folks would like to be gentlemen, wouldn't you? I'll tell you what we'll do. You give us twenty minutes to finish our meeting, and then we and the crowd will remain a half-hour and listen to you." To this the opposition and the crowd agreed. When the opposition got their turn, it was only to tear down the Mormons. One said, "Why, if you would let them, these Mormons would bind the Book of Mormon in the same cover with the Bible and ask us to take it and like it."

Not wanting the meeting to close on that note, Elder Richards said, "You wouldn't mind if I make an announcement before the meeting closes, would you?" No objection was raised, so he addressed the crowd: "If you will come back next Tuesday at seven-thirty, I will tell you why we would bind the Book of Mormon in the same cover with the Bible and ask you to take it and like it. Bring your Bibles with you, for you will have no further use for them after that day, if you are not willing to accept the companion volume of scriptures which the Lord promised he would bring forth and put with your Bibles."

His announcement provided effective bait for the crowd. The next week they came with friends they had brought along to see the fun. The missionaries sold sixteen copies of the Book of Mormon and gave another to Mrs. Hendricks, a Portuguese woman, who had no money with her. She had been prepared spiritually by a dream to receive such a book and she was hungry to be taught. "What a joy to teach those whose hearts the Lord has prepared," Elder Richards wrote in his journal that night. By May 2 he was finally feeling encouraged that his mission would not, after all, be a failure. The next week their calendar was completely filled with appointments, and other visits were scheduled for dates further in the future.

One visit was to the McDonald home, to which the elders would return a number of times. The man was confined to his bed; and his wife would never come in and listen to the elders, but instead went into an adjoining room, left the door opened, and ironed. Elder Richards made it his business to speak loudly enough that she could hear what he was telling her husband. Mr. McDonald had never joined any church, but every time the elders left, he would say, "I guess I have been a Mormon all my life and didn't know it."

On the last visit of his mission, Elder Richards said to the man's wife, "Mrs. McDonald, won't you come in and listen to me today? You have never so honored me, and you may never see me again in this life." She came in, and he asked her husband to let her follow along in his Bible, a thing he liked to have people do so that they would not think the missionaries were using different Bibles than theirs.

They had just started their discussion when the couple's son, a student at Harvard, came in. His mother said to him, "You are just in time. You have a trained mind. You sit down and show us how this man is trying to lead us astray." The elder discussed the promise to Joseph of a new land in the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills, where that land is, and the two records which the Lord commanded should be kept. The son followed along in the family Bible.

When Elder Richards was through, he closed his Bible and said to the young man, "Please tell your mother how I am trying to lead you astray." The young man turned to his mother and said, "This man isn't trying to lead you astray; he is teaching you the truth."

As the missionaries prepared to leave, Mrs. McDonald said, "Mr. Richards, even if I don't believe what you are trying to tell us, there is something about you I can't help liking. Won't you pray with us before you go?" Her heart was closed to the truth; and the men also, although convinced of the truth of what they had been taught, did not join the Church. (Blue Book, p. 66, and interview.)

Before the elders left for a mission conference in Boston, however, others showed great sincerity and real promise as repeat visits were made and the gospel was more fully taught to them. The conference was to be presided over by Church President Heber J. Grant, and President B. H. Roberts would of course be there. There was a good deal of anticipation of a spiritual feast, and Elder Richards looked forward to seeing again his friend President Grant. At the conference he would also learn of his mission release. It was disappointing, however, that after the public announcements made and the encouragement given to the people, attendance at the meetings was poor and there were few strangers there. New Bedford had a better showing than most of the branches. There was no explanation for the poor attendance except that many members were not sufficiently committed to make the trip and that people in general were "simply not hunting for the truth."

That night Elder Richards stayed in the home of a member in Lynn, Massachusetts. With the disappointment of the poorly attended meetings fresh in his mind, he drifted off to sleep and had this dream, which he recorded the next evening, Monday, May 10, 1926. (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. VIII, p. 89.)

I had a very beautiful dream last night. I dreamed that while we were met together in priesthood meeting, the Savior appeared [in a pillar of light], and immediately we began to sing "Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna to our Lord." It was a most wonderful feeling, and I awakened with the thought that, though the world doubted his coming, I had actually lived to see it. It was a sweet and beautiful climax. I do hope I will be worthy of him when he does appear, for I do know he shall come. (Retold in interview with a minor correction to journal entry as indicated in brackets.)

While still at the conference, Elder Wadsworth had been instructed to report for the month-long training school to be held at mission headquarters in Brooklyn. Elder Richards was to have a new companion for the remaining weeks before his release, which was set for June 14. Realizing the critical need for follow-through on his now considerable number of investigators, and with the termination of his mission imminent, he told President Wittwer that if he did not send a good, capable elder to follow up on his investigators when he left, he would never forgive the president in this world or the next. "It has cost me too much in time, effort, and means to fill this mission, and I cannot afford to see my efforts fail and my work go back to seed." (Blue Book, p. 66.)

President Wittwer took no offense at the strong words but fully understood what was at stake. As Elder Wadsworth's replacement he sent Elder Thomas K. Bailey, a capable, twenty-seven-year-old schoolteacher from Arbon, Idaho. This elder labored faithfully to become acquainted with each investigator and to assist fully in the wind-up of the work so painstakingly begun by Elder Richards and his earlier companion. After three weeks of whirlwind activity, Elder Bailey told President Stonely of the Providence, Rhode Island, Branch, "I had not previously known what missionary work really was."

On May 14 LeGrand reported his release date to Ina and firmed up plans for her to accompany his former counselor Elliott Taylor and his wife to Detroit, where he would join them at the close of his mission. Then, remembering their anniversary due on May 19, he wrote, "It would be hard to get nearer heaven than the night I first held you to my heart as my own darling wife."

When Ina's answering letter came, it was a contrast in joy and sorrow. She was elated with the news of his release and the plans for the trip. "I am like a youngster," she wrote. "I can't wait. If I once get hold of your coat again, I am just going to stay with you." But she was obliged to tell him of the sudden death of Katherine Curtis, young daughter of his other former counselor, Alex Curtis. The same day a letter came from George, LeGrand's brother, telling of his son's lingering illness and of the despair he felt. Elder Richards recorded, "I lost myself and had a good cry." That night he wrote letters of comfort to both sorrowing families and then stayed up late to call Ina long-distance-a rare occurrence for that time. Ina was both frightened and ecstatic. "How I did shake.... "she wrote to him, "but I was so thrilled, I still love the looks of the telephone corner."

Hard as it was, Elder Richards turned his thoughts away from home and family. The elders' days and nights were now filled with visits to investigators. Time and again Elder Richards recorded eight- to ten-hour days of talking until his "jaws ached." One elderly lady told him that it would be a shame for him to leave the mission field and that the Church should support his family so he could remain in New Bedford to teach the people. While tracting one day, the missionaries came to a door where the lady said, "Mr. Richards, what are you trying to do anyway? Are you trying to make Mormons out of us all?" He replied, "Well, we will never ask you to join the Mormon Church, but if I can show you how you can trade one dollar for five, I won't have to ask you to do it, will I?" She replied, "I get you." She was one of the contacts Elder Bailey was able to successfully follow through on. After Elder Richards went home, she wrote to him expressing her appreciation for the challenge he had given. "I decided to trade the one dollar for five," she said. "I was baptized last Friday."

With applications for baptisms beginning to come-Mrs. Hendricks; the nonmember husband of Sister Roberts; the Hadley mother and daughter-Elders Richards and Bailey looked for a suitable place to hold a baptismal service. They went to the YMCA and requested the use of the pool during hours it was not scheduled. "No!" said the man in charge. "Would you please state your objections?" they asked. "Well, you're Mormons aren't you?" was his curt and final reply.

The only alternative proved to be Buzzards Bay, the vast inlet from the Atlantic. They went out to select a possible place and decided on Harbor View, where cottages were not yet occupied and there was a measure of seclusion. On Saturday, June 12, Elder Richards baptized four adults and two children-the first convert baptisms for New Bedford in six years. The next day the six were confirmed. Eighty people were present, of whom twenty were investigators-nearly all of them found during the six months of Elder Richards's mission. In gratitude he recorded that night, "The Lord has sustained me in my last effort." And true to his trust, Elder Bailey labored untiringly for the remainder of his term; and the Lord sustained him to bring an additional fourteen of the twenty into the Church during the following year. A visiting member of the Twelve later told Elder Richards that the New Bedford effort was one of the greatest pieces of missionary work he had ever known.

On the Monday following the confirmations, the newly baptized member, Brother Roberts, drove Elder Richards into Boston to catch his train for Detroit. Of the journey, LeGrand wrote, "It would be hard to express my feelings as I neared Detroit. I arrived at 1:25, having so looked forward to this day. I found Ina... and my joy was full."

That evening they visited with Elliott and his wife, Marne, and the next day they took delivery on a new Chrysler for Elliott at the factory. They also ordered one for LeGrand to pick up two weeks later. For the intervening time they toured Eastern Canada and Upper New York and visited Church history sites, New York City, and Washington, D.C., returning then to Detroit for LeGrand's Chrysler Crown sedan. The couples lunched, said their good-byes, and started home separately.

LeGrand and Ina visited more Church history locations on their way; but when they reached Kansas City on July 1 it was unbearably hot. In those days neither cars nor hotels had air conditioning. Ina was weak and felt ill, so to spare her strength LeGrand drove her to Topeka, Kansas, put her on the train for home, and continued on alone. On the Fourth of July family members met him in Parley's Canyon, and as many as could pile into the new car rode the rest of the way home with him to Sugar House.

As he contemplated getting back to work, he felt a little like the man in the lines:

Home from his journey, Farmer John Arrived this morning safe and sound, With his new clothes off And his old clothes on, "Now I'm myself," said Farmer John.

(Blue Book, p. 70.)

In this chapter, all correspondence quoted is in LeGrand Richards Personal Latter File (1926) in his possession.

---
Notas:
[^1] Throughout this book, wherever material is quoted without a source reference, it has come from an interview the author had either with Elder LeGrand Richards or with the individual named at that point in the text.
