Lucile C. Tate, LeGrand Richards: Beloved Apostle ( 1982)

10

California: Bishop and Stake President 1929-1933

LeGrand quickly picked up the strands of life at home. President Frank Y. Taylor promptly reinstalled him as a high councilor in the Granite Stake. Under his resumed personal direction his business continued to prosper. He sold the Sugar House property, buying and moving his family to a larger, lovelier home on Harvard Avenue in Normandy Heights-where the president of Liberty Stake, Bryant S. Hinckley, soon called him again to the high council.

Ina was in poor health as a result of physical setbacks received since his return-a full-term stillborn baby girl, then later a miscarriage-but the lovely new home, developing friendships, and happy environment had raised her spirits and there was hope for her recovery. Life indeed looked good.

But another change was on the way. In December 1929 LeGrand's father came to his Main Street real estate office. "President Grant wants to know," George F. said, "whether you would be willing to move to California and serve as the president of Hollywood Stake."

"Well, Father," LeGrand responded, "I have my business here with a dozen people depending upon me for their jobs. I don't know what I'd do for a living in California. We have a lovely new home where Ina and the children are happy. Our daughters are at the mating age and have many fine friends." Then he said, "You'd better tell the President that I think enough of the Lord, the Church, and him that if this is what he wants, I will go down and look around to see how I can earn a living."

George F. reported LeGrand's response to President Grant and soon told his son, "The President says for you to go down and look around." So on January. 30, 1930, after selling his business and putting his home up for sale, LeGrand left by car for Southern California, telling his eldest son, LeGrand A., that he was "now the present man of the house, and to see that Mama is well cared for."

It was the tag-end of winter with its slush, snow, and bleakness when Ina, saddened over the necessary move, began to supervise small repairs, show the home to prospective buyers, and sort and pack less-used items-tasks which seemed mountainous in her weak condition.

For his part, as soon as LeGrand passed from the snow and cold into the California sunshine, he was full of enthusiasm for the area and could hardly wait to bring his family there to enjoy it with him. He wrote to Ina, "I need you and the kiddies now to make this a perfect home." He stayed in a modest hotel in Glendale and made contact with his former friends Alex Nibley and Preston Cannon, who suggested that he work with them selling real estate in Rossmoyne (a residential development largely owned by President Charles W. Nibley). In the face of the Great Depression, which had begun to get a stranglehold upon the country since the market crash of the previous October, LeGrand prepared to join them.

He studied nightly for his California Real Estate Board examinations, which he later passed, and worked diligently to get into a position to bring his family to California. He counted heavily upon the sale of the Harvard Avenue home for expenses and reserve. He encouraged Ina with his letters and sent a picture of a handsome Spanish-type house which would be within their price range when the Salt Lake house was sold. But up in Salt Lake, Ina's spirits lagged. She was confined to her bed part of the time, and Marian, now seventeen, was missing considerable school to care for her and help with the younger children. Marian wrote a poignant letter to her father. In part it read:

I'm afraid this letter is going to be a little lectury, but I love you a lot, so pardon it, please. Mother is awfully blue... I find her in tears every time she gets a letter.... She wouldn't tell you, but I can see what's happening, so I am. Please don't hold it against me 'cause I love you lots.... You know you're my only Daddy and we're terribly lost without you. (January 1930.)

LeGrand's answer to them was one of understanding, promise, and encouragement. To Ina he wrote, "It does look like I'm a traitor to run off and leave it all to you, but my desire is to share the burden with you. It would be such a joy to help you again." In answer to his daughter, he said, "Tell Marian I will just love her forever, teach her to drive the car, and do most anything to please her if she will just settle down and look after you so you will not break under the strain. She has it in her to make up her school easily."

In his next letter to them he wrote, "I am afraid if I don't come for you pretty soon, you will not want to come." Accordingly he decided that even if the Harvard Avenue house stood empty, he would get his family together again. He took over the lease on a Glendale home and brought his family there to be with him again. The older girls remained in Salt Lake to finish the school year-Mercedes teaching and Norinne attending the University of Utah.

In late May LeGrand returned to Salt Lake, finally to sell the Harvard Avenue home, pay all debts (which left him only a modest reserve), and bring his older girls home. Before he left Salt Lake, Joseph Grant Iverson, a favorite of the family, met with LeGrand and told him he had asked Mercedes to be his wife. Her father shook Grant's hand and assured him that there was no other man in the world to whom he would rather say yes for Mercedes.

In California the family attended Glendale Ward, which met in Stepper Auditorium, and entered into its activities. These were limited when compared with the stimulating ward and stake from which they had come.

It was not long before the president of Hollywood Stake, not having been informed of the reason for the move to California, called LeGrand to be bishop of Glendale Ward. When the information reached President Grant he wrote the stake leader that, since LeGrand had previously been so tied up with Church work and was just getting established in business, it might be best to let him get his feet on the ground before being called to so demanding a position. LeGrand heard of it and wrote his father with total frankness and uncommon sensitivity to the local situation:

Father, Glendale Ward is down on everything, and I think I'd better be bishop while I'm getting acquainted. If I am appointed stake president now, there will be an insurrection on the part of the leaders down here to think that a man was sent down from Salt Lake when they have so many talented men here in the stake. If I could lift Glendale Ward up, that would be my approach to the other appointment. (Letter and interview.)

George F. so informed President Grant, who in turn sent word to the stake president that they had reconsidered and it would be all right to appoint LeGrand as bishop.

Nothing happened, however, until late in June when George F. happened to be on a brief vacation and visiting in Glendale. It was decided that he and LeGrand would take a trip to San Diego, which LeGrand had heard was a beautiful place, and while they were gone the stake president came to Glendale Ward and released all the ward officers and had LeGrand sustained as bishop.

LeGrand and his father returned from San Diego and learned what had taken place. In sacrament meeting the next Sunday when the new bishop met with his ward, he said to the congregation: "Well, I guess I'm the only man in the ward with a Church job. Now, all of you who are willing to sustain the officers as they were before they were released last Sunday, except the former bishopric, please indicate it." All were willing, so he put them back to work.

He chose as his counselors William D. LeCheminant and Nephi L. Anderson. The new bishopric held their officers' training meeting and there received assurances of support in making any new assignments they wished. k lifted them to a new level of activity. Reed E. Callister, who was appointed Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association president, said that Glendale had been a "dead ward into which was breathed new life."

Under the new leadership the ward (home) teachers were reorganized and reassigned for greater coverage and efficiency. The bishopric worked to activate, strengthen, and prepare the youth of the Aaronic Priesthood for their missions. They encouraged the Saints to hold family home evening. His journal shows that the bishop faithfully observed it in his own home as an example.

Most ward members were from out of state, with a predominance of Utahns, and they needed sociality with each other; yet the ward was eight hundred dollars in debt, hard times were upon them, and public entertainment was out of reach for most. Long before the system became Church policy, the bishopric met with the priesthood and had them approve a budget system which would provide for maintenance and amusement expenses, with provision also to pay off the debt.

In the ward was a gifted man whom the bishop had earlier considered for a counselor but who could not serve in that capacity because of a Word of Wisdom problem. "Bishop Richards," this man said, "I'd do anything to help you that I'd be permitted to do." The Bishop answered, "Would you take over the ward finances, other than tithes and offerings?" "I will," was the ready response, and the man was totally faithful and effective in that position. The debt was paid, maintenance payments were met, and money was provided for the monthly ward party held-dinners, dances, socials-with no additional charge for member admission. These events were so successful that it was humorously related that people attended church to learn when the next party would be held. Commenting upon the finance chairman, Bishop Richards said, "What a waste of manpower it would have been to keep that talented man from performing so important a service just because of a physical weakness he had not yet found strength to overcome?'

His estimate of this brother was typical of Bishop Richards. He sought always to reach for a man's potential and then lift him to attain it. To aid him in his already keen perception about people, the bishop kept a little notebook, and when he observed someone who was gifted or adept at something, he made an entry to that effect; then, as particular needs arose, he had a ready reference to consult. He used this technique not only for party planning but for more serious Church functions and for assigning workers. He was committed to delegation and to finding those who could perform services in a superior manner.

One day when he visited the stake center, located in Wilshire Ward chapel, Sister Kathrine Higginbotham, who acted as receptionist for visitors there and also did much of the detail work for the stake clerk, said to him, "Bishop, how do you get all your members talking about you and your ward?" "Just put them all to work and show them a good time," was his breezy answer.

By Christmas of 1930 the ward was welded into a smooth-running, harmonious unit. On the home front too changes were taking place. In the fall Marian had gone to Salt Lake for a promised year at the University of Utah. Norinne worked at the First National Bank and Trust of Los Angeles and had received a proposal of marriage from Reed Callister. The older boys were active in school and sports and had part-time work. Nona and Alden were now acquainted in their school but happy for the holiday break. Ina was still somewhat homesick for family and friends in Utah, so when they went to Salt Lake for Mercedes's wedding on January 1, 1931, it was with pleasure not only at the temple ceremony performed by LeGrand's father and the Hotel Utah wedding breakfast and reception, but to be in Salt Lake again among old friends and many relatives. It was with some reluctance that Ina left her two daughters and returned to California with LeGrand.

He came back to his bishop's responsibilities with new enthusiasm. He noted in his journal that the spiritual progress of the ward was reflected in the tithing receipts for the first quarter of the year. They had doubled over the same period of the previous year, and this in spite of the deepening economic depression. He was still aware of the call that could come to him at any time, so to assist him in becoming better acquainted with the stake leadership, Bishop Richards and his counselors invited the stake presidency, the high council, and all the stake officers with their spouses to a chicken dinner and entertainment.

For the latter, they had a man dressed as St. Peter. A committee of sisters checked with the wives of the stake leaders and obtained personal information concerning each of these brethren, so that when they came before their judge, St. Peter was able to ask them questions about things which greatly surprised them. This caused such interest and merriment that the party was long remembered.

On April 25, about 1:00 P.M., the bishop received a telephone call from Elder George Albert Smith asking that he come into Los Angeles right away and meet with him and Elder Joseph Fielding Smith at their hotel. This he did. They explained that they had been appointed to attend the Hollywood Stake conference and reorganize the stake presidency. The presiding authorities had selected Bishop Richards to be the new president of the stake. In his journal the bishop recorded that he had had a long and very pleasant discussion with the two Brethren concerning the affairs of the stake and had explained that, despite "the understanding I had previously had with the Presidency, if there were some other man better qualified to take the place, I would be perfectly satisfied to continue as bishop of Glendale Ward, which labor I had enjoyed very much."

In his talk with these Brethren, the bishop learned that the high council and stake members were circulating a petition against the release of their president. In subsequent suggestions to the Brethren, Bishop Richards demonstrated a wise appraisal of both men and situations. He suggested that they might submit the matter to the priesthood leadership of the stake and ascertain their feelings. The Brethren agreed, a vote was taken, and Bishop Richards received about the same number of votes as the first counselor to the stake president. It was enough of a showing in his favor that the apostles decided to go ahead with the reorganization and install the bishop as president.

They asked whom he would like for his counselors. Guided by inspiration, he said, "For my first counselor, I'd like the man who headed the petition." "I don't believe he would accept," George Albert Smith commented. "I don't think he would either," LeGrand responded, "but it would stop him from leading any activity against me." The brother did refuse to accept. Bishop Richards's next choice was the second man on the petition, David A. Cannon, who accepted. (After he had served for a few months, he thanked his new president for selecting him, saying that he could feel himself growing under his leadership. Although this was unknown at the time, he was progressing toward later leading the stake himself.)

The visiting Brethren then offered to release all the former high council members so that the new president could start with a clean slate. "Oh no," LeGrand said, "I don't want them standing on the bank saying 'Watch him swim.' Just give me the high council as they are, and within a year I will have them all for me or release them one by one." As a result of these careful moves, that leadership body "never had a riffle."

Charles H. Norberg was selected as second counselor and was set apart with Presidents Richards and Cannon at the conference on May 3, 1931. Sister Kathrine Higginbotham continued doing the detail work of a stake clerk until quarterly conference in October of that year. President Richards always had a high regard for women and their ability to do important work, and with President Grant's approval he had her sustained and set apart as clerk of Hollywood Stake.

One of only 104 stakes in the Church, Hollywood had a membership of 5,891, with its Melchizedek Priesthood divided as follows: 203 high priests, 111 seventies, and 597 elders. There were fifteen units, which included wards and both independent and dependent branches.

The immediate concern of the presidency was fourfold: to overcome rifts and factions, to weld the stake family together, to harness the talents and abilities of its members, and to build spirituality. Two slogans were adopted to implement new approaches to old issues: "Not failure, but low aim is often our greatest sin," and "Work for everyone, and everybody working." In order to understand and appreciate what was accomplished, conditions at the outset of the new presidency's tenure need to be considered and a close look taken at the new president as he led the way.

A competent observer, Wilford G. Edling, still living at this writing (1982), was a young member of the high council under President Richards. Having a part in the actions and decisions of that body, and later serving as stake president, he had insight into both the nature of the men involved and the conditions that obtained in the stake at the time. Says he:

Deep-rooted factions in the stake involved members of the presidency, the high council, and other leadership, and President Richards found himself in a position where drastic changes of attitude, of organization, and social patterns were imperative. To see how these matters were brought up in the high council, the questions he would ask, the penetrating review that he would make of persons' individual concepts, was a wonderful experience. Implementation of actions often called for changing officers, sometimes releasing them without assigning other duties, sometimes shifting them from one office to another by reason of association, friendships, communal activities that would foster and supplement changes for good; and he did it with the end result not only of holding friendships but building them. Some who had been quite critical of him turned out to be his best supporters. In many cases he was able to change their whole concept of the gospel and its application in their lives. Things that had been important ceased to be so; others that were not, because they were not clearly understood, now came to the fore and became powerful motivating factors by which the members could live.

Brother Edling becomes even more precise in his observation of President Richards as he continues to tell about the latter's dealings with the council.

He always came to the high council meetings with a clear-cut program. He knew exactly what he wanted to discuss and how much time should be devoted to any one subject, and he didn't hesitate, in his very friendly, kind, but positive way, to bring us back if we got off or took too much time. He was always in command, but it was by way of directing and leading, not commanding us. I have never seen him say or do anything that would cause a person to think less of himself. Instead, he had the ability to build each one up in his own eyes as well in the eyes of others.

Inside, he was always firm. I have never seen him change his mind because someone disagreed with him, but I have seen him change it, and then lend his total support to an issue, if, after further evidence and explanation, he was convinced of its greater merit.

There were in the stake at that time a few highly educated and professional people who had not given the same attention to getting and keeping a testimony as they had to their secular studies and professions. For instance, one member of the high council, a doctor, said, "President Richards, I don't know that the gospel is true." "But you can know it if you want to," was the president's answer, "and you will know if you will just give a fraction of the time to find it out that you gave in getting your medical education, and then add a little earnest prayer." Shortly after this the man filled an assignment to one of the wards with his president, and there he bore fervent testimony concerning the Prophet Joseph and the restoration of the gospel. "Well, you found out, didn't you!" the president said after the meeting. "I certainly did," the doctor replied.

It will be seen that in many different ways President Richards liked to challenge people to do better, to be better, and to work for the highest good. For instance, parties then being held by stake leaders reflected the social status of some of them. In the beautiful lounge of the Wilshire Ward chapel entertainments were held for which formal dress was required for men and women alike. In connection with this practice, the new president gave his view. He too enjoyed wearing a tuxedo, but until the least member of the most distant ward bishopric could comfortably afford to wear one, formal dress would be optional and he would wear his Sunday suit. Yet because he was a great believer in the value of parties and socializing among the members of the Church, he fostered and enjoyed them. Monthly, two high councilors and their wives were assigned to plan an entertainment for the stake officers and their companions, and at Christmastime a party was held for all stake and ward leaders and their spouses. These events did much to promote unity and closeness.

Having equitably settled the matter of formal dress, the president promptly had another divisive practice discontinued-the ribboning off of front sections of the chapel to reserve seats for ward and stake leaders at conferences. Thereafter, those of the general membership who made an effort to come early took whatever seats they wished.

As changes were made and individuals were won over to consider the good of others, an increasing sense of unity prevailed, first in the stake family but also reaching into the wards. This was achieved partly by the president's inviting members of the high council and stake auxiliary boards to attend ward conferences along with the presidency at a time when this practice was not yet standard Church policy. Each was to come prepared to make a spiritual contribution but no one was to be disappointed if he was not called upon, for the president would keep track and see that each had an opportunity in his turn. Some wonderful ward conferences were held. The stake leaders were built up by the testimonies they bore, and the ward members felt the spirit of the stake visitors. When bishoprics saw the support the stake leaders gave their conferences, they in turn pledged the support of their memberships at stake conference. The result is reflected in attendance figures for the first conference after LeGrand became stake president, as compared with those of eighteen months later. (At that time, three Sunday sessions were held.)

July 11, 19311) 2362) 9933) 481January 21, 19331) 5032) 15623) 1538

(Hollywood Stake Historical Record, LDS Church Archives.)

Not only was growth reflected in numbers, but increased activity resulted from the philosophy that there was something for every man, woman, and child to do. Drawing upon his experience in Sugar House Ward, President Richards and his counselors met with bishoprics early on ward conference Sundays and went over priesthood rolls with them. As he had formerly done, they now placed check marks by the name of each inactive brother, saying to the bishop, "Now, the next time we come to your ward we would like these same rolls, and we want to know what you have asked each of these inactive brothers to do and what his response has been." Then, in the general session of the conference, the president would challenge the people that if any of them wanted to work for the Lord and help build his kingdom and they did not receive an assignment, they were just to let the presidency know and they would receive one. What with ward and visiting teaching, genealogy and temple work, missionary effort, and youth activity, there was something for everyone in addition to regularly assigned callings, and the members were encouraged to sense the importance of each area of need, not forgetting to include the young people.

"President Richards well understood the critical transitions in the lives of Aaronic Priesthood holders," says Brother Edling, whose assignment on the high council was particularly with the youth. "If a young man could make the transition from deacon to teacher happily, then he had a better chance of doing the same as he moved from teacher to priest. The president's aim was to infuse into them some of the same enthusiasm for their priesthood activity that they had for the demanding athletic program of the Church." Not only the Aaronic Priesthood bearers but also the corresponding-aged girls were encouraged to prepare for leadership and missions. President Richards told his counselors, "We've been pouring it into them, now let's take some of it out."

Accordingly the youth were invited to speak in ward and stake conferences about what the Church and the priesthood meant in their lives. In addition a spirit of sociality was encouraged through fathers and sons outings (in which President Richards participated with his own boys), and youth parties. An annual M-Men and Gleaner banquet and entertainment was held, and the young people would vie with each other to make each one more attractive and successful than the last.

One year the young lady chosen to take charge of this event said, "Oh, President Richards, I'm frightened to death." "Who are you afraid of, me?" he asked. "No," she answered. Again the question, "Are you afraid of President Cannon or President Norberg?" She again answered no. "Then you are just afraid of afraid," the president told her. "When you are conducting or announcing, why don't you look at one of us that you're not afraid of and then go ahead as if no one else were there?" She did that and got along just fine. The advice he gave her then became a guideline to him in later, more far-reaching assignments which required him to speak before immense audiences. Says he, "I fix my eyes on a friendly face in the audience, someone who is nodding approval, and I speak to him. That way I feel no fear."

In no Church assignment did LeGrand ever feel he was reaching fulfilment unless he was promoting the missionary effort and building up membership in the Lord's kingdom. Stakes were then functioning without stake mission presidents, and appropriately the missionary work was carried on through the seventies quorums. President Richards called many stake missionaries from among them, encouraged cottage meetings, and spoke at many of these meetings. Following the January 1933 stake conference, the visiting authority, Elder Melvin J. Ballard, remained for four evenings of missionary training sessions designed to motivate the Saints to open their doors to nonmembers so that the stake missionaries could effectively teach the gospel under favorable circumstances. Attendance at the four meetings was gratifying-837, 1127, 859, and 1218. Elder Ballard, who had a fine voice, delighted his audience by singing "The Seer" and preached powerful sermons. Other speakers, including President Richards, gave great impetus to the missionary effort. During the ensuing year, 486 cottage meetings were held in the stake and there were 140 convert baptisms; and this was achieved without the assistance of full-time missionaries and at a time when it was thought that investigators must be thoroughly indoctrinated in gospel principles and that it took six months to prepare one for baptism.

As new members came in and branches grew in activity, several new wards were created from them. As these new units were created and former ones grew in membership, the stake held leadership conventions to train new and old officers and teachers for greater effectiveness in their callings. At one of these President Leo J Muir of the neighboring Los Angeles Stake was invited to speak for an evening session. Under his inspired leadership his area had achieved an enviable record in spirituality, with special emphasis in genealogy and temple work. His stake regularly sent busloads of members to the nearest temple, in Mesa, Arizona. Up till now, Hollywood Stake had not sponsored any temple excursions; nevertheless President Muir, being an admiring observer of the general progress and varied achievements of his rival, said at the conference, "President Richards, we will have to give you credit for outdistancing us."

It wasn't long until Hollywood Stake gave special attention to the genealogical and temple effort in which they had been lacking. To head the program, President Richards had a certain brother in mind, a prominent and well-respected doctor. In his call we see a unique characteristic which had been evident in varying degrees since LeGrand's first mission but now had become an effective tool in recruiting and "about-facing" capable men to help build the kingdom. It was a breathtaking but guileless audacity which first startled the person, then challenged him to think, to evaluate, to choose, to change, to grow. It is apparent in his bold suggestion that the proud and pompous Mr. de Rijke attend church to see for himself what the Mormons have to offer; it is seen again in his assigning inactive priesthood bearers in the Sugar House Ward to talk in sacrament meeting; and it is observed often on his short-term mission in his blunt statement of his position to heckling crowds or resistant contacts. But however audacious, blunt, or bold his approach, it is always tempered with faith in and love for the individual. Even his opposition is led to think it over, to reconsider, to come around, and usually to lend support, so that in late years he can answer the question, "Did you ever have an enemy?" with, "I don't believe so; I think I made them all my friends."

One man who felt the force of his bold challenge and allowed it to shape him for everlasting good was the doctor mentioned above. When President Richards suggested his name to his counselors, they said in unison, "But, President, you can't do it. He smokes." "I know it," was the answer, "but he has a lot of good in him." In meeting with the high council the President repeated his request, to which members made the same response: "You can't do it; he smokes." To this he said, "I know it, but we can clean him up all right." The council reluctantly agreed that, were this to happen, the appointment would meet with their approval.

With that much encouragement, President Richards invited the doctor and his wife into his office and told them what he had in mind. He did not mention the smoking. The doctor tipped back his head and said, "President Richards, I'd do anything for you and the Lord." Although he didn't realize it, the president had him. "I knew you would, and that's what I told the brethren." Then, continuing: "Now, there's one little thing we'd have to ask you to do. We couldn't have a man at the head of our genealogy and temple work who is using tobacco" (the doctor's face colored as if he had thought the president didn't know about his cigars), "but I told the brethren that you'd quit it to do this important work for the Lord." The doctor put his head down on the desk for a few moments; then, raising it, he said, "I'11 quit."

About a week later, the doctor took a busload of Saints to the temple at Mesa, the first that had ever gone from that stake. President Richards went with them. They spent nearly a week working there. One morning they held a testimony meeting in the little chapel before going through sessions, and the doctor sat there with tears running down his cheeks. Even though he was an experienced speaker and toastmaster, he couldn't speak before the group. But as they walked into the lobby, he put his arms around his president and said, "Brother Richards, where do such feelings come from? I've never felt anything like this in all my life." "Oh, I think the Lord is just letting you know how much he appreciates your giving up your cigars and taking on this important work for him," was the ready response. The doctor did an excellent job in his assignment. Always liked and respected, he later became one of the most loved of bishops in the stake.

The growth, the unity, the training, and the increased activity of Hollywood Stake under LeGrand Richards's guidance was impressive. Elder George Albert Smith, in reporting to the Brethren in Salt Lake, said that for 1933 it led the Church in leadership; but perhaps of greater significance was the resultant increase in spirituality. Wilford Edling felt it. He says: "There was a change in the spirituality. As a result of what President Richards did, those of us that succeeded him found ourselves in friendships and conditions of understanding that never would have been there except that he had set the pattern and led the way." He adds: "Everything that happened in my life after I had felt the spirit of LeGrand Richards, and had seen how someone could subscribe completely to the will of the Lord, was colored by the experience."

The effect upon Brother Edling was shared by others. Kathrine Higginbotham, who continued to serve as stake clerk after President Richards left, was one who sensed it. She comments: "Those who followed him worked hard to maintain the level of spirituality which he and his counselors achieved, but they did not surpass it."

No area of need appears to have been neglected. LeGrand's journals (volume VIII, beginning at p. 143, and all of volume IX) show that he traveled the long distances to his wards with punctual regularity; he visited the sick, the troubled, the sorrowing; he initiated a program in the interest of the old folks; yet he stayed close to his own family.

At any time his would have been a distinguished achievement, but it was particularly so when viewed in the light of general conditions and of the personal loss and tragedy they produced. The country was in the depths of the Great Depression, when thirty billion dollars in stock values had vanished, a third of the country's banks had failed, and unemployment had reached fifteen million, with many more millions earning only starvation wages. New apartments just off Wilshire Boulevard in Los Angeles could have been bought for fifteen to thirty cents on the dollar of the first mortgage after wiping out the second. Nobody could finance the buildings because people could not pay the rent. There were those living in hundred-thousand-dollar homes who could not pay their utility bills.

No one knew the conditions better than LeGrand, who depended upon real estate (the business he knew best) to make a living. He could make sales, but people could not get financing to complete transactions. He recorded, "Everyone is having a struggle, and we are not spared." For all his adult life he had been on the giving, providing, helping end of things-for his family, his relatives, his ward members, and his Dutch friends. Now he found himself unable to make even his best efforts financially productive enough to buy a home for his family or to purchase such things as he had always provided to make them more comfortable. Even necessities were scarce, and occasionally it was not certain where the next meal would come from. Had he not come to California with some reserve resources, his circumstances would have been even worse.

Since he was the stake president, he and Ina often hosted General Authorities in their home as well as friends and relatives who came from Utah to visit. Even with her culinary skills, it was difficult for Ina to do as she would like for them. One time when President Grant was with them, she inquired what he might like for breakfast. He would enjoy a poached egg, he said. There were but two eggs in the house, and she had never poached an egg before. One she broke, the other made it safely to the President's plate. In addition to the home visits of President Grant and his own father, LeGrand noted in his journal those of J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Anthony W. Ivins, Melvin J. Ballard, Rudger Clawson, Stephen L Richards, Sylvester Q. Cannon, and Bishop John Wells, and he remarked that he had "enjoyed each one and learned much from them." His friendships with these great men were an encouragement to him as he carried his heavy Church responsibilities in an atmosphere of economic disaster.

That period was crushing to many a man's spirit. Some who found no work, or worked tirelessly with practically nothing to show for their labor, despaired, turned dishonest, left their families, took their lives. When his brother George F. Jr. wrote LeGrand to come home to Salt Lake and take over his business again, adding that the Brethren surely did not realize what a sacrifice LeGrand had made to leave all he had and go to California, he answered, "I will be a much bigger and better man in ten years if I do what the Brethren have required of me, than if I were to come home."

He expressed his feelings on the subject even more forcefully in his Christmas letter to Ina that year. In part he wrote:

The last year has been a very trying one for you, in having been taken away from your loved ones and friends and having to adapt yourself to new conditions.... I appreciate very much your loyalty.... The Lord has a work for us to do. The Patriarch said I "had not come here upon earth by chance, but in fulfillment of the decrees of the Almighty to do a great work in the building up of his kingdom."

My one great ambition is to not falter in that mission, so that another will be required to do my work; so I am happy when you are so willing to face all these changes and losses so cheerfully. Ours is a real partnership, neither can succeed without the other.... (LeGrand Richards Personal Letter File [1931], in his possession.)

Ina's ability to work with shortages and deprivations without complaint was a great aid to LeGrand's work, and he was grateful for her adapting to them, but there was one phenomenon to which she could not adapt-the earthquakes. They terrified her. The first big one came on March 10, 1933, while they were entertaining President and Sister Grant, Bishop and Sister David P. Howells of Wilshire Ward, President and Sister Antoine R. Ivins, and Kathrine Higginbotham. LeGrand wrote: "Ina, Sister Higginbotham, and I were in the kitchen and it felt like our home would be twisted in two. Everything that was loose began to roll around." Outside, the sidewalks rippled, waved, and cracked. Young Alden, who had been out, said, "Mother, it looks like someone is playing with the Fox Theater at the corner of Wilshire and Western." One hundred forty-seven lives were lost, and the reported damage was thirty million dollars, with the most severe losses in the Long Beach area.

The quakes continued intermittently until the end of the year. LeGrand described the October tremor. "At 1:00 A.M. we were awakened by windows and dresser drawers rattling, [and] the apartment rocking in a most vigorous manner. Ina was so frightened she almost lost herself.... I am afraid I will not be able to keep her here in California if these things do not cease." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. IX, p. 290.)

As well as being subjected to the Depression and to natural upheavals, the family suffered personal tragedy. Just a month after he became stake president, LeGrand and his counselor, David H. Cannon, were driving along Los Feliz Boulevard when they saw a large crowd gathered. Brother Cannon went ahead to see what it meant. He found LeGrand's daughter, Norinne, lying on the grass. A drunken policeman had run into Reed's car head-on, and she was severely injured about the face. Her nose was broken in two places, and her cheek "looked like she had been hit with a golf ball which had been embedded there," LeGrand recorded. "The bone had been broken and driven up under the eye socket, and had drawn the flesh with it." At the hospital she underwent an operation. President Cannon, as attorney, later got judgment for two thousand dollars against the police officer, but he was never able to pay anything.

By late summer of 1932, LeGrand and Ina's three eldest daughters were married. Mercedes had become Mrs. Joseph Grant Iverson on January 1, 1931; Marian became the wife of Harold R. Boyer on December 19 of the same year; and Norinne married Reed E. Callister on March 9, 1932. Now in August, the family were together for a rare visit. Marian and Hal were working in California earning money for school the next year, and Mercedes and Grant had come down for sports events.

On August 4, LeGrand A. and LaMont went to Santa Monica Beach with some of their friends. While there, LeGrand A. was riding a surfboard, and as he came over a high wave one end of the board caught in the sand and the other end dealt him a blow across his stomach. This caused internal hemorrhaging, and he started to cough up blood. They took him to the hospital, where the doctor performed an operation in an attempt to stop the bleeding; but after two transfusions a clot formed, causing his death the next day. LeGrand A. was the eldest son and the family's pride. They were desolate in spite of the many friends and family members that tried to comfort them. Ward and stake leaders and members responded with concern and compassion. Thirteen of LeGrand's and Ina's family members came from Salt Lake, including their parents. President Grant, who was in California at the time, deferred his return to Salt Lake so that he could attend the funeral and speak words of solace. LeGrand A. was buried in Forest Lawn Cemetery.

In his Blue Book, LeGrand wrote about his son and expressed his feelings for him.

At the time of his death, LeGrand stood six feet tall and weighed 150 pounds. He was a teacher in the Aaronic Priesthood. The principal of his high school in Glendale came to the house and told Ina that LeGrand was the finest boy he had ever had in his school. I used to take him with me on my visits to the various wards of the stake, and returning home, he would say, "My, Daddy, I don't see how anyone could listen to you and not believe the gospel is true."

In his little pocket memorandum he had listed the names of his girl friends with their telephone numbers, and then passages of scripture that impressed him, such as the promises of Jesus that we should become joint heirs with him of all things, through our faithfulness, and the words of Mormon, advising to let no man be your leader except he be a just man, walking in the way of the Lord and keeping his commandments.

LeGrand was a wonderful son, so free from vice and meanness of every kind, and so considerate of his parents. He loved the gospel and had a fine voice with which to defend it. He and his mother were such pals that it will take a long time for her to be happy without him, and I loved him dearly. (Blue Book, p. 74.)

Later, LeGrand's father, George F., performed the temple work for his grandson. In a letter to LeGrand he wrote, "I was ordained and endowed for LeGrand last evening in the Temple. President Grant and President Clawson were in the company of 164.... I am sure LeGrand was ready to receive these saving ordinances, and I am happy to have had the privilege of representing him in that sacred work." (LeGrand Richards Personal Letter File [1932], in his possession.)

As LeGrand had stated, it would take a long time for them to be happy without their son. Ina grieved as only a mother can. Those who were close to LeGrand said that he was quiet and mourned inwardly. He pleaded with his counselors to try to find some answers to the "Why?" in his and Ina's hearts. If they could just feel that there was divine purpose in his death, he said, comfort would come; but if, by choosing a different course and not coming to California, or by leaving earlier, they could still have had their son, then there was no comfort.

As it happened, it was neither counselors nor other friends who found the answer they sought. It was fourteen-year-old LaMont to whom the Lord gave inspiration. One day LeGrand was taking Ina for a little ride and asked LaMont if he would like to come along. He declined, and while they were gone he studied and compared the patriarchal blessings which had been given to him and LeGrand A. just a year before on the same day by Hyrum G. Smith, Patriarch to the Church, who was not acquainted with the boys. That evening when they had returned he sat on their bed with the blessings in his hands and said, "You have not understood these."

From LeGrand A.'s, he read, "You shall be privileged to preach the gospel in strange lands to strange people." Then from his own, "You shall be called to preach the gospel at home and abroad." He then explained that his refers to this world, but LeGrand A.'s to the other. Again he read from his brother's blessing (which, incidentally, was the first of the two the Patriarch gave to the brothers): "In the own due time of the Lord, your home will be the fit abode for the spirits of your loved ones." He explained that this meant in the hereafter, when LeGrand A. would have spirit children. But in his own it said, "You shall be privileged to see your children grow up around you and honor you in the same manner that you have honored your parents." This had unmistakable reference to this life, LaMont told them. (Patriarchal Blessings, LDS Church Archives.)

LeGrand says of his son's explanation: "It brought us great comfort, for we felt that with it we could hardly reach any other conclusion than that the Lord had not intended to leave LeGrand with us for long on the earth as he had LaMont." To his counselors and the leaders in the stake, he could say, "The Lord has been good to us, he has let us know," and peace could enter into his mind and heart again.

For Ina, it was a longer time coming. While she was in Salt Lake to await the arrival of their first two grandchildren nine months later, she was still struggling for emotional equilibrium. She wrote LeGrand: "Life and sickness are so uncertain, I seem to have lost most of my courage. Maybe with study and prayer I can rebuild; we have much to be courageous about." Then the babies were born. Marian's Barbara Ruth arrived on April 17, 1933, and LeGrand recorded in his journal, "Became a grandpa tonight at 11:15.... our first grandchild." Mercedes's Carla Ann was born on May 27, after which her mother wrote greetings (in the baby's name) to "Grandpa and Uncles LaMont and Alden, even if they don't deserve it for wishing I was a boy." (LeGrand Richards Personal Letter File [1933], in his possession.) With the birth of the babies, Ina began to find happiness again.

It was at the April conference while Ina was in Salt Lake that LeGrand's former teacher and friend, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., was sustained as second counselor to President Heber J. Grant, an appointment which pleased LeGrand very much. (President Clark was just completing a very successful assignment as United States Ambassador to Mexico, 1930-33.)

Shortly thereafter, LeGrand was invited to a banquet given by the California Bar Association at which Ambassador Clark was the invited guest and speaker. Will Rogers, the famed humorist, was also to have spoken, but he was away at the time, so he sent a lengthy telegram to be read for the occasion. LeGrand remembers that among other things Rogers said, "If we ever get into trouble with Mexico, we will have to turn back to J. Reuben Clark, Jr.; so God bless him, and make him a Democrat or a Republican as the situation may require." LeGrand remembers the further tribute paid his old friend when, at the same event, the president of the Bar Association introduced the Ambassador. "The time may not have arrived for Utah to propose a presidential candidate," he said, "but this man Clark is of the kind of timber from which great presidents are hewn."

By this time in his life, LeGrand could count most of the General Authorities as personal friends who had touched and influenced him. One of these was Elder James E. Talmage, about whom LeGrand wrote at the time of the apostle's death. (The journal entry is dated July 27, 1933.) "Aside from my own father, I believe Brother Talmage has had a greater influence than any other man," he said. "I had the privilege of attending his class as a young man at LDSU Sunday School. I have had many letters and books from him. He inquired daily as to my welfare when I had smallpox. He was a great man."

In the fall of 1933 another great man, Charles A. Callis, was released as president of the Southern States Mission and called as a member of the Council of the Twelve. LeGrand had a presentiment that he would succeed him in the South. When he voiced his impression to Ina, saying, "How would you like to go down to the Southern States with me and preside over the mission there?" she retorted, "You mustn't think so much of yourself." His feeling about the matter intensified, however, and when President Grant and President Clark came as the visitors to stake quarterly conference, he was even more certain. He showed them around on Friday and, with his counselors, hosted a reception for them that evening. They held priesthood meetings on Saturday and the morning session on Sunday. No word was said nor any indication given about the purpose of their visit. They were tense hours for President Richards.

After the morning meeting, the visitors met with LeGrand, his counselors, a bishop, and a missionary who was in difficulty. When the business was taken care of, President Grant requested that the others withdraw, as he and President Clark wished to speak with LeGrand alone. When only the three men remained, he asked LeGrand, "How would you like to go down and preside over the Southern States Mission?"

At this point LeGrand remembered that he had originally been called to the South for his first mission but that his bishop had intervened and he had gone to Holland instead. He now thought it a fine opportunity to fulfil that early request. To the Brethren he said, "I'd be happy to go to the South if you want me as the mission president, but if you are asking me to go because you know I'm having a struggle financially and the mission president's living allowance would help, I don't want to do it." President Grant assured him, "I don't know another man in the Church I'd rather turn that mission over to than I would you." "All right," LeGrand responded, "then I'd like to go."

At the time, he said nothing to Ina about the call. The afternoon and evening meetings were held, attended by 1725 and 1325 people respectively. When LeGrand got home, he said to his wife, "Ina, how long will it take you to get ready to go to the South?" She said, "Daddy, I don't think I'm well enough to do it."

Although she felt unequal to it, the pattern of their lives had been set and Ina began preparations to go. Both she and President Richards went to the patriarch George Bowles-a man of great prophetic power, who, according to some, seemed to have the Lord's arms about him all the time. In a blessing to Ina he promised her the health she required, "even to the coming of an angel" to buoy her up. He also pronounced a great blessing upon the head of his stake president. In part, he said,

In the past thou hast desired to have the voice of an angel to declare unto mankind the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ. That gift is yours and shall be henceforth a fullness thereof. Thou shalt be mighty among the children of men. (Blessing, December 16, 1933, Hollywood Stake Tabernacle, in LeGrand Richards's possession.)

Many hearts were heavy at their leaving. Parties, wishes, and gifts were given them and farewells were said. President David H. Cannon, who succeeded LeGrand as stake president, spoke for the members of the stake when he said: "He came to the office with such devotion to the Church and to its ideals and with such a fervent testimony of the gospel that his influence was immediately felt. He has stimulated spiritual growth throughout the entire stake." He told of LeGrand's abilities, his knowledge of Church government, his courage, his fine sense of justice, his understanding, and his deep humility which "had endeared him to them all." He paid tribute to Ina for her support to him and for "her cheery, comforting words and benign influence which would not soon be forgotten." (Hollywood MIA Stake News, vol. I, no. 2, Nov. 5, 1933, p. 4.)

The family said their good-byes, and by December 21 they were in Salt Lake City to prepare for and spend Christmas with Mercedes, Marian, their husbands, and the babies. The next day LeGrand resold his home on Eleventh East at half its original sale price. (It had been necessary to repossess it after the former buyer had defaulted.)

For the next several days he met with President Grant and various others of the General Authorities, and since the weather had turned unseasonably warm, he played golf with his father and mother. On December 29 he was set apart by President Heber J. Grant; and Ina, by President Anthony W. Ivins.

Before they left, LeGrand sat at lunch with President Grant and some of the Brethren, one of whom said, "LeGrand, if they keep you as long as they did President Callis..." but he didn't finish the sentence before LeGrand quickly interjected, "But they are not going to keep me as long as they did President Callis. I love missionary work, but I will take mine in shorter terms. I don't believe in long missions." President Grant nodded and said, "Neither do I." LeGrand then asked, "How long will you expect me to remain in the South?" The President answered, "Three to four years."

As LeGrand's family prepared for their journey, a snow storm threatened; so, with Ina, LaMont, Nona, and Alden, he drove to Panguitch, Utah, on December 31, 1933. There, in the town's only hotel, they saw one year out and looked ahead to what the New Year might bring. Heavy snow fell all night, and in the morning they were obliged to follow the snow plow in order to proceed. With only minor delays, they made the trip south and across country safely and according to schedule.
