Lucile C. Tate, LeGrand Richards: Beloved Apostle ( 1982)

11

Southern States Mission President 1934-1937

It was January 6, 1934, when LeGrand and his family arrived at the mission headquarters, located at 485 North Avenue, N. E., Atlanta, Georgia. They were met by Elder Charles A. Callis and his wife, Grace. The next day President Richards preached a sermon in the Atlanta Branch, and on January 8 he left for a tour of the mission with Elder Callis, mission president since August 26, 1908, a period of almost twenty-six years. Elder Callis was greatly loved in the South. He had been the great evangelist whose faith had healed many and whose preaching had helped to bring hundreds of converts into the Church.

After two weeks of constant travel the two brethren returned, and on January 20 a program was tendered the departing president and his wife. They responded with words of farewell, and President Richards paid tribute to them in a talk which was reported in the Liahona. (February 27, 1934.) In part, he said: "President Callis has been an earnest champion of the truth and has been wholehearted in his devotion to the work. He has inspired those laboring with him and gained the love and respect of all who knew him."

On January 31 the Callises left for Salt Lake, where he would take his place as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, and President Richards took over his responsibilities as president of the Southern States Mission. The ecclesiastical jurisdiction to which he fell heir included eighteen thousand members in nine mission districts located in Alabama, Mississippi, Georgia, South Carolina, and Florida. This is an area which at this writing, 1982, encompasses five missions, twenty-five stakes, ninety-one wards, and thirty-three branches. There were no local district organizations or district boards; no youth programs except one branch MIA (Mutual Improvement Association) in Atlanta and another in Jacksonville, Florida. There was but one local full-time missionary, James R. Boone. Almost no families had had any part in the Church school program or in the blessings available to those attending the temple.

President Callis had labored faithfully during periods of strong prejudice against the Mormons; in fact, one county was still closed to proselyting. His philosophy had been one of decentralization. He had kept his missionaries out in the country among people of humble circumstances and away from urban centers, where he felt temptations were great. President Richards, on the other hand, as a former bishop and stake president, saw the future of the Church in the South in terms of wards and stakes located in towns and cities, yet felt that their influence would naturally spread out into the countryside. From his previous experience as mission president he also knew the value of proselyting not only the poorer people but also the better-educated middle-class men and women. These would more readily give credibility to the message of the Restoration and could eventually take over the branch and district leadership in the South, thus releasing the missionary leaders to spend their time finding contacts and bringing them to conversion.

The new president saw the vast human resource among the youth of the mission, saw how greatly they needed missionary experience, training, and cultural development, which were available to youth in the West. He longed to help them, to lift them through the organized programs of the Church. His aim was to harness them for the Lord so that His blessings could become operable in their lives. With clear-cut goals, an indefatigable taste for work, and the will to drain heart, mind, and strength in carrying out his new responsibility, he moved ahead.

His first missionwide communique was to the effect that if his administration was going to be outstanding for any one thing more than another, it would be for everybody working. Then, on February 25, he set out by car with members of his mission staff for his second tour of the nine districts, one of three such tours a year he made during his tenure as president. Distances were great-the Mississippi tour alone was 1743 miles. Between district visits he would return to Atlanta to handle matters at the mission home and his correspondence. He wrote that he was "grateful for the dictaphone." His journal shows that he dictated five to nine rolls at a time as he worked late into the nights. With his great propensity for balance, he also gave quality time to Ina and the children. Then he would be off again with a new set of missionaries to preach and teach the new doctrine of growth and opportunity to the Saints.

Typical of his challenges to "get to work" is the following. At a conference he attended in one district, the Relief Society served lunch on the lawn between meetings, and this gave the president opportunity to circulate around and visit with the people. He went up to one brother, put his arm around him, called him by name, and said, "How long have you been a member of the Church? Forty years," the man answered. The president then asked three questions.

"What are you doing in the Church?"

"Nothing."

"Do you hold the priesthood?" He did not.

"Have you quit your tobacco?" He had not.

President Richards queried again, "What Church did you belong to before you became a Mormon?"

"The Baptist Church," the man responded.

"Why don't you go back to it?" the president continued. "You would make a good Baptist, and I don't see that Mormonism has done a thing for you." He then proceeded to teach him the parable of the talents and the statement of the Savior, "Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit shall be hewn down and cast into the fire." (D&C 97:7.) It was a turning point in the brother's life.

One faithful Saint who did "bring forth good fruit" was Samuel Taylor Blue, chief of the Catawba Tribe and branch president of the Catawba Indian Reservation near Rock Hill, South Carolina. During the days of persecution, he had carried the missionaries across the river on his back to protect them from the mobs. Under his leadership 97 percent of his tribe came into the Church. The Church News of October 10, 1981, featured him in an article.

In 1950 his friends paid the fare for him and his wife to attend April conference, where President George Albert Smith asked that he speak. "I have tasted the blessing and joy of God," he told the conference audience. "I have seen the dead raised. I have seen the sick whom the doctors have given up... restored to life.... I know that the gospel is true." (Conference Report, April 1950, pp. 141-42.) It was the highlight of his life. While in Salt Lake, Chief and Sister Blue visited with President and Sister Richards in their home and talked of their mutual efforts to further missionary work in the South.

To the Saints all over the mission the president said: "You are as much entitled to missionary training as our boys and girls out West. If you work for it, save for it, and pray for it, your sons and daughters can go on missions. We ought to have one from the South for every one we have from the West." It was only a matter of weeks until there were sixty-eight full-time local missionaries in the field. Some could afford to go for only three months, or six, or one year, but after their missions they returned to the branches and appreciably helped to staff and strengthen the local Sunday Schools and budding MIAs.

It was in the area of MIA that some of the most drastic changes were necessary. A total break with tradition was required. When the president told the people that they were going to teach the young people to dance, some of the brethren said it could not be done in the South, for if they let them dance in Church buildings the local inhabitants would burn the buildings down. To this he said, "Well, if they do, we will build them up again, only we will make them larger so more can dance in them." (One chapel was burned down-whether from arson was not established; but another larger one was built to replace it, and successful dances were held there.)

Emotions ran high. One good brother in west Florida said, "President Richards, if you let them dance in our building I will have my father's body removed from the cemetery next to the Church property." As the Lord's representative in the mission's program for the youth, President Richards told the man not to worry, they would not force him to dance in that building; but he added, "Before I leave this mission you will be dancing in it yourself and enjoying it." And he was.

Not only were the young people invited to attend the dances, but the girls were to come in party dresses. This was to foster a sense of refinement and self-worth, so that even country girls (many of whom worked barefoot in cotton fields) could hold out higher standards to the boys and not marry the first one that came along. One branch president who opposed the idea at first, later attended an MIA dance where the girls wore party dresses and danced the graceful patterns taught them. He told his members to get their daughters pretty dresses if they had to sell the chickens to do it.

For the boys, the standard of no-smoking was encouraged. In a tobacco-raising country, its use in those days was prevalent even among Church members. It wasn't just the youth of the Church but adult members too who were addicted to tobacco. President Richards began with them. He was approaching the steps of a chapel when a brother extended his hand saying, "Welcome to our mission, President Richards."

"Who are you?" the president asked.

"I am the superintendent of the Sunday School."

Noting the strings hanging from the man's shirt pocket, the president lifted out the pouch of tobacco and said, "I haven't been accustomed to seeing these things used by Sunday School superintendents, but we will talk about it later."

In his instructions to the members he now reminded them that "as with the priest, so with the people," and he taught them that the leaders and the parents would have to set the example. He then gave them a little time to straighten up. If a leader did not do so after a reasonable time, he was released.

There was great need for leadership training among the local members. President Richards had been in the mission field only six months when he organized a mission leadership convention in Jacksonville, Florida. To it came the missionaries and local leaders for three days of instruction and help. Departments were held for the auxiliaries, and the leadership was told that qualified women could take full part in the work of the mission. Then the leaders worked to help the women qualify, by teaching them to give talks, open and close meetings with prayer, prepare lessons, and serve as branch clerks. So implicit was the president's faith in a good woman's ability to serve that he encouraged them in any area of Church activity not specifically requiring the priesthood.

In addition to departmental instruction, general sessions and testimony meetings were held. The convention gave great impetus to the work of the mission as the participants returned to their areas fortified with knowledge of how to do things more effectively and fired with enthusiasm for the doing. These conventions were thereafter held annually.

Not only was it thought imperative to hold training sessions for the local people in order to prepare them for greater responsibilities and calls, but the missionary district presidents needed to catch the vision of their part in the total picture. They needed to see districts as junior stakes and themselves as junior stake presidents who would be superseded by local stake presidents when the time was fully ripe. It was a new view for mission districts. In order to implement the program, semi-annual seminars were held. To these came the nine presidents of the districts; four or five prospective presidents; the mission staff; mission heads of auxiliaries; and President and Sister Richards. Three three-hour sessions were held during each of three days, or twenty-seven hours of meetings in all.

President Richards made up the agenda covering every aspect of leadership in the mission. He then assigned to each attending member a segment of the work for thorough advance preparation. At the meetings, each presented and discussed his portion of the program. One of these agendas has survived the years. It is complete, comprehensive, and practical.

After such a seminar, President Richards felt that his leaders could have gone back into the various districts and supervised the district affairs without him. Transposing instruction into practical action, however, did not come easy to some, and it required infinite patience and constant guidance to bring each man up to the potential his president envisioned for him and for the work he had to do. After one of the seminars, a district president came to President Richards and said, "It is time to plan our next conference. What do you suggest?"

"Well," the president replied, "do you want this to be my conference or yours?"

"I guess I want it to be mine," the elder said.

"I thought you did. Now you figure what you feel we should have and then I will be glad to go over your suggested agenda with you."

Accordingly, for the conference the elder planned a program for Friday night with a dance following, and left Saturday and Sunday for leadership meetings with missionaries and local leaders as well as for general sessions for the Saints. For the Friday program he asked each branch in his district to furnish a number. When the program was presented, President Richards sat through it gritting his teeth. Nearly every number was a Negro stunt, and some were in highly questionable taste.

The district president came to the president afterwards and said, "President Richards, I daren't ask you what you thought of the program."

The president replied, "Oh, I think it was wonderful."

"You don't mean that, do you?" the surprised elder asked.

"Yes, it was wonderful because it showed us what our starting point is, but if you ever have another one like it while I am president of the mission it will be just too bad for you, my boy. Now, you will have to get out in the branches and censor what they are going to put on. They have to be taught that music is the voice of angels, but it is also the voice of hell-holes and dives, and they have to discern the difference."

Both the president's reprimand and his instruction to the missionary were received without offense, yet he had been firm and he was in character. The incident reveals again one of his most distinguishing characteristics-boldness tempered with respect for the individual, but crystal clear as to what was intended and what was needed in the way of change or improvement.

In all his labors with his missionaries President Richards aimed at being father, friend, and guide to them. That he was successful is attested to by many who, at the time of this writing, are still around and serving in positions of leadership and responsibility. One says: "He seemed to know our thoughts, and he had feelings of love and compassion for us in our great weakness. I loved and admired the president and felt understood by him as I had never felt understood by mortal man. His will was my pleasure, and with joy I gave my best effort to the work, taking him as my hero."

Another elder later sustained a hurt which he confided to his president by letter after returning home. "I'm afraid I have some sliver in my heart," he wrote. "I'll either have to get the rest of the arrow or continue on thus afflicted. If I had not always been able to confide in you so completely, I would not dare tell you my secrets, but you and Sister Richards have been like parents to me, so my confidences can be yours."

In all areas of mission life President Richards worked to keep the missionaries close to him. When he traveled he took some from the mission home with him, picked up others en route to ride from town to city, left them to work, and picked up others to continue on. He talked with them, listened to them, ate and lodged with them. In Atlanta, between trips, he allowed Saturdays for recreation time with them and his family. They gathered at the park for a picnic and games-softball and other games of prowess and skill, including Indian leg-wrestling, for which Elder Richards is noted. He surprised even the strongest and most powerful by throwing them.

Not only did President Richards work and play with his missionaries, but when they had troubles he did not merely write letters but went to them. One elder lost both mother and father during his mission, but to honor his mother's dying wish he remained in the field when she passed away. LeGrand took the news to him and remained several days. When the father soon followed his wife in death, the president brought the son to the mission home for a period. Upon his release, Elder Richards gave him a blessing, promising that if he so desired he would be able to earn enough to bring him back for an additional short-term mission. This the elder did, and it helped alleviate the sorrow and aloneness he so keenly felt.

President Richards was not without problems where his missionaries were concerned. There were car accidents and operations, sickness and discouragement. In each case he treated them much as he would his own children. He tells the story of one discouraged elder:

I received a letter from a missionary in South Carolina telling me he just couldn't take it, that he wasn't cut out to be a missionary, that he would be willing to furnish the money to keep a missionary in the field for two years, if I would just release him. [President Richards immediately caught a train and went to him.] I told him that I thought the Lord was pleased with his expressed willingness to furnish the money to keep a missionary in the field for two years, but I said, "If I were to release you and let you go home, you would never forgive me. In the future when your own sons were old enough for their missions, what would you say to them?" I said, "I will help you any way that I can, but you make a success of your mission. It will get easier day by day." To make this story short, he did his best and then some, and became a district president and one of my finest missionaries. (Just to Illustrate, p. 216.)

Everywhere he went the president preached, and his sermons then, as now, were punctuated with stories from his missions. (Just to Illustrate contains no less than forty-two oft-told ones from the Southern States alone.) One might ask how these and others can be heard dozens of times without tiring his listeners. James R. Boone (who served as a district president and at this writing is a patriarch in Jacksonville, Florida), gives us his view: "I once traveled with President Richards for nine days and heard him preach twenty-seven times. I feel that I have heard some of his stories at least a hundred times, but he has been so full of the Spirit that I still enjoy each telling." In saying this he touches truth. One of Elder Richards's favorite scriptures in connection with his preaching is, "The letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life." (2 Corinthians 3:6.) This is the principal reason why he never uses notes. He must communicate eye to eye, and freely, enthusiastically-even loudly-pour it out.

Stories help him to put his message across, just as they did the Master Teacher. A story holds the attention, teaches a lesson, is remembered. Elder Richards's never-ending store of them, gleaned from actual experience and told in simple, earthy style, creates a bridge between him and his listeners, whether young or old. He relives them and enjoys recounting them. He puts as much of himself into the hundredth telling as he put into the first, and somehow the hearer does not weary in the retelling any more than he tires when a friend says, "I love you." In essence, that is what Elder Richards is saying to his listeners. "I love you. I want to reach and teach you, bless and lift you, and help you become all our Lord intended you to be."

Feeling President Richards's spirit, his Southern audiences, although reluctant at first, soon took him to their hearts. President Callis had been a powerful and popular preacher, and many found it hard to shift allegiance. Noting this when he visited the South early in Elder Richards's presidency, Elder Melvin J. Ballard made a helpful statement to the people. A former missionary there, Francis L. Urry, reports that statement: "You people have looked to President Callis as your father, but he is now your grandfather. President Richards is your father; look to him." And they did. As one brother said, "We wondered if he would ever fill President Callis's shoes, but we soon found that he had boots of his own."

Not only the people of the South heard President Richards preach during the period he remained there, but the body of the Church heard him as well. By invitation of the First Presidency he attended all seven semi-annual conferences within the three and a half years of his mission and was called to speak in each. These talks are of record. According to some who heard them, his style of delivery, then as now, was informal and familiar, yet the sermons are tightly organized. He did not write them, but, as is now the case, he mentally formulated them with purpose, theme, and summary. Because of the freedom with which he speaks, his sermons seem almost extemporaneous, but in reading them we find the careful organization unmistakable.

In connection with President Richards's preaching, there is a charming bit of advice from his father, George F. Richards. The apostle visited the mission during the fall of his son's first year in the South, and as he observed the breakneck pace at which the president was driving himself in order to attain goals he had set for the mission, he worried. When he returned home, and periodically thereafter, he wrote of it. "I wonder, son, if you are undertaking to do more than you have strength to carry you through," one letter said. "I wish I could convince you to slow up a little and thus check old age which is creeping on." He continued, "Perhaps you like your work so well and do it so successfully that it does not tire you as much as like work tires some others of us. One way to ease up is to not put so much effort into your preaching, i.e., do not think you have to speak louder than is necessary to be heard in order to emphasize what you are saying." (LeGrand Richards Personal Letter File, in his possession.) Ina, too, thought he could tone down his dynamics to good advantage.

To please them both, he tried, but he was not entirely successful. Amusingly, he uses scriptural support to justify that which, in all probability, is a naturally amplified voice, born of his boldness, his conviction, and his much experience in preaching both indoors and on the streets. One elder said that when the president spoke at a street meeting on Lord's Corner in Atlanta, he could be heard a block away. In addition to the scriptures which instruct the elders to "declare my word with loud voices" (D&C 60:7), LeGrand likes Doctrine and Covenants 42:6. "And ye shall go forth in the power of my Spirit, preaching my gospel, two by two, in my name, lifting up your voices as with the sound of a trump, declaring my word like unto angels of God." (Emphasis added by LeGrand Richards.)

Throughout the mission were numerous chapels and rented halls of varying quality. The president preached in them all. Some had not even outhouses on the premises, but allowed the dense woods which crowded close to the buildings to serve such natural requirements. President Richards felt such conditions to be deplorable, and he set about to remedy them. As the mission's first building project, neat and sturdy outbuildings were constructed for each meeting place that lacked them. The next project was the painting and renovating of neglected buildings. The erection of new buildings soon followed. Early in his tenure, President Richards appointed a mature missionary who had had construction experience to supervise the building program-S. D. Pearce from Vernal, Utah. This man was so successful that following his release the Church called him back to the South to work full-time in that capacity. He returned with his wife and his brother, the latter to help him in the work.

Notable among the new chapels were those in Liberty, Mississippi; Augusta, Georgia; Orlando, Florida; and Columbia, South Carolina; the last named being dedicated on October 28, 1934, by Elder George F. Richards while on his tour of the South already mentioned.

Just as his father was worried that President Richards might break under the strain of his work, so was his mother. Added to her concern over his health was her worry that he would not find time for his family. "Ina and the children need some of your company," she wrote him. It was true that his work took him away with never-ceasing regularity and that, with three children yet at home, the mission staff, and a constant influx and outflow of missionaries to look after, Ina had her hands full. As a result she did not often travel with her husband. Nevertheless it was a fulfilling time for her.

After her years of illness, the blessing given Ina by the patriarch George Bowles before they left California had been honored of the Lord, and she was finally well. She headed the mission Relief Societies. She managed the mission household with efficiency and grace and saved hundreds of dollars through her careful buying and her culinary skills. While being a loving mother to her own children, she was also friend and confidante to the young men and women who served their missions in the South. Whenever the opportunity afforded, she also concerned herself with instructing them in manners, grooming, and the art of conversation. As always, President Richards appreciated her with a depth of feeling that constantly found its way to expression. He told Mable Chapman, his secretary, that her most important assignment in his absence was "to keep Sister Richards happy." In letters and in his journal are written words which he often expressed in person. "Ina has been a beautiful companion," he wrote on January 1, 1937. "She is all I could ever have asked for -so sweet and lovely and helpful-and her influence with the children has been wonderful. She has greatly strengthened me in my ministry because of the love and respect the people bear her." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. XI, p. 3.)

Despite the load he carried, he did not neglect Ina or the children. As in earlier assignments, he could break away from his work for brief periods to give them his undivided attention. "I've finished the Lord's work for this hour, now what can I do to make my family happy?" His journals from the mission period are full of entries showing that he took time with them at every opportunity. With Ina there were shopping times, lunches, a lecture (Carl Sandburg), a concert (Lily Pons); with the children there were school events, games, birthday celebrations; and he took them all to the movies (Maytime, Seventh Heaven, Magnificent Obsession). (LeGrand Richards Journals, vols. IX, X, XI.)

He regularly wrote to his married daughters, receiving special letters in return. Such an answer from Norinne brought him satisfaction. She wrote, "May my life someday bring me (through intense joys, suffering, and progressing experiences) some of your wisdom and spirituality. Is it possible, Daddy?" He also wrote to his son LaMont when he served a three-month mission in the South between his junior and senior years in high school, and later when, after graduation, he left for work and further schooling in Salt Lake.

The night before LaMont left home for the longer period, his father spent the evening with him. President Richards recorded in his journal: "Had a long talk with LaMont tonight until after midnight. Discussed my confidence in him and expectations of him. Also his program for future, including college, mission, and marriage." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. X, p. 73.)

As he counseled his own children about such important matters, he also extended fatherly advice to young people in the mission. One of his stories from west Florida shows him doing this.

A recent convert, a lovely young woman school teacher, came up to me and said, "President Richards, I am going to get married. What do you think of that?" I replied, "Wonderful. Do I know him?" She answered, "No." Then I said, "Is he a member of the Church?" She answered, "No." Then I said, "Well, you are a beautiful, clean young woman, and you could no more find happiness with an unclean man than you could mix oil and water. In your courtship with him you will know whether he is motivated by clean and holy desires, or whether he would take advantage of you if he could." Then I added, "And he must be a prayerful man with a faith in God, for, as wicked as the world is, I would not trust any man to be true to his wife and children who does not believe there is a God and that someday he will have to answer to him for what he does here on earth. Also, he must be willing to let you raise your children in the Church, for knowing as you do that the Lord has restored his truth to the earth, you would be a very unhappy woman if you could not teach your children the truths of the gospel." Then I added "Let me know when he joins the Church." I didn't dare tell her not to marry a nonmember of the Church, for I didn't know where she could find a young man in the Church, except our missionaries, and we had "hands-off" signs hanging all over them.

I didn't hear anything more from her until the next conference about four months later. Her train was late, so she came into the morning meeting late. After the meeting she came up to shake hands with me. As she put out her hand I said, "Name, please." She replied, "Oh, I am still Miss So-and-So?" I said, "What became of your anticipated marriage?" Her answer was, "He did not come up to your specifications." (Just to Illustrate, pp. 23-24.)

Working with countless individuals on a one-to-one level as well as his responsibilities on a missionwide basis kept President Richards going at a relentless pace. Always an early riser, he did not often finish his day until late hours. But it was as his father said: Even with the load he carried, he enjoyed his work, and it seemed not to tire him in the same way it might have done another. In laboring full-time for the Lord he appears to have tapped the source of renewal spoken of by his beloved prophet, Isaiah: "Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall; but they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint." (Isaiah 40:30-31. Emphasis added.)

On his fiftieth birthday, February 6, 1936, the president recorded, "I am enjoying wonderful health. I feel like a young man." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. X, p. 19.) For that same birthday he received a letter from his father which in retrospect is seen to contain a prophetic statement. He wrote: "The thought that a half-century has passed since you were born makes me feel quite aged. May you have many returns of the eventful day of your birth, and another half century at least." (LeGrand Richards Personal Letter File, in his possession.)

As the days passed, the president was careful to record in his journal not only near-at-hand events but also those that affected the Church, the nation, and the world. He noted that temples were to be built in Idaho Falls and Los Angeles; that the Pioneer Cemetery at Florence, Nebraska, was dedicated; and that George F. Richards, having served so many years as Salt Lake Temple president, was called in April 1937 to supervise all temples and at the same time was sustained as acting Patriarch to the Church. President LeGrand Richards also recorded the reelection of President Franklin D. Roosevelt; the death of King George V of England; Edward VIII's abdication of the throne to marry the American divorcee; and the coronation of King George VI-four events that captured headlines in many parts of the world.

The Southern States Mission, too, had a flurry of excitement over the official visit of a famous man, Elder Reed Smoot, member of the Quorum of the Twelve and recently senior member of the United States Senate. He toured the South with President Richards from the third to the eighteenth of December, 1936. There was considerable publicity as he met with distinguished people and the press and spoke over various radio stations. Everywhere in the South he was paid homage as a notable

With visiting apostle Reed Smoot at Columbia, South Carolina, 1936.

Gg

With Chief Samuel Blue

public figure, but there is a story which shows him quietly performing a humble service in private.

After the morning session of conference in Orlando, Florida, a brother came to President Richards and said, "My wife is lying at death's door. She'd be thrilled if you and Elder Smoot would visit her before she dies." "How far is it from here?" the president asked. "Thirty miles," the man replied.

President Richards told Elder Smoot of the request. "What do you wish to do about it?" Elder Smoot inquired.

"Well, I would like to go out and see her," was the reply. "Let's go," the senator agreed.

They drove the thirty miles, located the home, and upon entering the sister's room found her lying on a low bed. Elder Smoot lowered his towering frame to kneel beside her. He placed his hands on her head, gave her a blessing, and then kissed her good-bye. (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. X, p. 173, and interview.)

Both the visits from General Authorities and President Richards's attendance at semi-annual conferences in Salt Lake added a special dimension to his years in the South. His rail trips west afforded him opportunity to keep perspective, review progress, plan ahead, refresh his spirit, and pour out his soul in thanksgiving for his many opportunities. Gratitude is central to his character. He often recorded his prayers of appreciation to the Lord for his "standing and part in this gospel dispensation"; for the manner in which the Lord had sustained him; and for the outpouring of the Lord's Spirit which "is the greatest witness of the truth of this work." He observed that "at times, the Lord seems so near and the veil so thin." On March 29, 1936, he wrote as he traveled, "Had a lovely day reading and thinking over my work. Outlined report for mission presidents' meeting. Also planned what I might say if called to speak in general conference. In spirit and thought, I lived the day very near to the Lord." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. VIII, p. 44.)

He did speak at that conference. He took as his text the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, concerning how the Lord would "set up an ensign for the nations,... assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth." It was a subject upon Which he gave much thought at the time; in fact, some months later he expanded his thinking upon it to freely explore (on five pages of typed manuscript) ideas which he felt might be helpful to the Church in becoming an ensign to the nations. He covered such areas as council meetings, stake presidents' conventions, separation of Church and business, court and arbitration committees, Church-owned property, and missionary surveys. His grass-roots experience, his familiarity with Church administration and procedures, his wide vision, and his originality are evident in each area upon which he deliberated.

At the next general conference, October 1936, President Richards had an opportunity to speak with President Grant upon two matters, both of which had been discussed prior to his mission in the South. The first pertained to the Church President's stated hope that he might visit the Southern States during President Richards's term there. When reminded of it, he said with a twinkle, "Oh, I tell that to all the mission presidents." Not to be put off, President Richards said, "But we have counted on your visit, and we have a mission conference planned for next June at which you are the drawing card. Our people are saving their money to come, and we expect a wonderful time." Persuaded, President Grant said, "All right, I will come."

The second point for consideration was the duration of President Richards's mission. "I am willing to remain as long as you want me to," he said, "but when you come in June I will have been in the South for three and a half years, so if you still feel as you did when I went down there, it would be better for me to be released in the summer. That is a better time to restart my real estate business so that I can make a living, and it would also be a better time for my children to change schools." He continued, "Now, I have my work all planned six months in advance, and I wouldn't like to read about my release in the newspaper, so you might like to bring my successor with you." His longtime friend smiled and said, "All right, I will." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. X, p. 140, and interview.)

As it happened, Merrill D. Clayson, who was appointed

Mission President LeGrand Richards and Branch President Homer Yarn greet Church President Heber J. Grant, Charles A. Callis (rear), and Le Roi C. Snow (right) on their arrival in Atlanta.

President Richards's successor, was unable to meet the earlier date (May 1, 1937) which President Grant set for the mission visit, and he planned to go in June when his work as principal of South High School Seminary was completed for that year. In the meantime, Elder Charles A. Callis and LeRoi C. Snow accompanied President Grant to Atlanta, Georgia.

A very full two days of activity had been planned for the Church President's visit. After the missionary session on Saturday morning, Ina served a beautiful luncheon for the guests and mission leaders. Social calls and sightseeing filled the afternoon until dinner. Then in the evening nearly a thousand people gathered at the Women's Club for a reception, a program, and a mission Grand Ball with the presentation of nine district queens. It was a culmination of three and a half years of intensive work with the mission leadership and youth.

President Grant was delighted with the experience, and Elder Callis said that had he known it would be so grand he would have brought his wife. The press covered the evening events, and there were favorable comments in the newspapers concerning it and President Grant's radio address. Many city officials and dignitaries came, and they carried away like impressions of the Mormons and their influence in the Southern community.

On Sunday three conference sessions were held at Bass Junior High auditorium. The visitors were invited to do most of the speaking. President Grant was at his charming best, even singing for his audience. President Richards's young son, Alden, who had a sweet, clear voice, also sang. President Callis, happy to be back among the people of the South, warmed to the occasion and immensely enjoyed speaking to them again. It was a memorable event for Saints who had worked and saved to attend. A Sister Powell from South Carolina said, "President Richards, it was worth it even it I did have to sell my cow to come." For Brother Richards it was a deeply satisfying time and the realization of his dreams. He recorded that night: "Now I am anxious to turn the mission over. I have completed my plans with few exceptions." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. XI, pp. 122-29, and interview.)

One of the exceptions was the setting up of districts under local leadership, which the president had not yet completed. During the intervening month before President Clayson's arrival, he worked to accomplish it. Before he left, three local district presidents with full district councils and boards were installed and functioning. He told them, "You are like the prophet of old, who one day was called Jacob and the next day, Israel. Today you are districts and branches, but soon the Brethren will come and change you to stakes and wards. You will be the same people, but your names will be changed."

As he traveled from place to place, President Richards jotted down in his notebook everything he thought would be helpful to his successor-businesses the mission dealt with, proposed chapels which needed to be built, men he had in training for positions of leadership, and those who would want to be advanced in the priesthood who were either not ready or not yet worthy. This information he typed and had ready to turn over to the new president.

President Richards had yet another important work to do before he left, a work which he had neither anticipated nor planned but which had far-reaching and undreamed of import. In his journal are recorded the steps as this work progressed and was completed.

On May 24, 1937, at Gaffney, South Carolina, the missionaries put questions to him "about the order of procedure in presenting our story to the people." Extemporaneously he took an hour and a half doing this. In nearby Greenville on May 27 he "took an hour in scripture class, covering eleven evenings of instruction, and gave proper presentation of our message to investigators-in systematic order." On June 6 he "commenced the write-up of our message [to be given] once a week for six months." He worked all day on the outline on June 7 and completed ten pages. He continued on June 11 and then helped the elders hold a street meeting. We know that between that day and June 16 he completed his outline, "telling our story in order to properly present our message," because on that date he mailed copies of it to all the elders in the mission under title of "The Message of Mormonism." (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. XI, pp. 145, 152, 160, 162, 167.)

The importance of this labor cannot be overemphasized, for this was the outline that later served as the basis for his book A Marvelous Work and a Wonder, which he and many others consider to be his greatest contribution to the missionary effort of the Church. As shown, the groundwork for it was laid during the time when his mission in the South was essentially over.

In the light of what he had just accomplished, and what its future was to be, it seems significant that in his last general conference address as president of the Southern States Mission (April 1937), he said, "I believe that when the Lord announced to the Prophet Joseph Smith that a marvelous work and a wonder was about to come forth among the children of men, the work was to include many important things." He then delineated some of those things, including the Word of Wisdom and the Book of Mormon, and added, "In the analysis of every phase of our work, to me, it is a marvelous work and a wonder." That thought, that actuality, was deep in his consciousness, even though it would be many years before his book would be written and before its title would be "found."

President Clayson arrived on June 18, and LeGrand "was very well impressed with him." He and Ina showed him about the mission home (which they had had freshly painted and refurbished with new curtains and other niceties). LeGrand discussed the affairs of the mission with him and gave him the notes and suggestions he had prepared. (President Clayson later told him they had served as his "Bible.") Then with full confidence that his successor was capable of moving ahead on his own, he and his family left Atlanta. (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. XI, pp. 167-68.)

By the evening of June 19 they were in Paducah, Kentucky, 455 miles on the way home. That night LeGrand wrote that he had completed his work in a manner satisfactory to himself, and he hoped to the Brethren and the Lord. (LeGrand Richards Journal, vol. XI, p. 168.)

It was not many days until they were in Salt Lake City and he was reporting his mission to the Twelve assembled in the temple. He told them that he had filled in all the report blanks they had sent him, adding, "and goodness knows you've sent plenty; but there is no place on them to report what we have accomplished which I feel was of greatest importance to the mission-the individual growth and development that came as a result of harnessing the members and putting them to work."

He then told them that many from the mission had traveled west to receive the ordinances in the Salt Lake Temple; that young people had saved to attend BYU; that local youth had served missions; and that no missionary had been sent home in disgrace. He spoke of the three districts now under capable local leadership; of the full functioning missionwide MIA; of sites purchased, buildings remodeled and built, with others in the planning; and of the expanding membership which would occupy them and carry on the extended Church programs in the South.

It had been a different mission for President Richards. The missionaries had proselyted many, and converts were numerous, but his own efforts had been exclusively devoted to administrative work, to his missionaries, and to lifting and building up the members already on the books. He had faithfully and effectively enlarged and strengthened the foundation-begun by others before him and continued by those following-upon which the numerous missions, stakes, and wards of the south have come into being. And from his outline "The Message of Mormonism," written during the last weeks of his mission in the Southern States, he would later write the book which has reaped a vast harvest of converts for the Lord.
