Lucile C. Tate, LeGrand Richards: Beloved Apostle ( 1982)

12

Bishop of University Ward 1937-1938

Within a few days of LeGrand's return to Salt Lake City, Orin Woodbury, with whom he had had such a long and agreeable business association, offered him a half interest in the very successful and lucrative Woodbury investment and brokerage firm. LeGrand thought it over, and his reply was typical: "Orin, I think it is wonderful for you to make me such an offer, but I have never been second man in business. If I were to come in with you, that's what I would be, and I don't think I could be happy in that position." He continued, "I have confidence that I can reestablish my business as I left it when called to go to California by the President of the Church, and that I can retrieve some of the fortune I lost as a result of the Depression." So it was settled.

With characteristic vigor, he immediately set about rebuilding his real estate business. On June 26, 1937, he took his examinations at the Utah State Capitol, secured his broker's license, and began lining up prospects. On June 30 he rented office space for thirty-five dollars a month in the Columbia Trust Building at 125 South Main Street-"a fine building with marble halls," he recorded. On July 1 he commenced his business activities, and that day he closed his second real estate deal. He also moved his family into the George Lloyd furnished home at 545 DeSoto Street for a two-month period.

On July 3 he obtained eighty-eight real estate listings, ordered a new suit, and wrote in his journal that the Deseret News and the Tribune had "run a nice announcement with his picture." That evening he took Ina to the temple. During the month of July, he rented a Kodak and took pictures of his listed homes, bought new office furniture, ordered a neon sign for his window, obtained his multiple listing membership for $250, and began to build a sales force of six.

While his weekdays were filled with his many business affairs, he was instantly in demand as a speaker on Sundays. Four days after his return from the South, he spoke in the Salt Lake Tabernacle at the afternoon service under the direction of the Ensign and Liberty stake presidents. His talk, "The Worth of the Scriptures," appeared in the Church News of July 24. His KSL radio address of August 8, "The End of the Journey," was printed in the August 14 issue of that newspaper. Sometimes he preached two or three times on one Sunday. On July 16 he addressed the area's Dutch Saints for forty-five minutes in their own tongue. His years away had not estranged him from them. Their welcome was warm, genuine, and tearful when he greeted them that night at the Fourteenth Ward chapel.

For the next six months the days had to stretch in order to encompass his rigorous schedule. He began building a large new home at 925 South Thirteenth East with an adjoining triplex apartment. While it was being completed, he moved his family from George Lloyd's home to an apartment at 227 South Thirteenth East within the boundaries of the University Ward. It was while he was living here on a temporary basis that President Winslow F. Smith of Ensign Stake called him to be bishop of that ward, even though, when his home was built, he would be moving from the area.

When President Smith asked him about counselors, the new bishop chose Devirl B. Stewart as his first counselor. Brother Stewart had a background of ward experience, having served with the previous bishopric under Bishop Arthur T. Burton. In the brief time he had known him, Bishop Richards had come to respect Devirl and to enjoy his fine spirit.

For his second counselor, the bishop requested John L. Firmage. "But," said the stake president, "he is not active in Church affairs and has not performed any ordinances. I wonder if you are not making a mistake. There are a number of returned mission presidents in the ward who would make excellent counselors." But the bishop had a clear purpose in requesting this particular man. He explained it to the president. He had felt of Brother Firmage's sweet spirit when, after a trip from the East, he had borne his testimony in fast meeting. The bishop said also, "I think, because of Brother Firmage's standing in the financial and educational community, we will have a better connection with the wealthy, influential, and educated people in Federal Heights (which makes up a large segment of our ward) than if we take someone without his prestige."

The president was dubious, but after some deliberation and inquiry he was convinced that Brother Firmage was a good and a generous man and he and his counselors approved the appointment. The new second counselor proved to be an outgoing, friendly, and effective leader to the Aaronic Priesthood, in financial matters, and in positive influence which helped to build ward unity.

The ward was in close proximity to the University of Utah, and because of divergent views propounded by some of its educators and other men of influence, ward unity suffered over the issue of orthodoxy versus liberalism. A common question among members was "Are you a fundamentalist?" Shortly after the new bishopric was sustained on January 23, 1938, Bishop Richards attended the Sunday School Gospel Doctrine class. There the issue was freely discussed-and, of course, not resolved before the lesson period was concluded. The teacher asked the bishop if they had his permission to continue the discussion the following Sunday. "By all means," Bishop Richards replied, "but I should like to have the last ten or fifteen minutes to address the class."

The next Sunday brought a lively class discussion of such "controversial" issues as that the vision of Joseph Smith is not provable; that the Book of Mormon was not literally translated from golden plates; and that Christ was the Savior, not because he hung upon the cross but because he taught saving principles. The interchange of opinions and talk was terminated in time to allow Bishop Richards to address the class.

"The things I have heard in these two weeks of free discussion are not Mormonism," he told the group. "Now, as long as I am bishop of this ward, we are going to teach fundamental Mot-monism in this building. That means that Joseph Smith indeed received a vision of the Father and the Son (and it is provable by personal testimony), that he did indeed translate the Book of Mormon from the golden plates which he received from the Angel Moroni." He continued, "In that book, we read of the vision shown to Nephi by the angel, of Mary with child, of the child growing to manhood, of his choosing twelve apostles, and of his being crucified for the sins of the world. Now, that is Mot-monism."

The power of the bishop's office was upon him when he challenged: "Now, if any of you do not approve of fundamental Mormonism, why don't you go and organize a church of your own and teach what you want to. There are so many churches now teaching the precepts of men that one more won't matter." He then turned to Elder Joseph F. Merrill of the Council of the Twelve, who was in attendance as a member of the ward, and said, "Now, if I have said anything of which you do not approve, please correct me while the people are here." Elder Merrill responded, "I approve of every word you have said."

It was a sober class that filed out of the room. Some were jubilant. Lester F. Hewlett, who would shortly become president of the Tabernacle Choir, reported to President Grant that day that he had shed tears of gratitude that the Lord had sent them a man who could hold his own with the liberals. Some, however, were disturbed and thought the bishop to be severely orthodox. A few were angry.

For his part, the bishop soon went to his office and, sitting at his desk, put his head in his hands. The ward clerk, Joseph Toronto, who sat at a small table in the same room, remembers the bishop saying, "Oh, did I pour it on too strong? I hope I haven't put them from me. I have wanted them to love me so I could help them to love the Lord."

Feeling the intensity of the opposition and knowing the schism which could result, Bishop Richards was not surprised when the following anonymous and vitriolic letter came to him.

LeGrand Richards:

Do you know what you are doing with your narrow-minded Dogmatism? You will send the intelligent Mormons to the Unitarian church where they can have freedom of speech for which the Pilgrims came to America....

We believe in revelation, but we want to clarify our ideas if you don't mind....

You will be tempted to read this letter in Sunday School, but you won't. Why let the simple-minded that just take the dictation of orthodox fanatics know why you were made Bishop of this educated ward?

One of Many who believe this is still the land of the Free and the home of the Brave.

February 26, 1938

Bishop Richards read the letter thoughtfully and pocketed it. He was determined to win the support of his opposition.

Shortly after this incident he met with one of the most influential liberal educators in the area. By way of introduction, Bishop Richards told him about the words of his prominent friend in Atlanta, Georgia-a Doctor Sutton, who was also in the field of educational philosophy: "If I were to have my way, I would not award a doctoral degree in a university. We make them doctors. Doctors of what? Doctors of memorization. I would wait until they get out of the university and prove that their education has made them leaders in their fields, and then I would give them a doctor's degree." The bishop continued, "Now, by that standard, I am as much entitled to a doctor's degree as are you. You are a Doctor of Philosophy and I am a Doctor of Religion. I know what religion will do for the member, for the convert, for the missionary. I have proven it from every angle, and I feel that I can speak as a Doctor of Religion." From that point on, the professor and the bishop were on agreed equal footing. They had a great discussion and parted friends, but not before the educator had invited his bishop to attend an Exchange Club luncheon as his guest.

The bishop's interesting analogy of academic and religious skills implies the distinction he has always recognized without question. Only in the field of religion does he equate his training with that of a Ph.D. In all other areas-literature, the arts, philosophy, science-he defers to scholars who are academically his superior. (The three honorary degrees which would later be awarded to him perhaps justify that earlier assessment of his hard-won mastery over the complexities of applied religion.)

Another staunch liberal leader became both friend and cooperating member of the ward community when Bishop Richards had him supervise an outstanding program and party to which President Grant was invited. Knowing the man's liberal tendencies, the President questioned Bishop Richards's judgment when he became aware of the party chairman's identity through the bishop's personal invitation. In defense, the bishop said, "But President Grant, you've not questioned my judgment before. I want to make friends of my opponents, and I've found that a person catches more flies with honey than with vinegar. Now, I figure that I will do better working with them than opposing them. I'm not asking this talented man to teach a doctrinal class, but I don't think it will hurt to have him put on a great entertainment."

"Well," said the President, "I guess you know what you are doing." The President attended the party, enjoyed the evening very much, and complimented the educator who had made the event so memorable and the bishop who had made so wise a choice.

By such means the bishop brought to the troubled waters of that period a seasoned judgment, a personal warmth, and a sure confidence in the ward members which they found hard to resist.

He assiduously studied members' names, faces, and identifying detail so that he readily came to know them all, and his remarkable powers of recall made it possible for him to make his greetings and conversation with the people personal and meaningful. His long-standing success formula-plan, delegate, follow through-brought blessings of activity to every ward member willing to respond. He discontinued the practice of bringing noted outside speakers for sacrament meetings and instead called whole families to provide talks and music for the services. As in similar previous situations, his notebook kept track of each family's turn.

He was supportive of activities. One member recalls that when the choir prepared for a special program, the bishop attended each rehearsal, even though according to him he "couldn't sing a note." He wanted the members to know he was with them each step of the way. He also initiated ward temple excursions, attended them with the members, and at one time arranged for the temple president, Stephen L. Chipman, to speak to the group about the meaning and purpose of the clothing, the ordinances, and the saving work the members were doing. As always, his central aim was to increase faith and spirituality in those over whom he presided.

It was just two and a half months from the time LeGrand became bishop of University Ward that he was attending April general conference. After the morning session of the third day, he stayed to visit with missionaries and parents on the north side of the Tabernacle, where signs indicated meeting places for the various missions. When his Southern States group dispersed, he walked down to his real estate office on Main Street and found President Grant and his father, George F., seated there. As he walked in, the President hung up the telephone and said, "Oh, here he is now."

"It looks suspicious to see you two men here," Bishop Richards said.

"It is," the President responded. "We're going to change the Presiding Bishopric this afternoon, and we'd like you to be Presiding Bishop. Who do you want for your counselors?"

"Well, President, you've about taken away my thinking powers. Who can I have?"

"Any man in the Church you want," the President assured him, then pleasantly added, "We don't choose a man's wife for him, and we don't choose his counselors."

"How long can I have to choose them?" the new Presiding Bishop asked.

"Oh," President Grant replied, "we want to sustain them this afternoon."

The afternoon session would begin at two o'clock. It was now twelve-forty-five. Bishop Richards brought to the question all the power of concentration he could muster, then drawing upon his knowledge of Church procedure he said, "President, when you were deciding whom you wanted for Presiding Bishop, you had a list of men that were suggested by members of the Twelve. If you feel like entrusting the list to me, I think I could select my counselors from among them. They would be men that you Brethren of the General Authorities regard as having special qualifications for that office."

President Grant was pleased with this idea and wrote eight names on a slip of paper. He commented upon each, as did Elder George F. Richards. When the new Presiding Bishop checked the names of Marvin O. Ashton and Joseph L. Wirthlin, the two older men approved them.

"Are you going to tell them in advance?" the Bishop asked.

The President smiled. "No, we wouldn't have asked you if we hadn't had to consult you for your counselors."

"Well, now, President Grant," the Bishop said, "they may love the Church and they may love the Lord, but they might not feel that they would like to serve under me as Bishop. I'd feel much better about it if you would give them an opportunity to turn it down before their names are presented before the entire Church."

"Well," the President acquiesced, "if you feel that way, I will contact them." (LeGrand Richards interview and George F. Richards Diary account.)

The details of Bishop Ashton's affirmative response to his call are not known, but Bishop Wirthlin later told of his. President Grant phoned and said, "Is this Joseph L. Wirthlin?"

"Yes, sir."

"This is Heber J. Grant. We are going to change the Bishopric this afternoon. We'd like to know if you are willing to serve as a counselor to LeGrand Richards?"

"Well," said Brother Wirthlin, "there is so much involved. I have my business and I'm president of the stake. Can I come in and talk it over with you?"

"No," said the eighty-one-year-old President, "there isn't time. I have to have a little nap before the meeting. It will be all right, won't it?" It was.

The new Presiding Bishopric was sustained at the two o'clock session that day, Wednesday, April 6, 1938. (In those days, general conference convened for three days and always included April 6 in commemoration of the organization of the Church in 1830.) LeGrand was the last speaker before President Grant closed the 108th Annual General Conference.

Bishop Richards stood before the congregation deeply moved. At age fifty-two, he was now the seventh Presiding Bishop since the Church was organized. This would be his twelfth sermon from that historic pulpit, but never had there been such a time as this, for he now stood as a General Authority with the attendant responsibility of his call upon him. It proved to be his shortest talk to date.

He expressed his gratitude for the confidence of the Church leaders in him, and for the sustaining vote of the Church. He told of his love for the Brethren, the Saints, and the Lord, assuring his listeners that "there is not a place in the world I would not go, because of my love for and testimony of the gospel." He was grateful for every opportunity to serve that had ever come to him, but for that service, he said, "the Lord owes me nothing. All I have done in the Church, I have done because I love the Lord."

He talked of his predecessor, Sylvester Q. Cannon, who had been sustained as an apostle that same day. Since their days in Holland together, Bishop Richards had watched and admired his mission president. He recalled now that "it was as though the light of truth was streaming from [President Cannon's] eyes when he explained the glorious principles of the gospel to those who were seeking after truth." And he added, "I have always thought that this call [to the Twelve] would be, for him, inevitable."

The Presiding Bishop now addressed himself to the priesthood leaders with whom he would be working in his new assignment. With these encouraging words, he pledged himself to serve them without measure. "I hope," he said, "that you will never be afraid of me. I hope you will not hesitate to come to my office. I hope you will feel free to write, if there is anything I can do to help you. I am willing to give all I have, and all the Lord will give to me, to help this work roll [on] to the destiny which I know the Lord has decreed for it."

In his desire to render total service he reached out to the whole Church, but, as was his way, he remembered the needs of his family. To his children he said, "There is no achievement that can come to [you] that will be so pleasing to me as to know that [your] lives shall be lives of service to this great Church." (Conference Report, April 1938, pp. 119-20.)

George F. Richards was proud of his son. He wrote in his diary that day (April 6, 1938) that LeGrand's selection as Presiding Bishop had received among the Brethren a "unanimous vote"; that his son had "accepted [the call] in a proper spirit"; that he had "made a brief but splendid speech"; and that following the session "many people congratulated LeGrand and some congratulated me, including President Grant."

The next day Bishop Richards met with his University Ward counselors. His clerk remembers that he looked rather pale and shaken. A week later the new Presiding Bishop and his counselors were set apart in their respective callings. As the Brethren placed their hands upon his head and President Grant gave him a blessing, Bishop Richards remembered a dream, the significance of which had been withheld from him until now. He tells of it as follows:

About the time I was to be released from the Southern States Mission, I had a dream. In it I met President Grant on the street in Salt Lake City and he said, "LeGrand, come to my office, I have a special blessing for you." I went, and he gave me a blessing. When I awoke, I couldn't remember a thing about what he had said, but only how his words had thrilled me. When he laid his hands on my head within the same year and set me apart as the Presiding Bishop of the Church, I knew why the knowledge had been withheld from my memory. It would not have been right for me to know it at that time. I had to wait until the call came and the actual blessing was given.

Between his setting apart on April 14 and his release as bishop of University Ward on November 13, a seven-month period, LeGrand Richards served in the dual role of ward bishop and Presiding Bishop of the Church. Even with the complexities of his new assignment, he did not neglect his ward responsibilities, one of which was to call young men into the mission field. It was during this period that he called his own son LaMont to serve in England.

The ward counselors, of course, carried a heavy load, but the majority of ward members had been won to unified support so that the work progressed smoothly, and this helped a great deal. In an evaluation of Bishop Richards's part in bringing this about, the ward clerk, Joseph Toronto, says: "He brought into University Ward a warmth, a love, a fellowship that was foreign to many of the members. It was the spirit of the gospel, the Spirit of Christ, and there was a unifying force felt there that lasted for a long time and left a lasting imprint upon the people with whom he served."

By the time Bishop Richards was released from his ward duties, he had already moved his family from the area. It had been a satisfaction to him that, since his return from the South, he had largely recovered his financial losses, had built a lovely home, and had returned his deserving family to their former gracious life-style. This home, with its beautiful canyon backyard, served as the family setting for the Presiding Bishopric years.
