Lucile C. Tate, LeGrand Richards: Beloved Apostle ( 1982)

13

Presiding Bishop of the Church 1938-1952

When asked if there was a transition period between his call and his taking over the duties of Presiding Bishop, Elder Richards replied, "No, the next day Elder Sylvester Q. Cannon, who had been called as an apostle and whom I succeeded, walked out; and I walked in and went to work." It was of course necessary for the new Bishop to again terminate his real estate business. His counselors too had their business arrangements to make.

Of these men so hastily chosen that general conference day, Bishop Richards later said: "If I could choose over again I could not have made an improvement, nor would I have exchanged one of these grand counselors for any man that I met along the way."

He spoke of each of them in turn. "Joseph L. Wirthlin was a noble character, as true and loyal to the Church as any man I have ever known. If we ever questioned the instructions of the Brethren, he would say, 'Well, you know, if they asked that we put the Presiding Bishop's Office up on Ensign Peak, there it would go.' That is the kind of faith he had."

Marvin O. Ashton was LeGrand's brother-in-law, a man whom Ina had loved and admired since boyhood as a "magnificent character." Of him Bishop Richards said, "When we knelt in prayer every morning in my office as we commenced the labors of the day, Bishop Ashton, in his plain-speaking way would pray, 'Now, Father, give us the good sense to do what we know to be right to do.' He didn't think we always used the good sense that the Lord Almighty gave us,... that we didn't always step out of our way to do only that which ought to be done. He had a great heart, and he was one of the finest boys' men I ever knew."

They were strong men, with spirits to match the Bishop's own, a spirit which President Grant commended when he set him apart as Presiding Bishop on April 14. In part he said: "The Lord is pleased with your wonderful loyalty, love, and devotion to the work you have been engaged in from young manhood until the present and for the readiness and willingness at all times to respond to every call made of you, holding first in your heart and affections the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ." He then blessed him that he would "increase in the love of truth and wisdom," and promised, "you will have the ability to do more work with greater ease than you have done in the past." (Blessing, Heber J. Grant to LeGrand Richards, April 14, 1938. Used with permission of the Office of the First Presidency.)

In view of the pace at which LeGrand Richards had driven himself in all of his Church assignments, particularly in the Southern States, where even his father worried about possible effects on his health, President Grant's last statement indicates that he was well aware of the ever-widening responsibilities of the new Presiding Bishop and was further preparing him for his work through this special blessing. Now, with no further personal business concerns to dilute his efforts, Bishop Richards could spend all his working hours in service to the Lord. In this prospect he experienced great joy, as did his counselors. By commitment, direction, and temperament, the three were perfectly suited to work effectively as one in purpose and in loyalty to the Lord and to one another.

At the beginning of Bishop Richards's term of office, the total membership of the Church (figures for December 31, 1937) numbered 767,652, with 118 stakes, 1,101 wards and independent branches, and 36 missions. (Conference Report, April 1938, p. 76.) The majority of the members lived in Utah, Idaho, Arizona, and California. One of the early assignments from the First Presidency was for the Presiding Bishopric to tour these states and become acquainted with the Saints, their leaders, and the youth. In doing this they sometimes traveled with members of the Church Welfare Committee. Harold B. Lee, managing director of the Church welfare system, was one who accompanied them at various times. When they had covered the area,

Newly called Presiding Bishop of the Church with counselors Marvin O. Ashton (left) and Joseph L. Wirthlin.

the Bishopric were permitted to set up their own conference schedules. They aimed at visiting every stake conference (then held quarterly). When Lee A. Palmer later came into the Presiding Bishop's office to assist in administering the Aaronic Priesthood program, he also held some Aaronic Priesthood training meetings in some stakes to help ease the travel load. They traveled in all kinds of weather and mainly by automobile.

Since responsibility for the Aaronic Priesthood was central to their call, this segment of their work was of immense importance from the beginning. Elder Richards tells that when President Grant set him apart to administer the temporal affairs of the Church, that seemed to him a great task, but when he set him over the Aaronic Priesthood he was "truly humbled." That call he took most seriously, and he aimed to reach every boy. To accomplish this it was necessary to touch and influence their leaders.

One medium to accomplish this goal was the Progress of the Church, a bulletin sent out monthly by the Presiding Bishop's Office, its first issue appearing June 1939 (vol. I, no. 1). It was a rousing challenge to bishops and stake presidents, and it bears the unmistakable stamp of LeGrand Richards. "Zion must arise and put on her beautiful garments," its editorial read. "We are custodians. The leader who can get ten men working is greater than he who does the work of ten men. All can be assigned to some useful service. Priesthood was given so that all men might be engaged in the work of their Father. This will still be true when the membership of the Church has increased to ten million." (The last issue of Progress of the Church [vol. 6, no. 8] was sent out August 1943 with the announcement that it would hereafter appear in the Church Section of the Deseret News, where it continued to provide regular communication between the Presiding Bishop's Office and the bishops and stake presidents.)

Once a year, stake conferences were devoted to the Aaronic Priesthood, and here again the Presiding Bishopric expended effort to motivate and teach. In preparation, a letter was sent to each stake president six weeks in advance. A suggested program approved by the Council of the Twelve accompanied it, wherein talks for a deacon, a teacher, a priest, and a bishop were assigned for the priesthood session and a talk for a young woman was added for the Sunday session. Study questions were included so that the youth could prepare his talk based upon sound information, and he was encouraged not to read the talk at the conference. Bishop Richards felt that when a talk is read, much personal benefit is lost to both speaker and listener. He has always set the example in this respect, and during his years as Presiding Bishop he extracted a promise from his counselors that they likewise would not read their talks.

With ward and stake leadership so instructed and encouraged through written media and regular personal contact with the Presiding Bishopric, a plan to involve the boys directly was initiated through the Individual and Quorum Award Program. It was particularly the Quorum Award which had a touch of genius in it, for through it a group spirit was instilled into the young men of the Church. This held them to one another in a bond of quorum loyalty which Elder Richards's associates say was unmatched before or since. It brought tremendous results. Many reports came in of boys on vacation who insisted that their fathers find the nearest church so they could attend their priesthood meeting and not let their quorum members down.

The Awards Program was challenging but not demanding beyond possible wide attainment. It required that the quorum must have the following: an average of 50 percent or more members at quorum meetings; 75 percent or more must fill a minimum of twelve priesthood assignments during the year; 75 percent or more must observe the Word of Wisdom; 75 percent or more who earn money must pay a full tithing; and 50 percent or more must participate in quorum service projects or Church welfare projects.

One priesthood assignment was the collection of fast offerings, which although not initiated at this time, was given great emphasis by this Presiding Bishopric. This one-to-one contact of the deacons with members helped to build spirituality in the boys and in the adults, and it greatly increased the fast offering funds, thereby blessing countless needy persons.

Other efforts to build spirituality were made through a specially designed Aaronic Priesthood manual, a songbook, and other books compiled under the direction of the Presiding Bishopric by Preston Nibley-Inspirational Talks for Youth and Faith Promoting Stories (Deseret Book, 1941, 1943).

Also under the direction of the Presiding Bishopric was an outstanding three-act pageant, "Prepare Ye the Way," in which six hundred Aaronic Priesthood bearers took part. It was presented to record crowds in the Salt Lake Tabernacle for three consecutive evenings. The prologue was spoken by Bishop LeGrand Richards, and a 450-voice Aaronic Priesthood choir, with Alexander Schreiner at the organ, provided the music. The production was endorsed by the First Presidency - Heber J. Grant, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and David O. McKay-who charged the young men, "You have been given 'the keys of the ministering of angels.' See that you use these keys to open the doors to realms of high thinking and clean living, ever bearing in mind the injunction, 'Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord.'"

It was not only through plans, directives, literature, and programs that the Aaronic Priesthood made such strides under Bishop Richards (the area in which he feels he made the greatest contribution during his term as Presiding Bishop), but it was his personal contact, and that of his counselors, with the boys themselves. Wherever they went they preached in a way that appealed to young men and of attitudes which benefited them.

Bishop Wirthlin said, "Boys and girls of our Church must have recreation. To provide for it, each ward and stake needs to set up a budget at once where no charge is made for ward entertainment.... where doors of the recreation hall stand open and the hand of fellowship is extended to all who wish to enter. No other requirement should be made for youth to attend ward socials than good behavior. Let rich and poor share alike." (Deseret News, April 8, 1940.)

Although there previously were isolated instances wherein forward-looking bishops saw the logic and were applying the principle (Bishop Richards himself had done so as a ward bishop), the setting up of a Churchwide budget system for ward maintenance and needs was initiated under this Presiding Bishopric. Elder Mark E. Petersen, as a counselor in Liberty Stake and then Sugar House Stake presidencies, witnessed the change-over. He says, "It revolutionized the whole concept of ward and stake financing and was very beneficial to the total Church."

Bishop Ashton, in his persuasive and powerful way, made an appeal for youth leadership. "There are some people... that have a thousand cattle on a thousand hills, and if you'd ask them for a thousand dollars, they'd get nervous prostration. The same people would hammer the stand and remind us where the young people are going. We'll have less trouble if we just go with youth more. Thank the Lord for the fine bishops and stake presidents who have taken that philosophy and are going with their young people." (Conference Report, October 1946, p. 133-34.)

Bishop Richards pleaded with bishops to make sacrament services appealing to the youth. He remembered his boyhood in Tooele when he sat with his friends and listened to elderly, white-whiskered brethren wander through sincere but deadening talks which seldom varied from the last time, while the youth fidgeted and counted the long minutes until the last song was sung and the benediction lengthily pronounced.

At the time LeGrand Richards became Presiding Bishop, the feeling in the Church was that sacrament meeting was more for the older folks and that Sunday School and Mutual (MIA) were for the young. Elder Richards says: "Our average attendance at sacrament meeting was about 15 percent. We had many wards and stakes as low as 8, 9, and 10 percent. I told the bishops in the Tabernacle one day that I'd be ashamed to preside over a ward or a stake that couldn't get at least 25 percent of their people out to that meeting." He continues: "Many bishops took issue with us. They didn't think it could be done." In 1981 one stake president told him, "I was in your meeting when you made that statement. At that time our average attendance was 8 percent." During Bishop Richards's tenure in office, the Church average attendance at sacrament meeting reached 38 percent-an all-time high for the period.

In his leadership days in Liberty and Sugar House stakes, Elder Mark E. Petersen recalls, he not only observed the sharp increase in sacrament meeting attendance in those stakes but was impressed with "the magnificent work Bishop Richards and his counselors did with both the Aaronic Priesthood and the girls' programs in the Church."

While the Bishop reached out to youth in meetings, he also did this in every way he could personally touch a life. He sat one Sunday with a deacons quorum president and his bishop in personal interview. He said to the boy, "How many deacons are there in your quorum?"

"Twelve," the young president replied.

"How many attend quorum meeting?" he asked.

"Six," was the response.

"Now," said Bishop Richards, "you are a farm boy. If your father gave you charge over twelve of his sheep and one morning you found six gone from the corral, what would you do?"

"I'd go out and hunt them," the boy said.

"That's what your Father in Heaven expects you to do with your deacons, my boy." Then when the young man told him that they didn't have a regular advisor, Brother Richards counseled with the bishop on the crucial need for good priesthood leadership.

Another time he took his question about youth leadership directly to a group of boys. "What do you want most in a priesthood leader?" He got a direct answer. "We want someone who doesn't think boys are a pain in the neck."

That he as Presiding Bishop did not consider boys in this category is evidenced in the following two experiences. At the time he was Presiding Bishop it was thought that the General Authorities should do ward (home) teaching along with other priesthood holders in the Church. He obediently complied. From the experience, he tells this story.

I took a teaching beat in Yale Ward, and when I went into the home of a prominent attorney one night I found there only his son, a priest in the Aaronic Priesthood. In talking with him I learned that he'd quit going to his own Church and that he had been visiting in other churches. I wondered how I could get him back to where he belonged in his Church. I said, "How would you like to go ward teaching with me?" He said he'd be glad to. We made an appointment for the following Tuesday night.

We went to four different homes. In each, I talked to him via the families so he wouldn't think I was preaching to him. When we were through it was still early, so I said, "What are you going to do for the rest of the evening?" He said, "Nothing." I said, "Well, I live over there in an upside-down house. How would you like to come and see it?" He said he would, so we went and I took him through it. I had build it down into the hollow, and we had to go down to the bedrooms instead of going up.

After our tour, we went into the living room and sat down. I said, "Now, it's all right for you to visit other churches providing you know what you have in your own Church." So I took an hour or more and explained to him what we have to offer and what he could not find in any other church. When he left, I felt that I had him straightened out, so I called his bishop and said, "Bishop, I think I have another missionary for you." And he called him on a mission.

Bishop Richards's man-to-man approach with Aaronic Priesthood boys was appealing, even to one in his own family. He tells of an agreement he made with his son Alden, who at the time was too young to get a driver's license and yet had commenced going out occasionally with girls. One day his father talked with him in these terms:

"My son,... I have been thinking that I need a partner in my business. The more I think of it, the more I think you should be my partner, for I am going all around the Church telling brethren how to raise their sons, and my words would fly right back in my face if, when I was out at conferences, you failed to attend your priesthood and sacrament meetings."

Then I added, "And the more I think of it, the more I think you need a partner in your business, for you like to go out occasionally with your boy friends and the girls, and you do not have an auto nor a driver's license. I think I should be your partner, for I have an auto and I have a driver's license, so I can be your chauffeur."

Well, we agreed on this partnership. My desk calendar would show the appointments I made with him to take him and pick up his boy friend and then the girls. I would leave them at a show and inquire, "Shall I wait for you?" His reply was, "No, Dad, I will call you when we are ready to come home," so I would keep close to the phone awaiting his call. When he called it would usually be that they were at the confectionery store.

One Sunday, Mother and I were out of town attending a stake conference. As we neared home, I said to her, "I would give a dollar to know whether our son got up and got to his priesthood meeting, but I wouldn't ask him for anything. I wouldn't want him to think for one minute that I did not trust him to keep his agreement."

When we arrived home, he explained that although he had been out playing in his orchestra until midnight the night before, he had set the alarm clock and got up early and attended his priesthood meeting. This pleased me very much. (Just to Illustrate, pp. 211-12.)

Bishop Richards's personalized teaching has had far-reaching influence, and many prominent men who were then either Aaronic Priesthood leaders or young men comment upon that influence. President Ezra Taft Benson, then a counselor in the Boise, Idaho, Stake presidency, remembers "Bishop Richards's great enthusiasm for the Aaronic Priesthood and the emphasis he put on not losing any boy." He also remembers that the Bishop "was willing, even anxious, to meet with the young people whenever he visited there. He wanted to reach out, to touch each heart." These pre-conference 8:00 A.M. meetings with the youth are still part of his approach to reaching them. At age ninety-six (1982) he charms them and teaches them with his ever-ready fund of stories and experiences, so that they are not even aware of the learning process; but they remember him, and his stories remain with them to lift and motivate them to live better.

A man who felt the impact of his personal touch was Dallin H. Oaks, formerly president of Brigham Young University. "I was struck by how warm and loving he was. He was the Presiding Bishop when I was a deacon in the Aaronic Priesthood. I had to learn all the names of the General Authorities, and I remembered LeGrand Richards, Presiding Bishop of the Church. I always thought of him as my Bishop and I have always called him Bishop. I still have a kind of little boy's admiration for him."

When the influence of the Quorum Awards Program was being strongly felt in the wards and stakes, a sister went to President Lorenzo H. Hatch of Granite Stake and said, "President, you have done such a wonderful thing for the boys, why don't you do something for the girls?" So in that stake they developed for the girls almost a duplicate of the Awards Program. It was so successful in Granite Stake that it came to the attention of the Twelve, and George Albert Smith, then President of the Quorum, sent a letter to all stake presidents in the Church recommending it for adoption.

When Bishop Richards heard of this from Elder Joseph F. Merrill, he said, "It will never go over in the Church."

"Why won't it, Bishop?" asked Brother Merrill.

"Because there is nobody to promote it. Half the stake presidents won't know they've received the letter thirty days after they get it. You've got to have somebody to promote a program in the Church to have it take hold."

Elder Merrill then asked, "Would you brethren of the Presiding Bishopric do it?"

Bishop Richards answered, "We have plenty to do."

Elder Merrill pressed. "Would you brethren of the Bishopric do it?"

"We're not asking for any more work," was the answer. "But, would you brethren of the Bishopric do it?"

Just a little impatient, the Bishop answered, "Now, Brother Merrill, we do anything we are asked to do by proper authority, and if we are asked to do this, we'll do it." And they did.

When Bertha Reeder became General President of the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association she asked for the program, and she pledged at their YWMIA meeting in the Tabernacle that she would maintain and continue it at the level to which the Presiding Bishopric had taken it. As a result of her willingness and her pledge, the program was turned over to her organization to administer from that point on. It had great influence for good among the girls, just as the Aaronic Priesthood Award Program did for the boys.

However demanding the organization, promotion, and administration of the Aaronic Priesthood programs were, they made up only a portion of Bishop Richards's administrative responsibilities. Bishop Wirthlin later wrote: "From the installation of the first Presiding Bishop until the present time those who have been called to [that office] have... received, distributed, and accounted for the contributions and tithes of the people; looked after the poor; comforted the weary; admonished and exhorted to good works those who faltered; provided and maintained adequate places of worship; and accounted for the records of membership, activity, and advancement of all members of the Church." (Improvement Era, November 1956, p. 794.)

When LeGrand Richards became Presiding Bishop of the Church, the wards and missions were retaining the money they received for tithing, using what they needed for ward operational expenses and remitting the remainder to the Presiding Bishop's Office. There was no regular auditing system and no required time for remitting the funds. It was a loosely structured system which could invite problems. Under this Presiding Bishopric the system was completely reorganized. Henceforth all tithes and contributions, Churchwide, came to the Presiding Bishop's Office first, and expense monies were then dispersed back to the local units of the Church according to their size and needs.

Such a change was of great concern to the bishops, who were fearful lest their operating needs would not be met. But one of the things LeGrand Richards had promised bishops and stake presidents in his general conference remarks was that they need not be afraid to come to him. He was true to his word. Mabel Jones Gabbott, who was Bishop Richards's secretary during this transitional period, says: "Here was a man who could guide the bishops to see what the Lord wanted. They would come in with their problems and he would seat them across the desk and be so considerate and kind. It was a big step, but he'd been a bishop three times and a stake president and he understood their problems and their needs. He was never hurried, but he encouraged them that it was all right, that they'd get enough money to run their wards, and that this was the Lord's way of doing it. They would then leave with their fear and apprehension quieted and feeling that, in him, they truly had a friend."

Taylor H. Merrill was office manager for the fourteen years of Bishop Richards's tenure and found him to be a kind and loyal supervisor. He tells of the accounting methods initiated to handle tithes and offerings under the new rules: "Under this Presiding Bishopric all the tithing books and tithing receipts were numbered. When a ward wanted a tithing record book, they would apply. It would be sent out and a record kept of the receipt numbers. Every month these numbers would be checked off, and if one were missing, the stake auditor would be asked to find out where it was. A copy of every receipt issued came to the Bishop's office and it had to match the amount of money sent in because there were no deductions at the ward level."

Another innovation within the Presiding Bishop's Office came in the area of Church membership record-keeping. Elder Richards recalls: "If you wanted to find the record of a member, you'd have to write to the ward where he lived, and if it was not there, to the ward in which he lived before. There were no general membership records in the office at all. So we gathered in from all of the wards and branches the names and all the information they had about their members, and we built up a Church membership record."

Taylor Merrill adds further detail concerning the change:

Membership cards written in longhand were coming in which could not be read. One ward clerk couldn't read the former's writing, so much of the information was nothing like that from which it began. The new Presiding Bishopric changed all this. Each ward was instructed to make a typewritten card for every person baptized or blessed, and thereafter the original card followed the individual wherever he went, but it passed through the Presiding Bishop's Office on its way to the member's new location.

Sister Ella Jack, a devoted and efficient woman, was put in charge of the Membership Department. A Church member from California who came in to see Bishop Richards said, "They tell me you have a membership record now." "That's right," the Bishop responded. "Does it work?" the man asked. "Well, you give me your name and date of birth and we'll see whether it works or not." The man did so, and the Bishop called Ella Jack. She said, "Just a minute, Bishop," and in a moment she told him the ward in which the man was a member. "It works," the man said, as he walked away satisfied.

Brother Merrill tells of the changes also made in the Annual Reports (Form E) which the stake clerks were completing once a year, a complicated and tedious labor for which they were being paid. Under Bishop Richards's direction these forms were simplified and their statistical information was compiled and submitted each month instead of annually. The girls in the department put them on the calculating machine, lined up all the wards in a stake with a blank sheet at the end of the line, and ran them through, tallying the totals and copying the data once a month. This system provided a quick statistical check which was readily available for the April general conference report each year. It eliminated the previous payments to stake clerks and saved the Church thousands of dollars.

Under the Presiding Bishop's jurisdiction came both the Church building program and the Legal Department, the latter having responsibility for legal matters concerning Church real estate holdings. Bishop Richards's real estate experience enabled him to work closely with that department in initiating and supervising the analysis of individual records and from that the creation of a general, detailed listing of all real estate holdings. This general record, the first of its kind, was an invaluable aid to the building program.

During the war years (1941-1945) severe building restrictions were imposed, and wards that had raised money for buildings but could not proceed with their chapels were advised to send their funds to the Presiding Bishop's Office to be kept in trust and earning interest until such time as their buildings could be erected. To arrange these and other matters, the bishops came in to see their friend LeGrand Richards at general conference times. "We had bishops lined up two deep," he says, "trying to get to talk to us about their building matters."

Bishop Richards at work on Church building plans.

As restrictions lifted, the building program went forward with renewed vigor, and 666 new chapels had been erected by 1952. Elder Richards recalls: "We had Brother Howard J. McKean come in to direct the building of chapels, and later Brother Frank Bowers joined him. We didn't have a crew out in the Church then, but we worked through local builders in their own areas." He adds: "I had to inspect many of the sites where they wanted to build. I traveled quite a lot for that purpose."

In addition to such trips for wards and stakes, he also was responsible for supervising the mission building program. He tells of one mission trip he made.

The mission president from Mexico had been up to Salt Lake for general conference and talked with the First Presidency. He wanted to buy a building that he had inspected down there. The Presidency thought it would be better if I, as Presiding Bishop, were to go down and look at the property, so I went back with the mission president. We drove to the property. I said "Drive on."

"Don't you even want to see the building now that you've come all the way to look at it?" asked the president.

I said, "Well, I've seen the neighborhood that it's in." But I looked at the building, then I said, "Now let's see if we can't find a building where the middle-class people live-clerks from the stores, attorneys, doctors, and so forth. If you go to the middle class, the humble rich will come down to it and the poor will come up to it." So we checked with real estate men and we found a building that was less expensive than the one we had looked at, but it was in a nice neighborhood. We recommended it, and that was the one they bought.

Further commenting upon the missions, Bishop Richards says: "Mission presidents would come in scolding about not getting buildings. 'Shall I tell you whose fault it is?' I would ask. 'Whose?' they would respond. 'Yours,' I'd answer. 'You go out to the branches that want buildings, you write us, and then you forget about the branches until they bother you again, at which time you come and scold us.'" He then counseled them and taught them their duty. "You must take the lead. You've got to go to the branches and work out the details and decide what is standing in the way, help them work it out, and then encourage them to proceed. If the problem is lack of approval for the purchase of the land, get something that can be approved so they can go forward."

In this way Bishop Richards trained the men over whom he presided-not only mission presidents but stake presidents as well-in all matters pertaining to Church building programs. He often used the statement of the banker to a prospective real estate investor. "When you buy real estate," he advised, "there are three things you always want to consider. They are location, location, and location."

Another project having to do with Church properties was that of grounds beautification, begun in 1937 but given great impetus under Bishop Marvin O. Ashton. Many chapel grounds were not landscaped and were overrun with weeds or sagebrush. Thatcher Ward of Bannock Stake was an example. (Church News, July 17, 1937, p. 2.) When ward and stake leaders were counseled to plant grass, shrubs, and flowers, some resistant bishops told Bishop Richards, "Our boys would pull them up." To this he emphatically replied, "Your boys will be too proud of their fine meetinghouse grounds to do any such thing." The program went forward. The work pioneered in those early years laid the foundation for the now beautifully landscaped grounds associated with practically every Church-owned property in the world.

There were other aspects of Church real estate in which Bishop Richards was personally involved. His sound business judgment made possible the buying up of investment property for the Church which either saved or brought in hundreds of thousands of dollars. He negotiated for all the properties on the block north of the Salt Lake Temple, except for one house on the northwest corner of the block, as well as those on the east side of State Street adjacent to the present Church Office block. He tells of this last business transaction as follows:

Elder Frank Evans and I negotiated for the purchase of the Bransford Apartments (now Eagle Gate) on the corner of State Street and South Temple, including the apartments on both sides of First Avenue. After we were given their lowest selling price, I asked the representative at the bank if it would do any good to make a counter offer. He said it would not, that they had other people interested in its purchase but that Mrs. Bransford had wanted to give the Church first opportunity to purchase it.

After we had inspected the property, I said to Elder Evans, "I have a feeling that if we were to offer less than the price they are asking, that we would get the property." He agreed with me, so we asked President George Albert Smith if he would be disappointed if we didn't get it. He said, "You brethren understand these matters better than I do. You ask my counselors, and if they approve, you make the offer."

They approved, so I called the officer at the bank and thanked him for giving the Church the first opportunity to purchase the property, but I said, "When building restrictions are lifted, there will be new apartments built, and it would cost nearly as much to remodel these buildings and bring them up to date as it would to build new ones, so we have decided not to accept your offer. Shall I return the abstract?"

"No," he said. "You spoke as if you might be interested in making a lower offer." He then asked me if we would make such an offer.

I replied that I believed that our committee would be interested, but that I didn't want them to feel that we didn't want to pay what they felt the property was worth. He asked for time to take the matter up with his committee, and in two hours he called me and said they would accept the lesser offer. (Blue Book, p. 35.)

During the last year that he was Presiding Bishop (1952), LeGrand Richards was visiting in Glendale, California, and had a rare opportunity to procure another very valuable piece of property for the Church. He was visiting with a Dr. Walker, whom he knew well when he lived in California. The doctor told him of a widow named Jacquelin Lewis living in LaVern, California, who wanted to give her property to some charitable organization. She had no children. Elder Richards tells the story:

We decided to visit her, and this resulted in her giving the property to the Church on an annuity basis. [Mrs. Lewis later told President Vern R. Peel that the thing that made her decide to let the Church have the property was her meeting Bishop Richards.] We purchased some of the adjoining property and additional water rights, and in 1971 we sold about ninety-eight acres to the Metropolitan Water Company for cash. This returned to the Church all they had invested in the property, with a sizable surplus, leaving us with 385 acres clear of all encumbrance. Mrs. Lewis had died in December 1971, so we had nothing more owing her. I have been supervising the operation of this property for twenty years. We have some citrus groves and a number of buildings on the ranch. Some of the land has been sold.

In his position as Presiding Bishop, Brother Richards also served for years on the Board of Zions Securities Corporation (the Church's holding company for real estate), and for a long term as chairman of its executive committee. He also served as secretary and as director of Hotel Utah, director of ZCMI, and director of Beneficial Life Insurance Company.

On April 21, 1938, he was chosen president of the Board of Trustees of LDS Hospitals, and he had the supervision of all Church hospitals for the fourteen years of his term as Presiding Bishop. As such he was an advisor to the Primary Association for their Children's Hospital (later Primary Children's Medical Center). The hospital was then located at 40 West North Temple. It was Bishop Richards who located the site for the present building at 320 Twelfth Avenue and took President Grant up to see it. The President approved it, in fact he was thrilled with it; and when the businessmen of Salt Lake gave a banquet to honor his eightieth birthday and presented him with a thousand silver dollars to be used for some charitable purpose, he gave them to the Primary Association to help build their new hospital. President Grant thought that, for such a good purpose, the silver dollars could be sold for a hundred dollars apiece.

Later the dollars were made into paperweights and turned to the general president of the Primary, LaVern Parmley, and her counselors to dispose of. But nothing much was done beyond minor sales. One day in their hospital board meeting, Bishop Richards said, "Sister Parmley, do you know why you can't sell these dollars? You have never thought you could." When she asked for his suggestion on how it could be done, he said, "Just ask each Primary organization in the Church to sell one dollar to one, ten, or twenty persons." To show it could be done, he took the first paperweight to some members, told the story of the dollars and the purpose for which they were intended, and had no trouble in placing it. The Primary presidency took it from there, and they found they did not have enough dollars to supply the requests. A hundred thousand dollars came in from these sales, and this went a long way in those days to build the superb medical facility which was completed by 1952. (Church Section of the Deseret News, February 13, 1952, p. 12.)

Another beautiful facility which received the Bishop's careful attention was the Relief Society Building. As advisor to the Relief Society in their social work, he came often in contact with three great successive general presidents-Louise Y. Robinson, Amy Brown Lyman, and Belle S. Spafford. The last-named tells of her association with him in the days when she first accompanied Amy Lyman to meetings as her counselor. "I was always glad to go," she says. "He was always so fair, so wise, and so understanding. I saw the penetrating judgment he had in counseling us." Shortly after she became Relief Society president in 1945 World War II ended, and with building restrictions relaxed, she and her counselors-Marianne C. Sharp and Gertrude Garff -agreed that they should "go after a building of their own" as their predecessors had hoped and dreamed for.

Presiding Bishopric and General Relief Society President Amy Brown Lyman at Relief Society Centennial celebration, 1942.

Accordingly they met with the First Presidency-George Albert Smith, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and David O. McKay-and told them that if they charged their hundred thousand Relief Society members a dollar apiece, they could have a fine building. President Clark said, "If you are going to build, build greater than that." After briefly discussing the matter, the Brethren suggested five dollars apiece, with one year to get their money in, and the sisters went to work on this basis. "Bishop Richards had responsibility for the financial matters of the Church and the Building Committee," says Sister Spafford. "And we turned to him, and oh, what a response we got from that great man!" She adds:

He loved the Relief Society and he loved the women of the Church and he wanted them to have the best, and he was willing to work for it. He went out early in the year to a conference in Idaho Falls, and he phoned me between sessions and said, "Sister Spafford, they've raised their money, and I'm so thrilled."

She recalls how he counseled them on the architect, on the size of the building, and on the location. On the last-named point Elder Richards recounts:

fter the money was all collected, they could not commence construction of their building because the First Presidency [now David O. McKay, Stephen L Richards, and J. Reuben Clark, Jr.] did not tell them where they could build it. Years passed, and the money was depreciating in value and building costs were advancing.

Sister Spafford was in my office one day, and I said to her, "You are never going to build that building for the sisters, are you?"

She asked, "What do you mean, Bishop?"

I said, "Oh, you are going to get credit for raising the money, and your successor will get credit for the building."

She responded, "Well, Bishop, we can't do anything until the First Presidency tells us where we can build it, and my counselor, Marianne Sharp [daughter of President Clark], says her father said, 'Just wait until we tell you where you can put it.'"

I said, "Sister Spafford, Marianne isn't the president of the Relief Society and President Clark isn't the President of the Church. Now, if you will go to President McKay and tell him how embarrassed you are after hurrying the sisters to get their money in, and that the money is depreciating in value, and the cost of building is increasing every day, I believe he will give approval for you to commence construction. And if he asks you where you want to build, tell him that corner [where the building now stands], and if he asks for your second choice, tell him that corner, and if he asks you for a third choice, tell him that same corner. It won't be any harder for them to decide where you can build it today than it will ten years from now."

She went to President McKay, and within ten days she had his approval to go ahead.

As head of the Church's temporal affairs, Bishop LeGrand Richards and his counselors prepared the weekly agenda for the Expenditures Committee meeting with the First Presidency, and Bishop Richards conducted those sessions under assignment from the First Presidency. (Later, members of the Twelve served terms on the committee, and as a member of the Twelve, Elder Richards has so served.) Almost from his youth, the Bishop had known the members of the various First Presidencies under which he served, and he was as outspoken with them as with any other men with whom he associated. On one occasion, with typical frankness he questioned President Clark on a point. "LeGrand, are you questioning my veracity?" the elder of the two asked. "No, sir," the Bishop respectfully answered, "only your memory on the matter," and it passed with no further comment. Mable Chapman, who served as his secretary during his last years as Presiding Bishop, said of him, "He simply has no 'Sunday front.' He treats members, missionaries, branch leaders, General Authorities, and family members with equal kindness and respect." (Letter, September 13, 1981.)

In 1942 he was forced by a severe heart attack to temporarily stop all activity-a period he did not like at all. The Deseret News reported his illness on May 4, 1942. He had gone to a stake conference in Grace, Idaho, accompanied by a member of the Church Welfare Committee. In the night after his Saturday meetings, intense pain and great difficulty in breathing made it necessary to seek help. He obtained an administration from his host, President M. Ezra Sorensen, and the committeeman who accompanied him. But his condition worsened, and they called in the local doctor and phoned Bishop Richards's family in Salt Lake City. Dr. Gill Richards sent a representative from his office, with oxygen equipment not available in the small town. LeGrand's parents and Ina reached Grace as quickly as they could, and the doctor there told Ina that he would not have given "ten cents for his chances of pulling through that first day."

Bishop Ashton traveled with Elder Harold B. Lee, who had been an apostle for about a year, to visit him the following Sunday afternoon and to give him a special blessing. Elder Lee later spoke of the occasion: "In a brief moment, when my hands were on the head of Brother Richards, I knew that the Lord loved him and that he was going to live. The certainty of that was as sure to me as it is today that he was spared for a great and glorious mission." (Conference Report, April 1952, p. 126.)

When it was safe to move him, an ambulance brought Bishop Richards to the LDS Hospital in Salt Lake. After what seemed to him an interminable convalescence, he met with the First Presidency and his own counselors and said to them, "Well, I found out what hell is!"

"What is it, Bishop?" asked President Clark.

"To see the other man working and not be able to myself." He added, "If there is any truth to the words of the song, 'There's sweet, sweet rest in heaven,' then I'm going to ask to be routed in the other direction."

Bishop Marvin O. Ashton's quick wit could not resist the rejoinder. "Well, Bishop," he said, "you may not have to ask for it."

"Yes, I've thought of that too," replied Brother Richards, who knew he was now comfortably back with the men he loved and in the work which gave him such satisfaction.

From then on he carried his usual work loads, but his associates often saw him walking with a cane. The old hip trouble made him less sure of step, but it did not slow him down.

Illness and death created many changes in Church leadership and personnel during LeGrand Richards's term as Presiding Bishop, and some of these touched him very deeply. Illness and age had weakened President Heber J. Grant, and on May 14, 1945, he died at age eighty-eight after almost twenty-seven years as President of the Church. Only the thirty-year term of President Brigham Young was longer. President Grant had lived to call a total of twelve members to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, the first being Melvin J. Ballard (1919) and the last Mark E. Petersen (1944). (Church News, April 8, 1944, p. 3.) His passing was keenly felt by Bishop Richards, who had had close personal contact with him since his first mission in Holland-a period of forty years.

On May 21, 1945, George Albert Smith became the eighth President of the Church, and LeGrand's father, George F. Richards, became President of the Quorum of the Twelve on the same day.

The next year, on October 6, 1946, Bishop Marvin O. Ashton addressed the Church as usual at general conference. Elder

Bishop Richards (center) with other General Authorities and government officials at funeral service of President Heber J. Grant.

Richards tells that, that evening, Marvin O. said to his wife, Rachael, "Rae, I have a cold, and I believe I'll sleep in the other room so you won't catch it." The next morning, one of the children said, "Unless Daddy soon gets up to take me to school, I'll be late." Upon entering the room where he had slept, his wife found that he had passed away. It was a great shock to his family and his associates.

Bishops Richards and Wirthlin (seated) with Bishop Thorpe B. Isaacson, new members of the Presiding Bishopric.

Part of the tribute paid him by Bishop Richards on October 9, 1946, has already been quoted. He also said: "I'm proud to have known him. I pray that when my battle is over, I'll be worthy of his eternal association and companionship. It will be hard to fill his place." (Funeral Sermon [tape], LDS Church Archives.)

Thorpe B. Isaacson, a capable man who had been serving in the Yale Ward bishopric, was chosen to fill the vacancy occasioned by Bishop Ashton's death, and he proved an energetic and able leader in the Presiding Bishopric. He gave up great financial success to serve the Church in this position.

Photo taken on Elder George F. Richard's seventy-eighth birthday shows him with Sister Richards and their thirteen living children (LeGrand in on back row, right).

Yet another death was to deeply affect LeGrand Richards while he was Presiding Bishop. On August 8, 1950, his father, George F. Richards, died at age eighty-nine. He had served as an apostle since 1906 and as President of the Quorum for the last five years. Shortly before he passed away, LeGrand visited him in his apartment, and his father took him in his arms and, using his childhood nickname, said, "Grandy, my boy, I love you." Those words were a great comfort to Bishop Richards. As has been shown throughout this book, LeGrand's father wielded a powerful influence for good in his life, as both teacher and exemplar. A few weeks before his father's death, Bishop Richards said in a talk at BYU (Deseret News, June 23, 1950), "The greatest evidence of Joseph Smith's leadership were the men who surrounded him...." He could say the same for his father, whose life from childhood had been lived among the choicest men of the dispensation-men who had been, and would yet be, increasingly important in shaping the life and ministry of his son LeGrand Richards.

Of President George F. Richards's family, President Ezra Taft Benson says: "In my early childhood my father always held up as the ideal family that of President Joseph F. Smith; but when President Smith passed away, then he held up the family of George F. Richards. It was Father's ideal for us."

In the year that his father passed away, Bishop Richards's book A Marvelous Work and a Wonder (Deseret Book, 1950) was published. That year too the Presiding Bishop's Office moved from 40 North Main Street to the Church Administration Building at 47 East South Temple. Offices and partitions were arranged to give maximum space and utility, and all the various departments and their employees took up the total fourth floor of the building. They were functioning in that location when David O. McKay succeeded George Albert Smith as President of the Church on April 9, 1951.

In addition to the Bishopric's heavy responsibilities of administering the Aaronic Priesthood programs and the temporal affairs of the Church, there were areas of activity which were warmly human, individual, and sometimes personal, and these broke the pace and gave further variety to the work. Some were occasioned by what Bishop Wirthlin described as LeGrand Richards's "open door policy." He said: "It was inaugurated at the beginning of his term, wherein no one who desired audience with him or his counselors should be denied a hearing. Our office doors remained always open, and the widow, the harassed businessman, the youth with his problem, the immigrant, always received a kind word and assistance from Bishop Richards." (Church Section of the Deseret News, April 23, 1952, p. 11.) It was about an immigrant that Elder Richards tells this story:

Old Brother Franz Wiegel from Holland came in one day when I was Presiding Bishop. He'd just been out to attend a meeting in the Holladay area, where his son was ward chorister, and the son's bishop had invited him to come back the next Sunday and be their speaker in sacrament meeting. He was so thrilled with the invitation, he came in to tell me about it. Although he'd been President of Amsterdam Branch, he'd lived many years in his Salt Lake City ward without ever being asked to speak. The morning after he'd preached in Holladay he was waiting for me again when I came to my office door, and he was all bubbling over with joy for the experience he'd had.

I later spoke at his funeral in LeGrand Ward, and there were five men in attendance who had served as bishops while Brother Wiegel had lived there. I turned to these brethren and said, "You are all great men, but you would have sent this Dutch friend of mine home to his eternal rest a lot happier if just one of you had invited him to talk in your sacrament meeting while he lived here in your ward. It is true he didn't have good use of the English language, but I didn't have good use of the Dutch language when I went to Holland, nor would I ever have done, if they hadn't given me an opportunity to speak." (I spoke to them this way to teach them to recognize people from lands abroad who might come and live in their wards.)

An innovation attributed to Bishop Richards, and one which afforded the General Authorities with some relaxation and enjoyment, was that of having an entertainment and dinner for them on the Tuesday following April conference. He and his counselors hosted the first one. A program titled "The Providing Bishopric Entertains the General Authorities," dated January 8, 1942, is in possession of Mabel Jones Gabbott. A border of line-drawn caricatures is placed across the top-Bishop Ashton chasing a pig, Bishop Richards emptying his pockets of money, and Bishop Wirthlin skinning a cat. Mabel Jones Gabbott wrote the dinner menu in verse. The program itself was one to provide warmth, humor, and merriment with such toasts as "Even the apostles are human," by Amy Brown Lyman; "In the Dust of the Twelve," by Elder Thomas E. McKay; "If our wives would only help us," by President Oscar A. Kirkham; and "Greasing the squeak in the Church," by President David O. McKay. The party was so successful that such entertainments became traditional. Under President Spencer W. Kimball, the number of General Authorities increased dramatically and the nature of their work took on worldwide responsibility and jurisdiction, so the socials are held less frequently now.

Bishop Richards spoke in each of twenty-eight general conferences during his term (1938-1952). His sermons, while continuing to emphasize the importance of the Restoration and the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith, focused even more upon themes relating to the youth of the Church-faith, chastity, the Word of Wisdom, the payment of tithes and fast offerings, prayer, testimony, following inspired leadership, and achievement through living the gospel. He taught with boldness and enthusiasm and by means of his rich fund of stories and experiences. He always spoke with great clarity.

The Presiding Bishopric years were happy ones for Ina. She was well. She loved her home and the many activities incident to her husband's responsibilities. And she loved him and her children (two of whom were still at home). In a letter from this period she wrote to her husband: "These children of our youthful love have twined themselves into my heart. Oh, may they find the best in life-full strength and beauty, grace of soul and mind; but you, you have first place."

During these years, the last of the children, Nona and Alden, were married in the temple and left. As additional grandchildren came along in the other families, Ina felt an increased joy in life. Her snoopje (treat) cupboard and bread bin were always stocked. She taught the little ones in her own special way. If a child bruised himself, she would draw his attention from his hurt with, "Listen, here where you bumped the table. Can you hear it cry?" In summer the children came to play in the hollow, rolling down the slopes in old blankets. On the Fourth of July there were fireworks. in winter, granddaughters would dress up in fancy clothes and hats and play theater, with Grandma "Inee" taking part. Also in winter, Ina's girls would come and spend afternoons with their handwork in front of the fireplace over which hung the oil portrait of their grandfather George F. Richards.

On their thirty-fifth wedding anniversary (1944), LeGrand said to Ina, "Mommy, what do you think we'll be doing thirty-five million years from today?" With typical spunk she answered, "Where'd you get such an idea? It makes me tired to think of it."

"Well," he said, "you believe in eternal life. We're told that time is measured only to man, and that with God there is no such a thing as time. It's one eternal round, there's no beginning and there's no end. Now, Mother, if you believe that, you and I ought to be pretty well acquainted with each other thirty-five million years from today."

While this was spoken in fun, such was Bishop Richards's faith, and Ina's, in the eternity for which they were working to prepare themselves.
