Lucile C. Tate, LeGrand Richards: Beloved Apostle ( 1982)

14

A Marvelous Work and a Wonder 1950-

One day in 1950, while LeGrand Richards was still the Presiding Bishop, a man who was not a member of the Church called on him in his office. The man was well versed in the scriptures and could quote them readily, and he and his host joined in a spirited gospel conversation from which the Bishop reluctantly excused himself to go to an important meeting. Before leaving, Bishop Richards gave the man a copy of A Marvelous Work and a Wonder, which had been published earlier that year, and said, "Mark everything you think is wrong in this and bring it back to me." In three days the book was returned to the Bishop's desk while he was absent. The reader had "scribbled round the borders and all through the book." On the flyleaf he had written:

Up to the time when I had no knowledge of this book, my life was pointless. I could not see myself in proper perspective in relation to God, to Christ, to the Church of God, [or] in regard to those of the sons of God who walk in darkness. By reading, I am enlightened beyond expectation. I begin to become aware of spiritual values which were not apparent before.

Then on the end sheet he wrote, "In this book, I find no flaw. It is an education in itself."

What is it about this book that could draw forth such statements from a stranger? One of its strengths is its doctrinal soundness, which stems from the author's knowledge covering the total spectrum of the scriptures from the Old Testament to the Pearl of Great Price. If anyone will match against the four standard works the scriptural references contained in its pages, he will find that the author has voiced the profound messages of the Restoration with great skill. In its pages we seem to hear the word of the Lord speaking clearly through the ages but sorted out and placed in sequential order so that his purposes, his plans, and his promises to his children in our day can be readily understood. This inspired work reflects the author's lifetime of study, an undertaking pursued not only for his own comprehension but also so that he can make the gospel message intelligible and appealing to others and can lead them to walk in the path he has personally proven by virtuous living and dedicated service.

The spirit of the book is that of the missionary, which Brother Richards later came to appreciate as the same spirit which rested upon John the Baptist when he went forth to proclaim and prepare the way of the Lord. In a revelation given to Joseph Smith in 1830, it is referred to as the spirit of Elias.

And also with Elias, to whom I have committed the keys of bringing to pass the restoration of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began, concerning the last days;

And also John the son of Zacharias, which Zacharias he (Elias) visited and gave promise that he should have a son, and his name should be John, and he should be filled with the spirit of Elias. (D&C 27:6-7. See also Luke 1:13-17.)

LeGrand Richards's recognition of this special spiritual power had come five decades earlier when, as a boy of fourteen in Tooele, he heard two elders bear their testimonies and tell of traveling without purse or scrip while on their missions in the Eastern States. This same spirit which he had felt as a boy rested mightily upon him in Holland and intensified "almost to the consuming of my flesh," he records. He was often upon his knees thanking the Lord for the great privilege of being a missionary and pleading that he might always be worthy of the precious message which he bore to all who would listen.

The same spirit accompanied him back to the United States, generating a continued sense of commitment. When he found his eternal companion, that prior commitment was explicit in the eternal covenant they made with the Lord.

This summarized development of LeGrand Richards's missionary spirit and skills is reflected in greater detail in preceding chapters. His life continued to follow the "strait" course of obedience, sacrifice, and service in every call that came to him. His steady and constant desire was to share the message of the gospel with as many as would listen. He increased the number of "listeners" when, at the request of his missionaries in the Southern States, he prepared a concise and logical outline to demonstrate the most effective method of presenting the gospel to investigators. [^1] This he sent to them under the title "The Message of Mormonism." He also sent them a letter containing additional suggestions for presenting the gospel message. In part it read:

By us the gospel is to be preached in all the world as a witness to all nations. (See Matthew 24:14; Revelation 14:6-7.)

We are the fishers and hunters the Lord promised to send forth in the last days to fish and hunt Israel "from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks." (See Jeremiah 16:16.)

We are sent out two and two as the seventy of old (see Luke 10:1) with this instruction from the Master:

"And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house.

"And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it; if not, it shall turn to you again.

"And in the same house remain, eating and drinking such things as they give; for the labourer is worthy of his hire. Go not from Muse to Muse." (Luke 10:5-7. Italics added by LeGrand Richards.)

In these words and those which follow in this chapter, the Master indicated that those who receive his servants receive him. He seems to want to impress the seventy that when their peace rests upon a house the Lord has done his part of the work, and he then leaves the responsibility to his servants to remain there and deliver the whole message so it can stand as a witness for or against them; and hence the instruction: "Go not from house to Muse."

If we tell our story we have a right to be heard, regardless of the hundreds of Christian denominations already existent in the land.

If we properly tell our story, there is no need for argument, which should remove the fear from the heart of the missionary. Missionaries have usually felt that they were going forth to argue or debate and should be prepared; but if they are prepared to tell our story intelligently and enthusiastically, their hearers will become listeners and questioners.

By explaining a few principles of the gospel we have not delivered our message as a witness against the people any more than a man has built a house by laying the foundation. How can a person judge as to the beauty of the house when the foundation only is laid, or even when part of the sidewalls are built? The same rule applies in the presentation of the gospel-how can a man judge as to its truth before he has heard it?

The outline itself is something of a masterpiece in brevity, logic, and practicality, and it reflects Brother Richards's orderly, building-block approach to inducing an investigator's understanding of the gospel. Beginning with the philosophical basis of Mormonism, it traces the steps of the Restoration via heavenly visitants and delineates the incomparable fruits of the gospel, these together representing the "restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:21.)

It was during the early years as Presiding Bishop that Elder Richards began to receive letters about his outline, "The Message of Mormonism." One from a mission president read:

For some time I have been dreaming over a program of subjects for the missionaries to use in their contacts and follow-ups with investigators, subjects with natural sequence that will make their message more effective and intelligible.

This morning I was cleaning out a drawer and ran across the answer to my dreams-dust-covered and neglected. It was a mimeographed booklet entitled "The Message of Mormonism," by LeGrand Richards. I have read it through, and it embodies just the thing I would like to place in the hands of each missionary.

Would it be agreeable to you if I make copies of it for this purpose? It is excellent and would be effective in stimulating systematic study and regulated presentation. (Preface to A Marvelous Work and a Wonder, Deseret Book Company, First Ed., 1950, p. v.)

Not long after this there came another letter from a former missionary who taught seminary. He had been using the outline for eight years. It read:

In all my Church work I have found this the most helpful of introductions to the restored gospel. I have often thought that this outline, by all means, ought to be circulated in all missions of the Church in order that all missionaries might profit by its use, because it presents such a clear and comprehensive picture of the message we have for the world, and also it presents it in such a logical order.... I consider it excellent. In fact, the best I have seen, and I am writing this with the hope that it will get more, yes, much more publicity.... (A Marvelous Work and a Wonder, Preface.)

Locked into the most demanding assignment of his life, and by the very nature of that calling prevented from doing full-time missionary work, Bishop Richards pondered the requests and letters. One day the thought occurred to him, "Why don't I develop these outline subjects the way I would present them if I were going into a home one night a week for six months?" Since "The Message of Mormonism" had proven valuable to many, how much more valuable to the missionary work might a book be which could have much wider distribution!

Now he began to write industriously as he traveled by train or stayed overnight in hotels. It was shortly after Mable S. Chapman became his secretary in August of 1943 that he began bringing her "sheaves of handwritten papers, partly in ink and partly in pencil. That was when one must carry a bottle of ink to fill a pen," she says. "The pages were written as he traveled to and from his conference assignments, no doubt using his knees as a table. With the movement of the train, there were sometimes additional humps in the writing, though he was an excellent penman." (Letter, September 13, 1981.)

Of his project, Brother Richards says: "I wrote it in longhand. On my assignment to Portland I don't think I looked out of the window once going up or coming back. Then I went down to Arizona and attended the Mesa conference. My next conference was over in Inglewood, so I stayed the whole week rather than come home for one day in Salt Lake. I sat in the motel writing until my eyes were so tired that I was sick to my stomach."

Bishop Richards had a conference scheduled for Farmington, New Mexico, at the time when the manuscript was well advanced, and he said to Lee A. Palmer, secretary to the Aaronic Priesthood program, "How would you like to go with me and let me read to you as you drive us down and back?" This was agreeable to Brother Palmer. When the reading was complete, the Bishop asked his friend, "Does that sound to you like it's worth publishing?" The other man answered, "If I could have had that information before going on my mission, it would have saved me half of my mission time." Together, they then decided to work toward its publication.

"Lee had some literary ability," says Elder Richards, "so he went over it. He deleted some of my material. I have a tendency to repeat; and not only that, but I can fill a whole page with one sentence, so he broke it down-shortened sentences, paragraphed it, put headings in, made it read easier." Mable Chapman comments, "Bishop Richards was anxious to have the manuscript published as a missionary tool, so the approval of the Church Reading Committee was obtained."

As the material went through the reading and editing steps, three Improvement Era staff gave their assistance-Doyle L. Green, managing editor; Marba C. Josephson, associate managing editor; and Elizabeth J. Moffitt, manuscript editor. (Bishop Richards gave them grateful acknowledgment at the beginning of his book.) Lee Palmer followed through with Deseret News Press on the printing, and the first edition appeared in 1950, the year LeGrand's father, President George F. Richards, passed away. Unfortunately, his father did not have the pleasure of seeing the completed work, although he was well aware of its preparation and had made some suggestions for a title along with those possibilities indicated by President George Albert Smith. "President Smith didn't like us using the words Mormon and Mormonism, which of course my outline title had done," Brother Richards explains. "So the President's and my father's suggestions were considered." None of them seemed just right to the author. He waited. As he was reading the scriptures one day, he was forcibly impressed with these words of Isaiah:

Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men:

Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. (Isaiah 29:13-14.)

These were the words which had so impressed him during the last months of his mission in the South that they served as the text for his April 1938 general conference talk. Now he could hardly wait to tell Brother Palmer about his "discovery."

At the office the next day, he said, "Lee, I think I've found a name for that book."

"What is it?" his friend asked.

"The words of Isaiah, 'a marvellous work and a wonder.'"

"That's it!" Brother Palmer enthusiastically agreed. So it was decided.

It was an arresting title, and it would often pique the curiosity of the potential reader. One man in England reported that he had been in a public library and had seen a copy of A Marvelous Work and a Wonder on the shelves. "The title intrigued me," he said, "so I borrowed the book, read it, looked up the missionaries, and applied for baptism." He later became a bishop and visited Elder Richards at general conference time.

Over the years few changes have been made in the text of the book, and those made were designed mostly to update the scientific references or the statistical detail as the Church expanded worldwide. In thirty-one years and twenty-three printings (1950-1981), A Marvelous Work and a Wonder sold more copies than any other Church book save the Book of Mormon-the publisher reports one and a half to two million copies printed in the United States, and to this number must be added fifty thousand copies printed in Europe. It has been translated into eighteen languages, including French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, Korean, Samoan, Dutch, and Thai. Elder Richards has never accepted a penny of royalty on the book.

As sales manager of Deseret News Press at the time, Elder Thomas S. Monson saw the work from the printer's viewpoint-he "had the opportunity of printing that book," having seen it in manuscript form "written just as LeGrand Richards speaks." Says he:

I've watched the book go through printing after printing. I've watched as it's gone from modest runs on letterpress printing to high-speed rotary printing, to offset printing, and finally to the point where it is mass-produced like no other LDS book except the Book of Mormon. It is a missionary in print.

We wore out nickel and chromium-surfaced electrotype plates of LeGrand's book because it had to be reprinted so many times on such long runs. It is a phenomenon!

In the LDS Church insert of the October 1980 Readers Digest, the book was offered free by the Church Publicity Department to anyone who sent in a coupon or called on a toll-free number. By this means the offer went into 18,700,000 homes and businesses in the United States and 1,225,000 in Germany. Through that offer, as of June 1981 there had been 9,871 requests for copies. One forwarded to Elder Richards by the Church Publicity Department reads: "I think it is a remarkable book. I've never read anything like it! If it is at all possible, please send me another copy. Send more literature. I would like to congratulate the author of the book very much." This reader's recognition of its compelling power is quite typical of the responses received.

Many others who have been spiritually touched and/or converted have told of its effect upon them, and their stories come from all over the world, from people of all ages, and from those in all walks of life. Scarcely a day goes by but what letters or people come to Elder Richards's office to tell him about his book and to thank him for writing it. A mere sampling of the stories can be included here.

A mission president from West Australia wrote: "A young man, while residing in Kalgoorlie, had a brief encounter with the Mormon elders. He became curious about the gospel and ordered your book. He said after receiving it, 'That night I read it through and gained my testimony.' As soon as he was able to get leave from his work, he journeyed to Perth and was baptized."

From the Norwegian Mission came this story: "On Tuesday, August 22, a good looking athlete, twenty-five years of age, walked into the mission office and asked to be baptized. He had read your book. He knew it was true and had prayed about it and had his knowledge confirmed. I have not seen such faith and humility before. He should become a great leader for the Church in Norway."

A note came from Millbrae, California: "This is to inform you of a testimony I heard at the California Merced Stake conference last Sunday. A black from Ghana asked to speak in an investigators' meeting we held after the conference. He said he had searched for the true Church for a long time and in his searching came across your book. He was so impressed that it told the truth that he looked up the Church. He was there to present himself for baptism."

A newspaper reporter in Chile read a copy of the book and wrote a two-column article about it which was published. It said that A Marvelous Work and a Wonder was the most wonderful book he had ever read. The mission president sent Elder Richards a copy of the article with an English translation. The reporter applied for baptism.

Elder Richards attended a stake conference in New Orleans where a Scottish convert with a beautiful voice sang. After the meeting Brother Richards visited with her. She said her greatest sorrow was the fact that she couldn't get her husband interested in the Church.

"Why don't you get the missionaries to help you?" he asked.

"He won't talk with them," she replied.

He asked if her husband did much reading. She answered, "Quite a bit."

"Well," he responded, "when I get home I will send you a copy of the missionary book I have written, then you get him to read it."

A few years later Elder Richards attended that stake for another conference. The husband, now an elder, was there with the book in his hand, and with him were his neighbor and his neighbor's wife, whom he had brought into the Church by the use of that book.

Once when Elder Richards filled a stake conference assignment at Price, Utah, the next morning a sister visited him in his office who had traveled from that town for that purpose. She was in tears. Her bishop had just released her as president of the Primary and asked her to serve in the Relief Society. Since she did not know much about that organization, she had not learned to love it. Wiping the tears from her eyes, she said, "It wouldn't be so bad, but my husband is not a member of the Church and I have to teach the children all alone."

Elder Richards asked, "Why don't you convert him?" She assured him that she had tried.

"What of the missionaries?" he asked.

"I have tried that too," was her response. "Does he read?" Elder Richards queried. "Yes," she replied.

"Then I will autograph one of these missionary books, and you get him to read it as a compliment to me, and then you write and tell me what he has to say."

In a few weeks he received her letter. Her husband had read the book but didn't say much about it. Then he read the Book of Mormon. Then he read A Marvelous Work and a Wonder again. After that he said, "Now I am ready to join the Church."

After he was baptized he became active in missionary work, and when he had been a member for a year his wife again wrote that they were going to the Manti Temple to be sealed. It wasn't long before this man was called to be the stake mission president, a position in which he served with distinction.

An eighty-four-year-old man in Springfield, Missouri, who had recently been baptized wrote that A Marvelous Work and a Wonder had done more for his conversion than any other factor.

A fourteen-year-old girl wrote: "I am a recent convert to the Church. I am now in process of reading your book. You can't imagine the way the Spirit has touched my heart while I have read it.... Since this year's school has started I have given the Golden Questions to 225 people. I am getting pretty good results. I would love to go on a one-and-a-half-year mission for the Church when I am older and am going to try my hardest to achieve that goal.

A doctor in Ashland, Kentucky, wrote: "A copy of your book was given to us as a Christmas gift by an LDS physician and his wife with whom we became acquainted while I was serving an internship in Phoenix, Arizona. I will soon be ordained an elder. We have received our temple recommends and will be sealed for time and eternity on March 12 in Salt Lake City. We would like it very much, if possible, if you would perform the ceremony." He did.

An FBI agent and his family moved into a Mormon community in Wyoming, and his wife said to her Mormon neighbor: "We know you are Mormons and we don't know much about the Mormons, and should we ever say anything that is offensive to you, you will know that it is because we don't know better." The Mormon neighbor said, "Would you be willing to read one book that will tell you what we believe?" She said she would, and after reading A Marvelous Work and a Wonder she and her husband and family joined the Church. They have since served in the mission field, as also has their daughter, and they have visited Elder Richards in his office to thank him for writing the book.

President N. Eldon Tanner wrote a memo to Elder Richards saying: "A short time ago, I sent to a man in prison a copy of your book. I asked the man to tell me what he thought of it and how it affected his life. This was his response: 'For you, sir, to truthfully believe and accept my interpretation, and evaluate what one book has done to my soul and [my] belief of the prophecies fulfilled from its contents, I would need to write you a book myself. I express endless admiration and confidence for the truths revealed.'"

Others of Elder Richards's associates have expressed their appreciation of the book. Elder Richard L. Evans wrote: "I am constantly hearing appreciative, wonderful comments of you and your work, and of the influence that your great book is having in the Church and out of it. I have taken pride and satisfaction in sending A Marvelous Work and a Wonder to some of my critical but honest friends who are not members of the Church."

From Bishop Victor L. Brown he received the following: "...I am grateful for your great missionary leadership. I hear comments constantly on the tremendous effect your book has not only upon investigators but upon members. This is certainly a monument to your great efforts."

And Elder Sterling W. Sill, with typical enthusiasm, wrote: "If someone were going to try to select an apostle Paul for this dispensation, it would be LeGrand Richards. The apostle Paul wrote the largest segment of the New Testament, but of all [the contemporary Church books except the scriptures themselves], I am sure that your book stands unchallenged at the top of the list. So far as I know, it has been responsible for more converts than all others put together."

Mission presidents also are impressed with the book's remarkable converting power. One of these wrote:

Many times since returning from presiding over the Southern Australian Mission, we have expressed to you our appreciation for the great help your book was to us in bringing souls into the kingdom in the great country of Australia.

We can truly say that we know of no single book other than the Book of Mormon that reached and interested more people and caused them to become converted to the gospel of Jesus Christ.

The book is so straightforward, so true and so convincing, we felt that if we could get an investigator to read it, he was well on the road to conversion. It is a wonderful help to the missionary also, for his own understanding and development, whether used at home or in the mission field.

Elder Richards considers A Marvelous Work and a Wonder to be his most significant contribution to the building of the Lord's kingdom in our day. "I think there are thousands of men and women in the world who have been good enough to be members of the Church all the time," he said, "but no one has stopped long enough to fit the truths together so they can understand. This my book is doing." (Blue Book, p. 36.)

Surely the patriarch George Bowles was prophetic in his blessing to the then President LeGrand Richards of Hollywood Stake when the latter had just been called to preside over the Southern States Mission. The patriarch said: "I... bless you, for in the past thou hast desired to have the voice of an angel to declare unto mankind the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ. That gift is yours and shall be henceforth a fullness thereof." (Hollywood Stake Tabernacle, December 16, 1933.)

That powerful converting "voice" is nowhere more evident than in A Marvelous Work and a Wonder.

This was before the days of standard missionary discussions for presentation to investigators.

---
Notas:
[^1] Throughout this book, wherever material is quoted without a source reference, it has come from an interview the author had either with Elder LeGrand Richards or with the individual named at that point in the text.
