Lucile C. Tate, LeGrand Richards: Beloved Apostle ( 1982)

15

Apostle: Early Ministry 1952-1959

It was shortly after noon on Sunday, April 6, 1952. The morning session of the 122nd Annual General Conference had just concluded. With no premonition or forewarning, Bishop Richards received word from Henry D. Moyle, counselor to President David O. McKay, that the President wished to see him at his office. When he arrived there, President McKay told him he had been chosen to fill the vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve occasioned by the death of Elder Joseph F. Merrill on February 3. Recounting the experience, Elder Richards said, "I wept and the President wept, and we hugged each other, and then we went over to the afternoon meeting."

When President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., read the names of the Twelve and Elder LeGrand Richards's was among them, an audible ripple of approval arose from the audience. At the conclusion of the sustaining vote, President McKay said, "Elder Richards, will you take your place here in the Council," and immediately after that he called upon the new apostle to speak. At the podium, where he had stood many times before, Elder Richards said: "Only the men on this stand can know what has gone through my mind and heart since President McKay called me to his office following the morning meeting.... My soul is subdued." (Conference Report, April 1952, pp. 111-12.)

Elder Richards was sixty-six years old-seasoned, tried, and virtuous; virtuous in the larger, knightly sense of the word, which adds to chastity all the qualities of moral excellence-faith in the cause; valor; courtesy; compassion; justice; and loyalty. These had come from a lifelong love of the truth and an unswerving determination to follow it at any cost. He was a man purged of "woodenness and earthiness," "a vessel unto honour... and meet for the master's use, and prepared unto every good work." (2 Timothy 2:20-22.)

President McKay acknowledged many of these qualities when he spoke at an event to honor the former Presiding Bishop shortly after the conference. Said he: "Devotion and duty characterize his life.... Fealty and brotherliness together describe his loyalty to the cause and to his friends. He would gladly give his life for the truth, even as Christ made the supreme sacrifice. His loyalty extends to those less worthy-he always stands by his friends and helps them in their need." (Church Section of the Deseret News, April 23, 1952, p. 11.)

One leader, however, expressed a note of sadness at his call. General President of the Relief Society, Belle S. Spafford, remembers leaving the conference saying, "What am I going to do without my Bishop?" She says:

I just couldn't keep my feelings down, and I said, "I don't understand why they would move a man from one position to another when he is so needed, so competent, and so valuable where he has been serving." I felt bereft and as if I couldn't function without his wise and valuable counsel, so I went to see him. I told him, "I feel so lost that it is hard to accept my disappointment. May I occasionally come to you anyway?"

Then he taught me a great lesson in Church government which I have never forgotten. He said, "Now, Sister Spafford, you have a new Bishop and he will be your advisor, and you wouldn't want me to step into his role, now, would you?"

Elder Richards had already moved on to other good works, as had the new Presiding Bishop, Joseph L. Wirthlin, and so must she.

Before his new call came, Elder Richards had already participated in the concluding event of a project which had received his care and close attention. The Primary Children's Hospital had been dedicated the previous month. As Presiding Bishop he had not only located and purchased the site but had arranged all the business for its construction.

The year before, while still in that same position, Brother Richards had accompanied President McKay on his first out-of-state trip after the latter became President of the Church. They traveled to Gridley, California, to dedicate the new ward and stake building there, and LeGrand Richards was called upon to speak in three of the meetings. (Church News, April 25, 1951, p. 2.) It was such trips as this (added to his wide travel experience as Presiding Bishop) which helped him to pace right into the regular tight routine which is standard for members of the Quorum of the Twelve-travel assignments, council meetings, conferences, interviews, preaching, committee work, correspondence, and so on.

Now, as he went to work in new assignments, Elder Richards was often in the news. He and his family were frequently photographed. The May 1952 issue of the Improvement Era carried his picture on its cover, with a biographical sketch and family picture inside.

Elder Richards and Ina were at the railway station along with many other General Authorities who traveled to Omaha, Nebraska, for the dedication of the Mormon Pioneer Memorial Bridge, named to honor the early Church members who crossed the Missouri River near Florence, Nebraska, in 1846.

In June 1952 Elder Richards, along with Lowell S. Bennion and Alfred M. Durham, was given an honorary M-Man Award for his "inspiring influence among the youth of the Church." The other two men were cited, respectively, for "inspired counseling" and writing of the song "Carry On."

At the October conference that first year of his ministry, Elder Richards's talk still reflected his interest in and devotion to the youth of the Church. He counseled them to enter the "strait gate"; refrain from profanity; live the Word of Wisdom; and be chaste. He now spoke to them not as Presiding Bishop but as a special witness for the Lord. Between conference sessions he allowed a candid shot by the Church photographer of himself with Belle S. Spafford, General President of the Relief Society, and Emma Rae McKay, wife of President McKay.

The next year was filled with hard work and with many assignments from the Brethren. One of the latter was a tour to the South Pacific, where he dedicated three chapels and inspected four others then under construction. He and his traveling companion,

Elder LeGrand Richards and family, at the time he became as apostle.

General Authorities and wives as Salt Lake City railway station as they leave for dedication of Mormon Pioneer Memorial Bridge at Omaha, Nebraska.

Evon W. Huntsman, returned from the trip late in December, 1953. On December 13, while they were gone, Elder Matthew Cowley passed away. The following year Elder Richards was appointed by Utah's Governor J. Bracken Lee to succeed Elder Cowley as a member of the Board of Trustees of Utah State Agricultural College. Considerable disharmony had arisen between the board and the school faculty, and Elder Richards's appointment had a great leavening, stabilizing effect upon both groups. His amiable personality, his gracious manner of dealing with people, and his philosophy of letting differences mellow and narrow before acting upon a matter ("better united on a poor policy than divided on a good one") resulted in his appointment as chairman of the Board of Trustees, after which business proceeded "without a riffle." He combined congeniality with strong leadership based on well-defined aims, orderly procedure, and close attention to needs and priorities. As one associate said, "He is either hot or cold, never lukewarm. We always know where he stands, yet he never offends."

A letter to Elder Richards from R. H. Walker, a dean and director at the college, reflects the feeling there for Elder Richards. In part he wrote:

The statements you made at the Advisory Committee meetings were most effective, and helped to clinch the message we were trying to put over better than anyone from the College could do. It helped to give a sense of dignity, sincerity, and honesty that could not be given by anyone else....

All of the time you have served as a member of the Board of Trustees your influence has been felt in great measure, not only by the members of the Board but also by the faculty and the students. It has contributed in great measure toward harmonious working relationships... [which] mean more to the effectiveness of the faculty and students at the College than money or physical facilities. (Letter, November 1, 1956.)

While Elder Richards served as chairman of the board, he lent his support in changing the name of the college to Utah State University, which was a more representative designation than the one by which it had been known since its establishment as a land-grant university in 1888. The name change was officially

Bishop Richards and Daryl Chase, respectively chairman of the Board of Trustees and president of Utah State University.

Elder and Sister Richards in hawaii.

approved during the first half of 1957, and when commencement exercises were held and graduating students received their diplomas, these bore the new name of Utah State University. Elder Richards's term of office on the board expired on July 1, 1957.

Three years before that, the Church News carried an article announcing the publication of Elder Richards's second missionary book, Israel, Do You Know? (October 16, 1954, p. 12.) Without preplanning, this served to mark and make a special contribution to the nationwide Jewish Tercentenary. This was the year when national attention was being centered on American Jewish people who had just begun an eight-month-long celebration to commemorate the arrival of the first permanent Jewish settlement in New Amsterdam (New York) three hundred years earlier, in September 1654.

In the preface to the book Elder Richards expressed his "sincere love for the descendants of Judah; an unswerving faith in their destiny as a chosen people of noble birthright; an unbounded admiration for the manner in which they have maintained their racial identity through two thousand years of trial and abuse." The book had been written out of "a deep-rooted desire to bring them hope and the feeling of good will and fellowship wherever they are throughout the world."

That desire had come to him early in his Church service. When he returned from presiding over the Netherlands Mission in 1916, he spoke privately with his father, George F., saying, "I don't know what the Church has in mind for the Jewish people, but if it ever starts the missionary work with them, I would like to have a hand in that." He thought that if he could take the Bible and the Book of Mormon to them he could convince any of them that "we have the truth." Ina of course was well aware of his desire to so serve, so on the day when President Grant called their home and tried to locate Brother Richards to tell him he was being called as Presiding Bishop, Ina told LeGrand, "I thought surely that was your call to Jerusalem."

Bishop Richards had sorrowed over the brutal treatment of the Jews during World War II and had rejoiced when Israelbecame a nation in 1948. Then, after A Marvelous Work and a Wonder had proved to be so helpful in missionary work, he thought again of his desire to address Israel in like manner. "I will never get to go to the Jews now that I am the Presiding Bishop," he told himself, "so why don't I write our message to them the way I would like to tell it." So it was that he began the book when A Marvelous Work and a Wonder had reached a fairly wide market. He wrote it in much the same way as the previous book-as he traveled, an hour here and two hours there, in spare moments as the work of his ministry would allow. Lee A. Palmer again assisted him in preparing the manuscript for publication.

Early in the preparation of the book, Rose Marie Reid, a Canadian Mormon who achieved great success as a designer and manufacturer of clothing, visited Elder Richards in Los Angeles. She was enthusiastic about doing missionary work among the Jewish people with whom she associated in her business. She said to Elder Richards, "I have many Jewish friends who are interested in Mormonism and I don't want to make mistakes while teaching them." To her inquiries about books or lesson outlines that might be used, he told her of the book Israel, Do You Know? which he was writing. After it was published he sent her a copy.

In the meantime she wrote some introductory materials keyed to the special needs she had in teaching her Jewish friends, including "do's and don'ts" for others who wished to work with their Jewish acquaintances. Introducing her lesson material, she wrote: "Teaching the gospel to the Jewish people requires a completely different approach from teaching anyone else.... The very first thing to do is to read Israel, Do You Know? by Elder LeGrand Richards. It is a presentation of the gospel never before given, but which every member of the church should know. Encourage others to read it so they will not undo, in ignorance, their work with Jewish investigators." ("Plan for Teaching the Gospel to Jewish People," LeGrand Richards office file.)

Sister Reid's plan for teaching was tailored to her particular needs and her way of presenting the gospel to the Jewish people, so the Missionary Department of the Church did not adopt it for general use; but she was diligent and sincere, and she succeeded in bringing some of her Jewish friends into the Church.

With the publication of Israel, Do You Know? in 1954, letters began to come to Elder Richards which gave evidence that it would do what he had hoped. One multimillionaire in New York read the book with profound interest. The chief heart specialist in San Francisco read it three times and expected to take it to the most learned among the Jewish people in that city. A Jewish friend in Salt Lake was given a copy and purchased three dozen more to give his Jewish friends in New York. A rabbi in Chicago read it and, while he was not prepared to say he could accept it, the book set him thinking. He wanted to take it to New York and discuss it with a Jewish friend.

Letters came also from members of the Church whose understanding and appreciation grew through reading the book. One of these came from a friend in California who wrote: "I find myself with a keen urge to mail copies of this message to the Jews and all Israel, to my many minister friends, as well as to my Jewish acquaintances in Palestine. I already have copies on their way to Israel with letters of further explanation...." From another member of the Church came this comment, "It is indeed heartening to know that one of the Lord's apostles in our day has set forth our call to Judah in such clear and ringing tones. If some way can now be found to get the Jewish people to actually read and ponder the message you have so well set before them, it surely will hasten the time when they at long last will rejoice with us in the precious gospel of Jesus...." And from Elder Spencer W. Kimball came this note: "I took your book with me this weekend and read it. My, it is wonderful, wonderful!" (Letters in LeGrand Richards files.)

With this encouragement, Elder Richards's desire to teach the Jewish people grew. When he was taking a conference assignment in Los Angeles on one occasion he said to Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, then President of the Quorum of the Twelve, "Would it be all right with you if I set up a little missionary work with the Jewish people down in California?" President Smith answered, "You may do whatever you wish." Thereafter, as he took his regularly scheduled assignments, Elder Richards began the work in various cities. "We didn't make any great progress with conversions," he said, "but we tried to get some of the missionaries trained to tell our story in a manner acceptable to the Jewish people." Los Angeles became the center of this activity under the supervision of Stake President John M. Russen, with the help of J. Leland Anderson and Leo J. Muir.

In a brief report of that period, Elder Richards writes about his work with the Jewish people. In it he tells of the Lord's promise to the Jews:

And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, which shall be left....

And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.

The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. (Isaiah 11:11-13.)

Elder Richards then suggests that "we of Ephraim should lead out in establishing this friendly relationship, for we are to take the everlasting gospel to the Jewish people, including the Book of Mormon, which was preserved for 'the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations.'" (See title page to the Book of Mormon.) He continues by saying that it will be through our doing this and their being restored to the church and fold of God that they "shall be sanctified in holiness before the Lord to dwell in his presence day and night forever and ever."

He concludes his report by saying, "We feel their sanctification as we listen to the testimonies of some of these wonderful people of the house of Judah who have joined the Church, and we feel to say with the apostle Paul:

For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus.

For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ.

There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.

And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise. (Galatians 3:26-29.)

Two testimonies of Jewish converts follow: The first is that of an industrial designer and artist whose grandfathers were both rabbis. After relating how he studied the gospel and the words of the missionaries, he states:

The study completed, the words of the missionaries impressive, but not by any means totally convincing, there was only one place left for a very confused heart to turn for counsel-the ultimate source of all wisdom-God himself. I asked him the questions that were destroying my peace of mind and troubling me so greatly, and requested a sure and infallible means of recognizing the answer. No vision was obtained, no glorified beings were seen, no heavenly voices were heard. Deep down in the recesses of my mind a feeling that this man Jesus was, as he claimed, the Son of God and the Christ of the world was made manifest in a sure and positive manner.

This humble testimony I can leave with you. Since becoming a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints I have been happier than ever before. The knowledge that it is possible to possess my family through all eternity, easily compensates for all earthly riches or scorn by relative or friend.

Another testimony comes from a certified public accountant and business counselor whose activities are nationwide.

With all my mind and energy I believe this gospel to be true. In January of 1958, the only thing I knew about Mormonism was a word called polygamy. That month I met an individual who introduced me to the subject of Mormonism. It was the first time I ever discussed religion with anyone that was not dogmatic, loud, or smug. It was reassuring to find someone who did not make a mystery of the Bible or religion and could logically discuss the subject. The usual cliches were missing, the vile language when you disagreed or asked questions was gone, and the abrupt ending of a discussion due to differences of opinion was certainly not evident. Hence, for the first time in my life, a discussion of religion did not seem distasteful and I was interested enough to want to know more about the subject.

How does one go about this? The logical thing was to do some reading. I asked for some literature and began to read. The more I read, the more questions I asked. Strangely enough, I got answers without evasiveness. The answers made sense. My desire to read the Mormon literature became quite intense and I no longer was interested in reading anything else but this and the tax literature necessary for my work. I decided that if it were the truth, I did not want to miss it, and if it were not true, I could trust my own mind to determine that....

As accounts of these conversions came to his attention, and as Israel, Do You Know? reached an ever wider audience, Elder Richards was full of gratitude for the Lord's blessing to these people and for his part in helping the work go forward.

At the 1956 October general conference he was prompted by the Spirit to speak concerning the work of the Lord among the Jews in the latter days. He concluded with these words:

It is my privilege to be personally acquainted with quite a few converted Jews of prominence, and I find in their hearts the same love of God, the same love of the truth, the same testimony of the divinity of the work that you and I have.... I have burning in my soul a testimony that if we will be kind to them, the Lord will richly reward us for every kindness we show unto these, our brethren of the house of Israel. (Conference Report, October 1956, p. 26.)

Three years later, in March of 1959, the Brethren recommended that organized missionary work among the Jewish people be temporarily discontinued. While it was personally disappointing to him, Elder Richards did not question but accepted the decision and instructed those who were working in the program to lay it aside.

Elder Richards's personal interest and effort with Jewish people continued. Israel, Do You Know? sold forty thousand copies during the next twenty years. (As with A Marvelous Work and a Wonder, he accepted no royalties from it.) The interest generated by the reading of his Israel book brought many Jewish people to the Church offices, and they were sent to Elder Richards, who was delighted to visit with them. As he explained the relationship between Israel and Judah to them, his teaching skills increased, and this prepared him for later blessings and opportunities with Jewish people.

He continued to fill all regular assignments incident to the work of the ministry, as well as many special calls. One of the latter was his further service as chairman of the Church Old Folks Central Committee, from which President McKay declined to release him, and it was in this connection that he had the pleasure of honoring Ruth May Fox on the occasion of her hundredth birthday. (Church News, November 14, 1953, p. 9.) She had performed great service in helping and inspiring the youth of the Church, first as a counselor in the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association (1905-1929), then as its General President (1929-1937). It was she who had volunteered to help Ina with her children when LeGrand was deathly ill with the flu during the epidemic of 1918-1919.

Through all the early years of his apostolic ministry, Elder Richards worked with unremitting, consuming energy. His father, George F. Richards, was no longer there to worry over him, so his long-time friend J. Reuben Clark, Jr. took upon himself the fatherly role. He wrote: "I have enjoyed my association with LeGrand very, very much-an association I would like to help him preserve by remembering that once he had a very serious trouble which sometimes returns if due care is not taken. Please be careful of yourself, LeGrand, and remember that you are a 'heart-scarred' veteran." (Letter, December 28, 1957, Blue Book, p. 16c.)

President Clark also spoke of LeGrand's great contributions in missionary service. "May the Lord continue to bless you as he has so abundantly done in the past in your work in the cause of the Lord. For you, Brother LeGrand, have had a great achievement, bringing the message of the gospel to the hearts of the honest that they might enjoy blessings by embracing and living it." (Letter, September 2, 1958, Blue Book, p. 16g.)

It was May 19, 1959, when LeGrand and Ina celebrated their golden wedding. He was seventy-three and she would be the same on September 14 that year. On that occasion he gave the sage advice to inquirers, "Don't ever argue and you'll have a happy home." And as they looked back over fifty years, the trials, joys, losses, and gains were distilled and summarized in Ina's brief statement, "Nobody could have a better, sweeter life than we've had."
