Lucile C. Tate, LeGrand Richards: Beloved Apostle ( 1982)

16

Apostle: The Middle Years 1959-1975

LeGrand Richards's bride of fifty years, Ina Ashton Richards, was by nature a home-loving person. Although her health during the most recent years had much improved, it was still far from robust; and her energy was never great. Consequently travel was a strenuous activity to her, and she rarely accompanied her husband on his many Church assignments, preferring instead the quiet routine of caring for her home and of having children and grandchildren come in and out. When on one of his many trips Elder Richards had expressed his concern that she was too much alone, she had written, "No, LeGrand, I really don't get lonely any more. The Lord makes it up to me in a very special way and I love him as I have never done before." In another letter, she wrote, "Even though you have always been very busy, and away much of the time, we have felt great security in your love and faith. You have been better to me than I have ever deserved."

But despite her preference for the home life, during their golden wedding year (1959) Ina consented to accompany her husband on the most extensive trip of their lives-a mission tour of three Scandinavian countries plus Finland and the Netherlands. They left Salt Lake on June 20 and sailed from New York in the Oslofjord of the Norwegian Line, landing in Copenhagen, Denmark, on July 1, where they were met by President and Sister Holger P. Petersen. Together they all met the plane which brought Ezra Taft Benson, apostle and U.S. Secretary of Agriculture, to speak at the Rebild-fest on the Fourth of July, the American holiday celebrated there. He was also met by the United States Ambassador, Val Petersen, and many high Danish officials, who had arranged for a state reception.

The plane was taxied up near the terminal and a red carpet was rolled out along which the dignitaries stood in positions dictated by protocol. It was at this point that President Petersen saw demonstrated an example of brotherly love between the Authorities that he has never forgotten. Secretary Benson came off the plane and greeted the first two or three officials, then he caught sight of Elder Richards. He left his distinguished hosts, walked over to greet and embrace his fellow apostle, and returned to the welcoming line as if nothing had happened.

When the appointed day arrived, approximately thirty thousand people came to hear Secretary Benson's forceful talk on the value of freedom and the right of man to choose his course in life. Elders Benson and Richards and Ambassador Petersen later spoke to four hundred Saints in the Copenhagen Branch. The remaining nine days of the Richardses' stay in Denmark were spent with President and Sister Petersen touring the mission districts, holding conferences, missionary interviews and testimony meetings, baptismal services, and leadership sessions, and conferring with the mission president on mission matters.

From July 13-23 they similarly toured the Swedish Mission with President and Sister Harry T. Oscarson. Again they heard the testimonies of the missionaries, and Elder Richards interviewed each one. He checked into building and legal matters with the president and inspected and approved a choice building site just outside of Stockholm. He also recommended the sale of the mission headquarters, which was located in a factory area, and the building of a new mission home and chapel in a more favorable location.

The next week he and Ina spent in Norway with President and Sister Ray Engebretsen. Again the rapid pace of the mission tour schedule, the business matters, and building considerations filled the days. The Richardses were particularly impressed with the energetic efforts of the missionaries in that land. In the course of their travel, partly by air, they had opportunity to view the breathtaking scenery-mountains, valleys, fjords, and coast-line-during a spell of perfect weather.

By August 1 they were in Finland. The rigors of the trip were telling on Ina-the interminable meetings, the travel, the varied accommodations and food, and the hours and hours of talks and sermons were noticeably tiring her. Wife-like, she suggested to her husband that he vary his talks with a few literary quotes (which she often carried with her in a little notebook). He said, "Now, Mommy, you can't preach my sermons for me. My mission is to tell the message of the Restoration, and I can't use up the people's time with pretty pieces." (Interestingly, however, he had already memorized many of her "pretty pieces" and had often pleased her by quoting them at firesides, at family gatherings, and in his homey talks to the countless couples he married in the temple.)

A most rewarding part of their journey came near the end, for after forty-three years away they returned to Holland for a twelve-day visit. One of Elder Richards's former Holland missionaries, Rulon J. Sperry, was now the mission president. (He

had pleased his longtime friend by sending him the first copy of A Marvelous Work and a Wonder in Dutch. It had arrived just

before the Richardses left on the trip.) Now, with President and Sister Sperry, they saw the old places and noted the many changes. The mission headquarters were now at The Hague, but the party went back to the old home at Crooswijkschesingel 7b, and Ina sat on the steps in front, reminiscing, and wondered if they shouldn't ring the bell and go inside.

As her ears and tongue became accustomed to the strange yet familiar sounds of the Dutch language, Ina was able to speak briefly in the meetings without the aid of an interpreter. Elder Richards, however, was immediately back in his element and preached with ever greater ease to the countless Dutch Saints and strangers in both meetings and informal conversation. While there, he dedicated chapels in Zeist, Holland, and in Antwerp, Belgium, from the latter of which, during World War I, the refugees had fled when the German howitzers shelled the city. Belgium was now again part of the Netherlands Mission.

When they had completed their tour, had visited the graves of Elders Welker and Gold in Groningen, and had said good-bye to their hosts, Brother and Sister Richards reluctantly left the beloved little country of their earlier mission experience, with its waterways, windmills, and flower fields, and especially the Saints they found so wonderful. They then traveled to Hamburg, Germany, to attend the European Mission Presidents' Seminar to be held there.

Elder and Sister Marion G. Romney had been touring the missions of continental Europe simultaneously with the Richardses' northern tour, at the conclusion of which the two couples met for the seminar. The meetings were held in the new district (now stake) center, which was dedicated by the visiting General Authorities as part of the business of the seminar. As senior apostle (1951), Elder Romney presided in the joint sessions. Elder Richards conducted and spoke in many of them.

October conference found the travelers home again, and when Elder Richards spoke at the Tabernacle he was filled with the spirit of missionary work. He told of the five hundred missionaries he had interviewed and of listening to their testimonies. He paid tribute to their parents, who in many cases were struggling to keep their young people in the field. One missionary had asked Elder Richards, "Couldn't I stay here for another six months?" to which the apostle replied, "No, you had better go home. You have your military work to get behind you, and your schooling. Then you ought to get married and raise your boys as your father raised his and send them on missions so they will do the rest of your missionary work for you."

A family in Finland had impressed him. They had long saved to go to the temple in Switzerland and were very thrilled about it. The mother said, "Brother Richards, we have been members of the Church for only six years, and we figure we are only six years old. We did not know how to live, and what to live for, until we found the Church." (Conference Report, October 1959, p. 34.)

The trip which Elder Richards and Ina took in 1959 was only one in a long list of those he has taken during his ministry, lifting his voice in testimony. In addition to the European countries mentioned, he has toured missions and attended conferences in Australia, New Zealand, South America, South Africa, the Central American countries, Mexico, Tonga, Samoa, Hawaii, Japan, Canada, and in all of the United States. And he has attended area conferences which have taken many of the General Authorities to people who could never hope to attend general conferences in Salt Lake City.

Illustrative of these was the one in Munich, Germany (August 24-26, 1973), when he and many of his associates accompanied President Harold B. Lee to meet with "the largest group of Latter-day Saints ever assembled on continental Europe." Some fourteen thousand members from all over Europe came to hear the counsel and messages of the leaders and to listen to the Tabernacle Choir and to their own superb singing groups. Elder Richards had a twenty-minute speaking assignment for the conference, "ten minutes of which," he regretted to say, "were used up by an interpreter."

Whether abroad or at home, his preaching was and is distinctive. One characteristic is his use of the parenthetical insert which allows him to "breathe" during his rapid-fire delivery. By this means he also takes his listeners into his confidence and thereby disarms them. Two examples are typical: He will say, "I drove up to a gas station in Florida. To a man sitting by one of the pumps, I said, 'Are there any Mormons around here?' (I knew there were, but I wanted to hear what he would say.) He replied, 'There is a whole colony of them living out here a few miles.'" Or he may remark, "Then I said to this man (I always like to challenge a person, because then it gives him something to look for), 'Would you be willing to let me come into your home and tell you the story of Mormonism?'"

Another of his preaching abilities is that of calculating the length of a sermon. Elder Richard L. Evans wrote, "You were masterful Sunday morning on television, speaking... without note or script, and finishing on the precise second. It was a remarkable performance." (Memo to LeGrand Richards, April 19, 1968, Blue Book, p. 19f.) Elder Richards's eyesight does not now permit him to see the clock clearly, so in a recent general

LeGrand Richards speaks.

"I finished on time!"

conference he handed President Benson his cane and asked him to tap Elder Richards's heel one minute before he was supposed to finish. He closed on time.

Presidents of the Church who have conducted when he spoke in general conference have variously remarked: "We have just listened to a tornado" (Joseph Fielding Smith). "We have just heard from 'a marvelous work and a wonder'" (Harold B. Lee). "Is there anyone who doesn't know Brother LeGrand Richards who has just spoken? Is there anyone who does not know the great missionary he has been?" (Spencer W. Kimball).

Others of his brethren comment on his preaching as follows:

He has traveled the world, lifting his quick-paced voice like a clarion in proclaiming the gospel which he so much loves. (Thomas S. Monson.)

He lifts his voice as a trump. He believes in speaking with a loud voice and can quote scriptures to demonstrate that this is the way it should be done. He takes every request to speak-at firesides, seminars, institutes, whatever. Some would sidestep, but he likes to do it, is talented in it, and does it endlessly. (Bruce R. McConkie.)

He meets the needs of the Saints that want to hear the gospel preached, and he does it with such a sense of conviction and sincerity and enthusiasm that those who hear him know whereof he speaks, and invariably he touches the hearts of his congregation. His capacity for remembering scripture, stories, and the experiences he has had is remarkable. His power of recall is, I think, an absolute miracle. (Gordon B. Hinckley.)

With typical self-deprecation, Elder Richards expresses his own view of his preaching: "What is a good meal for a sparrow may not be a good one for an elephant. While I might please the common people, when you get up to the elite and the educated, they may not enjoy listening to me because I'm just simple."

The stories and experiences to which President Hinckley referred are elements which give vitality and appeal to Elder Richards's sermons, and they endear him to his audiences, whether vast or intimate. In order to preserve them as a collection, Marvin W. Wallin, manager of Bookcraft, asked him to allow their publication, and Elder Richards reluctantly agreed. Accordingly, he jotted down from memory a list of a hundred and thirty incidents, stories, and experiences, and from these he dictated the actual "illustrations" just as if he were telling them to a friend or an audience. As a result, the editors say, "they are told in crisp, clear language, and applied with telling insight." They were transcribed, organized, and published in 1961 under the title of Just to Illustrate. Many letters received by the author attest to the delightful hours of reading they afford.

Yet another book was to appear which would broaden the base of enjoyment in Elder Richards's sermons. In October 1971 he had delivered his seventy-fifth general conference talk-more such talks than any other living man except President Joseph Fielding Smith. (Only his second heart attack and the subsequent hospitalization at Cedar City in March 1964 had kept Elder Richards from a conference session, and that was the only one he had missed since his first conference address, given while he was yet president of the Southern States Mission.) So popular had his sermons become that many had asked when someone was going to publish a book of them. It was his son G. LaMont Richards who, recognizing their value and popular appeal, responded to the many requests. Drawing from sermons given in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, at the stake conferences, at temple dedications, at funeral services, and at campus devotionals, he organized them under subject headings and prepared a biographical introduction. To the satisfaction of Elder Richards's many admirers, Deseret Book Company published the compilation, LeGrand Richards Speaks, in 1972.

Since that time many of Elder Richards's sermons have been recorded and made available on cassette tapes through leading bookstores. By this means his talks have been enjoyed over and over again and his spirit made manifest through the voice quality and style of delivery which are uniquely and enthusiastically his own.

Another characteristic, often demonstrated before and after his sermons, further endears Elder Richards to the people-his availability, his personal touch, through which he shows his love, his warmth, and his sincerity. He readily admits that President David O. McKay was his exemplar in this. Years ago he attended the wedding reception of the President's daughter in her parents' home. As the then Presiding Bishop Richards and Ina came within speaking distance of the McKays, he said, "Well, President, I guess you'll be happy when this handshaking is over?" "Happy nothing," President McKay answered, "I'm having the time of my life!" Again in Gridley, California, when Bishop Richards accompanied President McKay to dedicate a ward and stake center, the leaders there, thinking to spare the President, tried to hold back the crowds who pressed to reach him. "Let the people come," the President said, and he stood and shook hands until all who desired to had had the opportunity. He was a man for the people and he taught Bishop Richards a great lesson, the importance of which he has never forgotten.

With First Presidency and other General Authorities after close of general conference session.

Elder Richards often says, "Long after they've forgotten what we say, the people will remember that a General Authority shook hands with them." To illustrate, he tells this story: "I dedicated a chapel in Lethbridge, Canada, and ten years later a man met me here in Salt Lake and said, 'Elder Richards, don't you remember me? Just as you left that building [in Lethbridge], we shook hands together.'"

It is not only adults who remember, but children as well. A woman wrote to him in 1975:

When I was about seven or eight years old, I attended a stake conference with my parents in Panguitch, Utah. Elder LeGrand Richards was the visiting Authority, and he told story after story of faith-promoting experiences. I listened with such intent that I felt he was talking directly to me. When conference was over, Elder Richards came down into the audience and shook hands with all who remained, including everyone on the row where I was sitting, except that he passed me by, as I was short and sandwiched in between my parents. I was so hurt to think the warmth and love I felt in his message wasn't meant for children. As these thoughts went through my mind, Elder Richards paused and came back to me. He took my hand, kissed it, and said, "We musn't forget a little lady." I don't remember any of his talk now, but I do remember the conviction I felt at the time that he was an Apostle of the Lord. (Letter, LeGrand Richards office files.)

In yet a different way his handshake conveys his warmth and sincerity in putting forth his own missionary effort. Elder Bruce R. McConkie tells a story that to him was "the most dramatic illustration of missionary zeal and what we ought to do" of anything he had ever witnessed:

I was seated on the rear of a plane in Denver. I had come in from the Texas area, had gotten on and seated myself at the rear. We had a few minutes before take-off and Brother LeGrand Richards got on. He'd come in from some other area. He started at the front and walked the full length of the plane shaking hands with everyone aboard-people he'd never seen before-and he asked each one if he was a Mormon. He came clear down to me at the back of the plane, greeted me, and shook my hand. He then turned around and walked up to his seat in the front, raised his hand in typical fashion, and said, "There are seventeen of us on board tonight. Isn't it wonderful to belong to the Church?" and sat down. The plane was full of non-Mormons, some had never heard of the Mormons, but that is exactly what he did. I got up and went to sit by him, thinking to myself, "That would never have occurred to me to do," yet all over the plane people smiled, laughed, were pleased. He hadn't offended. He hadn't hurt anyone's feelings and he'd left a good impression and feeling for the Church.

Another thing that has endeared Elder Richards to the people and has given memorable guidance and inspiration to countless couples entering the temple, often for their first visits there, has been the thousands of marriages he has performed. Elder Thomas S. Monson remembers that before the underground tunnel connecting the Church parking lot with the temple entrance was constructed, "Elder Richards would walk out of the front door of the Church Administration Building on many a snowy day, and with his cane, make his way west on South Temple, then north on Main Street to the little east gate, so that he might not disappoint some couple waiting expectantly for him to marry them. He never thought of the inconvenience to which he was put, only of his responsibility to respond to the commitment that he had made to perform that service." In recent years the Brethren have discouraged people from asking the General Authorities to perform marriages, because of their immense work loads and in many cases their advanced years, yet Elder Richards still finds a way to do it for family members, children and grandchildren of his missionaries, Dutch friends, and other acquaintances of a lifetime.

In 1969 Elder Richards was given a generous gift by two friends-a trip to Israel. This was the realization of a lifelong dream. He went in company with Daniel H. Ludlow, who thoughtfully kept a daily diary of the trip and presented it to Elder Richards as a memento of their experience. It shows the days packed with sights and sounds as they traveled the ancient paths back into sacred history. Unfortunately the trip was cut short, for while he was gone Elder Richards's son-in-law died, and he returned home to help comfort his daughter Mercedes and to attend Grant Iverson's funeral. The December 1970 Instructor (center insert) carries an article by LeGrand Richards titled, "In the Land of the Nativity." In it he expressed his feelings about the many places associated with the birth, ministry, trial, and crucifixion of the Lord Jesus Christ. "As we toured the country," he wrote, "in my mind I tried to follow him and imagine I was present with him in many of the important experiences of his life."

As interesting as Elder Richards felt the Holy Land was, the two things that stood out most forcibly were his meeting with some of the Jewish people and the burning desire he had to tell them of the relationship of Judah to Israel and of future events which would eventually see them walking together as children of our Heavenly Father. He had little opportunity to share that message in Israel. At home, however, he did so whenever Jewish visitors were referred to his office. He still does. He welcomes them with a hearty handshake and his twinkling smile, discusses with them matters pertaining to the developing land of Israel, and then invariably challenges them with the question, "What would you say if I were to tell you that you are not an Israelite?"

"What do you mean, Mr. Richards?" they quickly respond.

"Well, where does the name Israel come from?"

Then they must admit that it was the name the unidentified visitor gave to Jacob when he wrestled with him.

"And how many sons did Jacob have?" he continues.

"Twelve," is the ready answer.

Then he reminds his visitor that after a few generations the twelve tribes were divided into two kingdoms-that of Judah and

that of Israel. "To which do you belong?" he boldly asks.

"Judah," they say.

"Well, I belong to the kingdom of Israel."

Throughout the interview, Elder Richards has kept the lead and is satisfied. He can now tell the story of Joseph who, through his sons Ephraim and Manasseh, and because of Reuben's transgression, received a double portion. He can point out the prophecies concerning the land of Joseph (America) and their fulfillment, and he can explain about the stick of Judah (the Bible) and the stick of Joseph (the Book of Mormon).

Brother Richards then expresses his gratitude for the stick of Judah which, initially, their people preserved for us, and says that we are now ready to return the compliment and present them with the stick of Joseph. He challenges his visitor to hasten the day when "Judah shall walk with the house of Israel" (Jeremiah 3:18), by investigating and by reading the Book of Mormon. He also offers a copy of his Israel, Do You Know? with an invitation to criticize anything in the book with which the visitor does not agree.

So challenged and instructed, one government official from Israel indicated that if Mr. Richards would come to his land, he would invite all his friends into his home and give the entire evening for his visitor to tell the things he had heard that day. Another man-a doctor from Israel-was brought to see Elder Richards by a couple from California who after their visit wrote:

Gratefully we acknowledge the wonderful half-hour we spent in your presence with our guest Dr. ----- of Israel. He expressed great respect and admiration for you and the things he listened to. The twinkle in your eye caught his fancy and won his heart. Several times during the day, he remarked that nothing he had seen in America impressed him half so much as the things he saw and heard that one day in Salt Lake City. (Excerpted from "My Experiences with Visitors from Israel," by LeGrand Richards [xerox pp. 1-8], office copy.)

Another Jewish visitor who found his way to Elder Richards was a young convert to the Church from New York, who had been rejected (buried) by his family because of his conversion. Upon hearing his story, Elder Richards offered to be family to him. The young man was in Salt Lake to receive his training before entering the mission field, so for the duration of his mission Elder Richards wrote to him, encouraged him to hold fast to the faith and keep up his good work, for, he said, "The more you give away, the more you have left to give." Then in a postscript, he told of baptisms among Jewish brethren-a prominent rabbi in Tempe, Arizona, and "a bright, intelligent man in California," adding, "so you see, we are getting a foothold with our Jewish friends." On the other hand, the missionary wrote of his struggles, disappointments, and successes, and often signed his letters, "Your Utah missionary, the roaring, testifying lion of Judah." (Letters, August 21 and 29, 1975, office files.)

By the time these letters were written, Elder Richards had seen the reward of his patient waiting and quiet efforts as he looked for the work with the Jewish people to go forward again. It came about early in the administration of President Spencer W. Kimball.

Within a four-year period, the Church saw three changes in its First Presidency. President McKay died January 18, 1970. His successor, Joseph Fielding Smith, served from January 23, 1970, until his death on July 2, 1972. He was followed by Harold B. Lee, who became President on July 7, 1972, and served for only a year and a half before he died suddenly December 26, 1973. On December 30, 1973, Spencer W. Kimball became the twelfth President of the Church.

Elder Richards had known President Kimball for many years, and later he told of their early association:

I visited him in Arizona when he was stake president and I was Presiding Bishop. I said to him one evening after our meetings, "Spencer, I don't know what the Brethren have in store for you, but I expect to see them move you up." It wasn't long before he was called into the Quorum of the Twelve. He hasn't forgotten that and I haven't. I've loved him ever since. He's about as Christlike a man as I've ever known. He's like my Daddy." (Ninetieth Birthday [tape transcript], February 6, 1976.)

President Kimball indeed remembered the incident. He spoke in the October 1979 general conference of the time when he and Bishop Richards went down to Miami, Arizona, and after their meetings talked most of the evening. "I don't know whether he [Elder Richards] will remember that or not," he said, "but it was very impressive to me." (From "Give Me This Mountain," Ensign, November 1979, p. 76.)

Of Spencer W. Kimball's Presidency, Elder Richards says: "I'm one who believes that the fundamentals of the Church will never change; but we will learn how to do our work finer and better than it's ever been done before. President Kimball has done so many new things. You can't hold him down. He's an original."

One of the things he did not long after he became President was to call Elder Richards to his office and ask him to review what had been done to carry the gospel to the Jewish people. Brother Richards experienced a great thrill as he told of his sincere earlier efforts. "He took my book, Israel, Do You Know? so he could reread and discuss it. I told him a little about the different cities where we'd set up the work and what had been said to me when I had asked what program we were going to have for teaching the Jewish people, but was told to discontinue it. President Kimball was interested and wanted the work to go forward, so I gave him all the information I had."

The President was very attentive and thanked him for his report. Then, with typical energy and directness, he reactivated the program. It was April 3, 1975, when President Kimball spoke at the Regional Representatives Seminar, saying, "We are neither Greek nor Italian, nor Mexican, nor Jew. We are all Latter-day Saints-brethren and sisters-just fellowmen with the same overpowering responsibility." He then told of his long-time concern for the Jews and said that he "hadn't quite understood why the work had been discontinued." He continued:

This does not mean a proposed mission to Jerusalem. it means that we go to New York, Philadelphia, Chicago, and the other cities and spread the gospel to the Jews as we do to the Lamanites, as we do to the Gentiles, and give them an opportunity to hear the gospel... and that day, I think, cannot come until we, the witnesses of Jesus Christ, get busy and present the message to them.

I remember a period of time when some special effort was given by Elder LeGrand Richards and others of his associates to the convincing of the Jews that Jesus is the Christ. I believe some progress was made, but the work was discontinued. I quote from Elder Richards: "When all the facts are known and fully understood, the descendants of Judah will realize that Joseph fed his father, Jacob, and his eleven brothers and their families from the granaries of Egypt during the period of famine that saved their lives. That gift is not to be compared with what the descendants of Joseph have to offer the descendants of Judah at this time." [LeGrand Richards, Tract, "The Mormons and the Jewish People," p. 6.] (Report of Regional Representatives Seminar Proceedings, pp. 5, 21-22.)

On November 20 of the same year a Jewish Mission Task Committee (JMTC) was organized by the Missionary Committee of the Church. Jewish converts Philip A. Rennert, Rod Zeidner, and Harry L. Glick were called to make a thorough study of all pertinent source materials, the first of which was Elder Richards's Israel, Do You Know? They then conducted an extensive survey by means of a questionnaire to be used with Jewish converts and Jewish nonmembers. From these interviews they developed a status report, a summation of mission plans for Jewish people, and the resulting training material for missionaries and mission presidents, investigator discussions, and related flip-charts. These they reported to President Kimball in May 1976.

Another report went to the President on July 12 expressing the feelings of the JMTC members. "Since the day of our assignment," it read, "we have been impressed with the urgency of the Lord's missionary program to his people. With his continued help it will be completely operational in a very short while." Soon after that, the work commenced in cities containing major Jewish populations.

Aside from missionary effort, from which he is never far removed, some other areas in which Elder Richards functions as a member of the Council of the Twelve are those of special administrative assignments (for example, he has served as Director of Mid-American, U.S.A., Missions); various boards (with his associates in the Quorum, he has served on the Board of Trustees of Brigham Young University); and committee work.

Committee work done by the General Authorities is "routine" in the sense that it follows a regular meeting schedule for review, study, and deliberation, and deals with ongoing matters of Church administration, but the results of such work affect the whole Church. One area of Elder Richards's jurisdiction is that of boundary changes-the dividing of wards and branches and the creation of new stakes of Zion Churchwide-over which committee he serves as chairman. He is also chairman of the committee to approve changes of counselors in stake presidencies, bishops of wards, and all temple workers worldwide.

Because of his vast and lengthy Church experience, Elder LeGrand Richards brings to the committees on which he serves a wisdom, a spirituality, and a practical direction which is invaluable to the total Church as touching the matters within the committees' concerns. On each of these committees, two or three other General Authorities have variously served with him. One of them, Elder Bruce R. McConkie, gives valuable insights into the nature and character of his chairman as he observes him in council:

When Elder Richards has a meeting, he thinks the prayer should appertain to the business that is coming before the committee. We all know what is expected of us in that situation. His full attention is given to us, and invariably, after the prayer is over, he will make some comment on it, showing that he was centering his interest upon what was being said. In fact, in all matters that come before the committee he is attentive. As the secretary sits and reads the material under consideration, sometimes for an hour or more, you must center your faculties or you'd be off in the "ethereal blue," but Brother Richards is very attentive. He'll catch every point. He does not let anything get by him. He is always in command.

He does not repeat himself. He doesn't, in conversation, say something and then, not realizing he's said it, say it again, which is a characteristic of age. He is simply not subject to that.

He doesn't waver. He speaks his mind freely. He is conservative in the financial sense of the word. He is courageous; he is unhesitant; he is admirable.

Important to Elder Richards is the efficient work done by his personal secretary, Margaret Bury, who is also secretary to the Boundary Change Committee. She has been with Elder Richards for seventeen years and affirms that in no word or action has he ever disappointed her. Having had secretarial training himself, he knows what her job involves and he is quick to praise work well done. He has the ability to make those around him feel relaxed and comfortable while doing their work, to feel a sense of personal worth, and to have freedom to use their initiative. She feels herself to be a happy, contributing part in the complexities of his busy office-an office in which important matters are resolved and one through which many people and letters pass.

For his part, he appreciates her pleasant telephone manner, her loyalty and good judgment, her quiet efficiency, and her cheerful disposition. It would, in fact, be difficult to imagine anyone working with him daily who is gloomy or negative. For himself, he says, "I try to see the bright side of life instead of the dark. Like the girl sings in the musical South Pacific, 'I'm only a cock-eyed optimist.'" ("Elder Richards Notes Eighty Years," Church News, February 5, 1966, p. 3.)

Further illustrating his bent for optimism is a story he told while still serving as Presiding Bishop:

A young lady phoned me for an appointment, and when she came to the office she sat there and cried for a little while, and then she said, "I guess I'm jittery."

"Well," I said, "that's all right." Then when she had composed herself, she said, "Bishop, what is there for the young people today? We have war. They are taking all the boys; it looks like another great war is ahead of us. What do we young people have to live for?"

I looked at her for a few minutes and said, "Have you ever thought of the other side of the story?"

She said, "What side?"

"Well," I said, "you remember the story of the two buckets that went down in the well; as the one came up, it said, 'This is surely a cold and dreary world. No matter how many times I come up full, I always have to go down empty.' Then the other bucket laughed and said, 'With me it is different. No matter how many times I go down empty, I always come up full.'"

I said, "Have you ever stopped to realize that of the millions of our Father's children, you are one of the most favored? You are privileged to live in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times that the prophets of old have looked forward to, when there is more revealed truth upon the earth than there had ever been in any other dispensation of the world's history, and where we enjoy blessings and comforts of life that kings did not enjoy a few years ago. Have you ever stopped to think of that side of the story?" And before she left, she decided that probably it wasn't as cold and dreary a world after all as it might be.

I said, "You just go on, and live right, and don't lose your courage, and don't think that life isn't worth while and isn't worth living. Whether you are permitted to live a long life or a short one isn't going to be the thing that is going to determine your success or failure; it's how you live...." (Conference Report, April 1951, pp. 39-40.)

In the lesson he taught this young woman, Elder Richards was only reflecting his own life and experience, for he has lived to merit unexpected, unsought, and sometimes overwhelming blessings, honors, and awards. Although he is never certain that he deserves them, he feels joy and gratitude because of them.

Presidents Spencer W. Kimball and N. Eldon Tanner with Elder Richards at Brigham Young University on occasion of his receiving honorary doctorate.

As examples, for his efforts with the youth, particularly in connection with the Aaronic Priesthood as it related to Scouting, he was awarded the Silver Antelope by the National Council of the Boy Scouts of America at Pasadena, California. (Church News, November 15, 1958, p. 3.) In 1964 he received the Silver Beaver for "distinguished service to boyhood," this at the hands of President N. Eldon Tanner, himself a former high official in Canada's Scouting program. (Church News, February 15, 1964, p. 3.)

Because as a young man he had longed for a more extensive education, the recognition by three universities meant a lot to him. On June 6, 1964, he was awarded an Honorary Doctor of Humanities degree from Utah State University where he so successfully served as Chairman of the Board of Trustees; Brigham Young University awarded him an Honorary Doctor of Christian Service degree on April 17, 1974; and on June 2, 1977, the College of Southern Utah at Cedar City awarded him an Honorary Doctor of Letters degree.

In spite of his high position, recognitions, and honors, Elder Richards continued to retain his down-to-earth, human approach. At the suggestion of his son LaMont, he purchased a lovely home at 1291 Wasatch Drive in October of 1960. It was a pretty white rambler with grey-blue shutters and a fenced-in backyard where the grandchildren could play while the grown-ups visited. Always "a farmer at heart," Elder Richards enjoyed working in the soil. His daughter Mercedes retains a vivid picture of her father "down on one knee planting tulip bulbs."

Whether it was a "borrowed Dutch know-how" or a "green-thumb" carry-over from boyhood is not certain, but neighbors say that his tulips stood straighter and showier than theirs and bursting with such vitality that no one could match them. Someone accused him of "praying over them." One neighbor tells that when he was a campus bishop a student ward member came to his door for home teaching. He rang the front door bell excitedly, saying when it was opened, "Bishop, do you know what I just saw?"

The bishop couldn't imagine.

"Well, Elder LeGrand Richards is over there kneeling by that tulip patch," the student said incredulously.

"Of course," his bishop answered matter-of-factly. "Why don't you go over and visit with him. He'd love it."

The young man did so, and his former bishop says that even now that he serves as a stake president he has never forgotten the impact of his visit.

When they were in their eighties, it became more difficult for LeGrand and Ina to care for garden and home. The time came when, for his safety's sake but nevertheless to his chagrin, President Benson forbade Elder Richards to drive his car any longer (he still chafes over that, saying when people must drive him, "They've made a beggar of me"). Finally he sold the Wasatch Drive home and moved into the Bonneville Towers Apartment on South Temple. There his daughter Mercedes lived, and as Ina's health worsened she was near at hand to give loving assistance to her mother when Brother Richards was away.

President and Sister Benson also lived there, and as neighbors they observed Elder Richards's devotion to his wife. Elder Benson also remembers that his friend would come in from a conference saying to Ina, "Aren't the Saints wonderful?" and she would answer good-naturedly, "Indeed they are, and they surely spoil you."

To the Richardses, their family has always been of the utmost importance, and out of love for them (as well as in obedience to the prophet, Spencer W. Kimball, who charged each Church member to write his personal history), Elder Richards wrote a biographical sketch of his life, including special letters, important family data, and his testimony, then placed them in a genealogical binder. This is the Blue Book referenced in this book. He did the typing himself and he has each year added a page of highlights to update the story. He began the account with his large and distinctive signature and the statement: "There should be a desire in the heart of every man, however humble, to leave some vestige, as he passes, to attest to future time the fact that he has been on earth and acted something there." (Author not identified.)

He wrote his testimony (shown on preceding page) in long-hand, its carefully formed letters showing no trace of shaky unevenness. This still characterizes his penmanship at ninety-six.
