Lucile C. Tate, LeGrand Richards: Beloved Apostle ( 1982)

17

Apostle: Past Ninety 1976-

Few leaders in this century have preached the gospel with the fervor and far-reaching effects of this apostle of the people.... At ninety, he continues to sparkle like a mountain spring with wit and wisdom and hard work in building the kingdom of God around the globe." Elder Thomas S. Monson said this to a large assembly of General Authorities and the members of LeGrand Richards's immediate family who were gathered to honor him on his ninetieth birthday, February 6, 1976.

Following that introduction by the chairman, Elder Ezra Taft Benson, President of the Council of the Twelve, addressed the group. In part he said: "Sitting beside me is one of the noble and great ones shown to Father Abraham. There is no better example of our religion in action than that of our faithful and honored guest-Elder, Bishop, President, Brother LeGrand Richards.... We love you and honor you, and hand you this little volume of the scriptures [signed by all of the Brethren]. I imagine that you have worn out one or two copies."

Accepting the gift, Elder Richards asked, "Who have you been talking about, Ezra?" Then turning to family and associates he said, "I don't deserve this, but it's very nice and I appreciate it. I love my family with all my heart. I love the Lord in like manner and the privilege of bearing his name honorably throughout the world in this calling. I love you Brethren-and I love the women as much as the Lord permits." He touched Ina's shoulder' and smiled. He closed with the words: "No matter what happens, I can only expect a short time to tarry with you. The words of Moroni as he closed his writings express my feelings at this time." He then quoted from them: "And now I bid [you] all, farewell. I soon go to rest in the paradise of God." (Moroni 10:34.)

President N. Eldon Tanner responded by telling of his question to Brother Richards when he entered the door on that occasion, "Have you lived all your life in the United States?" and of LeGrand's answer, "Not yet!" which seemed to refute his sober, Moroni-like farewell of a few moments before.

President Tanner then told of once asking Elder Richards which book he liked best beyond the scriptures, and of the ready answer: "Life of the Prophet Joseph Smith by George Q. Cannon, which I read as a boy. It made me wish that I could have lived in his day and helped him through all the hardships and trials that he had to endure." "I think," said President Tanner, "that he's done that with every President of the Church under whom he's served, and with every associate he's had. He's tried to help them carry their responsibilities in addition to his own and to make their loads lighter."

All the guests stood to honor Ina Ashton Richards, small and frail beside her husband, and she thanked "whoever thoughtfully gave the lovely corsage" she was wearing. The birthday event came to a close with Elder S. Dilworth Young's words of benediction for LeGrand and Ina: "Be kind to them in their remaining years, enlarge them, keep them. May we have them with us as long as they would care to stay." The Brethren, including Elder Richards, then left for their respective offices to pick up their important work where they had left it.

Always the missionary and anxious to share the gospel with an ever-widening number of people, Elder Richards had recently sent to all ministers in the Salt Lake area the following letter:

Dear Reverend_______:

Under separate cover I am taking the liberty of sending you a copy of the book I have written called A Marvelous Work and a Wonder. Since you are living here at the headquarters of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, it would please me very much if you would take time to read this book carefully....

This will enable you to give correct answers to inquirers that come to you from time to time regarding our Church....

Nintey years young.

Elder and Sister Richards study the scriptures.

In the same spirit of friendliness, he had many opportunities to talk with and share his book with churchmen as they visited in his office. One of these invited him to speak to his congregation for their Lent service on the subject of "My philosophy of life." This gave him much pleasure, as did the fact that so many of his audience came up to shake his hand afterwards. Part of his effectiveness, of course, was his unusual command of the scriptures which he loves deeply, having studied, taught, and lived them for nearly a century. In spite of impaired vision he remains an ardent student, reviewing all of the standard works each year.

That same April, at general conference, he spoke to his own people about the value of the scriptures:

If we didn't have the holy scripture, what would we know about our Father in heaven and his great love that gave us his Only Begotten Son? What would we know about his Son and his great atoning sacrifice, and the gospel that he has given us, the pattern of life to live by, and the answers to where we came from, why we are here, and where we are going? Without a knowledge of these things, we would be like a ship upon the ocean without a rudder or sail, or anything to guide it. We might keep afloat, but we would never come into port. (Conference Report, April 1976, p. 12.)

On May 4 that year, Elder Richards received the first of a new fifty-thousand-copy reprint of A Marvelous Work and a Wonder, always a thrill as he contemplated the missionary thrust this represented. He also found satisfaction as he was able to touch an ever-increasing number of young missionaries through regular speaking assignments to the Missionary Training Center on BYU campus, and more recently by means of direct telephone hookups to mission conferences in the field. For the latter he preaches to gatherings of missionaries and their presidents while sitting at his office desk. In response to one of these sessions, President Donald B. Jessee of the Oregon Portland Mission wrote: "The highlight of these conferences was your enthusiastic message.... The reception was excellent and all in attendance could hear as if you were standing at the pulpit.... This work will accelerate because of your words." (Letter, February 26, 1981.)

On July 1, 1976, Elder Richards entered the hospital and Dr. Russell Nelson operated on his ulcerated foot "to make sure the blood was reaching it," so he spent his country's great Bicentennial Birthday sitting at home with his "foot on a stool." A bit dejectedly he reported that he "didn't get back to the office until the fourth of August." (Blue Book, p. 9.)

That December he contributed a generous sum to be used for the establishment of a park honoring Orson Hyde upon the Mount of Olives in Jerusalem, as willing a gift as he ever made in his life. By this time the preliminary negotiations going forward in Jerusalem between Elder Howard W. Hunter and the Jerusalem Foundation (of which Jerusalem Mayor Teddy Kollek was president) were bearing fruit. The foundation is a charitable organization, one of whose functions is the beautification of the ancient city. It was the dream of the mayor and his group to develop a greenbelt around the city as a national park. Through initial contacts with Church leaders, President Harold B. Lee and Elder Ezra Taft Benson, and more recently with President N. Eldon Tanner and Howard W. Hunter, the Church had developed a good rapport with Jerusalem leaders and had become a likely candidate for "one of the largest and most prestigious sites on the Mount of Olives." It so happened, however, that this site was part of a larger parcel of land owned by an Italian corporation-the Institut Luigi Gedda, headed by a doctor in Rome-upon which that corporation planned to build a genetics institute. Through various talks and negotiations, an agreement was reached that the Institut would grant to the Municipality of Jerusalem a nine-hundred-and-ninety-nine-year lease for the five-and-a-quarter-acre site in exchange for other property considerations, and the Orson Hyde Foundation, a corporation organized for that purpose, was given the opportunity to develop the Mount of Olives site in return for a million dollars. The money would be used for grading, paths, walks, planting, water, amphitheater, etc. The Orson Hyde Foundation's contract was not with the city of Jerusalem but with the Jerusalem Foundation, with Mayor Teddy Kollek as its president and spokesman. Upon completion of the garden, the Municipality of Jerusalem would assume the responsibility for the park's perpetual maintenance and care. These arrangements agreed, only the task of raising the million dollars remained.

All of these developments Elder Richards followed with keen interest, but it looked as if he might not live to see the fulfillment of the project. On February 4, 1977, he became very ill and was taken to the LDS Hospital. His son-in-law Harold R. Boyer administered to him, and the family wondered whether this was to be his last illness. On his ninety-first birthday, February 6, he received visits from "all members of the Quorum of the Twelve except one who was out of town on assignment," the "highlight" of his total hospital stay. (Blue Book, 1977 Summary.)

In spite of his serious illness, and in his absence, he was elected president of the Orson Hyde Foundation. He wrote that on March 1, 1977, "through President Tanner, Elder Hunter, and the Hyde family, I was elected president with the responsibility of raising a million dollars. I am pleased with this assignment and am enjoying it very much." (Blue Book, 1977 Summary.)

He worked hard to accomplish the goal. On September 7, 1977, he met with the officers of the foundation and outlined a campaign for collecting the funds. A beautiful booklet was prepared which included colored photos of the grounds for the proposed park, a map of it in relation to the city of Jerusalem, and architectural renderings of the projected memorial. a picture of Orson Hyde and his October 1841 dedicatory prayer offered on the Mount of Olives were included, as was a picture of Elder Richards and his brief letter of invitation to "good people everywhere [to] join us and share the joy of doing something positive to beautify the Mount of Olives."

Money in large and small amounts began to come in, along with pre-prepared contribution cards which served as a record of donor names. These names would eventually be inscribed on a scroll, protected by a time capsule container, and placed in the stone wall of the grotto within the park. Elder Richards commented, "It is wonderful to see how our friends are responding to our invitation to join us in this venture." In October the Church News (October 29, 1977) printed a special issue on Jerusalem and the park and made a general invitation to Church members who would like to participate in the fund-raising for the project.

That same October, Elder Richards had delivered a stirring general conference address and had given the devotional talk to an estimated fifteen thousand BYU students assembled at the Marriott Center to hear him. His days were crowded and his calendar full, and in between meetings, assignments, and committee work a steady flow of people came to his office or wrote for counsel and encouragement. Both were given in his typical commonsense, optimistic approach. To a child, he said, "Sustain and respect your father in his position. Give him love, understanding, and some appreciation for his efforts." A granddaughter was told:

Just keep living in the clouds. You remember that little song in South Pacific, "If you don't have a dream, how're you going to have a dream come true?" Dream of the wonderful things that you want to accomplish in life and the kind of people you want to be associated with forever, and then keep yourself sweet and clean so that when you are married in one of our Heavenly Father's holy temples, there will be no skeletons in the closet that you will have to worry about. (LeGrand Richards files.)

To the woman whose husband had been accidently killed, leaving her with three small children, he wrote, "Don't try to live your whole future at once. Take it one day at a time and the Lord will bless and sustain you." To another who was worried about evil spirits, he wrote:

I don't think you should hesitate to go to the temple. I think you ought to try and live a normal life and quit worrying about your condition and about evil spirits.... Worry is one of the devil's best tools, and I think the fact that you are worrying about evil spirits opens the door for them to annoy you. Just don't think of such things. Think natural thoughts and happy thoughts. Sing happy songs to yourself and quote happy poetry to yourself, and don't think negative thoughts. (LeGrand Richards files.)

To single women longing for a husband and children, he said:

If you do not have opportunity to marry a good man in this life, the Lord has made ample provision for you during his thousand year Millennial reign, when the righteous dead will be called forth on the morning of the first resurrection. There will be millions of good men who have died without marriage, including multitudes of war casualties, or like my own wonderful son LeGrand, who died as a result of an accident. We will all be young again and there will be thousands of temples (as the prophets have said) where marriages for eternity will be performed. The Lord has told us "His purposes fail not, neither are there any who can stay his hand. From eternity to eternity he is the same, and his years never fail." (D&C 76:3-4.) So he will not provide these blessings for some and withhold them from others. Now, if you live for it and work for it, you will have opportunity to marry one of the Lord's choice sons, and don't you forget it.

To the newest apostle, feeling the weight of his call, he said, "Don't worry too much about things you can't change. Focus on what you've got to do that you can do something about, because the kingdom is complex and you can't always fix what you might want to fix. Remember, it's the Lord's Church. Let him worry about it! He is able to take care of things even though you might not be able to."

While Elder Richards's life continued to be full, rich, and vast in area and influence, his wife's sphere of activity diminished. Ina's health was failing. She had sustained through spinal deterioration the crushing of three vertebrae, about which she cheerfully and incongruously said, "Wasn't I lucky not to have broken them?" The pain often kept her in bed. A granddaughter, who came most mornings to help, would arrive in time to find Elder Richards dressed for the office and reading the scriptures as he waited for his ride. (Ina always wanted to be wakened for his good-bye if she'd been sleeping.) She treasures the experience she had with her grandmother, noting her patience; her femininity, as she always "kept a white handkerchief in her hand"; her courtesy and concern for anyone caring for her; and her optimistic, "I am getting better, aren't I?" As her son Alden often said, "She is a little bundle of sweetness." And her life revolved around LeGrand. His homecomings were the highlight of her day, his presence her strength and her comfort. In the early afternoon she would call his office for a brief chat and to inquire when he expected to be home. The waiting was long.

One time when she was especially ill and her daughter Nona sat with her, she turned her face to the wall and was very still. It appeared that she would die. Nona phoned her father and he came home. As Nona stepped back to leave a chair free for him, he sat close to Ina, took her hand, and pleaded with her, "You can't leave me. I need you. I've told the Lord I can't live without you." His strength then literally flowed into her and she rallied. They clung to each other and expressed their love in such tender terms that Nona bowed her head and left the room. Later she said, "I saw such pure love, I felt that I was in the hallowed halls of heaven and that if I raised my eyes I would see the angels."

Shortly before Sister Richards passed away-still sweethearts.

Although still very weak, Ina occasionally improved a little. On December 19, 1977, she and Elder Richards attended their family Christmas party, held in the cultural hall of Nona's ward, their family having far outgrown any home. (These yearly Christmas parties are among the grandchildren's fondest memories.) On December 29, LeGrand and Ina hosted a Christmas dinner at the Lion House for his brothers and sisters and their companions. There were twenty-three present.

The next day at about 8:00 A.M. Ina fell and broke her hip while attempting to help her husband in the kitchen. She was taken to the LDS Hospital and x-rayed. Upon hearing of the imminent operation necessary, she said, "I'm just glad that it's me and not Daddy." When he had seen that her medical needs were attended to, Elder Richards went to his office to take care of his responsibilities, then returned to see Ina safely out of the anesthetic in the evening. The next day he worked a full schedule. About 5:00 P.M., before he could reach her, Ina passed away. Her daughters Marian and Mercedes were with her. Alden had just left to get his father. Marian said at the time:

If women could have the spirit of service to others that Mother had, not extolling their own virtues or wishing to compete, they would find joy in their roles. She was perfectly willing to be Father's companion and his support and to do anything she could to help him. One of the last things we heard her say was, "I never stood in Daddy's way, did I?" She lived and died true to her partnership agreement.

Norinne came from California for the funeral, carrying with her a white hyacinth-a favorite flower of her mother's. President Marion G. Romney spoke feelingly of her kindness and her great qualities. Ina's son LaMont enumerated the rich dividends her faithfulness had paid to them all. In his private farewell to Ina, Elder Richards was heard by one of his sisters to say, "Good-bye, Mommy, I'll be seeing you in a few days." Whether days, months, or years, it would be but a brief moment of the eternity in which they lived. To his children, he said, "I'm grateful I'll have her forever. She is as good as any of the angels she will meet on the other side, so she'll be able to feel at home with them."

The days of the new year, 1978, were filled with assignments and responsibilities, and as he traveled, his mind often turned to Ina. He knew she was there waiting for him, but he had a question. He expressed it to Elder M. Russell Ballard as they flew to Atlanta, Georgia, for a conference. "I'm not afraid of dying," he said. "The only thing that worries me is, will I be able to find Mommy when I get over there?"

Brother Ballard says he knew Brother Richards had asked that question of other associates, who had reassured him he'd find her with no difficulty, but his own answer-"Brother Richards, in your case that might be difficult"-really got his attention. He sat right up and said, "What do you mean?"

Elder Ballard replied, "Well, with all of the thousands of people that you've converted to the Church through your personal ministry, plus those your book A Marvelous Work and a Wonder has converted, you'll probably have a hard time finding "Mommy" in the crowd that will be there to greet you."

"Now, you don't mean that," Elder Richards responded in his modest way.

It was while at the same Atlanta conference that Brother Ballard made some observations of Elder Richards which he later recalled in an interview:

His spiritual insight is unequaled. He let me and the Regional Representative participate heavily in the interviewing, but he was very, very attuned to everything that was happening spiritually. When the moment came to make the decision [on who to call as stake president], there was no question. He and the Lord had already chosen. He is a great spiritual motivator. He just has that gift.

It is this attunement-the light within, the steady affirmation that the veil is thin and the Lord is near-that is the dearest of all the gifts Elder Richards possesses. He has lived for it. He treasures it. In his great sermon, "The Gift of the Holy Ghost" (Ensign, November 1979), he said: "To me, the gift of the Holy Ghost is as important to man as sunshine and water are to the plants. You take them away, and the plants would die. You take the Holy Ghost out of the Church, and it would not be any different than any other Church." He continued with the promise given to the faithful priesthood bearer: "The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever." (D&C 121:46.) A granddaughter recalls hearing him say to a group of young people who visited him, "I would rather have my priesthood than all the money, marbles, or peanuts in the world."

Following Ina's passing, two manifestations were given to Elder Richards which indicate his ever-increasing attunement to the Spirit-even to the seeing of things not visible to the eyes of those who are closest to him. In the first, he felt Ina's influence in a matter which was of great importance to the family. For years the Ashton family had been trying to find a record of the father of Henry P. Lindsay, Ina's great-grandfather. He was from North Carolina, where the vital records were largely destroyed during the Civil War. Elder Richards's daughters had spent much time and effort trying to establish the name and record. Three of them-Nona, Marian, and Mercedes-had made a trip to North Carolina for that purpose, but without success.

When he was ill in the hospital, Brother Richards and Nona were watching television one day when a group of eight people appeared on the screen. One said, "We are going to the funeral of James Lindsay, father of Henry P. Lindsay," after which the picture disappeared. Elder Richards said, "Nona, please call Alden at KSL and have them rerun that picture so we can make a record." Nona had not seen the picture. Nor, apparently, had anyone except Elder Richards, for when Nona phoned Alden there was no picture to rerun. (Blue Book, p. 3.) On the strength of what Brother Richards had so plainly seen and heard, the temple work was done for this ancestor.

The second experience occurred in the Salt Lake Temple on May 4, 1978, at a meeting of the General Authorities. It is told in part by Elder Boyd K. Packer, upon whom it had a profound effect. Testimonies had been borne, Elder Richards first and then each taking his turn. Later, Brother Richards asked to speak. Elder Packer quotes him: "Brethren, I have something to tell you. A little while ago, I saw a man seated above the organ there and he looked just like that." (He gestured toward President Wilford Woodruff's portrait which hangs in the room.) He then added, "I saw him just as clearly as I see any of you Brethren."

Of the experience, Elder Richards said: "He was dressed in a white suit and was seated in an armchair. I thought at the time that the reason I was privileged to see him was probably that I was the only one there who had ever seen President Woodruff while he was upon the earth. I had heard him dedicate the Salt Lake Temple and I had heard him give his last sermon in the Salt Lake Tabernacle before he died. I thought it wonderful that the Lord could project, without mechanical means, the likeness of a man long since dead." As Elder Packer says of Brother Richards, "He links us back. Here is a man who rubbed shoulders with those who stood with the Prophet Joseph Smith."

In June of 1978 Elder Richards went into the hospital for a hernia operation. He had the operation on a Monday, recuperated Tuesday at the hospital, returned to his apartment Wednesday, and was back at his office on Thursday. "The operation was successful," he said. "I had no pain." Perhaps by this time he was becoming inured to pain. Elder Packer, one of those whom Elder Richards designates as his "guardian angel," facetiously asked him one day as he lent his arm to his associate and they walked to their meeting in the temple together, "Who is going to help you over when I die of old age?" They chuckled together, then Brother Packer, feeling the pressure of weight upon his arm, solicitously inquired, "Are you in constant pain?" "No more than I can stand," was the cheerful answer. "Which means," the younger apostle surmised, "that he is in pain all the time. He simply lives above it." In spite of pain or discomfort, Brother Richards exercises his leg and foot many times each night to keep it as limber and usable as he can.

On his ninety-third birthday, February 6, 1979, Elder Richards was asked to offer the opening prayer at the Utah House of Representatives, where his son LaMont was serving. On February 23, his father's birthday, he was taken to the hospital, where he remained in critical condition for nearly a month. In the March 2 temple meeting of the First Presidency and the Twelve, President Kimball asked if any of the Brethren had heard how Brother Richards was. One said that he had talked with the doctor that morning and had been informed that it was only a matter of hours. Elder Richards's obituary had been written. His daughter Mercedes and her husband, serving a mission in Malaysia, were notified. Some of the Brethren had canceled their conference assignments so they could attend the funeral. Then a remarkable thing happened which Elder Thomas S. Monson relates:

One of the most circumspect and quiet members of the Twelve, Elder Howard W. Hunter, asked to speak. Recognized, he said, "Brethren, LeGrand Richards is going to be back. He is not going to die at this time. He is going to be out of the hospital and functioning effectively." He then turned to the empty chair next to him, normally occupied by Elder Richards, and said, "And he is going to be sitting right here in this chair participating in the discussions of this council!" It was as prophetic a statement as I've ever heard in my life.

At the hospital, however, there was no indication that the doctor's prognosis would not be correct or that the life forces would again flow back into the quiet figure that lay suffering and unconscious. His daughter Marian kept vigil in turn with the other family members and watched once as his forehead wrinkled as if an actual struggle of will were in process. Elders Packer and Maxwell had earlier entered the room to give Brother Richards a blessing and, when they had gone, she noted a few of the words Brother Packer has spoken. "Ina is close from the other side," he said. "If you still have work to do here, you can do it, and you can communicate with the Savior upon your desire."

Not long after that, a granddaughter and her husband were taking their turn watching at his side when they heard Brother Richards making strange, low sounds. Alarmed that her grandfather was dying, she was about to call for medical help, but her husband restrained her, saying, "Listen, he's singing." Bending near, they could make out the words: "Oh, bless me now, my Savior, I come to Thee."

On two occasions he tried to get up with all the hospital paraphernalia attached and was intensely disturbed that he was forcibly returned to his bed. The first occasion was at not being allowed to attend the funeral of President Marion G. Romney's wife; the second, that he was kept from joining his Brethren for the rededication of the Logan Temple.

Finally the day came when he roused up in bed, looked at the IV tube attached to his wrist, and said, "Who did this without my permission?" Marian, who sat by his bed, laughed with a sense of deep relief. It was the turning point. Although yet a very sick man, he would now begin to mend. LaMont tells of his father saying, "Get me out of this bed or I'll never get out again." LaMont got medical help to remove the attached tubes so he could get his father up for a brief time.

The patient was deeply appreciative of every family member who stayed with him or came to visit, as he was for the visits and blessings of the Brethren. He did all in his power to hasten the healing process for himself. He sat or stood when allowed and "practiced getting well." At every opportunity that presented itself, he preached the gospel. According to one family member who was visiting him, a fellow patient in hospital gown and green carpet slippers brought a nonmember Greek doctor to see him and stayed to listen while Elder Richards expounded the gospel plan to him (in a weaker voice than usual). He greeted a group of young people who wondered if they might look in on him, and he gave them both his smiles and his counsel.

Most days his secretary visited for an hour or two, keeping him informed of office business and the progress of the Orson Hyde Foundation fund-gathering, letting him know how greatly he was needed back at his work. Others encouraged him toward what then seemed an impossible goal-his actual attendance at the dedication of the Memorial Park in Jerusalem, now set for the coming October 24. Finally, on March 20, 1979, he went home with his daughter Nona and her husband, J. Glenn Dyer. Later he wrote: "Nona and Glenn are taking such good care of me, I will likely remain here the rest of my life." (Blue Book, recap for 1979, p. 1.) Until his illness he had lived alone in the apartment, missing his companion very much but glad he had outlived her, "because," said he, "I figured (having taken care of all our business affairs) I could get along better alone than she could without me." But it had been a lonely time, and he felt at home and grateful to Nona and Glenn.

At the April conference following Brother Richards's release from the hospital, President Spencer W. Kimball announced in the first session that all General Authorities except Elder Richards were present. A stir of disbelief went through the audience as they took in the situation. Elder Richards had come in and taken his place on the stand, sitting in full view of the congregation, a blanket over his knees, oxygen tube in his nose, and a broad though wan smile on his face. President Kimball turned, saw his beloved associate, and delightedly corrected his previous announcement.

The following week in the meeting of the Twelve, Elder Richards said, "I read in the minutes where you'd received word of my imminent demise, but I fooled you, didn't I?" That day his associates witnessed the literal fulfillment of Elder Hunter's prophetic utterance of the month before.

As Elder Richards meets weekly with the Council, its members observe him as a man unique among them. Elder Neal A. Maxwell, newest member of the Quorum, speaks of this uniqueness with the Latin phrase sui generis (forming a kind by itself). He then comments upon some of his unique qualities:

He has an innocence concerning the sins of the world and their many aberrations. They are difficulties to be dealt with, but are not part of the focus of his life. He is unspotted. His single-mindedness in serving the Lord is an emancipating thing, for it frees him in so many ways. He is uncluttered by any ego considerations.

Elder Richards has a disposition not to be too bound by precedent or handbook but to do what is most redemptive in the lives of people, trusting them and giving them a chance. His instincts are to do what makes the most sense and not fret and stew. He is a pragmatist in terms of problems being solved.

He will say what he wants to say-emphatically and boldly, but sweetly; he does not require a lot of "air time" in the councils of the Church in order to feel good. He can be in a meeting and feel it has been successful even though he didn't give a long speech

Elders Mark E. Petersen and Bruce R. McConkie visit with Elder Richards when, following his near-fatal 1979 illness, he puts in surprise attendance at general conference with blanket and oxygen supply.

in the middle of it. Because he doesn't comment excessively, people tend to listen more when he does.

(Elder Packer smiles as he comments upon the latter characteristic. "Brother Richards will say, 'Well, I've had my day, you "boys" can do the talking. I take my case to the people.'")

With the others, Elder Maxwell also recognizes the historic vantage point from which Elder Richards functions. "He has a sweep of history which no one else in the councils has." [^1] Elder McConkie further comments upon Brother Richards's wide experience and stabilizing influence: "He is an old 'war horse' who has been through it all and whose judgments have been good in the past and continue to be good in the present."

President Gordon B. Hinckley adds his view on the same subject:

His unswerving devotion to what I would call true principles, not only of the gospel but of Church government, has been, to me, a great thing. He has been an anchor, holding for consistency in doctrinal teaching and in the operation of the Church in its many programs. I think that has been a most significant thing that has come out of his long life of experience in the Church. He's seen it all from then until now. He's been an active participant for almost a century. That coupled with his reading of Church history and his capacity to remember what he reads (and his powers of retention are tremendous), has given him a background that very few men have. No one among the General Authorities has lived as long as he nor been exposed to the breadth of experiences that he has.

Elder Packer picks up the same theme on a slightly different note. He refers to the venerable Brother Richards who, "when we approach and wrestle with a problem, has seen some version of it three or four times before. It will have been enacted on a different stage and the actors have been changed, but the script is the same as far as the problem is concerned. When you have been through it in 1918, 1937, and 1969, you just aren't afraid of it. You have both perspective and perception to see what is right and the absolute courage to do what is right."

President Hinckley pinpoints another area in which Elder Richards has performed a unique service:

His great concern for those who were born elsewhere and came here as immigrants and didn't speak the English language nor understand it with ease has been a major contribution. He has worked and talked with persuasion to his Brethren to see that these people were provided with opportunity to teach, to serve as officers in the Church where they could grow and develop and feel the great enthusiasm that comes with service in the Church.

Building upon President Hinckley's statement, Elder Packer recalls that Brother Richards will say in council, "'I think we should give the people what they want' (meaning, of course, what they need). We are talking now about the oppressed people, the minority groups. He is large-souled in their behalf." Also toward the erring, wayward ones he is great-hearted. Elder Monson speaks of a case wherein a missionary had done something foolish and embarrassed the Church. "We might tend to quickly find fault," he said, "to wonder what had possessed the young man to do such a thing, to judge a bit harshly, but Brother Richards will say, 'Yes, Brethren, if we could put a forty-year-old head on the missionary's nineteen-year-old shoulders, then we might judge him so.'"

President Tanner seemed to speak for all of the Brethren when he recently said, "LeGrand, you are an example to us all," to which the latter quickly replied, "Only in age, President, only in age."

Miraculously, considering his recent serious illness and his advanced age, Elder Richards was able to again carry on his official duties between April and October general conferences in 1979-meetings, committee work, groundbreaking (Jordan River Temple), area conference in Atlanta, Georgia, mission presidents' seminar, and the final gathering of the funds to bring the total to over a million dollars for the Orson Hyde Memorial. The only concession he asked for was that during the time he needed oxygen on a regular basis at night, his conference assignments be within a day's travel time; but (according to President Benson) he was unhappy if he didn't receive a stake conference assignment every week.

Miraculous also was the fact that on October 21 he and ten members of his family left for the dedication of the park in the Holy Land. Elaine Cannon, General President of the Young Women of the Church and a close friend of the family, said to Elder Richards in greeting as they boarded the plane, "I think you're fabulous to go and buy a new suit and a beautiful new foulard tie for the trip." He smiled and answered, "I bought two suits. I have a lot of work yet to do." It is this forward-looking attitude of his which Sister Cannon greatly admires in him-"the take-charge-of-yourself approach. Now get on with your life and don't look back. If you've had a heart attack, move forward. If you've got a bad leg, keep walking. If you have to have oxygen, buy a new suit. I think," she concludes, "he's simply marvelous."

As soon as the party arrived in Jerusalem, he wanted to go directly to the Memorial Gardens to determine that all was in order before he turned the remaining $225,000 to Mayor Kollek. He found President Tanner and Elder Hunter already there. The garden was beautifully planted, and all was in readiness. The next day he attended the meeting held in the Jerusalem Council Chambers with Presidents Kimball and Tanner, Elder Hunter and Mayor Kollek, and others. One of the Brethren said to the mayor, "Now we still owe $225,000," to which Mayor Kollek replied, "I trust you." Elder Richards then gave him the check paying the balance of the million dollars in full.

On Saturday, the Jewish Shabbot or Sabbath, Elder Richards and his party held a testimony meeting in the grotto area of the park. There were about a hundred persons present. They sang "Come, Come Ye Saints" and "God Be With You," after which Elder Richards wished "to get on with the meeting." One of those who bore testimony was Wilford C. Edling, Brother Richards's former friend from Hollywood Stake, whom he embraced in greeting. A family member heard Brother Edling say, "Until the time comes when the Savior kisses me, this will be the highlight of my existence." Participants commented on the beautiful spirit present, which lingered as the family group returned to their hotel.

On Sunday, October 24, 1979, the American visitors and Church leaders along with their Jerusalem hosts and guests assembled at the park for the dedication services. Formalities were attended to and talks were given, among which was a ten-minute address by Elder Richards. It was a long-awaited opportunity-to speak to Jewish people in their own land-and he made the most of it. In part he said:

When Israel first became a nation, one of your great leaders, Dr. Chaim Weizmann, said that it was a mystical force that had brought your people back to the promised land. It is that same mystical force that made it possible for me, as president of the Orson Hyde Foundation, to collect a million dollars for the development of this park. As much as it is worth to the community here, what we have to offer you would be worth far more than the million dollars.

He then told them of the stick of Judah, the stick of Joseph, and the land of Joseph. He explained about the new covenant with the house of Israel and the house of Judah spoken of by Jeremiah (3:14-15, 18), which covenant "we have," and of Jeremiah's words that the "house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel." He then gave invitation for the house of Judah to come and partake of the blessings promised wherein "there shall henceforth be no more two kingdoms, but one kingdom, and one God shall rule over them all." (See Ezekiel 37:22-23.) He then concluded, "I can't think of anything about which Fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob would be more thrilled than to know that these two branches of their posterity had come together and were walking together as the prophet said they should."

In that talk, Elder Richards again boldly and fearlessly bore witness to a people not yet ready to receive the word, but they heard his witness along with the prophet's and others'-a witness which at least made a deep impression upon some. Israel Lippel, former Assistant to the Chief Rabbi of Israel and Director-General of the Ministry of Religious Affairs, now Chairman of the Jerusalem Institute for Interreligious Relations and Research, wrote "Apostle LeGrand Richards" on August 4, 1981:

Dear Honorable Friend,

... I shall never forget your presence at the dedication of the Orson Hyde Garden, which was an unforgettable event at the Mount of Olives in Jerusalem about two-and-a-half years ago. Furthermore, as I recall, you were the only one who made the speech straight out of the heart and not from a speech sheet.

After the dedication, a little luncheon was held for about a hundred invited guests. Seeing Elder Richards standing and holding a plate in his hand, Mayor Kollek rustled up a little table so his guest could sit down. Elder Richards thanked him for the courtesy and then said, "Mayor, I want to tell you something."

"What's that?" asked the mayor.

Looking Mayor Kollek directly in the eye, the apostle said, "Ten years ago I was here in Jerusalem, and one day I went into three synagogues, and hanging up on the wall in one of them was a large armchair. I asked the rabbi what it was there for (I knew, but I wanted him to tell me, which he did). He said that it was so that if Elijah comes, 'we can lower the chair and let him sit in it.' Now, Mayor, I want to tell you something, and what I tell you is the truth. Elijah has already been. On the third day of April 1836 he appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple."

The mayor said, "I guess I'd better tell them to take that chair down."

Through these and other encounters in Israel, Elder Richards and Mayor Kollek have continued a dialogue by correspondence. The latter sent to "Mr. Richards" an album of fine photographs pertaining to the dedication. Also, his contacts in Israel have opened a new dialogue of discussion between various Jewish educators and our Church representatives there through the Jerusalem Institute of which Israel Lippel is chairman. According

Speaking at Orson Hyde Memorial Park dedication, 1980.

On nintey-fourth birthday, 1980, he holds his nintey-ninth and hundredth great-grandchild, Elizabeth Boyer, left, and Eliza Jane Boyer.

to Professor Dov Noy of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, who wrote Elder Richards on August 30, 1981, more than twenty people had gathered for a "very, very friendly discussion of · religion." Rex Skidmore represented the Church in the meeting, and all twenty signed a page to include in the letter for Brother Richards.

It was on the Christmas Eve following the Jerusalem trip (1979) that Elder Richards's granddaughter Carla Welling received a tape from her missionary son, Richard, in Holland, wherein he expressed the hope of his mission president, John Lindberg, that "Grandpa might come to our missionary conference in May." Upon hearing of this informal request to once again visit the little country he loves, Elder Richards considered it, and the conference assignment was given him along with an additional conference visit to England. Inasmuch as the Netherlands conference coincided with the time of Richard's release, it was decided that his parents, Carla and Duane Welling, would accompany Elder Richards.

Immediately he began to review his Dutch scriptures. On May 1, 1980, the group left for Holland. On the plane, Brother Richards was his usual outgoing, hand-shaking, mission-oriented self, but some of the time he sat with eyes closed, having explained, "Now, I'm not asleep but just practicing my Dutch, so if any refreshments come by, tell me, because I don't want to miss anything good." He enjoys food, is a hearty eater, and has the Richardses' sweet tooth.

His language review, overlaid upon his ever-ready linguistic skill, gave him complete freedom in speaking when the party arrived in Holland. Meetings and visits were a joy to him and a delight to his audiences and friends, particularly to the older members who drank in the rich and sonorous tones of the beautiful High Dutch of the scriptures that he spoke so well. Many tears of joy where shed for both the sound and the spirit of his preaching.

In Utrecht Richard was called upon to speak, his great-grandfather following him. When the young elder finished and offered his Dutch scriptures, Elder Richards touched his own

At missionary graves in Groningen, Holland, 1980

With missionary great-grandson Richard Welling in Holland, 1980.

forehead saying, "No, Richard, I have it all up here." Not only did the hectic pace take them from one meeting to the next, but while in that land they visited the old mission home in Rotterdam where Carla's mother, Mercedes, had lived as a child. There the two Dutch missionaries, Elder Richards and his great-grandson, had their picture taken.

He wished to again visit the missionary graves in Groningen, although Richard doubted they could find the place. It was a cold day, but when they arrived at the cemetery they were met by a sight to warm the heart. A small cluster of Dutch Saints had gathered. The memorial marker was scrubbed, the wrought iron fence freshly painted, and an exquisite spray of fresh flowers lay against the stone shaft with a gold ribbon upon which the words "Greater love hath no man.... "were inscribed. Elder Richards wept openly in memory of his friends and in gratitude for the precious Saints who had cared for the graves so tenderly.

After Richard Welling's release and the conference in England, the party returned to Salt Lake. The next morning, Carla thoughtfully waited until about nine o'clock before calling to inquire how her grandfather had fared. Nona reported that he had been at his office for two hours. No, he had experienced no jet lag from the long trip.

Between his decision to make the trip to Holland and the actual trip, Elder Richards had been given a wonderful ninety-fourth birthday party by his family members. The event was held in the Relief Society Building and to it came President Kimball, his counselors, General Authorities and their companions, members of the Richardses' extended family, friends acquired during his long life, and many state and city officials, including Utah's Governor Scott F. Matheson and his wife. When Sister Belle S. Spafford, under whose direction the building had been erected, greeted him, he said, "I hope you don't mind my party being held in your building, because I already sent you a letter thanking you for the privilege." Touched by his thoughtfulness, she answered, "I consider this to be as much your building as mine."

Elder Richards's grace, humor, optimism, and unique physical, mental, and spiritual powers have made him something of a legend in his lifetime. Everywhere people have their own Richards stories which are repeated to their children and friends, so that he becomes ever more widely known and loved. Many letters come to his office which have the flavor of legend. One man writes that he is sure Brother Richards will pass the century mark. A woman thinks he is "one of the Three Nephites." Another, in her thirties, proposes marriage. A former secretary applies to work for him "during the Millennium." Another is certain he will "be translated."

His Brethren of the Twelve affirm that "his powers have not diminished, if anything they have grown sharper." They show him special deference, not as an elderly man but as a beloved associate, a valiant co-builder of the kingdom, a "missionary prince" whose greatest contribution, according to one, is "his testimony and his voicing of it." Says President Gordon B. Hinckley:

No one who listens to LeGrand Richards has any doubt that he knows that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith was and is a prophet, and that the Church is true; and I think there is no more significant contribution that any man can make than to serve as a witness of the Lord with power and conviction and sincerity, and LeGrand Richards does that in a marvelous way.

For his own part, Brother Richards says, "Whether I work on this side of the veil or that doesn't matter so long as I can preach the gospel. If the Lord wants me over there, he knows what to do, but he hasn't found a place where he can use me yet."

By Father's Day, June 20, 1982, Elder Richards will have outlived all other General Authorities of the Church in this dispensation up to that time. With youthful optimism he feels certain he will make that date and beyond. His son LaMont speaks of his youthful outlook in words from General Douglas McArthur: "Nobody grows old by merely living a number of years. People grow old only by deserting their ideals.... In the central place of every heart, there is a recording chamber; so long as it receives messages of beauty, hope, cheer, and courage, so long are you young."

(General Douglas McArthur, Los Angeles, January 16, 1955.) LaMont adds, "And Father is young." Death holds no terror for him, although he would like to go as his brothers Joel and Oliver went-in an instant. He does not look to the next life as "sweet, sweet rest"-he would be miserable in that state. Rather, he sees and anticipates that life in the stimulating terms of a comment by Richter which many years ago Elder Richards recorded in a journal:

The ambitious man rejoices in the thought of time and space without limit in which to strive and improve forever. Ambition and hope are always young. The youth of the soul is everlasting, and eternity is youth-a glorious thing to the man who believes his soul and his life will endure forever.

<_2._>Sources Consulted

Primary Source Material

The primary source material for this book consists largely of Elder LeGrand Richards's personal holdings and of selected items from his office files. Most originated with him; a few are about him, were under his direction, or are in his or the author's possession and not otherwise available. They follow in alphabetical order under the name of the originator or owner. Within items, LeGrand Richards's name is abbreviated to "LeGrand Richards."

Ludlow, Daniel H. Israel Diary. Prepared for LeGrand Richards as the two traveled in the Holy Land together (July 2-12, 1969).

Reid, Rose Marie. Plan for Teaching the Gospel to the Jewish People. Pamphlet. LeGrand Richards office files.

Richards, Ina Jane Ashton. Note Book. Collection of poems, notes, and quotations.

---. Patriarchal Blessing. 1908.

Richards, LeGrand, Album. Pictures from the Netherlands and Southern States mission presidencies.

---. Bibles. Dutch (1903); signed and dated by LeGrand Richards (June 29, 1905), with many subject notations in Dutch and English. English; inscribed and dated by Ina Ashton Richards (February 6, 1923), with twenty-three pages of subject notations by LeGrand Richards.

---. Black Book. Writings of LeGrand Richards while he was president of the Netherlands Mission.

---. Blessings. 1894, 1905, 1933, 1938.

---. Blue Book. Letters, family data, testimony, personal history, and yearly up-dates on that history from 1973 (when it was prepared) until 1981.

_______. Green Book. Collection of poems, quotations, and sayings from LeGrand Richards's first mission to Holland. 1905-1908.

---. Hollywood MIA Stake News. 1933. LeGrand Richards office files.

---. Journals. (LeGrand Richards kept journals only during his four missions and his tenures as bishop of Glendale Ward and as president of Hollywood Stake in California.) Vols. I-III cover his first mission to Holland, with a summary up to his marriage on May 19, 1909. Vols. IV-VI cover his Netherlands Mission presidency (1913-1916), with a summary up to his call as bishop of Sugar House Ward. Vol. VII records his short-term mission to the Eastern States, with a summary up to and including five months of his Hollywood Stake presidency (1926-1931). Vol. VIII contains entries for the remainder of the California period up to his departure for the Southern States Mission (1931-1933). There follows a two-year gap indicating one or two missing volumes; to fill in this period (1934-1936) the official Record of LeGrand Richards, President of the Southern States Mission, an almost daily record of mission progress and business, was used. Vols. IX-X cover the remaining part of the Southern States Mission presidency (1936-1937) and the family's return trip home to Salt Lake City.

---. Letters. There are 178 letters to his wife, children, father and mother, brother, and a few friends, and theirs to him. They cover the period from 1910 to 1943. Four are undated.

_______. A Marvelous Work and a Wonder. Typewritten manuscript.

---. Picture Collection, including those photographs owned by LeGrand Richards and those lent by family members. Others were supplied by the Church Photography Department and the Deseret News.

_______. Printed Programs. "Prepare Ye the Way," Aaronic Priesthood pageant under direction of the Presiding Bishopric (1941); LeGrand Richards office files. "The Providing Bishopric Entertains the General Authorities" (1942), courtesy of Mabel Jones Gabbott; LeGrand Richards office files.

_______. Sermons. Principally from Conference Reports, LDS Church Archives. As Southern States Mission president, LeGrand Richards spoke at each general conference (1933-1937). As Presiding Bishop of the Church, he spoke at each general conference (1938-1951). After he became an apostle (1952) he preached in every general conference except one when he was confined in the hospital with a heart attack. Other sermons reviewed were BYU Devotional Addresses, BYU Press collection, and LeGrand Richards on Cassette, Covenant Recordings (1979).

----. Tract. "The Mormons and the Jewish People."

Tare, Lucile C. Interviews. Question and discussion sheets were prepared by LCT and formed the basis for nearly a hundred interviews with Elder LeGrand Richards, other General Authorities, family members, and LeGrand Richards acquaintances which, in effect, covered the entire expanse of his long life. Wherever material is quoted in the text without source reference, it is taken from these interviews.

West, R. B. Diary. (Richard B. West was secretary to the Netherlands Mission under President LeGrand Richards.) Courtesy of his son Hugh S. West.

Woodbury, Orin F. Memoirs. Copy in possession of author.

LDS Church Archives Materials

"Evaluation of the Jewish Proselyting Program." 1975. Missionary Department.

Journal History of the Church. 1938-1982.

Netherlands Mission Historical Record. 1905-1908, 1913-1916.

Presiding Bishopric Files. "Progress of the Church." 1939, 1943.

---. Subject Files. 1938-1952.

Richards, George F. Diaries.

_______. Personal Record Book.

Richards, George F., Jr. Diaries.

_______. Oral History Program. Interview by William Hartley. 1973.

Richards, LeGrand. Oral History Program. "Presiding Bishopric Years." Interview by William Hartley. 1974.

Reid, Rose Marie. Oral History Program. Interview by William Hartley. 1973.

Sugar House Ward Minutes. 1919-1926.

Tate, George F., ed. "Nanny Longstroth Richards." In Stephen Longstroth and His Fathers. 1979.

Tooele Ward Records. Book 7716A.

University Ward Historical Record.

Books

Allen, James B., and Leonard, Glen M. The Story of the Latterday Saints. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1976.

Cannon, George Q. Life of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons, 1888.

Hymns. Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1948.

Jenson, Andrew. Encyclopedic History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Salt Lake City: Deseret News Publishing Company, 1941.

Jordan, William George. The Power of Truth. Salt Lake City: Stevens and Wallis, 1943.

Kelsch, Louis A. A Practical Reference. Chicago: Northern States Mission. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1897.

Nibley, Preston. Inspirational Talks for Youth. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1941.

________. Faith Promoting Stories. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1943.

Pratt, Parley P. A Voice of Warning. Various ed. beginning 1837.

Richards, G. LaMont. LeGrand Richards Speaks. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1972.

Richards, LeGrand. Israel, Do You Know? Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1954.

---. Just to Illustrate. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1961.

---. A Marvelous Work and a Wonder. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1950.

Robinson, [Alice] Minerva Richards Tate, et al. Life of George F. Richards. Provo: J. Grant Stevenson, 1965.

West, Franklin L. Life of Franklin D. Richards. Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1924.

Periodicals

Church News and Church Section of the Deseret News. 1937-1982.

Deseret News. 1933-1982.

Ensign. As referenced.

Instructor. 1962-1970.

Juvenile Instructor. As referenced.

---
Notas:
[^1] Throughout this book, wherever material is quoted without a source reference, it has come from an interview the author had either with Elder LeGrand Richards or with the individual named at that point in the text.
