Scot Facer Proctor, Maurine Jensen Proctor, Source of the Light: A Witness and Testimony of Jesus Christ, the Savior and Redeemer of All ( 1992)

PERSONAL NOTES

Photographs, in and of themselves, never tell the full story. You won't see the stray cat that walked through the doorway in our nighttime exposure of a Jerusalem home. The exposure took eight minutes, and even the cat's hesitation in the doorway wasn't long enough to show up on the film. You won't see the crowds that cluster at every site significant in the life of Christ. We waited, sometimes for hours, nervously watching light conditions change, until that brief minute when no one was in the scene. You won't see the blue barrel in the distance at Tel Be'er Sheba. Our daughter hefted it behind a rock and then hid herself so she wouldn't show up in the picture.

To capture the Savior's life in photographs, however, is to find out how deeply Israel bears record of Him. The land is His visual aid, the echo of everything He said, with meanings lodged in every tree and stone. We once thought His message was completely devoid of the time and place He gave it. As we shot pictures in olive vineyards and sheepfolds, as we watched for sunrises on the Galilee, we found that His message is in the land itself. In every way, Bethlehem was designed by nature and history to be His birthplace. The anguishing atonement should have been suffered in a place with olive trees and a press. We hope you'll come to learn why on this photographic journey to the lands of the Savior.

A visit to Israel shatters one's old and sometimes cherished ideas about the place. Whoever wrote "Far, Far Away on Judea's Plains" had simply never been there. Israel is not flat and brown but mountainous, and in the springtime its hills are brushed with a colorful palette of flowers. We shot the pictures for this book in Israel's wettest year in recorded history, and even the stark Judean wilderness was touched with green. Christ's birth was not on a frosty, snow-covered night, the baby laid in a wooden manger. The sounds of springtime accompanied His birth, and the manger was probably stone, the Middle-Eastern feeding trough for animals.

Shooting the photographs for this book was no small task, as we entered the Middle East with an eighty-seven-pound camera bag, a large tripod, 350 rolls of film, eleven suitcases, and two of our daughters. Through all of our travels and flights, we boldly protected our film from X-ray machines at least fifty-five times (including the flights into the Arabian Peninsula), saying things to guards who spoke only Hebrew or Arabic: "Film very, very sensitive," or "Is very special film." Sometimes it would take thirty minutes just to talk our way through security in broken explanations and foreign tongues.

Close to the summit of one of the mountains above the valley of Dothan in northern Samaria. Near this place the servant of Elisha was told, as Israel's enemies encompassed them, "Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them. . . . And the Lord opened the eyes of the young man, and he saw: and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire around about Elisha."

Carpet of flowers touched by the precious gift of rain near the road to Jericho. Seldom seen in such abundance in the Judean desert, prophecy that as the righteous gather to Israel, "the wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them; and the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose."

We went to Israel with a schedule, hoping to shoot certain sites on certain days, but a few days into the trip we tossed our schedule and decided to follow the light, intently watching the sky and listening to the Spirit. Many days we were up at two or three in the morning, traversing dangerous roads to set up our equipment in pre-scouted locations and wait. Offering all of our skills, the best equipment, the finest film, our greatest plans—all was nothing unless the Lord painted the picture for us. It was a deep lesson for us to see "that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." [^1]

One dark and overcast morning, we left our kibbutz and traveled ninety minutes to the banks of the Jordan River, expecting to arrive just before sunrise. It was one of those days photographers dread—hazy, gray, diffused. We drove down a dirt road to the location we had found the day before. The tripod was locked, the shutter set, the depth of field marker aligned, film waiting. Nothing. We couldn't even tell if the sun had risen. We knelt down in the dirt by the tripod and pleaded with the Lord to paint a picture that would testify of His Son's baptism. We ended our prayer, and seconds later clouds broke, the beams of light began to pierce the heavens, and we fired away. When we were done, the sky returned to itself, hazy, overcast. We prayed over every picture and saw daily miracles.

Hoping to capture the scene as it might have appeared nearly two thousand years ago, we shot Bethlehem at dawn on April 6, the true birth date of the Savior. We went to the Kidron Valley and shot Absalom's Tomb on the very night, based on the Jewish calendar, that Jesus would have walked from the Last Supper through the Kidron past that tomb and on to Gethsemane. The moon was nearly full, casting shadows through the olive vineyards, and we almost felt that if we could just disappear into the shadows and be quiet enough, we could see the Lord and His apostles walk by. It was on a night like this, we thought, a night just like this.

Often, the scenes we saw were teaching moments for us. The waters of the Sea of Galilee were slate gray the morning we waited for the fishermen to arrive. We had come at dawn to shoot a picture of fish. The foreign tongues of the merchants who had gathered were mainly Hebrew and Arabic, but the rabbis spoke Yiddish, which we could understand. "The first three boats are coming," they said. Finally we could see dots on the horizon and then distinguishable shapes moving in toward the small harbor. We quickly got the big Pentax ready, bulky tripod and all. The crowd gathered to see the fish for which they would bargain for their restaurants and markets. The two men on the first boat looked bone-weary and haggard. They had toiled all night to bring in a catch. One burly man, his face lined with exhaustion and goodwill, asked in Hebrew what we were doing there. The rabbis explained briefly that we needed a picture of some fish. He turned to us and in broken English said, "If you want picture of fishermen, you can have. If you want picture of fish, you cannot; we have none." We could see that ancient scene in our minds as seven of the apostles came toward shore in the morning with empty nets after fishing all night. Unrecognizable to them, the resurrected Savior stood on the shore and asked, "Children, have ye any meat?" [^2] Then He told them to cast their nets on the other side, and they pulled in a multitude of great fishes. When they saw the abundance, they knew immediately it was the Lord who had given.

We have felt the Lord's gifts and know that what He promises, He is able also to perform. Our journey to the Sinai desert in a rental car was delayed until later in the afternoon than we had hoped to leave Cairo. Nevertheless, we drove swiftly toward the Suez Canal, calculating an arrival at the holy mountain about 8:30 that evening. The darkness gathered to pitch by the time we turned east, following the map. All was going well as we raced into the darkness on schedule, knowing that a 2:00 A.M. start up the mountain would be needed to catch first light and sunrise. Up ahead it looked like we were coming upon a very steep descent. We slowed down to nearly thirty miles an hour, and suddenly the road ended—without sign or warning. The car literally flew a number of yards as we went off the pavement, dropping three feet to the dirt and rocks below. With hearts pounding and ears perked for adverse noises from the Fiat engine, we inched our way forward on this now four-wheel-drive road. Construction was taking place, but there were no indications of any kind as to how to detour around the repairs. Flashing our lights, we discovered another dirt road going off to the right. Another mile, now to the left. Now two roads going opposite directions and boulders across the highway in repair.

Unable to even trace our way back, we were lost in the darkness with no food and little water in this stark, ancient, desolate region of the earth. We stopped the car and began to pray, pleading, "Dear Father, please hear us. We are lost and afraid. Please show us the way." Within a minute, out of nowhere, a Toyota pickup full of Bedouins was ahead of us. We had not seen another car all night. Somehow they sensed our need and began to turn on their blinkers and flash their lights to signal to us every turn, every rock, every danger. This went on for nearly two hours, through turns and roads that we could not have followed in the day without a guide. Finally they pulled over, apparently coming to the turnoff to their isolated home. A man in white native dress came over to our car and said in broken English, "Straight, no go left, no go right. Very bad, three kilometers. Then okay to Mount Sinai." His directions were perfect; we arrived safely but worn thin at nearly midnight. We learned again that the Lord is aware of each of us and sees to our most intimate needs.

We are so grateful for Truman and Ann Madsen of the Jerusalem Center for Near Eastern Studies. Their daily rallying of love, support, and stories was one of the highlights of our experience in the Holy Land. Truman's seasoned suggestions were a wonderful influence on our thinking as we created this book, which we desire to go to all the world. To our precious parents, Paul and Martha Proctor and Maurine Jensen, we are indebted for mortality and bonded for eternity. To our beloved friends, John and Diane Madsen, we are eternally grateful—their thoughts and prayers are felt daily. To Ron Millett, Sheri Dew, Kent Ware, and Jack Lyon of Deseret Book we are so thankful. Sheri is remarkable in her visionary approach to projects, and she has carried us long and far. Kent has become one of our best friends, a man whom we love dearly and thank for the art direction throughout. To Nina and Darrell Ownby we are grateful; they have ever been a support and a strength to us in our lives. We are indebted to Christopher Bigley for his timely help in our home. And to our children we are tenderly thankful. How many thousands of knocks on the door of our home office we have had to turn away to complete the project. Their names need not go unmentioned: Melissa, Laura, Eliot, Julie, Lucas, Rachel, Andrew, Thomas, Truman, and Mariah.

Our hearts are full as we offer this book as our witness and testimony of the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom we look for all things. His atoning sacrifice is the center of our lives. From that witness we desired to do this work, and we give this book to Him, with eternal love and gratitude.

Looking north from the summit of Jebel Musa, Mt. Sinai, as first light touches ancient, twisted red granite of the holy mountain. From the 7,497-foot peak in the southern region of the Sinai Desert, range upon range of mountains can be seen. Near this place Moses conversed with the God of Israel, "face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend."
