Scot Facer Proctor, Maurine Jensen Proctor, Source of the Light: A Witness and Testimony of Jesus Christ, the Savior and Redeemer of All ( 1992)

Section 1:

I AM HE WHO WAS PREPARED FROM THE FOUNDATION OF THE WORLD

Springs at Dan in northern Israel bubbling forth with clear, cold water from aquifers fed by the snowfields of 9,232-foot Mt. Hermon—source of the Jordan River. The word Jordan means "coming down from Dan."

Red poppies in Galilee, a vibrant reminder of the blood shed in the Savior's sacrifice. The poet writes: "Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting; The soul that rises with us, our life's star Hath had elsewhere its setting And cometh from afar; Not in entire forgetfulness, And not in utter nakedness, But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home."

A baby cried in the stillness of a spring night in Bethlehem, and the world would never be the same. Here in the vulnerability and tenderness of an infant was the Lord Himself. Jesus Christ had come to walk the dusty roads of mortality, to know hunger, pain, and rejection—all to ease our burdens. When we kneel at the very limits of our earthly endurance, we can always know that He has been there before us. Yet the story does not begin here. It begins in a time beyond our memory, before our birth, before the veil of forgetfulness dropped over our spirits. There in the premortal world, we all lived as spirit sons and daughters of Heavenly Parents. Called Jehovah, Jesus Christ was the firstborn, the preeminent One of all the sons and daughters of God. John testifies, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. . . . And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us." [^1] In mortality Jesus prayed, "Glorify thou me with . . . the glory which I had with thee before the world was." [^2]

Sunset over Yam ha-Melah (the Dead Sea) in the wilderness of Judea as viewed from Jordan. In the unbearable heat of summer in this lowest place on earth (1,303 feet below sea level) over 5 million tons of water evaporate from the sea each day. No life survives in this water with 30 percent salt, yet the Prophet Joseph Smith said that the waters of the Dead Sea must be healed before the Son of Man will make His appearance.

In that premortal world, a grand council was held, whose results led the morning stars to sing together and all the sons of God to shout for joy. [^3] God the Father presented a plan that would enable all of His sons and daughters to progress to be like Him. For each spirit, the plan would involve risk, a leaving home to dwell on earth, a testing. Yet it would also mean the obtaining of a body, an opportunity to prove faithful, a school. "We will go down," the Lord said, "for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell; and we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." [^4]

In this world, mortals would, by their very nature, be subject to sin and heartrending weakness. Forgetting everything before that first breath of mortal life, they would err, stumble, sin. Because it is an eternal law that "no unclean thing can dwell with God," [^5] they could not return to their Heavenly Father without a Redeemer, someone who would take upon Himself their sins, making their garments "pure and spotless" again before God, [^6] giving new life. It was God's beloved Son, Jehovah, who volunteered Himself as the sacrifice, to take upon Himself all the sins of the world. This would demand a perfect life, a complete submission, a never bending to temptation, an "infinite and eternal sacrifice." [^7] "Father, thy will be done," said Jehovah, who would be Jesus Christ, "and the glory be thine forever." [^8] I will perform this weighty task, He was saying, not for acclaim or honor, not to upset thy throne, but for love.

We, as sons and daughters of God, must have looked to Jehovah with such trust, knowing that He would not fail us. Without Him we would be forever shut out from our Father; with Him we could have eternal life. "There shall be no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ." [^9] This was the "plan," a term completely missing from scripture until modern revelation. For erring souls on the earth, Jesus Christ would plead our cause: "Father, spare these . . . that believe on my name, that they may come unto me and have everlasting life." [^10]

Vault of heaven above the mountains of Naphtali in Lebanon overlooking Kiryat Shmona at dusk. "The elements are eternal," the scriptures teach, and "the word create [as used in Genesis] came from the word baurau which does not mean to create out of nothing; it means to organize; the same as a man would organize materials and build a ship."

Looking west from the ancient city of Samaria (modern Sabastiya) into the land that was occupied by the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh in the northern kingdom. For nearly three thousand years the country of Samaria has been divided against Judah. After three years of besieging by Shalmaneser of Assyria, this area was overthrown (in 721 B.C.), and the Ten Tribes were carried away captive and lost to history.

In that premortal council, gifted and cunning Lucifer, called a "son of the morning," [^11] presented his own plan: "Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor." [^12] Lucifer devised an apparently risk-free plan, but one he surely knew would thwart the children of God. He would allow no freedom of choice, no agency. Forced into conformity to law, mortals would not progress or learn, unempowered to choose right or wrong, light or dark. In halting the progress of others, his evil design was to usurp the very throne of God. Isaiah recorded, "Thou [O Lucifer] hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God, . . . I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High." [^13] The desire to dominate, to be first, to crush others is a pattern and inclination that continues to come from this ancient source. Lucifer, who is Satan, swayed many of the hosts of heaven with his flattery, lies, and deception. "Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me," said the Lord, "and sought to destroy the agency of man, . . . and also, that I should give unto him mine own power, . . . I caused that he should be cast down." [^14]

"And there was war in heaven." At stake was the precious gift of agency and more, the very opportunity for the sons and daughters of God to eventually have eternal life, His life. "Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels, and prevailed not; neither was there place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, . . . he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him." [^15] Yet the war in heaven was only the first contest in a struggle that would relentlessly continue, for where were Satan and his minions cast? Onto the earth, where the forces of light and darkness would continue to clash.

The lot of Satan and his followers was to never be given bodies, to never live again in the presence of the Father. In their miserable condition they would strive to lead the children of men astray, cause them to suffer as they suffer, and bring enmity and division into the hearts of people everywhere.

The desert gives forth its glory when water comes to the region. Flowers in a small ravine between Arad and the Dead Sea bursting forth for a few days. The solitary places of the Holy Land seemed to attract the prophets of old—perhaps because in these desolate regions one comes to understand that without God, man is nothing.

"Before I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations," [^16] the Lord told Jeremiah, speaking of that time before time, before the foundations of the earth. So it was that the Lord's leaders were chosen and foreordained for the missions they were to perform on the earth. Michael, the mighty archangel who had led the forces of heaven in the war with Satan, "reached great distinction and power before he ever came to this earth: and . . . helped to frame this earth while he was yet a spirit." [^17] He became Adam, the first man on earth. "And our glorious Mother Eve with many of her faithful daughters" [^18] were among those called to "carry the message of redemption unto all." [^19]

Others of the "great and mighty ones" [^20] were selected to lead dispensations, those periods of the earth's history when the knowledge, keys, and power of the gospel of Jesus Christ would be given from the heavens. Enoch was chosen to be a leader as were Abraham, Moses, and John the Baptist. Abraham, shown in vision the intelligences that were organized before the world was, said, "Among all these there were many of the noble and great ones; and God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; . . . and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born." [^21]

How were these chosen? "According to the foreknowledge of God, on account of their exceeding faith and good works . . . they . . . are called with a holy calling . . . to teach his commandments unto the children of men." [^22] They were not chosen to receive the honors of men or the praise of the world, to impress with flashing, glittering power. Instead, they were selected to serve and to lift, to love, and to carry the gospel of Jesus Christ to the ends of the earth. Their rewards in this life might include deprivation, tribulation, distress and persecution, [^23] and they might be stoned or beheaded or crucified. All this was "that the trial of [their] faith, being much more precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise and honour and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ." [^24]

Shadows of evening begin to steal across the northern portion of the Wilderness of Zin in the Negev Desert with the mountains of Edom in the background. In this region the children of Israel were encamped and very thirsty when Moses smote the rock and "the water came out abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their beasts also." The Lord always tries to teach His children that prophets are His representatives on the earth, and that whether His message is "by [His] own voice or by the voice of [His] servants, it is the same."

Rushing waters of Dan through emerald foliage at Banias in northern Israel. St. Francis of Assisi tried to capture the feelings of all nature responding to the Creator: "Thou flowing water, pure and clear, Make music for thy Lord to hear, Alleluia! Alleluia! . . . The flow'rs and fruit that in thee grow, Let them his glory also show, Alleluia! . . . Oh, Praise him! Alleluia!" Alleluia literally means "Praise ye Jehovah."

Each stream that slides over smooth stones, each eagle that mounts on the wind, each dolphin that leaps in the air was created by Jesus Christ under the direction of His Father. "All things were made by him," John declares, "and without him was not any thing made that was made." [^25] Life in its boundless varieties, nature with so many colors in a single wheat stalk that an artist could never paint it, this was the creation that sprang from the heart and soul of Jesus Christ. As creator, He knows every particle, every element, every atom. "For the earth is full," He declares boldly, "and there is enough and to spare; yea, I prepared all things." [^26] He is the architect, the designer, the poet, the composer of nature's sweet song, and as each phase was completed He stopped long enough to declare that it was good.

He "laid the foundations of the earth," and "laid the measures thereof," and "stretched the line upon it." [^27] He is "in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made. . . . He is in the moon . . . as also the light of the stars . . . and the earth." [^28]

As the poem is a reflection of the poet, so the earth in all its bounty and generosity reflects the Lord. "All things are created and made to bear record of me," [^29] says the Savior. The patterns of sleeping and waking, of night being broken by the dawn of a new day, remind us of the resurrection. Daily meals remind us that we are nourished by the sacrifice of death. The spin of the atom and the spin of the earth remind us that the very essence of the universe is built on opposition in all things. As we can read them, even the lights in the heavens are for signs and seasons to teach us about the Lord. [^30] The wise men looked upward to see that He was born.

Why this creation with its reminders of the mission of the Lord built into its very structure? The Lord answers clearly, "Behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." [^31] To the voice of the Creator, even the dust of the earth will instantly respond; it is only His children who hesitate.

Lucid daffodil in Jerusalem, an early spring reminder of the newness of life and the hope of the resurrection. Lines can be drawn, point to point, from the ends of the petals, to form the Star of David, a symbol of great power in Israel and a multiculturally understood symbol of unity and oneness with the Lord and the heavens. "All things bear record of me," says the Lord.

Eden. The very name connotes all that is paradisiacal. It was a garden where fruit and flowers came forth spontaneously with colors so exquisite and tastes so sweet as to delight the soul. It was where two people lived in such harmony and unity with the earth that all nature responded with peace. There Adam and Eve, the first man and woman on earth, received the breath of life and instructions from the Father, with whom they walked and talked. "Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat; but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat, . . . nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee; but, remember that I forbid it, for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die." [^32]

In this garden, Adam and Eve lived in perfect oneness and companionship. She was his helpmeet, meaning in Hebrew, "a power or strength equal to." Adam calls her "bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh." [^33] "Bone in Hebrew symbolizes power, and flesh weakness. [This phrase] thus becomes a ritual pledge to be bound in the best of circumstances (power) as well as the worst (weakness)." [^34]

When first placed in the garden, Adam and Eve had immortal bodies, enlivened by the spirit instead of blood. In this physical condition, they could not die but lived in a state of perpetual innocence. "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth," [^35] the Lord said to them, but this presented a dilemma. With these bodies, they could not bear children.

Now entered into this peaceful scene Lucifer as a serpent, hoping to thwart God's purposes. "He sought also to beguile Eve, for he knew not the mind of God, wherefore he sought to destroy the world." He enticed her to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. When she responded that God had said that in the day they ate, they would surely die, Satan had a ready answer: "Ye shall not surely die; for God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil." [^36] Satan's tactic was a mingling of deception and truth.

How long Eve considered the decision we do not know. Should she take such initiative in the search for knowledge? Should she pay the price entailed to replenish the earth and bear children? Here, indeed, was the test of agency, for she could not have it both ways. At last, with some misconceptions and a good deal of courage, she ate, and Adam soon followed. A very real physical change came upon them, with blood coursing through their veins, and their bodies became mortal and subject to disease and decay. For their transgression, they were cast from Eden and the presence of the Lord, entering a world of sin and corruption.

Adam and Eve were cast into a world not as pleasant as the Garden of Eden, for now the earth would yield noxious weeds and tares that would afflict and torment them. Yet Eve did labor together with Adam, and they offered sacrifices unto the Lord, even the firstlings of their flocks. They were instructed by an angel that the sacrifices were "a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth."

The law had been broken, and the consequences had to be faced. "Cursed shall be the ground for thy sake," the Lord said. "By the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, until thou shalt return unto the ground—for thou shalt surely die." [^37] Only through repentance and the atonement of Jesus Christ could they return to the Lord. Eve revealed, "Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption." [^38] The pattern was set, and the human family began.

Fertile fields and rolling hills of the promised land given by the Lord to Abraham just north of Be'er Sheba. The Atonement of Jesus Christ would apply to the faithful who were born before Him, "that thereby whosoever should believe that Christ should come, the same might receive remission of their sins, and rejoice with exceedingly great joy, even as though he had already come among them."

Cast out from the garden, Adam and Eve were not left to wander in their new world of thorns and thistles in ignorance. From the beginning, they were taught the gospel of Jesus Christ. The gospel was not a new invention during Jesus' mortal life, nor are scholars right who suppose that when they find fragments of the gospel taught before Christ's mortal life, that He borrowed from an earlier source. The gospel of Jesus Christ is of the most ancient origin. "In that day the Holy Ghost fell upon Adam, which beareth record of the Father and the Son, saying: I am the Only Begotten of the Father from the beginning." [^39] Starting with Adam and through all generations of time, Christ's atonement would reconcile those who would repent, restoring them to the Father's presence.

Jehovah, who is Jesus Christ, revealed His gospel to the faithful in all ages by His own voice and the voice of angels. Enoch records, "He stood before my face, and he talked with me, even as a man talketh one with another, face to face." [^40] He appeared to the brother of Jared, to Moses, Isaiah, Nephi, and Amos, in each case teaching those mysteries of the meaning of existence that humanity has always yearned for, the very things we forgot by coming into mortality. For love, the Lord has wanted His children in all ages to understand and keep His commandments.

Thus, with the faithful in every dispensation Jehovah made powerful covenants, calling and ordaining them to His holy order, which is the priesthood. The priesthood gave them the authority to act in His name, to perform ordinances, to heal and bless and even "by faith, to break mountains, to divide the seas, to dry up waters, to turn them out of their course; to put at defiance the armies of nations, to divide the earth, to break every band, to stand in the presence of God." [^41] So powerful was the faith of Enoch, in fact, that using this power, the Holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God, "he spake the word of the Lord, and the earth trembled, and the mountains fled, . . . and all nations feared greatly." [^42]

Straw brick remains at Tel Be'er Sheba. A well was dug in this area by Abraham. Water in the desert is a key to survival, with summer temperatures often soaring to 115 degrees Fahrenheit and above. A well becomes an extremely important focal point of a community. Wells of the desert are generally looked upon by Middle Eastern cultures as gifts from God and are to be shared freely with all in need.

Living in the bleak desert of Haran, Abraham, repelled by his father's idol worship, sought the Lord in prayer. Jesus Christ appeared to him, saying, "My name is Jehovah, and I know the end from the beginning; therefore my hand shall be over thee." The Lord covenanted with Abraham that "as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, . . . and in thy seed after thee . . . shall all the families of the earth be blessed." [^43]

With this promise, Abraham would become the father of the faithful, but how? At sixty-two, he still had no children as his wife, Sarah, was barren. Nearly forty years more they waited, yet Abraham "staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief; but was strong in faith, . . . being fully persuaded that, what he had promised, he was able also to perform." [^44] At last the promised child, Isaac, was born, and one Jewish tradition says Sarah was so filled with joy that her skin became young again, the wrinkles falling away, and she counted her years with the age of her son.

After many years, the Lord asked the ultimate test, saying to Abraham, "Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering." [^45] Moriah, a mountain whose sacred meaning would echo through time, would, according to tradition, one day be the site of the temple in Jerusalem. Abraham's feelings must have been anguished as he and Isaac made the three-day journey to Moriah. Not only was he asked to see his son suffer and die but also to replay a horrifying, repulsive moment from his past when he himself had been bound and placed on an altar to be sacrificed by a wicked priest. Now he was walking up a mountain to bind his own son on the altar. Apocryphal literature reports that Satan, disguised as a kindly old man, accompanied Abraham partway on the trail up Moriah, asking, "What kind of a God would ask this of you?" [^46]

At the moment Abraham lifted the knife to thrust into his son and slay him, "the angel of the Lord called to him out of heaven, and said, . . . Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son from me." [^47] But God the Father would not withhold His only Son from the world.

Looking north across the ruins of Tel Be'er Sheba to the Nahal Hevron (River Hebron), which flows only a short time during the year. From this area Abraham "rose up early in the morning, . . . and went unto the place which God had told him," to the land of Moriah, to sacrifice his son Isaac. It was on the morning of the third day when Abraham could see Moriah, a modern journey of about 50 rugged miles.

I stretch my hand over the sea, and it obeys my voice . . . I say to the mountains—Depart hence—and behold, they are taken away by a whirlwind, in an instant, suddenly." [^48] This is Jehovah speaking, who in heaven and earth has all power, knowledge, and love. In His protective hands, "all things work together for good to them that love God." [^49]

Jacob, renamed Israel, had twelve sons, the favorite called Joseph, who was hated by all of his brothers because of Jacob's preferential love for him and his spiritual gifts. When Joseph came to visit his brothers who were tending their flocks in Dothan, their envy had reached murderous proportions, and they took their seventeen-year-old brother and cast him into a pit. Not long after, a caravan bound for Egypt came by, and the brothers impulsively sold him to the group for twenty pieces of silver.

Yet it was not in Jehovah's plan for Joseph to be cast away and forgotten: "The Lord was with Joseph . . . and made all that he did to prosper in his hand." From prison, Joseph was called to interpret Pharaoh's troubling dream about seven fat-fleshed cows who were eaten by seven lean ones. With insight from the Spirit, Joseph said that Egypt would see seven years of plenty and then face a terrible famine for seven years. Advising that Egypt store wheat in the plentiful years for the lean ones, Joseph suggested that "Pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise, and set him over the land of Egypt." Pharaoh said to his servants as he looked upon Joseph, "Can we find such a one as this is, a man in whom the Spirit of God is?" [^50] The prisoner of Egypt in a stroke was made second only to mighty Pharaoh.

The Lord had brought Joseph from a dry pit in Dothan to the throne of the greatest kingdom in the world so that he could become a divine instrument in saving the house of Israel. When the famine ravaged the earth and the people cried for bread, Israel and his house also sorely suffered. "I have heard that there is corn in Egypt," [^51] said Jacob to his sons. They went to Egypt and were saved, a type that would be reflected in the mortal life of Jesus Christ.

Valley of Dothan in the northern part of modern Samaria. In this place, Joseph's brothers conspired against him and threw him into a dry well. Note the perfect timing of the Lord: right after Joseph was thrown into the pit, the brothers sat down to eat bread, looked up, and noticed a caravan heading to Egypt. Had Joseph been left to the elements and without water for long, he could have suffered greatly or even died of thirst.

Perhaps the glow of the burning bush by night brought the curious Moses to climb the holy mountain. Raised as royalty in Pharaoh's court, given education, wealth, and knowledge in the ways of the Egyptians, he had been outcast for his sympathy toward the Hebrew slaves. Israel, who had come to Egypt to be fed, had been turned to bondage by a new pharaoh who knew not Joseph. So Moses kept sheep in the land of Midian until the Lord called out to him from the burning bush, "Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground. . . . I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry." [^52] Through Moses, the Lord Jehovah would deliver His people.

Glory of the morning sun flooding light into the bleakness of the Sinai Desert as seen from high atop Mt. Sinai. As one prophet exclaimed about the law: "My soul delighteth in proving unto my people the truth of the coming of Christ; for, for this end hath the law of Moses been given; and all things which have been given of God from the beginning of the world, unto man, are the typifying of him."

Yet Moses was concerned. Who should he say had sent him? "What is his name? . . . And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: . . . Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you." [^53]

Moses learned more of the glory of this Jehovah when he was caught up into an exceedingly high mountain and "saw God face to face." As the presence of God withdrew from Moses, "he fell unto the earth," depleted of his natural strength. He said, "Now, for this cause I know that man is nothing, which thing I never had supposed." [^54]

Who then parted the Red Sea that Israel could walk through on dry ground? Who fed them manna in the desert wilderness for forty years? Who gave them water springing from a rock? Who amid the thunders and smoke of Sinai gave the law? The Old Testament calls Him Jehovah. In mortality He looked like other men. It was Jesus Christ. Ironically, it was that very law that accusers would try to batter Him with in His lifetime. Some Pharisees would ask Him, "Why will ye not receive us with our baptism, seeing we keep the whole law?" But Jesus would say to them, "Ye keep not the law. If ye had kept the law, ye would have received me, for I am he who gave the law." [^55]

View from a cleft in the rocks at the summit of Mt. Sinai. Surely the tables of stone upon which the law was carved were made of the red granite so abundant on the mountain. The first set of tables given by God contained a fullness of the gospel, but because of the people's wickedness these were broken by Moses, for the Lord said, "I will take away the priesthood out of their midst; therefore my holy order, and the ordinances thereof, shall not go before them. . . . But I will give unto them . . . the law of a carnal commandment."

The children of Israel had been in Egypt for generations, but worse, Egypt had come to be in them. Though the distance from Egypt to Canaan, the promised land, is not far, they wandered in that wilderness forty years, that the searing heat, the struggle, the testing might strip every shred of the world from their souls. From the heights of Mt. Sinai, overlooking range upon range of twisted desert mountains, Moses had received the law. Unlike the law of Christ, which asked its followers to be anxiously engaged in a good cause of their own free will, the law of Moses was a preparatory gospel for those who neglect good works unless constrained by a law of performances. "The law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ," [^56] noted Paul. Jacob added, "For this intent we keep the law of Moses, it pointing our souls to him." [^57]

Thus, every morning and every evening a spotless lamb was sacrificed on the temple altar as a burnt offering. The priests were to keep the fire burning perpetually, its wafting smoke a continual reminder of the spotless sacrifice of the Savior. Year after year on the Day of Atonement, Israel was reminded that because of sin they had been cut off from the Lord's presence and therefore were subject to spiritual death. But God would accept a substitute—the death of an animal, perfect and blameless—instead of the offender.

As they trudged from one desert camp to another where crops would not grow, they gathered manna in the morning for food. It was a symbol of God's constant gifts to them, a sign of their daily need for Him. In one discouraging time when hunger and thirst had nearly overtaken them and the comforts of Egypt seemed more attractive than following an unseen God, they began to speak harshly against Moses, and fiery serpents came among them, biting with deadly fury. Finally, the people turned again to Moses, begging him to pray the scourge away. The Lord directed Moses to make a serpent of brass and fasten it to a pole, holding it up for all the people to look upon. "And the labor which they had to perform was to look; and because of the simpleness of the way, or the easiness of it, there were many who perished." [^58] The serpent was a symbol of the Lord Jesus Christ held up on the cross, and the message was "Look to the Lord and live."

Survivors in the harsh, unrelenting desert of the Sinai must conserve and cling to every drop of moisture from the heavens. "Thou shalt remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee . . . in the wilderness, . . . and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with manna, . . . that he might make thee know that man doth not live by bread only, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord."

Jacob, a prophet who lived about 550 B.C., wrote, "We knew of Christ, and we had a hope of his glory many hundred years before his coming; and not only we ourselves had a hope of his glory, but also all the holy prophets which were before us." [^59] Though it is not always evident in Old Testament accounts, the underlying message of every prophet was the coming of Christ. The records contained a "fulness of the gospel of the Lord" when they were first given, but in the process of passing them down, some evil-designing people "have taken away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord." [^60] In fact, the Bible refers to more than twenty sacred records that are not currently available in the holy canon.

The persistence of the acacia tree is impressive as it sends its tap root more than 300 feet into the earth to draw sustenance to its branches. The scriptures have been given to mankind to feed and nourish the soul and to bring us to Jesus Christ. Eusebius tells us that Moses renamed Oshea, the son of Nun, Joshua (or Jeshua, the Hebrew equivalent to Jesus) because Joshua bore such a resemblance to the Savior.

Still, what remains tells us that Christ was joyously anticipated. Isaiah saw His birth: "Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel." [^61] The prophets knew the plan of salvation and exulted, "O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace! . . . O how great the holiness of our God." [^62] Nearly 600 years before Christ's birth, Nephi described plainly a vision of His life of service and love: "I beheld the Lamb of God going forth among the children of men. And I beheld multitudes of people who were sick, and who were afflicted with all manner of diseases, and with devils and unclean spirits. . . . And they were healed by the power of the Lamb of God." [^63] The Psalms passionately capture glimpses of His sacrifice: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? . . . All they that see me laugh me to scorn . . . saying, He trusted on the Lord that he would deliver him. . . . They pierced my hands and my feet. . . . They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture." [^64]

In searching for a way to express His mission and atonement, the prophets called forth superlative names to describe Him. He would be Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace, [^65] a Star out of Jacob, [^66] Messiah, Redeemer, "the Lord of hosts, . . . the Holy One of Israel." [^67] The prophets said He would be born in Bethlehem, come out of Egypt, be called a Nazarene, have one to go before Him to prepare the way, and be betrayed for thirty pieces of silver.

Storm gathering over the Mediterranean Sea as seen from Mt. Carmel south of modern Haifa. Elijah came on this mountain against the 450 "prophets" of Baal and challenged them to prove their god. Their attempts failed, and Elijah prayed: "Hear me, O Lord, hear me, that this people may know that thou art the Lord God. . . . Then the fire of the Lord fell." Not only did the Lord show forth power here on Carmel, but this, according to Elijah's word, ended the three-and-a-half-year drought: "It came to pass in the mean while, that the heaven was black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain."

"Now will I sing to my wellbeloved a song of my beloved touching his vineyard. My wellbeloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill: and he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, . . . and he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes." [^68] This is the sad song of Israel, a vineyard, pruned and cared for, taught by prophets, and then bearing wild, bitter fruit. What a heavy disappointment to the Lord, who has so carefully nurtured the vineyard.

Yet the vineyard type is carried even further in the allegory of Zenos, where the story of a tame olive tree in a vineyard becomes an analogy for the entire history of Israel. The gray-green olive tree is a common sight in Israel, where it may live to be two thousand years old. With remarkable staying power, even when it appears to be all but dead, new branches will spring from living roots. So the story can be interpreted that the master of the vineyard (the Lord) nourished a tame olive tree (Israel) in his vineyard, but as it waxed old, it began to decay (apostasy). Loving this tree and wishing to do everything to save it, the master pruned it, digged about it, and nourished it, and though young and tender branches shot forth, the main top began to perish. "It grieveth me that I should lose this tree," [^69] said the master, and why not be stricken? The Lord had sent prophets, revelations, and signs, and still Israel strayed. Yet no effort was too great for the master to save his beloved vineyard. He grafted in new branches from a wild olive tree (the intermixing of Gentiles with Israel), hoping to give the tree new life. The master then took away the natural, young, and tender branches of the tame olive tree and planted them in the nethermost parts of the vineyard (the scattering of Israel), hoping that in other ground away from the decay they would yield good fruit. Thus, Israelites Lehi and his family were asked to leave Jerusalem just before the Babylonian destruction of 587 B.C. to resettle in the Americas. Though in this faraway corner of the vineyard, "they are not lost unto the Father, for he knoweth whither he hath taken them." [^70]

Beautiful ancient olive vineyard near the fields where David used to keep the flocks of his father, Jesse, in the hills surrounding Bethlehem. An olive tree can appear to be dead and yet will still produce new life from the strength of the root at a later time. Trees thrive in the rocky hills without irrigation, able to endure long periods of drought. An olive tree can yield 25 gallons of oil each harvest.

The children of Israel lived in Canaan, the promised land, first under a series of judges and then under kings, most notably David and Solomon. These were the glory days for Israel, her greatest moments, with vast, secured boundaries. King David, who became a religious symbol of epic proportions, conquered Jerusalem and proclaimed it his capital. Solomon constructed the impressive temple with cedars from faraway Lebanon. He adorned it with gold and silver and installed the Ark of the Covenant in the Holy of Holies. After Solomon's reign, however, the kingdom was torn by internal strife and divided in two. Israel in the north, whose capital was Samaria, was the homeland of the ten tribes, and the remaining two tribes, Judah and Benjamin, formed the kingdom of Judah in the south.

Early morning light bathes a hillside of numerous caves at Qumran, where records now referred to as the Dead Sea Scrolls have been found. Scrolls or fragments of scrolls have been discovered in the mountains pictured to the west. In ancient Jewish custom, one must never destroy a record or document in which the name of God is written. Parts of every book of the Old Testament have been discovered in or around Qumran.

Throughout this period, the Lord sent prophets as a sort of national conscience, calling the people to return to the Lord. Though sometimes their appeals were heard, this olive tree had decayed and to save His vineyard, the Lord would allow its destruction and scattering. Thus, in a three-year siege, Assyria conquered the northern kingdom in 722 B.C. Assyria's policy was to exile many of its conquered inhabitants to other parts of its vast empire. In this way the ten tribes became lost, many of them scattered throughout the earth's population. Next, looking for help from Egypt that never came, Judah fell to Babylon in 586 B.C. The temple was destroyed and the population exiled, but not before the family of Lehi was led away to begin a colony of Israelites in the Americas. Those dispersed Jews in Babylon lamented, yearning for their homeland: "By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down [and] wept when we remembered Zion." [^71]

The exile would end when Persia conquered Babylon and allowed the Jews to go home to rebuild Jerusalem and their temple. Yet it would continue to be an uneasy history. First the Greeks conquered them, defiling the temple by sacrificing a pig on the altar. Then in 63 B.C. the Jews fell an easy prey to the Romans. By the time of Christ's birth, they had known several conquerors; local leaders had been inept, greedy, and cruel. Despite their yearnings for a resurgence of a glorious nation, they had seen only turmoil, dispersion, and religious decay.

The Jews had become divided into various groups. The aristocratic Sadducees controlled the temple and the priesthood. The Pharisees interpreted the law for the masses, and its forms had become rigid and spiritless. The Zealots advocated armed struggle against the Romans, and the Essenes, whose Dead Sea Scrolls were found in this century, separated themselves into a remote desert location called Qumran on the north shore of the Dead Sea.

These groups were so far from the original spirit of the law that if someone were to come along and claim to be a new lawgiver, he would by their understanding be breaking the law. Instead, they looked for a great deliverer who would free them from the bondage of foreign rule and oppression. "Oh, when would he come? In the feverish excitement of expectancy, they were only too ready to listen to the voice of any pretender . . . Yet, He was at hand—even now coming: only quite other than the Messiah of their dreams." [^72]

Looking east across ruins at Qumran where five different periods of settlement have been discovered dating from 150 B.C. to A.D. 68. A sect of Jews—apparently the Essenes—lived here to seperate themselves from temptations and influences of Jerusalem and the world. The complete scroll of Isaiah that was discovered here is over a thousand years older than any other known copy of that sacred book. Reservoir areas for water were likely used for ritualistic washings, water storage, or perhaps even baptisms.
