Scot Facer Proctor, Maurine Jensen Proctor, Source of the Light: A Witness and Testimony of Jesus Christ, the Savior and Redeemer of All ( 1992)

Section 2:

BEHOLD THE LAMB OF GOD

Spring sun rises over the north shores of the Dead Sea in the Judean Wilderness. Near here John the Baptist was calling people to repentance and saying, "Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight."

Original steps at the south end of the wall of Jerusalem which led to the temple at the time of Jesus. Zacharias and Elisabeth both were descendants of Aaron, and therefore any male offspring they had would hold rights to the priesthood. Thousands of people ascended these steps over time, including the Son of God.

It was the time of morning sacrifice on that October day when Zacharias drew the lot for the hallowed service that a priest could perform only once in his life, the offering of incense in the temple. Bearing the golden censer, he stood alone in the Holy Place, and at the appointed signal he spread the incense on the red coals of the altar, letting its sweetness waft to heaven, a symbol of Israel's prayers and yearning for the Lord. No tradition is known of an ordinary priest receiving a vision in the offering of incense, but suddenly, on the right side of the altar appeared the angel Gabriel telling Zacharias his prayer had been heard and his wife, Elisabeth, would bear a son to be called John. He would come "in the spirit and power of Elias . . . to make ready a people prepared for the Lord." Zacharias wondered at the news; he and Elisabeth were old, and her barrenness had been the sorrow of their lives. But as a sign for him and all those who waited outside, he was struck deaf and dumb. [^1] A new day had dawned in Israel.

Detail of flowers coming forth from stone steps leading to the temple. For a woman to be barren in Israel was a curse above all others. As Rachel cried, "Give me children, or else I die." Elisabeth had longed for a child, but hopes were dimmed by her age until that marvelous day when the promise was given by the angel Gabriel. John, by birth, would be a rightful heir to the throne of Israel.

How Israel needed the long-promised Messiah! Not only in the Roman oppression, but in the land itself, the absence of rain and dew, the disorder of society, the silence of prophecy, they needed their deliverer, but they had lost sight of who He would be. They looked for an earthly king who would come in sudden splendor and vanquish all their foes. What a surprise He would be to their dearest expectations. Nothing about the humble home in Galilee where Gabriel appeared was distinctive except the spirit of the young virgin Mary. And the angel said unto her, "Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour with God." She would bring forth a child, who would be the literal Son of God, and would call His name Jesus. "How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?" she asked, to which Gabriel answered, "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee." Mary's reply was one of trust and willingness: "Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word." [^2]

For comfort in her awkward circumstance, Mary traveled the hundred miles to the Judean home of her cousin Elisabeth, then six months pregnant with John. Who but one who had also known the miracles and mercy of the Lord could better understand her younger cousin's heart? At their first meeting, Elisabeth, filled with the Holy Ghost, needed not to be told of Mary's circumstance: "Whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?" And the babe who would ever be a witness of Christ leaped in her womb. A clue to Mary's nature is found in her response, a great psalm of praise to the Lord, whose echoes show she had a deep knowledge of the scriptures and the poetry of her people: "My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour." [^3]

Home after three months, Mary faced the wounded feelings of her betrothed Joseph. Betrothal was a contract in Israel as binding as marriage and he had determined "to put her away privily" until Gabriel came to him in a dream saying, "Fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife." [^4]

Rocky slopes of the hill country of Judea near where Mary came to visit Elisabeth. One source says that Mary's parents had longed for a child, for her mother, Anna, had been barren. Through angelic ministrations Joachim and Anna were informed they would bring forth a daughter who would be the mother of the Messiah.

On a spring morning in Bethlehem, restless donkeys loudly bray, roosters crow, and the sound of tinkling bells play off the hills where sheep graze. Not in a frosty December but in a season of green, new life, Jesus Christ was born in an ancient, dusty village long prophesied as the place. Bethlehem in Hebrew means "house of bread," and He was the Bread of Life to a hungry world. Its pools of Solomon were a principle water source for Jerusalem, and He came to give living water. Lambs to be sacrificed in the temple roamed its countryside, and He was the sacrificial Lamb. It was the City of David, and He came, a Son of David, to be the King of kings.

So it was, with the spring flowers spread across the hills, that Joseph and Mary, both descendants of the royal line of David, came to their ancestral home to be registered for a tax ordered by their Roman overseers. It was a journey of eighty uncomfortable miles for Mary, now nearing delivery, and she and Joseph probably traveled with family to protect themselves against desert marauders. In Bethlehem, swollen with visitors, "there was no room for them in the inn," [^5] but another translation tells us more: "There was none to give room for them in the inns." [^6] The innkeepers were distracted, self-serving; they had no eye for new stars or heavenly things. It was, as it always would be, a problem of heart. The very Creator of the earth could find no place here. Jesus later said, "The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head." [^7]

"And so it was, that, while they were there, the days were accomplished that she should be delivered." [^8] Mary, that "precious and chosen vessel," [^9] "brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger," [^10] in a stable for animals. Not for this birth would there be rich finery or skilled attendants, just a new star overhead for those who would look heavenward. Into the darkness, the Light of the World had come. He was, as Isaiah had prophesied, Emmanuel, God with us, come to bear our sorrows and infirmities, come to lift our souls.

View of Bethlehem from shepherd's hill photographed on April 6 in celebration of the true birth date of Jesus, April 6, 1 B.C. Spring is the most beautiful time of year in Bethlehem. The rains have come, and the hillsides are covered with lush grasses and myriads of flowers. Bethlehem in Arabic means "house of flesh."

Looking out from a cave in the hillside by Bethlehem at sunset on April 6. The young shepherd who would tend flocks in these hills a thousand years before Jesus was David, who, in his youth, was called by the Lord "a man after his own heart." Perched on the highest hill just southeast of Bethlehem was Herod's magnificent palace and fortress, but the Son of Man would be born in a cave.

With sheep folded safely in caves scattered about the hills of Bethlehem, shepherds watched over them, alert for night dangers. Tonight there would be little sleep, for this was the season of special care when fragile, new lambs had to be protected. Then, out of the darkness, brighter than the stars, an angel of the Lord appeared to them, "and the glory of the Lord shone round about them: and they were sore afraid." [^11] Calm came to their troubled hearts as the angel gave the holiest announcement that had ever come to the world. It was delivered not to the pompous or the powerful but to a group representing one of the lowliest occupations in class-conscious Israel: "Fear not: for behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, who is Christ the Lord. . . . And suddenly there was with the angel, a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace; goodwill to men." [^12] With the shepherds would the hearts of people everywhere be turned to say, "Let us now go . . . and see this thing which is come to pass." [^13]

Ancient manger at Megiddo in the Jezreel Valley. A manger was a feeding trough for animals and was made of stone—not of wood, as is so often imagined. Jesus, as a baby, was wrapped tightly in swaddling clothes and laid in a manger—and truly Jesus is the stone of Israel.

The shepherds quietly spread the word about the child, while in the heavens a new star appeared. Wise men came from the east, following the star. Who were these men? Some have speculated they were Jews of the diaspora, living in Persia, who had pored over records enough to discern heavenly signs and their meaning. Innocently, they went first to the palace of Herod. They asked, "Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen his star in the east, and are come to worship him." [^14] Troubled, Herod called the chief priests and scribes to ask where it was prophesied that the king should be born. They answered that it was Bethlehem, "for out of thee shall come the Messiah, who shall save my people Israel." [^15] Then lying Herod told the men, "Go and search diligently for the young child; and when ye have found him, bring me word again, that I may come and worship him also." [^16]

The Nile River flows through Egypt, bringing the miracle of life to the surrounding desert region. Joseph and Mary and the baby Jesus fled Palestine by command of the angel and came to Egypt to live until the death of wicked Herod. All of the journeyings out of Egypt and the experiences in the wilderness of the house of Israel are types of the Savior's life and mission and of our lives as well.

To the glorious, golden temple Joseph and Mary came bearing Jesus forty-one days after His birth to present Him to the Father. The child Jesus, as the firstborn son of a Hebrew family, had to be redeemed, and Mary, having given birth, had to be purified. The wealthy bought lambs for the burnt offering of purification, but this family was poor and bought the offering of the poor—a turtledove or a young pigeon. Among the worshipers at the temple that morning was devout Simeon, brought there by the Spirit, for it had been revealed unto him "that he should not see death, before he had seen the Lord's Christ." Seeing the baby, he rejoiced and took Him into his arms, blessing God and saying, "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace." [^17] Then, looking at Mary, he prophesied, "A spear shall pierce through him to the wounding of thine own soul also." [^18] Already, Golgotha cast a shadow in their lives.

Aged Anna, too, stepped forward to bear joyful witness that this child was the Lord, but in his palace not far away Herod was not so joyful. This promised King of the Jews was a threat to his power, and Herod's mad and frenzied history showed that he responded to threat with violence. "His whole career was red with the blood of murder. He had massacred priests and nobles; he had decimated the Sanhedrin; he had caused the High Priest, his brother-in-law . . . to be drowned in pretended sport before his eyes; he had ordered the strangulation of his favorite wife, . . . though she seems to have been the only [one] whom he passionately loved." [^19] His three sons, the uncle and father of his wife, his mother-in-law, his friends, all fell victim to his suspicious and guilty terrors. Now he added to the pool of blood at his door by ordering the death of all the children from two years and under in Bethlehem and the nearby coasts, hoping thereby to massacre Jesus. Thus the revelation was fulfilled, "In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation and weeping, and great mourning, Rachael weeping for [the loss of] her children, and would not be comforted because they were not." [^20]

One apocryphal source gives insight into how John was spared: "Elizabeth also, hearing that her son John was about to be searched for, took him and went up unto the mountains. . . . But Herod made search after John, and sent servants to Zacharias . . . at the altar, and said unto him: 'Where hast thou hid thy son?' And he answered and said to them 'I am a minister of God, and a servant at the altar; how should I know where my son is? . . . I am a martyr for God, and if he shed my blood, the Lord will receive my soul. Besides, know that ye shed innocent blood.'" Then they slew Zacharias "in the entrance of the temple and altar." [^21]

Jesus was spared because an angel appeared to Joseph in vision, telling him to flee with Mary and the child to Egypt. The Lord had said of His people, "Israel is my son, even my firstborn," [^22] and because the Lord works in patterns, types, and shadows, the miracles, events, and deliverances of Israel's past were reenacted in the life of Christ. The prophets spoke of both Israel and Christ when they wrote, "Out of Egypt have I called my son." [^23]

Ancient aqueduct that carried water some twelve miles from a source on Mt. Carmel here to Caesarea on the Mediterranean coast. Herod died a most terrible death, "swollen with disease and scorched by thirst, ulcerated externally and glowing inwardly with a 'soft slow fire,' surrounded by plotting sons and plundering slaves." Knowing that no one would shed one tear of sorrow at his passing, he gathered all the principal families and the chiefs of the tribes in his kingdom to his Jericho palace and gave order that at the second of his passing, all of them were to be massacred.

When Herod was dead, an angel came to Joseph in a vision, saying to take Jesus and His mother home again. They settled in Nazareth, but every spring, joining with others in festive company and probably chanting psalms, Joseph and Mary went to Jerusalem for the Feast of Passover. At twelve, Jesus came along, entering the grand city Jerusalem, with its royal gardens and gleaming towers, its streets swollen with visitors, and the bleating of sacrificial lambs. Standing above the rest, in His mind, however, must have been the temple.

Wherever Romans, Persians, or Greeks went, they could take their gods with them, but for the Jews, there was only one temple in one place, Jerusalem, where the priesthood could offer acceptable sacrifices, where stood the golden altar and the candlestick shedding its perpetual light. Their history and their hearts were wound around the temple, and, in times of dispersion, the longing remained. In fact, "it was said that whoever had not seen the Temple of Herod had never seen a beautiful building." [^24] Though it lacked the Ark of the Covenant and the Urim and Thummim, though the Shechinah, the Divine Presence, was absent, still Jesus acknowledged it as His Father's house and as His house. [^25]

As Mary and Joseph left Jerusalem, they had traveled a day's journey before they discovered that Jesus was not in the company. After three days, "they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, and they were hearing him, and asking him questions." [^26] The learned, whose lives had been spent searching the nuances and legal meanings of each phrase of scripture, marveled at the startling precocity of this boy, the depth of His scriptural understanding. How evident this understanding was during His later ministry as He taught others, saying, "Have ye not read . . . ?" [^27] Somewhat reproachfully, Mary said, "Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us?" to which He answered, "Knew ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" [^28] Perhaps already, as the boy Jesus watched the sacrifice of the paschal lambs, He knew of that Passover day to come when He, the Lamb, would be the sacrifice.

Thirteenth-century arches on the temple mount in Jerusalem. The ancient temple was 162 feet high—a commanding structure on the 40-acre temple lot of Jesus' day. On feast and holy days, more than 100,000 people would gather about the temple.

Of the upbringing of Jesus the record is significantly silent, yet it is certain that He was subject to His parents and was taught the ways of God. Likely at the doorway of their home was the mezuzah, a folded parchment upon which the name of the Most High was written, that reverence might be paid to it upon entering or leaving. [^29] As a boy, He would have learned from the Psalms, "The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in." [^30]

Modern city of Nazareth in the Galilee looking to the northwest. Jesus grew up here and learned his father's trade of carpentry. Another translation suggests he was an "artificer" or "craftsman." Surely He used this knowledge to later teach about a "wise man, which built his house upon a rock," and of another, who, "intending to build a tower, sitteth . . . down first, and counteth the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it."

As a Jewish boy, His earliest lessons from the Torah would likely have been from the book of Leviticus, the particulars of the law of Moses. Here He would have studied about sacrifices, burnt offerings, the Day of Atonement. Could His own Messianic consciousness have been awakened as He repeated these ordinances? Was there a day, reading the scriptures, that He finally realized they were speaking of Him?

Luke said that Jesus "increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and man . . . and the grace of God was upon him." [^31] John saw that Jesus did not receive a fullness of all things at once "but received grace for grace . . . until he received a fulness." [^32] In Nazareth, Jesus served under Joseph, "and he spake not as other men, neither could he be taught; for he needed not that any man should teach him." [^33] Here He learned the trade of a carpenter. He must, too, have carefully observed the natural world, for His teaching would be laced with illustrations—the wheat and the tares, the lilies of the field, the habits of shepherds.

Being reared in Galilee was no compliment for a Rabbi or teacher of the law. A common saying of the day was, "If a person wishes to be rich, let him go north [to Galilee]; if he wants to be wise, let him come south [to Judea]." [^34] Hence could a question of doubt arise, "Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth?" [^35]

Imagine the tender feelings of Mary for her Son, for she knew who this child was. Still Mary "kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart." [^36] "What marvelous and sacred secrets were treasured in that mother's heart. . . . He was hers, and yet in a very real sense not wholly hers." [^37] "And after many years, the hour of his ministry drew nigh." [^38]

Light dances onto grass in a dry, stone wash just outside Nazareth. Surely the boy Jesus knew well all of the gullies, paths, and forests around Nazareth. Perhaps Messianic consciousness was touched as He looked from the hills of Nazareth to the Jezreel Valley, where the battle of Armageddon will yet be fought.

There was commotion in the wilderness of Judea a full day's journey from Jerusalem. A man, not unlike Elijah the Tishbite of old, dressed in rough camel's hair clothing, was crying with a loud voice, "Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." The dusty descent of nearly 4,000 vertical feet from Jerusalem to the river Jordan was crowded with multitudes seeking this widow's son who was raised in the deserts on "locusts and wild honey." [^39] John, who was filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb, was ordained by an angel at eight days old "to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the Lord before the face of his people, to prepare them for the coming of the Lord." [^40]

What a dark kingdom He had come to overthrow! In ancient times high priests had been appointed by God. Now Annas had been appointed high priest by the immoral Roman, Quirinius, and Caiaphas after him was appointed by Valerius Gratus. On the great altar in Herod's Temple, sacrifices were offered to the emperor and for the well-being of the empire. Absent from Judah was revelation, miracle, and prophecy. No wonder the people were stirred by the charismatic John preaching in the boiling desert! Some who taught them were self-appointed. John, as he acknowledged himself, was sent by the Lord. He preached with sweeping, renewing power to bear one anothers' burdens, help the poor, feed the hungry: "He that hath two coats, let him impart to him that hath none." [^41]

To those like the Pharisees who rested their salvation upon their bloodline or their knowledge of the law and came only to see a spectacle, John said boldly, "O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come? . . . Begin not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, That God is able to make of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham." To those who had faith and brought forth the fruits of repentance by confessing their sins, John administered baptism by immersion in the water of Jordan and in Ãnon, "because there was much water there." [^42]

Flowers coming forth from the Judean desert in spring. John preached in these regions with multitudes coming great distances to hear and be baptized by him. The Lord's covenant with Abraham concerning circumcision at eight days old was tied to baptism: "that thou mayest know for ever that children are not accountable before me until they are eight years old."

The sacred waters of the Jordan River as beams of light stream from heaven. In a most literal sense Jesus descended below all things, for His baptism took place at the lowest area of the earth, 1,300 feet below sea level. The nature of the Godhead can clearly be seen on this sacred occasion, with three distinct Beings, God the Father, His Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost.

That day of days had arrived—a day when heaven and earth would meet. By eternal plan the Son of the Highest would now come to John to be baptized of him. John was the only legal administrator in the affairs of the kingdom then on the earth, holding the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood. [^43] He was baptizing at Bethabara, "the house of the ford," the place where tradition says the children of Israel bearing the Ark of the Covenant crossed the river on dry ground to enter the promised land. [^44]

The ordinance of baptism was common to the Jews. They saw it like this: as a newly baptized person "stepped out of these waters he was considered as 'born anew'—in the language of the Rabbis, as if he were 'a little child just born.' . . . The past, with all that belonged to it, was past, and he was a new man—the old, with its defilements, was buried in the waters of baptism." [^45]

Still, baptism was more ancient even than Israel. It had been established at the beginning of time, for Adam "was caught away by the Spirit of the Lord, and was carried down into the water, and was laid under the water, and was brought forth out of the water. And thus he was baptized." [^46]

Now, seventy-six generations from Adam, came the one who had instituted the ordinance. What a moment in all eternity to see, standing at the water's edge, this Elias and the sinless Messiah, who had no need of being cleansed. John, in reverential awe, said, "I have need to be baptized of thee, and why comest thou to me?" Then Jesus spoke: "Suffer me to be baptized of thee, for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness." [^47] The ancient prophet Nephi expounded on this moment: "If the Lamb of God, he being holy, should have need to be baptized by water, to fulfill all righteousness, O then, how much more need have we, being unholy, to be baptized, yea, even by water!" [^48]

So John went with Jesus into the water and baptized Him by immersion. "And Jesus . . . went straightway out of the water; and John saw, and lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and lighting upon Jesus. And lo, he heard a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Hear ye him." [^49]

Locust tree in the wilderness of Judea near Jericho. Seeds from the locust pod provide nourishment to poor people of the desert and were likely part of the diet of John the Baptist. These husks, too, were fed to swine and cattle as fodder.

Because the stern and impassioned John had caused such an uproar among the people, instigating a popular movement that cut to the heart of Jerusalem's puffed-up hypocrisy, some thought perhaps he was the chosen one, the great Messiah, who would redeem Israel. The Jews, therefore, sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask John, "Who art thou? And he confessed, and denied not that he was Elias," but he also added, "I am not the Christ." Then some question arose as to which Elias he was, as their Jewish scriptures indicated clearly that one Elias was a voice crying in the wilderness to prepare the way of the Lord and another Elias was to restore all things. John clarified which Elias he was: "I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord." [^50]

As the forerunner for the Messiah, John said plainly, "He shall come . . . to take away the sins of the world, . . . to gather together those who are lost, . . . and to be a light unto all who sit in darkness." [^51] "I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance: but he that cometh . . . whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire." [^52]

After Christ's baptism, John was bold, emphatic that Jesus was the Lamb of God. He had been told to recognize Him by a sign, and the sign had been given. "When he was baptized of me," said John, "I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him. And I knew him; for he who sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me; Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he who baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And I saw and bare record that this is the Son of God." [^53]

Light shimmers across the waters of the Jordan River in early morning. John's call "was not a call to armed resistance, but to repentance. . . . The hope which he held out was not of earthly possessions, but of purity. . . . For himself he sought nothing; for them he had only one absorbing thought: The Kingdom was at hand, the King was coming—let them prepare!"

John continued baptizing and preaching another year after Jesus' baptism, but now his entire effort would be to send his loyal followers to the Lord. "He must increase, but I must decrease," [^54] John told his disciples. Jesus would later say of John, "He was a burning and a shining light: and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light." [^55]

Time-honored site of the Mount of Temptation, where Satan tempted the Lord after His forty-day fast. If indeed this is the mountain where Christ was shown the kingdoms of the world, the lush oasis of Jericho would have been in plain view before him, with Herod's cities with a "grove of the best trees for magnitude" and graceful palms and fruits in rich abundance of every variety.

Shortly after His baptism, "Jesus was led up of the Spirit, into the wilderness, to be with God." [^56] He would be there forty days, fasting and praying, communing with His Father, seeking to understand the full import of His mission and of His Father's will. This was a tender relationship between the Father and Son. During His ministry, Jesus would seek His Father often, pulling Himself away from the pressing crowds, "continu[ing] all night in prayer." [^57] One account says of such a prayer, "The eye hath never seen, neither hath the ear heard, before, so great and marvelous things as we saw and heard Jesus speak unto the Father." [^58]

In this barren wilderness where the sounds of wild beasts filled the chilly nights and the temperatures could soar to 120 degrees during the day, Jesus fasted, not to afflict Himself but in a spirit of rejoicing, [^59] sustained by an exaltation of spirit. Isaiah had written, "Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?" [^60] Still, at the end of forty days, He was hungry and physically weak when Satan chose this moment of apparent vulnerability to come to Him. What won't mortals do to appease the gnawing pangs of starvation? Esau sold his birthright; others have fought like animals. So Satan came to Him with taunting and enticing words: "If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread." [^61] This was an assault on two levels—not only that He should use the powers natural to Him as the Son of God to appease His own appetite, but also that He should prove beyond any possibility of doubt that He was indeed the Son of God. At the waters of Jordan, God the Father had just called Jesus His beloved Son, but Satan was asking, "Are you really? Why not prove His love? Why not prove your worthiness?" "If thou be the Son of God . . . " Satan had introduced the doubt, using the same pattern he would use to discourage mortals through the generations of time, attacking their worthiness, their sense of mission, their sense of the Father's care.

The southwest corner of the temple complex in Jerusalem. Although not traditionally thought of as the "pinnacle of the temple," if the Lord were brought to this corner and tempted by Satan to jump, the miraculous retrieval by angels would have been seen by thousands in the temple and in the crowded markets below, and surely the spectacle would have been taken as a messianic sign.

Jesus was not deceived, answering, "It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." Next, the Spirit set Jesus on the pinnacle of the temple, and the devil came, saying, "If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down: for it is written, He shall give his angels charge concerning thee: and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone." Again the implication of doubt, again from Christ the unflinching integrity: "Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God." [^62] Then, from the top of a high mountain, Jesus looked over the kingdoms of the world with their wealth and splendor as Satan promised Him all these things if Christ would worship him. Jesus, as a mortal, may not have had memory of His preexistent state, when He had created all things, but could there have been a greater affront than to offer Him what was already His? Jesus later said, "Fear not, little children, for . . . I have overcome the world." [^63] As one who had the attributes of both God and man, He endured and suffered the temptations common to mortality, and He triumphed, not only in these encounters with Satan but through a lifetime of temptation.

Flowers and grasses growing in the Galilee. Surely nature responded as the Creator walked among the flora and sat upon the rocks teaching the people. The Galilee was green and lush while Judea was more arid and brown. News of the Master spread with amazing swiftness to the regions round about Galilee, and throngs gathered to hear for themselves the Rabbi who "taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes."

"He has come." The word of Jesus spread quietly and powerfully, especially among the disciples of John. At first, it was a simple testimony of one person passed on to another. John stood with two of his disciples as Jesus walked by, and John said, "Behold the Lamb of God." Turning, they followed Jesus, wondering where He lived. "Come and see," [^64] He said. "Come and see": it was a refrain for all of Israel, for all humanity. We see Him with outstretched arms in invitation, "Come." Not come when you are worthy or come when you are perfect, not come when your life is cleared of distractions or pain, but come now, come as you are; arise, cast off your burdens, ye heavy laden, and come.

One of the two disciples, Andrew, profoundly stirred by seeing and hearing Jesus, went immediately to his own brother, Simon, and said with an excitement built of generations of yearning, "We have found the Messias." Come and see. The next day, the Lord Himself found Philip and offered the invitation to come: "Follow me." Philip shared the good news with Nathanael: "We have found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, did write, Jesus of Nazareth." "Come and see," [^65] said Philip. How much more readily the open-minded, robust Galileans would receive the invitation than the formalists of Jerusalem.

The path that the Lord would ask His disciples to follow would not be an easy one, yet Isaiah prophesied, "He will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths." Perhaps learning had overcome the Judeans, for their hearts were stony and hardened, while the hearts of the Galileans were generally more open and accepting of the Savior's teachings.

Nathanael came, and Jesus greeted him: "Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!" "Whence knowest thou me?" the puzzled Nathanael asked. How could this Jesus know his heart, his thoughts? Jesus answered, "Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee." [^66] This Jesus was also a seer, one for whom "secret things be made manifest, and hidden things shall come to light." [^67] It was a witness for Nathanael as he confessed, "Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel." Jesus replied, "Because I said . . . I saw thee under the fig tree, believest thou? thou shalt see greater things than these." [^68] "I . . . know my sheep," [^69] Jesus would say, and indeed He did, whether under fig trees or in the fields. In the secret places of their hearts and souls, this Lord has personal, intimate knowledge of each soul. Even a sparrow "shall not fall on the ground without" the Father's knowing it. "But the very hairs of your head are all numbered." [^70]

Bougainvillea growing in rich abundance in Jericho; it is used in traditional weddings for decorating and for adorning the hair of the bride. Tradition and scriptures emphasize the relationship of husband and bride with Jehovah and His people: "Thus the bridal pair on the marriage-day symbolized the union of God with Israel."

At a Hebrew wedding, late in the evening, the bridegroom set forth from his house, attended by friends and singers, to get the bride and bring her home for a feast. The guests were given fitting robes, and the feast was filled with riddles and amusements. Jesus was in attendance at such a wedding in Cana when His mother, Mary, apparently having some responsibility for the festivities, came to Him because they had run out of wine. John the Baptist, fasting and garbed in camel hair, lived an ascetic life, apart from the world, but Jesus came among the people, associating with others in social friendship, a trait for which He would later be criticized. When Mary told Him of the wine shortage, the traditional text says that He answered, "Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet come." [^71] That seems like a rebuke from this Son to His mother, inconsistent with His character. But another translation tells us better. He said, "Woman, what wilt thou have me to do for thee? that will I do; for mine hour is not yet come." [^72] In the home stood six stone waterpots used for the washing required by the intricate rules of the Mishnah. Jesus instructed the servants to fill them. Then He said, "Draw out now, and bear unto the governor of the feast." [^73] Apparently without gesture or word, He had transformed the water brimming in these pots into an abundance of wine, at least 120 gallons. It was such a delicious wine that when the governor of the feast tasted it, he called the bridegroom in surprise. The best wine was traditionally served first, but "thou," said the governor "hast kept the good wine until now." [^74] The Lord had provided generously as He said, "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly." [^75] He is not a God of scarcity and austerity, making humanity scramble for their needs. He is the Lord of gracious giving and fruitfulness. This, the first recorded of the Lord's miracles, looks forward to the last when He will reign in a millennial time, a time of peace and plenty when even the fruit of the earth will yield "ten-thousandfold." [^76]

Ancient stone waterpot in Cana of the period of Jesus' time. Such vessels held fifteen to twenty-five gallons. Mary's request of her Son showed her absolute trust in Him. Surely others, as they witnessed the miracle, began to build their faith and hope in the Messiah. The records do not indicate any "audible command or formula of invocation" on Jesus' part; the servants simply filled the pots with water at his request and drew out the sweetest wine.

The first Passover after His forty-day fast, Jesus took a scourge of small cords and cleansed the temple, His Father's house. He healed, blessed, and taught, and He openly confronted the formal religious powers of Jerusalem. Gone were the days of obscurity in Galilee. Few could ignore the fact that this unknown prophet worked such miracles as had never before been seen in Israel.

These miracles attracted Nicodemus, one of the seventy-one members of the powerful Jewish Sanhedrin. "As a judicial body the Sanhedrin constituted a supreme court, to which belonged in the first instance the trial of false prophets." [^77] This assemblage of priests and Pharisees traced its origin in the Mishna to the seventy elders whom Moses had called to help govern the Israelites. [^78]

The glow of small lights illuminates a scene in streets of old Jerusalem at night. All the references to Nicodemus in the gospels remind the reader of his coming to the Master by night, likely because his discipleship had to be kept secret since he was a Pharisee and member of the Sanhedrin. Any Pharisee who believed in Jesus openly was excommunicated.

Nicodemus came to see Jesus at night, likely so the visit would not be known by his colleagues of the corrupted Sanhedrin. This government master addressed the Man of Galilee as "Rabbi," a highly respected title. "We know that thou art a teacher come from God," he said, "for no man can do these miracles that thou doest except God be with him." [^79] Perhaps Nicodemus' phrase "we know" indicates there were other would-be disciples among the leaders of the Jews with less brave hearts who sent him as their inquirer. "It must have been a mighty power of conviction, to break down prejudice so far as to lead this old Sanhedrist to acknowledge a Galilean, untrained in the Schools, as a Teacher come from God." [^80]

Jesus told Nicodemus outright, "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." [^81] This meant repentance, baptism, and more. Born again meant having a heart that was changed through the Spirit so that one had "no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually." Someone born of the Spirit would have a heart "changed through faith on his name," [^82] knowing "love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith." [^83] Though Nicodemus was a supposed master in Israel, he could not at first comprehend the idea. Still, he became a secret believer who would later stand up for the Lord before accusers in the Sanhedrin.

Wind blowing through a field of wheat in the upper hills above the Sea of Galilee. Jesus told Nicodemus, "The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit." Jesus was trying to help this "master of Israel" come to understand the gentle but sure and powerful workings of the Spirit of the Lord in the conversion process.

The time was nearly noon when Jesus and His disciples arrived in a city of Samaria on their way to Galilee. The journey had been mountainous and long, and Jesus was wearied as He sat down at the very well dug by Jacob, the father of the tribes of Israel. Having sent His friends to the city to buy food, Jesus was alone when the Samaritan woman came to the well.

The village of Sychar at the base of Mt. Gerazim, a mountain holy to the Samaritans. It was some distance from here to the well of Jacob, perhaps two miles. According to tradition, Mt. Gerazim had miraculously been left uncovered by the waters of the flood and therefore, to the Samaritans, was the true place to worship, not the temple on Mt. Moriah in Jerusalem.

The Samaritans were hated by the Jews, considered "as a mongrel lot, unworthy of decent respect. When the Ten Tribes were led into captivity by the king of Assyria, foreigners were sent to populate Samaria. These intermarried with such Israelites as had escaped the captivity" [^84] and began to change the religion of Israel to suit their purpose, saving some form of Jehovah worship but adopting rituals the Jews regarded as unorthodox. The Jews would take long detours around Samaria just to avoid contact with these people.

How surprising, then, that Jesus had chosen to come this way and that He would speak to a Samaritan, especially a woman. His smallest choices were always filled with meaning.

Water container made in Hebron of the type and style in use during the first century A.D. A waterpot was a precious vessel to a family and provided for their daily needs of cooking, bathing, and drinking. The message of the Messiah to this meek woman was so moving that she left her waterpot and went to the village to tell all of her discovery: "Is not this the Christ?"

Water would usually have been drawn from the well in the early morning or evening, but this despised woman came at noon, probably to avoid the disdain of others. Jesus surprised the woman by speaking to her: "Give me to drink." When she wondered why He spoke to her, He answered, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water." [^85] Could this man offer her something that would lighten her daily task of drawing water? He offered much more, a well of water springing up into everlasting life, "which gift is the greatest gift of all the gifts of God." [^86] When He asked her to get her husband, she replied that she had none. Then He told her something that struck her to the heart. He knew that she had had five husbands and that the man she lived with now was not her husband. How could this lowliest of women be so well known to the Lord? "Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet," [^87] she said. The Lord told her more in the first outright declaration of His identity: "I who speak unto thee am the Messias." [^88] The woman ran with joy into the city, leaving her earthen waterpot and old life behind, and many believed her words.

Early morning silhouette of cliffs at Nazareth with Mt. Tabor to the right in the background. At the end of Jesus' sermon in the synagogue at Nazareth, the people asked, "Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary?" Such a comment, referring to Him only by the tie to His mother, was pointed to slander Him as illegitimate.

The synagogues of Galilee had never heard a voice like that of Jesus Christ, and He came to Nazareth to teach the people. They all knew Him, for He had spent nearly three decades in this town, learning and growing, gathering with the others at the synagogue. "And, as his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day." [^89] Surely the rumors were already flying about some of the miracles He had performed, and His neighbors were curious to see Him again. The chief ruler of the synagogue invited Jesus to act as the Sheliach Tsibbur, the messenger or delegate of the congregation. Jesus would have conducted the devotions, starting with set prayers: "Blessed be Thou, O Lord, King of the world, Who formest the light and createst the darkness. . . . With great love hast Thou loved us. . . . Have mercy upon us, and teach us." Then the Jewish Shema or creed was recited by Jesus: "True it is that Thou art Jehovah, our God, and the God of our fathers, . . . our Saviour, . . . the Rock of our Salvation." [^90] Here He was in their midst! What majesty! What power as He spoke these words about Himself! Then the minister delivered unto Jesus the scroll of Isaiah, for the custom was now to read passages from the Prophets, and Jesus began, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord." [^91]

Then Jesus sat down, for now the custom allowed the delegate to make comments on the reading from the scriptures, "and the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on him." He told them, "This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears." [^92] In their amazement some began to say, "Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary?" "And they were offended at him." [^93] Responding with great violence and wrath, they "rose up, and thrust him out of the city, and led him unto the brow of the hill . . . that they might cast him down headlong. But he passing through the midst of them went his way." [^94] Jesus was not accepted in His own country.

Catch of the morning on the Sea of Galilee at Tiberias. These fish are called "casief" and at maturity weigh between fifteen and forty pounds each, being some of the largest in this sea. Fishing at the time of Christ was chiefly done by means of a dragnet drawn in toward the land in a large semicircle.

As a Master in Israel, Jesus began gathering disciples—those who would learn His ways, do His will, and enter into complete fellowship with His work. [^95] Jesus came walking by the shore of the Galilee and saw Andrew and Peter as they were casting their nets into the sea. He called out to them, "I am he of whom it is written by the prophets; follow me, and I will make you fishers of men." [^96] In the Hebrew, this expression to bid another to follow was a permanent call. [^97] "And they, believing on his words, left their net, and straightway followed him." The three of them went a little farther and found James and John mending their nets on their ship. These sons of Zebedee were partners with Andrew and Peter in the lucrative fishing trade on the Galilee. "And he called them. And they immediately left their father in the ship, and followed him." [^98] Later, when the Lord asked them if they would ever leave Him they would answer, "To whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life." [^99]

North shore of the Galilee near Capernaum, where Jesus often taught His followers. Luke's account records that as Jesus first called the four fishing partners to be His disciples, they were, at His direction, given to find a "great multitude of fishes," so many that their nets broke and it took two boats to haul them in.

Word of the teacher who proclaimed astonishing doctrine with great power spread like brushfire through the Galilee. He healed a nobleman's son and cast an unclean spirit out of a man in the synagogue where He taught, "and the fame of him went out into every place of the country round about." [^100] People flocked to Him bearing their infirmities and sicknesses, their "diverse diseases and torments," [^101] and He had mercy on them. Wounded in the body or the heart, they came that He might give unto them "beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness." [^102] At Peter's house in Capernaum, He healed Peter's mother-in-law sick with a fever, and at sunset "all the city was gathered together at the door." [^103] "He laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them." [^104] The next morning, seeking His Father, Jesus retreated into a solitary place to pray, but He was not to be alone long for Peter soon found Him, saying, "All men seek for thee" [^105] —all needed healing for the bruises of mortality. "Sing, O heavens, and be joyful, O earth; and break forth into singing, O mountains: for the Lord hath comforted His people, and will have mercy on His afflicted." [^106]

Uncompleted arch at Capernaum missing its keystone. Some Pharisees were so far from the spirit of the law that they could not accept or understand that Jesus could truly be the Messiah. "Indeed the whole spirit of their religion was summed up, not in confession of sin and in humility, but in a proud self-righteousness at variance with any true conception of man's relation to either God or his fellow creatures."

On another day while He preached at Capernaum, so many were gathered at the door of Peter's home where Jesus stayed that there was no room to receive them. To the crowd gathered at the door came a group bearing a man taken with palsy. Unable to make it through the press of people, but with a determined certainty that Christ could and would heal the man, they climbed up to the roof of the house, removed the tiles, and lowered the man on his bed to Jesus. Imagine the surprise of the crowd, the hands that would reach out to steady the bed, the upturned, hopeful face of the one who had been so long afflicted as his eyes caught the eyes of the Savior. "Son, be of good cheer," said the Christ. "Thy sins be forgiven thee." [^107] But the Pharisees muttered among themselves, "Who is this which speaketh blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone?" [^108] Perceiving their thoughts, Jesus asked, "Whether is easier, to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Arise and walk?" [^109] The Son of God had come to heal both body and soul, and the people marveled as they saw the man leap from his bed: "We have seen strange things to day." [^110]

Six-pointed star found in the ruins at Capernaum, probably dating to the fourth century A.D. These two triangles, joined together, represent unity, lights and perfections. There is a Jewish oral tradition that says that the six-pointed star was engraved upon David's battle shield, and that the six outer triangles marked the six aspects of the Lord's spirit: "the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord."

Excavations at the site of the Pool of Bethesda in Jerusalem. Because Jerusalem has been destroyed at least twenty-five times, most of the original features of the city at the time of Christ are buried from twelve to twenty-eight feet below the present-day city. So thorough was the destruction of the "City of Gold" in A.D. 68 that the only thing it was left good for was plowing and planting.

The Lord had given Israel the Sabbath as a day of peace and spiritual renewal. Every seventh year the land was to rest to enhance its fertility, and after seven times seven the fiftieth year was a time of jubilee. But rabbis with furrowed brows multiplied the law, adding injunctions, restraints, and even the specter of capital punishment for trifling infractions. Thus some rabbis even held it as sin to walk on the grass on the Sabbath in case it be in seed, a form of threshing of the grain. Jesus the revolutionary did not come to be bound by hollow traditions or false formalisms, but to do "nothing . . . but what He seeth the Father do." At the synagogue was a man with a withered hand, and the Pharisees watched Jesus to see if He would heal the man on the Sabbath day. Knowing their thoughts, Jesus asked, "Is it lawful on the sabbath days to do good, or to do evil? to save life, or to destroy it?" [^111] And He commanded the man to stretch forth his hand that it might be healed. "The Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath day." [^112]

Flowers of Solomon's Crown are abundant in Israel and are a reminder of the splendor of the Lord's creations and of the nothingness of the kingdoms of men. A multitude "of impotent folk, of blind, halt, [and] withered" would wait at the pool of Bethesda for a miraculous movement of the water that brought healing to them. On the Sabbath Jesus healed a man there who had been unable to walk for thirty-eight years.

The time had now come for Jesus to organize His kingdom on the earth in the meridian of time, building "upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone." [^113] He found solitude in a mountain apart where He could commune with His holy Father, for He would choose those who had been foreordained in the premortal existence to serve in this high and holy calling. He searched the hearts of those among His disciples to find twelve whose special mission would be to witness of Him to all the world. And Jesus "continued all night in prayer to God." [^114] As the sun rose the next morning, He called His apostles unto Him. He ordained and set them apart by the laying on of hands. "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you," He told them, "that ye should go and bring forth fruit." [^115]

The last light of evening touches a solitary spot on the top of Mt. Arbel high above the Sea of Galilee. Jesus could have come to this place as He sought for guidance, inspiration, and revelation from His Father concerning the calling of His special witnesses. The pattern beckons the faithful to find solitary places and to seek for blessings and direction from the heavens.

These were simple men, all Galileans save one; men who were not trained as rabbis or scribes but whose spirits could resonate with the words of life the Savior had to offer. Their names have come down to us as familiar friends: Simon Peter, James and John, Andrew, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Thomas, Alpheus' son James, Judas (also known as Thaddeus), Simon Zelotes, and Judas Iscariot, the only Judean of the Twelve. "Ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called: But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise." [^116]

These Twelve, under the tutelage of the Master, would be transformed into powerful witnesses and would see visions, receive revelations, work wonders, and carry the burden of the kingdom of God on the earth. "Behold," the Savior would warn them, "I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves; be ye therefore wise servants, and as harmless as doves. . . . And ye shall be hated of all the world for my name's sake; but he that endureth to the end shall be saved." [^117] All things would be asked of these special witnesses, even their very lives, for Peter and his brother Andrew would be crucified, James would be beheaded, and all would suffer a martyr's doom save the betrayer and John, for the Beloved desired to stay on the earth until the Lord came again.

With their holy calling, Jesus would give them the gifts He possessed and told them to "heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give." This would be the pattern for all the disciples of Christ. He taught them to rely on the Spirit, saying, "Take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak." [^118]

Evening glow upon a lone tree growing out of rock on top of Mount Arbel, with the Sea of Galilee in the background. The cliffs fall over 1,000 feet from here to the lower hills by the sea. So honored and trusted were the apostles of the Lord that their very names will be inscribed upon the twelve foundations of the wall of the holy city—the New Jerusalem.

"He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me," [^119] "and he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him." [^120] This was the promise of One whose promises are sure, whose word is truth and whose gifts are eternal. So these common men who started out as undisciplined, untutored children came "to the knowledge of the Son of God, . . . that we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine." [^121]
