Scot Facer Proctor, Maurine Jensen Proctor, Source of the Light: A Witness and Testimony of Jesus Christ, the Savior and Redeemer of All ( 1992)

Section 3:

THAT THEY MIGHT HAVE LIFE MORE ABUNDANTLY

Field of flowers touched by light in the hills on the east side of the Sea of Galilee. The Light of the World taught in these regions where people would gather by the thousands to hear His words and parables, witness His miracles and mercy, and glean from the powerful spirit that radiated from Him. A good portion of the Lord's ministry would take place here in the Galilee.

From Mt. Sinai Jehovah had delivered the great law to Moses. Now, from another mountain, with the blue sea of the Galilee spread below, He gave the new law of the gospel. Where the law of Moses had focused on outward performances, actions visible to the world and easy to see, the new law focused on the state of the heart, the flow of the soul. "Blessed are they . . . " the Lord said again and again, not so much commanding His followers as describing the happy life, the way of true well-being. "Oh, the happiness of" those who are meek, merciful, and pure in heart. The "natural man" might believe he must compete for his share of things, oppress others, fight for dominion, protect his ego, prove his importance, and be ever wary lest another take advantage of him, but this was the way of misery. "I give unto you to be the salt of the earth," Christ told His followers. "I give unto you to be the light of the world." [^1] He was teaching something far different from the world's frail lessons of success, of social survival of the fittest.

Traditional site on the north of the Sea of Galilee where Jesus taught the transcendent Sermon on the Mount. Jesus counseled His followers to lay up for themselves "treasures in heaven," not the things of this world "where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal." He was teaching a condition of the heart, attained only by being rooted in Him.

"Blessed are they that mourn," [^2] He said, or, in one translation of the Aramaic, healed "are those weak and overextended for their purpose; they shall feel their inner flow of strength return." [^3] The Lord's love could be counted on without fail to heal the wounded and worn out. "Blessed are the meek," [^4] He said, or, from the Aramaic, "Blessed are the gentle . . . who have softened what is rigid within; they shall receive physical vigor and strength from the universe." [^5] "Blessed are the pure in heart," [^6] blessed "are those whose lives radiate from a core of love; they shall see God everywhere." [^7] "Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy," [^8] "they shall find their own prayers answered." [^9] The meek, merciful, and purehearted may seem to be the ones overlooked and trampled in a world where pride and ego rule, but evil is paid back in a heart filled with anxiety and fear, a running for but never finding satisfaction. On the other hand, the Lord offered the way to draw us out of ourselves, to focus His light within us, to give us peace.

Clover blooming in abundance at the site of the Mount of Beatitudes in the Galilee. Jesus taught in the most cosmopolitan region of the country, the main road of the ancient world. It was the meeting point between Damascus and the Egyptian frontier, between Antioch and Jerusalem, where the trade routes from Tyre and Sidon and the imperial highways all met together and branched out over the country.

Burnt offerings had marked the law of Moses, and now the new law required another sacrifice. "Ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and a contrite spirit," [^10] Jesus would say. As an offering on the altar, true disciples must put their old selves, those complaining, protective, frightened selves that see the world through the blinders of their own will. The disciples must be transformed, born again, unafraid to render unto the Lord all that they have and are. They must not hold back even the slightest part of themselves, afraid of what the Lord will ask. As one disciple said, "I will give away all my sins to know thee," [^11] and indeed that is required. Just as new wine could not be put into old bottles, so a new society could not be built out of external performances.

Jesus asked that His disciples strip themselves of "jealousies and fears," [^12] that they strip themselves of pride. Two men, He said, went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and the other a publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus: "God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess. And the publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. I tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather than the other." [^13] Jesus asked that His disciples sacrifice their self-righteousness, their need to create a worthy impression. They were not to do their alms before men, or to make a great show of their prayers: "Pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly." [^14]

Where the law of Moses said one should not murder, now Christ said that His flock must sacrifice their anger, their contempt for their fellows, their enmity: "If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee; leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift." And not to your brother alone, but to your enemy as well: "Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also." In fact, Christ asked the seemingly impossible, the complete sacrifice of will, of returning love for injury: "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you." [^15] His flock would sacrifice retaliation, vengeance, even taking offense as cankers in the soul they could not afford. Instead of focusing on the sins of others, they would look to shed their own weaknesses with His help.

"Be ye . . . perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect," [^16] Jesus said. In the Greek and Hebrew, perfect means "whole, healed, complete, the end product of a process." It was an invitation to joy, for only when we are whole can we be free. It does not mean that we always perform perfectly or competently, but that, repentant, we have no inclination to do evil, having been cleansed through Christ's atoning sacrifice. Christ's disciples must ultimately choose whether at the center of their souls is their own self-importance or the Lord, for "no man can serve two masters." We cannot seek both personal gain and the kingdom of God. Only when our eye is single to the glory of God will our "whole body . . . be full of light." [^17]

A city that is set on a hill in modern times is the city of Nazareth in the Galilee. Though Jesus came to gather the lost sheep of Israel, He would not turn away any who displayed faith in His words. The Lord would give a charge to those He taught to be a light to the world and not to hide their testimonies under a basket.

"Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow," Jesus said to His disciples gathered on the hill. "They toil not, neither do they spin. And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon, in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of these. Therefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which today is, and to-morrow is cast into the oven, how much more will he not provide for you, if ye are not of little faith?" [^18] Christ, the careful observer of an earth that had been created to bear record of Him, saw everywhere its lessons of our complete dependence on Him. He told His followers, "Take no thought for your life," [^19] a weak translation of the Greek, which means "to be very anxious about something." [^20] They were not to be driven by fear, nervously trying to control all the elements of their lives. If, instead, they would make their focus the will of God, one day at a time, as surely as the flowers unfold, all things would work together for them: "Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature?" [^21] "Your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him." [^22]

Poppies and other wild flowers after a wet spring abound in the regions of the Galilee and the Judean wilderness. Some think that "lilies of the field" refers to any flower with a bulb, while others consider the daisy to be the obvious candidate since it is so abundant and is the only flower commonly used as a fuel in ovens.

This, however, suggested, an abiding in the Lord, not an occasional visit to Him in times of crisis, with mumbled excuses about bothering Him. It is turning our lives completely to Him, because without Him, we can do nothing. [^23] "Cry unto God for all thy support; yea, let all thy doings be unto the Lord, and whithersoever thou goest let it be in the Lord; yea let all thy thoughts be directed unto the Lord." [^24] Hear this plea with a promise: "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you." [^25] Jesus spoke of a loving, intimate Father, ever concerned with His children: "What man among you, having a son, and he shall be standing out, and shall say, Father, open thy house that I may come in and sup with thee, will not say, Come in, my son; for mine is thine, and thine is mine? Or what man is there among you, who, if his son ask bread, will give him a stone? Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father who is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?" [^26]

Part of ancient wall at the village of Nain near where Jesus raised the dead son of the widow. One sacred hymn tries to capture the kind of love displayed at Nain that day: "Dear to the heart of the Shepherd, Dear are the sheep of his fold; Dear is the love that he gives them; Dearer than silver or gold."

Wherever Jesus went, the blind saw and the lame walked, as the language of despair and utmost need always spoke to Him. He could read it in the face and the heart, and out of the infinite power of His love always came sympathetic response. If yesterday it was the healing of the centurion's servant, tomorrow it would be a new gladness, a fresh surprise, an unthought of possibility as He would say, "I have compassion on you." So on the road to Nain came a new gift, yet unseen in His ministry, this one to a widow weeping anguished tears for the loss of her only son.

Scholars have speculated that Jesus' own mother was a widow as no mention is made of Joseph after Jesus' twelfth year. Could Christ have also been thinking of His own mother and the loss to come of her Son, when He looked with such concern upon this twice-grieved woman of Nain? It was probably the evening, the time of funerals, when Jesus and His many followers coming from Capernaum met the grieving procession at the gate of the city of Nain. At Israelite funerals, mourning women would lament, musicians would play, and the widow would have probably directly preceded the dead, whose body would have been carried face up in an open wickerwood bier. The pageantry could have given scant comfort to this woman who had lost her only consolation.

Jesus saw her and, welling with compassion, said, "Weep not." Then He did what would have spelled defilement to a priest—He touched the dead body, but the touch of death could not render Him unclean. Jesus said, "Young man, I say unto thee, Arise. And he that was dead sat up, and began to speak." Here indeed was the Master of life, the one who could even awake the dead, and with love "He delivered [the boy] to his mother." [^27]

Light from the heavens filters through the clouds and touches the village of Nain. A multitude was following the Savior as they met the funeral procession coming out of the gate at Nain and heading eastward to the burying grounds. Jewish tradition called for all to yield to the bereaved out of piety and respect for the dead, but Jesus instead stopped the mourners and with love called the young son of the widow back to life.

Not much later, Jesus was dining at the home of Simon the Pharisee. Yet it is clear that the invitation had not come with any genuine warmth as Simon seems condescending toward his guest. Going against the customs of courtesy, he had not received Jesus with a kiss of welcome, provided water for washing the dust from His feet, nor supplied oil for anointing the hair of the head or beard. As they were lying around the table, their bodies resting on the couches, their feet turned away from the table, an unnamed woman, who was a sinner, slipped in the door. There was heavy prejudice against conversation with a woman of even lofty character, but to allow the attentions of a stained woman was unthinkable. Yet she must have heard the Savior promise rest to the heavy laden, inviting them to come unto Him, for she "stood at his feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment." When Simon saw this, he said in himself that this Jesus must be no prophet or He would have known "what manner of woman this is that toucheth him." Jesus said, "Simon, thou gavest me no water. . . . Thou gavest me no kiss. . . . My head with oil thou didst not anoint. . . . Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much." [^28] When the Pharisees tried to trap Jesus because He ate with publicans and sinners, He simply answered, "They that are whole have no need of the physician; but they that are sick. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance." [^29]

Thorns and thistles growing along the edge of a wheat field in the Galilee, choking the wheat. The parables of the Lord had a great power to reveal or conceal their message depending on the heart of the listener. Some came to Jesus only to see the sensational, and to them the messages of truth were hidden.

One spring day Jesus was sitting by the seaside, and such a multitude gathered to hear Him, He asked that a ship be brought near so He could preach from the water. These were eager hearers, some listening to learn and believe, others listening to find accusation. So Jesus taught them in parables, perhaps the most common teaching method among the rabbis. But His parables, unlike those of the rabbis, were filled with eternal verities meant to bring the listeners to God: "Behold, a sower went forth to sow; and when he sowed, some seeds fell by the way side, and the fowls came and devoured them up: some fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth. . . . Some fell among thorns; and the thorns sprung up, and choked them: but other fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit, some an hundredfold, some sixtyfold, some thirtyfold. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear." [^30]

The soil does not have much depth in the stony places, and therefore the wheat dies. Parables were a common mode of teaching in Jesus' day, but the rabbinic parables would often lead a follower only to further study of the Torah, not to introspective searching. For those whose eyes were blind to the truth, the use of parables was an act of mercy on the part of the Lord. "For of him unto whom much is given much is required; and he who sins against the greater light shall receive the greater condemnation."

The listeners understood one level of what He said, many of them being "sowers" of their small fields, but the Savior wanted them to ponder and understand the parables beyond the obvious. In those days, the sower could choose to cast the seed by hand or by the means of cattle. "In the latter case, a sack with holes was filled with corn and laid on the back of the animal," so that as it trudged about, "the seed was thickly scattered. Thus it might well be, that it would fall indiscriminately on beaten roadway, on stony places but thinly covered with soil, or where the thorns had not been cleared away, or as on good ground." [^31]

"Why speakest thou unto them in parables?" the Twelve asked. "Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given." Then Jesus further explained: "When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth it not, then cometh the wicked one, and catcheth away that which was sown in his heart. . . . But he that received the seed into stony places, the same is he that heareth the word, and . . . with joy receiveth it; yet hath he not root in himself, . . . for when tribulation or persecution ariseth, . . . by and by he is offended. . . . But he that received seed into the good ground is he that heareth the word, and understandeth it; . . . and bringeth forth" [^32] a bounteous harvest.

Storks are a common sight in Israel as here among the fields south of the Galilee. Israel is a major crossroads for bird migration, with thousands of pelicans, egrets, herons, gulls, and ducks familiar to people working the land. The word parable means "to throw or set alongside or near." Most of the Lord's parables are metaphorical stories. The scriptures document more than fifty different parables used by the Lord to teach His listeners.

The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field," the Lord continued. "But while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way." Then the servants of the householder, seeing all the tares among the blades of wheat, asked the householder why the field had tares. "An enemy hath done this," [^33] was the reply. The actual tares the Lord spoke of were abundant in Palestine, likely the darnel, a weed that looks so much like wheat that until the time of harvest they are difficult to distinguish from each other. [^34] "The field was the world," the Lord later explained to His disciples, "and the apostles were the sowers of the seed; and after they have fallen asleep the great persecutor of the church, the apostate, the whore, . . . even Satan, . . . behold he soweth the tares; wherefore the tares choke the wheat and drive the church into the wilderness." The Lord often talked of the great apostasy that would come after His ascension into heaven, and now He gave the warning in parabolic form so the disciples would recognize it after He left them. "But behold, in the last days, even now while the Lord is beginning to bring forth the word, and the blade is springing up and is yet tender, . . . the Lord saith, . . . let the wheat and the tares grow together until the harvest is fully ripe." [^35] Even the farmers of today would never try to weed their fields or separate the tares until the time of harvest. And separation was necessary, for the grains of the darnel, so similar in appearance to wheat, if eaten would produce convulsions or even death. [^36] "Then ye shall first gather out the wheat from among the tares, and after the gathering of the wheat, behold and lo, the tares are bound in bundles, and the field remaineth to be burned." [^37]

Early morning light glows in a field of wheat and tares growing together in the Galilee. The appearance of tares is so similar to wheat that one cannot accurately tell the difference until the time of harvest. But the day of separation will come. The tares will finally be gathered in bundles and burned.

A field played prominently in another classic parable. Christ said, "The kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field; the which when a man hath found . . . for joy thereof goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field." [^38] Notice that he gladly sold all that he possessed to obtain this eternal treasure. "No man can become a citizen of the kingdom by partial surrender of his earlier allegiances; he must renounce everything foreign to the kingdom or he can never be numbered therein." [^39]

Early morning light bathes the hillside where the temple of Zeus stands in the city of Jerash in Jordan. One of the ten cities of the Decapolis, Jerash was second in size only to Damascus in Jesus' day. Established in 332 B.C. by Alexander the Great, the city thrived for more than six hundred years. The site wasn't excavated until the 1920s. Greek influence can be seen throughout.

"Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom." [^40] Then as now, in every season, the gospel of Jesus Christ is marked by missionary work, giving the good news of peace in this world and eternal life in the world to come. "Success attends his labors; multitudes hang on his every word; there is more ministerial service to be performed than one man can do. He can preach in only one village at a time; there are others who need to be healed, others who cry out for the cleansing of their spirits and the healing of their bodies, others than those to whom he can minister personally." [^41] Telling His apostles, "The harvest truly is plenteous, but the labourers are few," [^42] Christ sent them out to gather the believers, out to the Decapolis, east of the Galilee. Wherever they went, they were His servants and ambassadors. One day the gospel would be preached to all people, but for now their charge was to find the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

Called by some "the city of a thousand pillars," Jerash is one of the most complete excavated sites of a Greco-Roman city in the world. Jerash was located on one of the major trade routes of the ancient world—the King's Highway. Jesus must have been well known here, for people from Jerash were following Him in the Galilee. While traveling "through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis," Jesus Himself may have visited here.

The Pharisees hoped to excite jealousy between Christ and the Baptist, urging John's disciples to ask him piercing questions like this one: "Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, behold, the same baptizeth, and all men come to him." [^43] But John was not to be taken by such a temptation. Yes, he had lived a life of strict self-denial; yes, his ministry had been short and of scanty fruit; and, yes, now he was decreasing as Christ increased. But all this was as it should be. John's nobility of spirit is nowhere more evident than as he watched his followers begin to turn to another, and he rejoiced.

Sunset glimmers from the waters of the Dead Sea 3,800 feet below the site of Machaerus, where, according to Josephus, John the Baptist was imprisoned and beheaded. Herod Antipas was in the beautiful palace below the impregnable fortress of Machaerus having a party when he made a whimsical promise that led to John's death. From this site one can view geographically the whole life of John.

Now his trials would deepen. Herod the Great's vicious son Herod Antipas ruled as tetrarch of Galilee. Threatened at John's charismatic hold on the people, Herod threw him into prison. He was also boiling at John's bold denunciation of his adulterous marriage with Herodias, his brother's wife. John languished several months in a terrible dungeon at the fortress, Machaerus, near the desolate, forsaken reaches of the Dead Sea, while Jesus continued His ministry. Some have conjectured that as John suffered there alone, he began to wonder, "Why does not the great Messiah deliver me? Is He truly the One who has been prophesied?" He did send two of his disciples to bear a message to Christ, asking, "Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another?" But this was not an expression of doubt from John, but a teaching moment for his disciples. He had heard the voice of the Father bearing testimony; he was not a "reed shaken with the wind." [^44] Most tender is this piece of information given to us in one translation: far from forgetting the imprisoned John, Jesus "sent angels . . . [who] ministered unto him." [^45]

Meanwhile, Herod was desperate. He knew that John was a just man and "heard him gladly," but at his birthday, Herodias' daughter Salome danced, and in front of the chief men of Galilee, Herod made a foolish promise: "Ask of me whatsoever thou wilt, and I will give it thee." [^46] She asked for John's head on a platter, and Herod delivered it, though afterward he would have night tremors about it. In the future, he would have the wretched dishonor of having stood in judgment on both John and Jesus.

As the apostles gathered themselves together again from their missionary labors, Jesus, perceiving their weariness, said, "Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest a while," for so many were coming to them that "they had no leisure so much as to eat." Boarding a ship, they retreated across the Galilee to a city on the eastern shore called Bethsaida, but word went ahead of them, and many people running on foot along the shore arrived before they did, clamoring to hear the Master. The Savior's unending giving allowed Him little time for rest. A multitude of 5,000 men as well as women and children gathered on the grassy fields of spring, looking like a colorful garden, some of them no doubt pilgrims on their way to the Passover in Jerusalem. Jesus looked upon the wandering multitude starving for the word and was moved with compassion, "for they were as sheep not having a shepherd." [^47] Their fathers had been fed with manna by Jehovah in the wilderness, but now they were without provision, a scattered flock.

Hillside near the area of Bethsaida by the Sea of Galilee, reminiscent of where the Savior performed the miracle of the loaves and fishes. Here Jesus "fanned the flames of Messianic expectancy into a raging fire—here at last was the Coming One who would feed them as Moses (so they supposed) had fed their fathers." Counting the women and children, the multitude may have been between twenty and thirty thousand people.

After Jesus had taught and healed them, the shadows of the afternoon began to deepen. The apostles came to Him, noting, "This is a desert place, and now the time is far passed." They thought He should send the people away to buy food. Christ answered, "Give ye them to eat." What could He mean? How could they possibly buy enough bread? These twelve who had been with Him and taught at His feet could still not understand Him. Andrew saw a lad nearby who had five barley loaves and two small fishes. "But what," he asked, "are they among so many?" A barley loaf was the fare of the poorest, but the Lord took the five loaves and the two fishes and "looked up to heaven, and blessed, and brake the loaves, and gave them to his disciples to set before them; and the two fishes divided he among them all. And they did all eat, and were filled," with plenty left over, plenty to fill twelve baskets, plenty for other sheep wherever they might be. [^48] Who was this man who could produce abundance at His touch? An irresistible impulse seized the people to proclaim Him a prophet and to "take him by force, to make him a king." [^49]

Before morning sun has touched the waters of the Galilee, the fishermen return from their labors of the night. When the Roman tax collectors came to collect a tax from the Lord, He sent Peter, the fisherman, to the sea. "Cast an hook," Jesus instructed him, "and take up the fish that first cometh up; and when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a piece of money: that take, and give unto them for me and thee." Surely the tax collectors followed Peter and witnessed the miracle.

With the intensity and longing of centuries of oppression, the multitude wanted a worldly king, and they wanted him now. So Jesus "straightway . . . constrained his disciples to get into a ship" [^50] to go to the other side of the Galilee while He went up into a mountain apart to pray. Would it be a similar crowd who would at His hour of need before a Roman tribunal one day proclaim, "We have no king but Caesar"? [^51] For now this King of kings was alone on the mountain, while His apostles tried to sail across the Galilee. On this sea, fierce and sudden windstorms can sweep out of the steep mountains, hurling the ships about. At the fourth watch of the evening, between three and six A.M., Christ looked out across the sea and saw His friends "toiling in rowing; for the wind was contrary unto them." They had rowed only about three or four miles and were in the middle of the lake when Christ came to them, walking on the sea. He would have silently helped them and passed by, "but when they saw him walking upon the sea, they supposed it had been a spirit, and cried out." [^52]

Looking west across the Sea of Galilee as afternoon weather changes. Clouds can gather and wind can whip through the Horns of Hittim, blowing up a mighty storm with short notice on the sea. The Galilean province (about 60 miles long and 30 miles wide) in Jesus' day could have had a population of between 2 and 3 million people in more than 200 towns.

These disciples had already seen Jesus' magnificent powers upon the sea. Once before, He had been on the ship with the apostles when a great storm had blown up and the waves beat upon the ship until it "filled with water" and they were "in jeopardy." [^53] Through the storm, Christ had slept on a pillow in the back of the ship until His panicked disciples had cried, "Master, carest thou not that we perish?" "And he arose and rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, Peace, be still. And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm." Then the disciples had said one to another, "What manner of man is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?" [^54] Still, now they were astonished as He walked upon the water until He said, "It is I; be not afraid." [^55] Peter, loyal and impetuous, cried, "Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the water." "Come," He said, and Peter walked until the boisterous wind frightened him and he began to sink, calling, "Lord, save me." "And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him." [^56] So He catches us all when we have toiled against the wind and spent our energy and would drown. Then He comes quietly to us with words of love, saying, "It is I; be not afraid." [^57]

The expectation had grown among the Jews that the true Messiah would come on Passover to once again give them manna from heaven. The miraculous feeding of the multitude the day before had seemed to be the fulfillment of that expectation, and now the people, willing to give up their Passover pilgrimage to Jerusalem, returned to see if this was truly the Messiah. "Ye seek me," the Lord told them, "not because ye desire to keep my sayings, . . . but because ye did eat of the loaves and were filled." [^58] "Do not work for the food that perishes, but for the food that endures for eternal life," [^59] "which the Son of Man hath power to give unto you." [^60]

Vast wheat field in the Galilee, where grain is raised in abundance. In the Middle East, bread truly is the staple of life and is often the only thing eaten for a meal among the poor. The common daily bread is patted thin and round, perhaps two feet in diameter, and placed in an earthen oven for only a few moments. The word for bread in Arabic is the same as the word for flesh.

"This is the work of God," Jesus said, "that ye believe on him whom he hath sent." The people still wanted more: "Our fathers did eat manna in the desert. . . . What sign shewest thou then, that we may see, and believe thee?" [^61] Jesus said, "It was not Moses who gave you the bread from heaven, but it is my Father who gives you the true bread from heaven." [^62] Then the people said, "Lord, evermore give us this bread." "And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life; he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst." [^63]

Through the course of the past two days, the Lord had been trying to draw the people to Him by the symbols of the familiar exodus pattern of ancient Israel. Moses was at the mountain of God; Jesus had been at the mountain. Israel was led by God to the Red Sea; the multitude followed Jesus across the Sea of Galilee. Manna was called the bread from heaven; bread was given miraculously to the multitude. Israel had twelve tribes; twelve baskets were taken up of the abundance. Israel crossed the sea by night; the disciples toiled and crossed the sea by night. The Lord saved Israel that day at the Red Sea; Jesus came to the ship and saved them. All these things were a pattern to focus their minds on Him, Jesus Christ. But as His followers realized He would give them no more free bread, being blinded by their hunger for earthly food, "many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him." [^64]

Archway on one of the streets of the old city of Jerusalem. The scribes of Jesus' day wrote out the law, and they also classified and arranged its precepts, counting with scrupulous minuteness every clause and letter it contained.

"Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites!" [^65] Repeatedly Jesus leveled a warning voice to this elect group of Jews. He had come to call humanity to God through humility and the cleansing of the inner vessel. The whole system of Pharisaic piety was in outward performances, often seeking to attract the attention and admiration of men: "Woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye love the uppermost seats in the synagogues and greetings in the markets." [^66] Indeed, the desire for distinction among them during Christ's time was nearly insatiable. Ascending the ladder of ambition were the various levels of the scribes, rab, rabbi, rabban, rabboni, titles spoken with awe and a reverential kiss from young scholars who one day wanted to be like them. They believed that an oral law had been given to Moses on Mount Sinai to complete and explain the written law. This oral law had been handed down and preserved by the Pharisees, and they alone could interpret and expand its meaning. This exclusivity allowed them to adapt the law to new situations without admitting that anything had been changed. With the pretense of maintaining the law intact, they multiplied minutia and distinctions until the life of the Israelite was burdened on every side. In time, this oral law came to be regarded much more highly than the written law, and the Pharisee with his special knowledge was in a position of power. Yet, ironically, with all this pretension to piety, the Pharisees not only missed the Lord when He came among them, but they were also mad with desire to destroy Him.

Now-rare cedar of Lebanon cultured in a preserve in the western part of Israel near the coast of the Mediterranean. These trees grow straight and tall and were used by Solomon in building the temple. Because of their majestic look, they are sometimes used in the scriptures to personify pride. The tree can live to be more than 2,000 years old.

"Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye devour widows' houses, and for a pretense make a long prayer. . . . Ye are like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness." [^67] Like vultures, the Pharisees followed Christ, trying to prey upon Him. They interrogated, "Why walk not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands?" [^68] Hoping to prove Him a traitor, they challenged, "Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not?" [^69] To all of this Christ always had an answer. Though they claimed to work for the Lord, one day He would say to them, "Ye never knew me." [^70]

Interior of second- or third-century A.D. synagogue at Capernaum built on the foundation of a first-century synagogue—likely the one in which Jesus taught. On one occasion a man cried out for the Lord to heal his son: "Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief." So with each of us; the Lord must fill the deficit of our mortal limitations.

As Jesus sailed into Capernaum after visiting the Gadarenes, the people "were all waiting for him" and "gladly received him," [^71] but two in the throng had urgent needs. Jairus, the ruler of the synagogue, was probably a respected friend of Jesus, for in this very synagogue Christ had often preached, something that could not have happened without the local ruler's consent. Now this friend fell at the Savior's feet, pleading with the urgency of one seeing his child fade from life, "My little daughter lieth at the point of death: I pray thee, come and lay thy hands on her, that she may be healed; and she shall live." [^72]

Jesus went with Jairus, pressed by the crowd on every side. Then "a woman having an issue of blood twelve years . . . came behind him, and touched the border of his garment." No physician had been able to heal her. But now, with a touch, "immediately her issue of blood stanched." [^73] Jesus, knowing "that virtue had gone out of him," [^74] turned about and said, "Who touched me?" Peter noted, "Master, the multitude throng thee and press thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me?" But Christ could feel a single touch in a crowd as He could perceive the private ache of a heart. So the woman, ashamed of her malady, crept forth from hiding, "trembling, and falling down before him." "Daughter," He said, "be of good comfort, thy faith hath made thee whole." [^75]

While Jesus spoke, some came from Jairus' house with tragic news: "Thy daughter is dead." [^76] Christ, hearing it, looked upon Jairus' face wrenched with grief and said, "Fear not: believe only, and she shall be made whole." [^77] Miracles are the fruit of faith, and Jairus had to hold fast to faith as they came to his house where already was the tumult of grieving—flute-players and "them that wept and wailed greatly." Jesus told the mourners, "Why make ye this ado, and weep? the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth," and they "laughed him to scorn." Then, entering with the parents into the room where the twelve-year-old lay, Jesus took the child's hand and said tenderly in Aramaic, "Talitha cumi," [^78] meaning "Little maid, arise." And straightway, to the joy of all, she arose and walked.

Ancient tombs dot cliffs near Gadara, where Jesus found the man filled with devils. The cliffs run for miles to the sea coast. When the possessed man came toward the Lord, he was naked and bruised. So it is when we approach the Lord with our pains and trials, naked before him.

On the eastern side of the Galilee is Gadara, a region of steep, limestone cliffs pocked by caves and tombs. As Jesus and His apostles walked there, a tormented man met them who was "exceeding fierce," so much so "that no man might pass by that way." [^79] A dweller in the tombs, he had gashed and bruised his naked body. In his shrieking, raging state, "no man could bind him, no, not with chains," for he was possessed of evil spirits. Seeing Christ and recognizing who He was, the demons within him said, "What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the most high God?" [^80] Their preexistent memory remained, and though it is not the testimony the Lord seeks, "the devils also believe, and tremble." [^81] When Jesus asked the man his name, the devils answered, "My name is Legion: for we are many," [^82] and they begged Him not to send them away. With the power to command all things, He let them go into a herd of swine which then ran in a frenzy down a steep place into the lake and were drowned.

The Lord clothed the man and gave him a gift more precious—peace. As the Lord was departing Gadara, the man begged to come with Him, but Jesus said, "Go home to thy friends, and tell them how great things the Lord hath done for thee." The man spread this message throughout the Decapolis, "and all men did marvel."

Men ought always to pray, and not to faint," [^83] said the Savior. They ought not to give up or to feel overlooked, unheard, or forgotten. Ask "in faith, nothing wavering," [^84] and it shall be given you. To illustrate, He told this parable: "There was in a city a judge, which feared not God, neither regarded man." A widow, who had been wronged, came to him seeking redress, and he would not help her. Yet the woman continued importuning him. At last "he said within himself, Though I fear not God, nor regard man; yet because this widow troubleth me, I will avenge her, lest by her continual coming she weary me." [^85] Jesus' point was that if even an unjust judge will finally hear the continual pleadings of the widow and help her, how much more will our loving Father respond to persistent, faithful prayer.

He illustrated the depth of God's love for us in one of the richest parables of all: "A certain man had two sons: and the younger of them said to his father, Father, give me the portion of goods that falleth to me. And he divided unto them his living." [^86] Now this was extraordinary. "A first-century Jewish son would not have dared ask his father for his share of his inheritance while the father was still alive and in good health. And the typical father would hardly have capitulated so quickly. The son's request was equivalent to wishing his father's death." "It is difficult to imagine a more dramatic illustration of the quality of love which grants freedom even to reject the lover, than that given in this opening scene." [^87] The father in granting this request was jeopardizing his own living. Jesus wanted to illustrate how deeply the son was estranged from his long-suffering father.

The son took his journey into a far country and spent his fortune in riotous living until his pockets were empty. When a famine swept the land, he was forced to the most degrading task of all for a Jew, feeding swine. Finally, "he came to himself" and said, "How many hired servants of my father's have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger! I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants." [^88] Now,"'an Oriental nobleman with flowing robes never runs anywhere.' To do so is humiliating." [^89] Yet as this son is still a long way off, the father, filled with love, ran to meet him and "fell on his neck, and kissed him." He gave him the best robe, put a ring on his hand, and killed the fatted calf for a feast so that all would be merry. When the elder son saw the festivities, he stubbornly refused to come into the house and complained. He had ploddingly, loyally worked for his father for years and had never been given a fatted calf. The father replied, "Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine. It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found." [^90]

The father, here, of course, represents God, and the parable demonstrates His amazing love and forgiveness. The typical scene would have been for a humiliated son to return amid taunts and jeers of the community. Yet the father protected him and turned mocking to rejoicing.

Built under Suleiman the Magnificent, these walls of Jerusalem date only to A.D. 1542. Jesus told of a king who forgave his servant a debt of 10,000 talents. Then, however, this same servant would not forgive the small debt of a hundred pence. When Jesus taught this parable of the two debtors, He tried to show the disparity between the debt He paid and the debts owed to us by our fellowmen. The ten thousand talents owed by the one debtor would be equivalent to over $4 billion in gold, while the other man owed one day's wages.

"Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?" [^91] "Which of them should be accounted the greatest?" [^92] These were questions that would be raised more than once among the disciples of Jesus, a question based on a most worldly impulse—who is number one? "Pride gets no pleasure out of having something, only out of having more of it than the next man. . . . It is the comparison that makes you proud: the pleasure of being above the rest." [^93] Pride was not to be the principle upon which the kingdom of heaven was founded. "Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?" Jesus had an answer for His disciples, who were still maturing in understanding. He "called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of them . . . Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child," He said, "the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven." [^94] Each was to become "as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father." [^95]

Living things springing forth from the desert of Perea in Jordan. What the Lord asked of His disciples was so unlike what the world seems to suggest one will need for success. The Lord gathered rough, burly fishermen around him and told them to be like little children. He taught His followers to love their enemies in an occupied nation with real enemies seen and dealt with every day. His teachings were bold and heart-changing.

If they were to hear the glorious words "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world," they must seek not to be the chief but rather the servant of all. Jesus said: "For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee? And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." [^96]

Rather than seeking to raise himself above his brother, a true disciple would "esteem his brother as himself, and practice virtue and holiness before me. . . . For what man among you having twelve sons" would say unto one: "Be thou clothed in robes and sit thou here; and to the other: Be thou clothed in rags and sit thou there? . . . I say unto you, be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine." [^97]

Late afternoon light touches the side of steep ridges that lead down into Wadi Qilt just outside of Jerusalem. The Wadi is normally dry, but in rare years a substantial river flows from here to Jericho for a few weeks. The gospel of Jesus Christ is like water in the desert, giving the powers of life to that which was seemingly dead.

The year from the Passover after the feeding of the 5,000 to the Passover when Christ was killed marked a period of decline of popular opinion toward Him. Before, some scribes and Pharisees with their devious questions had despised Him, but many of the multitude had loved Him, basking with gladness in His teachings and miracles. However, after the bread of life sermon and His refusal to step forth as earthly king, His popularity began to wane. He spoke what seemed to be hard things to a people so long oppressed: become as a child, love your enemies, seek a peace that is not of this world.

When Jesus took His apostles on a missionary journey inland to Caesarea Philippi, He was an outcast from Galilee. Many had been told that He had performed His miracles through the power of the devil. Amid such widespread defection, He felt to bear testimony.

At Caesarea Philippi, He asked, "Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?" [^98] The answer was embedded in the question. He was the Son of the Man of Holiness, who is God, the Eternal Father. Jesus Christ is His firstborn.

The disciples passed on what they had heard. Some people, like fearful, superstitious Herod Antipas, thought Jesus was John the Baptist risen from the dead. Some thought He was that Elias, so prominent in Jewish scripture, who would restore all things. Others believed Him to be one of the old prophets come again. Then Christ asked his intimate friends, "But whom say ye that I am?" Peter affirmed without hesitation, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." Jesus responded, "Blessed art thou, . . . for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven." [^99]

Massive rock cliffs at Caesarea Philippi with one of the main sources of water for Israel freely flowing from beneath it. The Lord significantly used a subtle word play on Peter's name here, for petros means "small rock" and petra means "bedrock." Christ is the Stone of Israel, and Jesus, likely standing by this rock face, emphasized the powerful rock upon which the church would be established: the rock of revelation.

Peter had been given revelation, an undying knowledge that Jesus was the Christ. Upon such revelation, this steady, unmoving rock of testimony of His divinity, would the Lord build His church, "and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." [^100] Peter was then promised that he would be given the keys of the kingdom, the priesthood power and authority to act in the name of the Lord.

Evening was upon them as Jesus took His chief apostles, Peter, James, and John, "into an high mountain apart." [^101] As He climbed these slopes, what solemn thoughts may have filled His heart, for He had come to commune with His Father, and perhaps to receive the sweet ministrations of heaven to prepare and fortify Him for His coming atonement and death. The apostles, too, would need this hour of vision and comfort to prepare their hearts to stand unshaken before the shameful insults and awful humiliation in the days to come.

After they arrived at their solitary place, the exhausted apostles slept while Jesus prayed and received the comfort and reassurance He needed from His Father. Even in Gethsemane itself He would need angelic assistance to face the terrors and anguish of the atonement until that time when He was left alone to triumph over sin. When the apostles awoke, they saw and heard unspeakable things, such as is rarely given to mortals. In their descriptions, they struggle for words. Christ was transfigured before them, "and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light." [^102] His clothes were "white and glittering," [^103] "exceeding white as snow." [^104]

Morning sun bursts forth in splendor through clouds above Mt. Tabor in the Jezreel Valley, a possible site for the transfiguration of Jesus. Mt. Hermon, in the north, is another site thought to be the location of this grand event. One translation indicates that Elias (John the Baptist) was here at the event. The pattern of the transfiguration of the earth was shown to the apostles in this glorious vision, "of which account the fulness ye have not yet received."

Then, quickened by the Spirit, the apostles saw two beings who while on earth had been translated for the job they were about to perform. These were Moses and Elijah, who appeared in glory to speak of Christ's death and resurrection. Just days earlier, Jesus had explained to His disciples that He must "suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be slain and be raised the third day," [^105] to which Peter had adamantly protested, "Lord, this shall not be unto thee." [^106] Now, with the added testimony of these heavenly ministrants, Peter was assured it must be so.

Christ had promised Peter the keys of the kingdom of heaven, saying, "Whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven." [^107] Moses and Elijah now conferred these priesthood keys upon the apostles. Yet this was not the end of the night's wonders, for a bright cloud overshadowed them, shielding the face and form of God the Father, who said, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him." [^108]

Sun touches the top of the Herodian wall at south end of the temple complex in Jerusalem. When Peter asked the Lord, "How oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him?" the Lord answered with a resounding "Seventy times seven!" Then in modern revelation He added, "I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men."

It was an October morning in Jerusalem during the Feast of Tabernacles when Jesus sat in the temple teaching. The celebrating crowds had been divided the day before because of Him. Some had said, "This is the Prophet"; some, "This is the Christ," infuriating the chief priests. Yet even their own officers would not bring Him to them, saying, "Never man spake like this man." [^109] Thus, during the night, the Jewish rulers wove a net to entangle Him.

As He taught, they brought to Him a woman who had been taken in the very act of adultery, probably caught in the immorality and abandonment of the feast. Imagine the terror-stricken woman, fresh from the agony of detection, dragged before the pitiless faces of the people and flung into the sacred grounds of the temple. Was she still scantily clothed, bruised from her rough handling? Was she set before the Lord or thrown there in contempt? Apparently her accusers were not interested in her. They had brought her to Jesus because they hated Him. Then they asked the question they hoped would ensnare Him: "Master, this woman was taken in adultery, in the very act. Now Moses in the law commanded us, that such should be stoned: but what sayest thou?" [^110]

As the woman trembled before Him, they thought they had caught Him in a dilemma. Everyone knew that the law of Moses decreed death for adulterers, both men and women, and that the accuser should cast the first stone. If Jesus excused the woman, it would seem He was denying the law. If, however, He condemned her, where was the compassion and forgiveness that had marked His ministry? He ate with sinners; He had chosen a publican among His Twelve. How would He treat the adulteress?

In the face of their hypocrisy, Christ gave the perfect response—nothing. He just "stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground, as though he heard them not." Was this a reminder that He had first given them the law, written with His own finger on Moses' stone tablets? Or, very different, was it a reminder that what was written in dust could be swept away with the wind? As they continued to question Him, He stood and said, "He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her." [^111] Was he speaking not just of sin in general but more stingingly of this same sin? "Which among you is not an adulterer?"

The question seared their shame-ridden hearts, those who would stone a woman when they themselves were impure. "And they which heard it, being convicted by their own conscience, went out one by one, beginning at the eldest even unto the last: and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst." When Jesus saw they were alone, He said, "Woman, where are those thine accusers? hath no man condemned thee?" She said, "No man, Lord." And Jesus said unto her, "Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more." [^112] The gratitude and release from bondage she felt at His words could only be expressed in her life: "The woman glorified God from that hour, and believed." [^113] It is God's forgiving love that frees us from guilt and pain: "Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord remember them no more." [^114]

Detail of giant blocks of stone weighing three to four tons each in the south wall of the temple complex dating to the time of Jesus. The woman left the scene and became numbered among the believers. "By this ye may know," the Lord emphasizes, "if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will confess them and forsake them."

Light touches the terraced fields so typical of the Holy Land near Hebron. Generations of stone removal and careful husbandry have made these otherwise sterile areas quite fertile. The rains often come in torrents for a short time each year, so the leveling of the hills helps hold the precious moisture.

As the crowds on the temple mount continued to question Jesus about who He was, He said something that must have pierced them to the heart. Through their years of dispersion and subjugation, they had tenaciously held to their chosen status. They were the seed of Abraham, God's elect, a designation many wore with a strutting pride. Now Christ challenged that saying: "If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham" but instead "ye seek to kill me, because my word hath no place in you." "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad." Only those who accepted Him would be heir to God's blessings. He could not have spoken more plainly: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am." [^115] Many listeners knew He referred to the Lord's naming Himself before Moses "I AM THAT I AM." [^116] This Jesus was proclaiming Himself the great Jehovah who had given the law from Sinai. Infuriated at the supposed blasphemy, the people took up stones to cast them at Him, but His hour had not yet come.

Tomb of the Patriarchs at Hebron built by Herod the Great over the cave of Machpelah. Here Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebekah, and Jacob and Leah were entombed. While thousands come to see where these were buried, modern revelation says that "they have entered into their exaltation, according to the promises, and sit upon thrones, and are not angels but are gods."

A man blind from birth was begging on the Sabbath, probably on the temple mount, when Jesus' disciples asked, "Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?" It was a typical question for those who had been reared to believe that disease was punishment for sin. A common Jewish view held that even the unrighteous thoughts of a mother might affect the state of her unborn child. Jesus' answer was thus surprising: "Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest in him." [^117] Then the Savior anointed the man's eyes with clay and asked him to go wash in the nearby pool of Siloam, and the man obeyed and went away with his eyes opened.

His neighbors, probably accustomed to the familiar sight of the beggar, marveled that the blind now saw, and immediately they went to some Pharisees, who brought the man forward for an inquisition, hoping to find a charge against Christ. The testimony of the man was straightforward: "He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see." The wonder of it could neither be denied nor explained, and in a turn the Pharisaic view was itself on trial. If this Jesus acted by the power of God, then the divinity of their own Sabbath rules, the power of their position itself, was in question. Unthinkable. Next they brought in his parents to verify that the man had indeed been born blind. This they could not deny, but they gave an evasive answer when asked how he had been cured. They knew "that if any man did confess that [Jesus] was Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue." [^118]

Western wall of the temple complex of Jerusalem, the holiest spot in the world to the Jews. A common solicitation for alms in the days of Jesus was, "O tenderhearted, by me gain merit, to thine own benefit." And Jesus did not turn the blind away. The Pharisees exclaimed, "Since the world began was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was born blind, except he be of God."

Excommunication, depending on the degree, meant a sort of living death for the people. The excommunicant "would allow his beard and hair to grow wild and shaggy; he would not bathe, nor anoint himself. . . . As if he were a leper, people would keep at a distance of four cubits from him." [^119] Even before this threat of the Sanhedrin, the healed man did not cower: "If this man were not of God, he could do nothing." So the Sanhedrin cast him out, but Jesus came to him, testifying that He was the Son of God, and the man answered, "Lord, I believe." [^120] That day the blind truly saw, and the sighted Sanhedrin proved blind.

Burned black in the sun, roaming the rocky hills in every kind of weather, the Middle Eastern shepherd has a tender relationship with his flock. He knows each one; each has a name. If one is stuck in a rocky, mountain crag, he will leave the others to find it, carrying it back, cradled protectively against his body. At night, when creatures roam the desert, hungry for sheep who have no defense against predators, the shepherd protects them in a fold. A hireling might flee before a wolf, leaving the sheep defenseless, but not the good shepherd. He would even give his life for his sheep. In the morning, he comes to the door of the sheepfold and calls his own sheep by name. Even if it is a common fold where other flocks have been sheltered, his sheep hear his voice and follow him, for they know him. They do not respond to the voice of strangers.

Last light of afternoon gently warms the backs of sheep in the hills around Bethlehem in Judea. The prophet Benjamin taught: "Whosoever should believe that Christ should come, the same might receive remission of their sins, and rejoice with exceedingly great joy, even as though he had already come among them."

In modern times a man traveling in a Middle-Eastern desert came upon a sheep that had been hit and injured by the king's car. An old shepherd, with a flock of fifteen or twenty, listened as the man explained to him that by law the shepherd must be compensated one hundred times the value of the sheep. However, under the same law, the injured sheep must be slain and the meat divided among the people. The traveler was told, "The old shepherd will not accept the money. They never do." When he asked why, it was explained, "Because of the love he has for each of his sheep." At that, the old shepherd reached down, lifted the injured lamb, and placed it in a pouch on the front of his robe. He stroked the sheep's head again and again, repeating his name as he walked off into the desert. [^121]

Sheep grazing in the hills around Bethlehem just before the shepherd calls them into the fold. Sheep are defenseless against the wolves and lions of the desert and must have constant care. The sheep know the shepherd and are truly known of him, each one individually.

"I am the good shepherd," said the Lord, "and know my sheep. . . . My sheep hear my voice, . . . and they follow me." [^122] To His listeners who lived in a land of shepherds, it was a compelling image: "The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want." As a lamb, He leads me to green pastures and still waters, to all that is nourishing and protecting. When I am broken, "He restoreth my soul." Though I walk through the deepest darkness, "I will fear no evil: for thou art with me." Only because of the good shepherd "goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life." [^123]

A deep doctrinal discussion was in progress, and the disciples thought Jesus was too busy when the little children were brought to Him. He was not to be disturbed, they said, responding out of the Jewish practice and tradition that kept women and children in the background. But the Savior was much displeased at this and said, "Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God." [^124] What a moment of surpassing sweetness this was as He took the children into His arms and embraced and blessed them, undoubtedly the same as He did at another place, one at a time. [^125] His ministry was not to the anonymous masses but always to the individual heart. It was against His very soul to turn away one who came seeking Him.

His disciples were to receive little children as if they received Him, and He added this warning: "Whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea." [^126]

Basaltic millstone at Capernaum. The top portion had a wooden handle that protruded and could be attached to work animals to turn the millstone in circles and grind the corn or grain. Average millstones weighed 200 to 500 pounds. The stone is a graphic reminder of the depth of severity the offense of little children is to the Lord.

Soon after, a rich young ruler came seeking Him to ask a question. Among the Jews, disciples asked their rabbis searching questions, so it was natural for the young man to ask the Lord, "What shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?" [^127] The Savior answered simply, "If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments," and then began reciting the Ten Commandments. Yet the rich man wanted more: "All these things have I kept from my youth up: what lack I yet?" Jesus answered, "If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come and follow me." The request tugged at his conscience but was too much, and "he went away sorrowful: for he had great possessions." [^128] The issue was not just a matter of heart, the impossibility of serving God and mammon. It is also a question of disparity, the poor all about us who hunger and want, while the rich hoard, live to excess, or exact high prices. The resulting enmity and disparity is not unnoticed by the Lord. An ancient prophet, exhorting his people to pray, added this warning: "If ye turn away the needy, and the naked, . . . your prayer is vain, and availeth you nothing." [^129]

Light slants across a wall at the entrance to the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem. Adults who enter here must stoop to pass this 50-inch-high door into this holy site of Christendom. Some think this is a representation of an eye of a needle where camels who would pass through into a city must be unloaded of all burdens and go on their knees to pass. Others take the eye of the needle analogy literally, "but with God all things are possible."

"Lord, teach us to pray," Christ's disciples pleaded as they watched Him in communion with His Father. So He taught them a pattern. "Our Father which art in heaven": [^130] We are to pray to the Father, the radiant one, "the creator of the shimmering sound that touches us." [^131] "Hallowed be thy name": We reverence this Lord above all else. He is more than we can envision, a holy of holies in our hearts. "Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven": We long for His kingdom to be established, yearn for the day when He will reign. "Give us this day our daily bread": Still, we live in the mortal here and now, and we look to Him as the giver of every good thing. "And forgive us our sins; for we also forgive everyone who is indebted to us": [^132] "Loose the cords of mistakes binding us. . . . Lighten our load of secret debts as we relieve others of their need to repay." [^133] "And suffer us not to be led into temptation, but deliver us from evil": [^134] Make us strong and clear. "Don't let surface things delude us." [^135] "For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen." [^136]

Young mustard flowers growing in a field of mustard twenty miles west of Jerusalem. Mustard is one of the most prolific and abundant plants in all of Israel, further testimony of the Lord's tie of the mustard seed to faith. The Lord's Prayer has a definite Jewish flavor with its longing for the Lord's kingdom to come and for the bread of life, like manna, to be given.

A question facing humanity throughout the centuries has been "What is most important? How do I spend my time, the energies of my spirit?" Jesus addressed this one day while visiting the Bethany home of His dear friends Mary and Martha. Martha, the meticulous housekeeper concerned over the details of entertaining Jesus, was "cumbered about much serving," while her sister, Mary, sat at Jesus' feet to be taught. Finally, somewhat dismayed at her sister, Martha asked, "Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? Bid her therefore that she help me." Then came the answer of answers for all of us distracted from our spiritual center by a load of care, undue worry, and incidental duties: "Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her." [^137] Amid all else, the expediencies that nip at us, we must turn our face to the Son.

Church and dwellings dating from only 800 years ago in Bethany near where Mary and Martha and Lazarus lived. No building remains in Bethany from the time of Christ. Jesus' Judean home was here in Bethany; in fact, until the Passion there is no mention of Jesus ever spending a night in Jerusalem.

Late afternoon light touches flowers and a section of the road to Jericho. This was a treacherous road from Jerusalem to Jericho, and people going to and from festivals and holy day celebrations would almost always travel in groups to protect against bandits along the way. The parable drew upon a common danger and fear for people who would travel alone on this well-known road.

"Thou shalt love thy . . . neighbor as thyself." This was written in the law, but a certain lawyer, hoping to justify himself, asked, "Who is my neighbour?" Jesus answered with one of the greatest stories in literature. It seems a man went down to Jericho and was beaten, stripped, wounded, and left for dead by thieves along the side of the road. The first upon this pathetic scene was a priest who saw him and passed by on the other side. [^138] Stripped and wounded, the man was unidentifiable and perhaps even dead. If he was a Gentile, he was unclean; but worse yet, if he was dead, contact with him would defile a priest. A priest, defiled, could not collect, distribute, or eat the tithes, and his family would go without. To this priest, the safe thing to do was to turn his eyes from the scene and pass on the other side.

Next came a Levite, whose rules were somewhat less strict. Still, contact with a corpse, or with one who might die while he rendered aid, would be ritually defiling. Defiled, a Levite could not eat the wave offering or wear his phylacteries. He looked on the broken man in the ditch, and he too chose to pass on the other side. Perhaps he thought this was the right and proper thing to do, a matter of keeping religious vows.

Last to come was a Samaritan. To a Jew he was an outsider, the hated, the heathen, the brazen Samaritan who lived a tainted religion. "He that eats the bread of the Samaritans," the Mishna declares, "is like to one that eats the flesh of swine." [^139] If the beaten man were to awake and see it was a Samaritan who helped him, the Samaritan might receive a spit in the eye for his thanks.

The serpentine road to Jericho was prolific with overhanging cliffs and hidden gullies where robbers could hide and attack innocent travelers. Twenty or more people could hide in the confines of this view within forty feet of the road just over the brow of the grass as it drops sharply to the stream bed below.

Why would Jesus choose as His prime example of charity a Samaritan? Probably because His doctrines were radical, meant to shake the listeners beyond their prejudices to the core of conscience. When the Samaritan saw the wounded, "he had compassion on him," and he poured oil and wine into his wounds and bound them, then set him on his own beast and brought him to an inn. The next day when he left, he paid the host and said, "Take care of him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee." Jesus designed the story not to show just the compassion of the Samaritan but also the price he was willing to pay for his service. "Go, and do thou likewise," [^140] said Jesus.

Glow of candlelight through the darkness of the tomb of Lazarus at Bethany. Jewish tombs often had two chambers, one for mourning and one for burial. Jesus knew all things concerning the raising of Lazarus, and yet He let all participate in the miracle: "Where have ye laid him?" yet He knew. "Take ye away the stone," He cried, and yet He could have called angels or used His power to move it.

Mary and Martha sent an urgent message about their brother to Perea where Jesus was teaching: "Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick." When Jesus heard of Lazarus' sickness, He said, "This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God," [^141] and He turned and continued His work two more days at Perea with the calm assurance of divinity, knowing that He would arrive in proper time.

After two days, He told the disciples that Lazarus was dead, but He said, "Let us go into Judaea again." This was a dangerous suggestion, prompting Thomas to say, "Let us also go, that we may die with him," for "they feared lest the Jews should take Jesus and put him to death, for as yet they did not understand the power of God." [^142]

As Jesus traveled on the road near Bethany, the news came that Lazarus had already lain in the grave four days, and heartbroken Martha, hearing that Jesus was coming, went out sorrowing to meet Him. "Lord," she exclaimed, "if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died." How often during that heavy four days since Lazarus' death Mary and Martha must have discussed this very thing. "If only Jesus had come, if only He had been here." Still, she had no complaining word for Jesus, no murmuring; she just affirmed, "But I know, that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give it thee." [^143]

Jesus answered, "Thy brother shall rise again," which Martha misunderstood, saying, "I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection, at the last day." Jesus explained further, "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: . . . Believest thou this?" Then Martha affirmed with loving faith, "Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world." [^144]

Then Martha went quickly to her sister with words every believer would long to hear: "The Master is come, and calleth for thee." Oh, He had come! As Mary left the home, perhaps with couches and chairs tossed over in the Jewish form of mourning, the mourners followed her, thinking she went to the grave to weep. Instead, she came to the Lord and fell at His feet. Jesus asked, "Where have ye laid him?" to which they answered, "Lord, come and see." Then, "Jesus wept," [^145] not apparently because Lazarus had died, for He knew that in moments His friend would rise. He wept, instead, for love and compassion, for the grief that tore the heart of His friends, for the bruises and scars of mortality, for all that hurts.

At the place of burial, Jesus asked the people to roll away the stone from the cave entrance where Lazarus lay. Martha demurred: "Lord, by this time he stinketh: for he hath been dead four days." Jewish belief was that a body began its corruption on the fourth day. But Jesus turned His eyes heavenward and said, "Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me." Then in a loud voice that must have shaken the listeners to the marrow, He cried, "Lazarus come forth." And "he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with graveclothes." "Then from that day forth [the Pharisees] took counsel together for to put [Christ] to death." [^146]

The modern entrance to the tomb of Lazarus in Bethany is twenty-four steps above the original chamber. After the great miracle here, the chief priests and Pharisees took council about Jesus, saying, "What do we do? for this man doeth many miracles." They saw His miracle as a threat that would attract Roman attention, and they feared losing their nation. With raging jealousy, from that day on they sought every opportunity to put Him to death.
