Scot Facer Proctor, Maurine Jensen Proctor, Source of the Light: A Witness and Testimony of Jesus Christ, the Savior and Redeemer of All ( 1992)

Section 4:

MINE HOUR HAS COME

View of an olive vineyard and a garden area on the Mount of Olives a few feet from the traditional site of Gethsemane. The exact place where Jesus suffered is not known today, but the power of the atonement transcends time.

Now His hour had come. Behind Him were the green hills of Galilee, the great crowds gathering on the grass to hear His word, the lap of waves on a blue sea. Ahead lay Jerusalem, the arrogant city on a hill, tense in its self-conceit, where already in their supreme blindness in the name of religious piety, plotters were scheming to kill the Lord Himself. Offended by His healing touch, by His words that cut to the heart of their hypocrisy, the Roman and Jewish rulers gathered in the high halls of the chief priest and conspired against Him. Jesus' final offense that had challenged their dominion was the raising of Lazarus. "If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him," [^1] they said. Raising the dead, healing the blind, lifting the broken heart, these were the offenses that kindled their anger and threatened their position.

Growing out of seemingly solid rock, two olive trees are joined as one in a Bethlehem vineyard, a symbol of the unity of the Father and the Son. Jesus said, "He that believeth on me, believeth not on me, but on him that sent me. And he that seeth me seeth him that sent me."

Still, their fanatical hatred did not stop Jesus from coming to Jerusalem for Passover with the certain knowledge of what He would face. Bitter contempt, insult, and death waited for Him along the shadowed roads of Jerusalem, often from the very people who claimed they represented God. What superb irony! Jesus said, "What shall I say? Father save me from this hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour." [^2] In Bethany, just over the hill from Jerusalem, Mary, sister of Martha, anointed His feet with a precious oil that she had saved "against the day of [his] burying," [^3] and He patiently told apostles who could not understand that He would submit Himself to be mocked, scourged, and spat upon. He would overcome the world, but not before it appeared to all those who loved Him that the world had overcome Him. They must face His humiliation before they saw His triumph.

Palm leaves are a common protection from the intense rays of the noon sun in the Middle East. As Christ made His triumphal entry, the crowds cut down branches from trees and waved them or twisted them into a matting and strewed them along his path. The waving of palm-branches was the welcome for royalty and kings.

He would suffer that others would not have to suffer, face agonies beyond description to do His Father's will: "For I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak." [^4] He had come from His Father, a messenger of love, and, having fulfilled all things, He would return to His Father. His prayer for His closest friends was that they could be one "as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, . . . that the world may believe that thou hast sent me." [^5]

Steep and winding road down the Mount of Olives directly across from the eastern wall of Jerusalem. Leaving Bethany the Sunday before his last Passover, Christ probably came along the ancient caravan road that ran from Jericho to Jerusalem where pilgrims who could not find accommodations in the city were camped. If ever Judah was to have her king, this was the time.

A young colt tied by its mother in Shepherd's Fields near Bethlehem. Christ told his disciples to find "a colt tied whereon never man sat. . . . And if any man say unto you, Why do ye this? say ye that the Lord hath need of him; and straightway he will send him hither." Ancient prophets had seen that the Messiah would make his royal entry on a donkey.

On that Sunday in spring, as Jesus and His band of followers went from Bethany to Jerusalem for the Passover celebration, He instructed two of His disciples to go into a village, where they would find a young colt. On this meek animal He would ride for His triumphal entry into Jerusalem, coming not as a proud king with conquests of war but rather in the rule of peace. The word of His coming had spread among the festive pilgrims gathered in the city, especially among His own Galileans, who had heard of His miracles, and as the fire spread from heart to heart, they rushed out to meet Him, making a rough carpet by unloosing their cloaks and throwing them in His path. Here was the promised Son of David, and now surely the kingdom was at hand! Waving palm leaves, they shouted hosannas: "Blessed be the King that cometh in the name of the Lord." [^6] Disgruntled and knowing full well that the people were proclaiming Jesus the Messiah, the Pharisees made a desperate appeal to Him to stop the commotion. He answered that if the people held their peace, the very stones would cry out.

Morning comes to the city of gold, Jerusalem. "Shofar sounding from the temple to call the world to prayer. The shepherd pauses in the valley and peace is every where. How many songs, how many stories, the stony hills recall. Around her heart my city carries a lonely ancient wall. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Forever young, forever old. My heart will sing your songs of glory. Jerusalem."

As Jesus first caught sight of Jerusalem, that city of palaces and ivory towers, of terraces and magnificent gardens, He wept. Though the multitude cheered as He began His descent down the Mount of Olives, He moaned in deep lamentation. "The contrast was, indeed, terrible between the Jerusalem that rose before Him in all its beauty, glory, and security, and the Jerusalem which He saw in vision . . . with the camp of the enemy around about it on every side." [^7] For with God's view, He saw that in A.D. 68, but a few years hence, the Romans would besiege the city until the temple would be left without one stone upon another, until the city would be tumbled to the ground, its former beauty in ashes. Scene after scene must have arisen before His eyes, the gory bodies of Jerusalem's children among her ruins, the famine that drove mothers to snatch food from their infants, the thousands crucified outside the city walls. He said that in those days the daughters of Jerusalem would say, "Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bare." "Then shall they . . . say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us" [^8] —all of this because they had rejected their God.

Because of the threats to His life, Jesus did not stay in Jerusalem but returned each evening of Passover week to Bethany. The next day on His way to the city, He hungered. Seeing a fig tree growing in the rocky soil, He went to pick its fruit but found nothing and cursed it. The fruit of a fig should appear with the leaves, and a tree like this, green and flaunting in its verdancy but absolutely barren, was the perfect symbol of a hypocrite, able to make a good show but to give nothing. "By their fruits ye shall know them," [^9] the Lord had told them, leaving a haunting question by which all can judge their lives: "What are your fruits?" As it was with the fig tree, so it would be with all the self-righteous who make a false show of piety. So it would be with Jerusalem and those who pored over the scriptures but did not know the Lord.

A pigeon flies from a palm-thatched roof in Tiberias near the Sea of Galilee. Pigeons and lambs were among the merchandise sold on the temple grounds. Former high priest Annas owned a temple market called the bazaars of the sons of Annas which stirred popular resentment. When Jesus cleansed the temple, the public was not enraged, but the rulers were indignant at the loss to their income.

The temple was a place of glory, with solid gold covering the great marble stones of the inner building. But it was also a place of ravenous wolves to the eye of the Lord as He walked through the outer Court of the Gentiles on that Passover week. Vendors haggled over prices on salt, oil, and wine used in the sacrifices, and everywhere the stench and filth of lowing cattle and bleating lambs assaulted the senses of those who came to worship. Money-changers used scales of questionable accuracy for the thriving exchange business of the Roman, Grecian, Egyptian, and Persian coins in common circulation, taking advantage of religious pilgrims. It was a noisy scene of desecration and bloated prices, dishonesty and dispute. As He had done once before at the beginning of His ministry, Jesus boldly went into the temple, overthrowing the tables of the money-changers, their coins scattering across the fouled floor, throwing out the buyers and sellers with indignation. "It is written," He said, "my house is the house of prayer: but ye have made it a den of thieves." [^10]

Morning light touches the Golden Gate in the eastern city wall as seen from the Kidron Valley. Though hard to document, the story is told that the gate was walled up by the Turks sometime after 1517 to stop the Messiah from entering. Jewish tradition held that the Messiah would enter Jerusalem through that eastern gate. Ironically, Christ had already made his triumphal entry through the eastern gate, one that is directly below the present Golden Gate.

In cleansing the temple, Jesus had upset the money-gouging bazaars of the chief priests and Sanhedrin. Merchants' pockets had been lined by the temple trade, but so had the pockets of some Jewish rulers who were now even more infuriated. On the Monday night of Passover week, just a few hours after the temple cleansing, the chief priests, scribes, and elders consulted together how they might quell the popular acclaim that was attached to this Galilean rebel. For three years they had tried to ensnare Him with devious questions, all to no avail, but now they would raise a new issue. Perhaps they could show that He had no rabbinical authority and therefore no right to teach or even to speak. So, gathering together in all the intimidating power of their age and position, they made their formal challenge, saying, "Tell us, by what authority doest thou these things? or who is he that gave thee this authority?" [^11]

Collapsing tower in a vineyard flanked by dead olive trees, decayed with time. A tower was common in well-cared-for vineyards in ancient Israel, where the master or his servants could watch for thieves. Besides fencing his vineyard, gathering out stones, and planting the choicest vine, the Lord specifically states that He "built a tower in the midst of it." Yet after all this care, it brought forth only wild fruit.

Palestine is a land dotted with olive vineyards, the gnarled trees with their dusty leaves lining the rocky hills and valleys. Thus for part of His answer, Jesus told this parable, using images familiar to them all: "A certain man planted a vineyard, and let it forth to husbandmen, and went into a far country for a long time." [^12] "And at the season he sent to the husbandmen a servant, that he might receive from the husbandmen of the fruit of the vineyard. And they caught him, and beat him, and sent him away empty." The vineyard owner sent more servants, and the same happened to them; they were beaten, wounded, or killed. Finally, all his messengers having been shamefully treated, the owner sent his well-beloved and only son, saying, "They will reverence my son." [^13] But the greedy overseers of the vineyard treated the heir no better, killing him and casting him out of the vineyard.

The analogy was clear. The Lord had planted His people Israel on earth as His vineyard and then returned to heaven, sending His servants the prophets to labor in the vineyard and receive an accounting. But Israel too often had misused, mocked, and killed God's messengers. Now the Lord had sent His own beloved Son, whose fate would be the same. The fruit of the vineyard would be evil and corrupt: "And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard wept, and said . . . , What could I have done more for my vineyard?" [^14]

What shall the Lord do to these husbandmen who had killed His Son in the parable of the vineyard? If these elders and scribes wondered, Jesus had a ready answer, a scathing denunciation: "He will come and destroy these husbandmen, and will give the vineyard unto others." [^15]

Who gave Him authority? Not to be trapped, He answered their question with a brilliant question of His own. "The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men?" Now it was the elders and scribes who were caught, for if they said, "Of heaven," then they were admitting that John was sent of God, and his witness of Jesus was binding upon them. If, however, they said, "Of earth," the multitude who loved John would rise up against them. They, who were supposed to know scriptural answers, could only mumble a humiliating reply—they could not say. [^16]

Denounced, humiliated, caught in their own pretensions, the elders' hatred intensified into an emphatic decision—they would put Him to death. But for fear of an uproar from the people, they must do it with subtlety. At that very moment, a traitor played into their hands, one of the Lord's own Twelve, Judas Iscariot. They did not go to him; out of the darkness of his heart, he came to them. The betrayal was his initiative. Without the tumult of open arrest, he would lead them to the Lord, for, as a friend, he knew the garden where Christ ofttimes resorted for private retreat. But he would do it for a price—thirty pieces of silver, ironically paid to him from the accursed temple treasury.

Aceldama is known as the field of blood purchased with the 30 pieces of silver Judas received for betraying the Lord. When Judas saw that Jesus was condemned, his soul shrieked, "I have betrayed innocent blood," to which the chief priests replied, "What is that to us?" Then, flinging the silver onto the temple floor, he "went and hanged himself." Taking up the silver pieces, the chief priests purchased this field for the burial of strangers.

How could one who had felt the Lord's touch, who had seen the dead raised and the lame walk, be consumed in such utter darkness? How could he turn from those kind eyes to clutch a paltry thirty pieces of silver? Perhaps it was ambition, perhaps greed. Perhaps it was the hope that Jesus would openly declare political deliverance to his followers. For Judas, Jesus was not the bright king of earthly reign who would bring honor and wealth to his followers. Luke says it simply, "Then entered Satan into Judas," [^17] and as he sold his master for the legal price of a slave, he sold his own soul.

It was Thursday of the Lord's final week, and that day He and His apostles would share the Passover, their last supper together. Some confusion has arisen because John wrote that the next day, Friday, as Jesus stood in mortifying trial before Pilate, "it was the preparation of the passover," the day when the Jews would search their houses and destroy anything containing leaven, the day they would take their yearling lambs to the gleaming white and gold temple for sacrifice, bearing them home again on their shoulders for the feast that night. How could the Lord and His apostles have eaten their Passover meal instead on Thursday? Best evidence suggests that the Lord and His apostles, being Galileans, followed a calendar that began at sunrise. Thus 14 Nissan, the day of Passover preparation, began Thursday morning, and their meal was eaten that night. However, on the Judean calendar, 14 Nissan began Thursday at sunset, and the killing of the sacrificial lambs occurred on Friday afternoon before 14 Nissan had ended. Therefore, at that same hour when the bleating of thousands of sacrificial lambs went silent, the Lamb of God, who "was lifted up upon the cross and slain for the sins of the world," [^18] would also cease to breathe. The last symbolic sacrifices were offered at the very moment of the ultimate sacrifice. All things bore record of Christ and His mission for those who had eyes to see.

Innocent, new lamb on the bedrock of the hills of Bethlehem. In Egypt at the first Passover, Israel brushed their doorways with the blood of a lamb so that the destroying angel would pass by. In all the Passovers to follow, they sacrificed an unblemished lamb on the altar. These symbols were to remind them that it is only through the blood of the Lamb of God, His atoning sacrifice, that we can pass through the door into eternal life, escaping spiritual death.

For their paschal meal, the last supper, the Lord sent Peter and John ahead to make preparations, saying with seeric vision that they were to go into the city where they would meet a man bearing a pitcher of water, an unusual sight in Palestine, where carrying water was women's work. They were to follow him into a house where the master, probably a loving disciple, would have prepared a large upper room, already furnished for the feast.

It may have been just at sunset as Jesus and the other ten apostles descended the Mount of Olives and entered the Holy City in all its festive attire. The evening lamps were lit; the lamb had been roasted on a pomegranate spit; the bitter herbs, the vinegar, the unleavened cakes were ready as Jesus reclined at the table over which He would preside.

The upper room, traditional site of the last supper. The site may be close, but this room actually dates back only to 1335. Some have speculated that the actual upper room may have been in the home of John Mark, who wrote the second Gospel. Judas probably led the soldiers there first and then to Gethsemane with Mark following. Mark may have been the young man seized at the arrest, who, leaving his linen cloth, fled naked, for his is the only Gospel that tells this story.

Their mood was somber, their hearts burdened as Jesus and His friends took the several hours to eat the Passover meal and perform its accompanying rituals. "Why is this night different from all others? Why do we eat only unleavened bread, bitter herbs, and roasted lamb?" they would have asked and answered. Whatever the traditional answers, for them this night was different because the Lord would soon leave them, and they bore a love for Him that made the thought unbearable. In just hours, they would look for Him and find Him not. He would say, "Whither I go, ye cannot come." Then, "supper being ended," Jesus arose, "laid aside his garments; and took a towel, and girded himself," [^19] poured water into a basin, and began to wash the disciples' feet. The feet of those in Palestine, clad only in sandals as they trod the filthy streets strewn with dirt and dung, were distasteful by day's end. Washing another's feet was the lowest of jobs, fit only for the utterly servile, fit not just for a servant but for a slave.

Thinking His Master too noble for such a task, Peter demurred, "Thou shalt never wash my feet," to which Jesus answered, "If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me." Then the impulsive, exuberant Peter, fired with love for the Lord, said, "Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head." As He poured the water over their feet, He wanted the memory borne deeply into conscience. "If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one another's feet." [^20] The greatest was not the one with the most acclaim or honor, doing work of power and distinction, but the quiet servant, meeting the unspoken need.

Then Jesus told them something that shocked their sensibilities: "One of you which eateth with me shall betray me." They all asked sorrowfully, "Is it I?" [^21] John, lying on Jesus' breast, asked who it was, and Jesus answered, perhaps to him alone, "He it is, to whom I shall give a sop." [^22] Then dipping the sop, He gave it to Judas, who asked with mock dismay, "Master, is it I?" "Thou hast said," [^23] answered Jesus. "That thou doest, do quickly." [^24] And Judas hurried out alone into eternal darkness.

Light flows through holes in a covered street of Jerusalem. This market runs west from the temple mount where modern traders work as did their ancestors of old.

"Little children, yet a little while I am with you," said Jesus in that upper room, and as His death approached, love was foremost on His mind. It was love that undergirded His life and His final sacrifice, love that never sought its own, love that didn't waiver before those who were wretchedly unlovable. Now He asked of those who would follow Him, "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another." [^25] This love would be a distinguishing mark of their discipleship.

Nothing communicated love more clearly than the Lord's institution of the sacrament: "As they were eating, Jesus took bread and brake it, and blessed it, and gave to his disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is in remembrance of my body which I gave a ransom for you. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it. For this is in remembrance of my blood of the new testament, which is shed for as many as shall believe on my name, for the remission of their sins." [^26] The Passover had been a symbolic looking forward to the blood of the Lamb, which would be shed as a ransom for the sins of all those who would believe on His name. The sacrament was in remembrance of Him with a dual pledge that all those who partook would take upon themselves His glorious name and He would send His Spirit to be with them. They could not save themselves from sin and death, but, through His sinless life, He could. For this reason He had come. What inexpressible comfort for these disciples in this awful hour.

The hyssop was used by the Israelites as a paintbrush to mark their doorposts with blood. After the first Passover, the hyssop reminded them to remain humble. Tradition has it that on Golgotha the Lord was given vinegar to drink, passed up to him on the branches of the hyssop.

Then Jesus, with the absolute knowledge of the events of that night, gave them news to make the heart shudder: "All ye shall be offended because of me this night: for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered"—scattered by fear, and the sword, and the trembling of the spirit. Could this be true for every one of His closest friends? But Peter with a rush of heartfelt emotion said, "Although all shall be offended, yet will not I." [^27] "I am ready to go with thee, both into prison, and to death," to which Christ sadly replied, "I tell thee, Peter, the cock shall not crow this day, before that thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest me." [^28]

"Peace" was a greeting given among the Jews. Shalom. On this night as the lights began to burn low in the upper room, the Lord offered the deepest peace: "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you." When armies clash, when neighbors look at each other with enmity, when the ambitious are relentlessly self-seeking, when fear and worry clutch the soul and cloud all good intentions, when one can never get enough, this is not peace. Peace, in fact, can never be the gift of the world and its inclinations. It is the natural gift of knowing God, of living radically different from the world. Submissive instead of willful, forgiving instead of revengeful, willing to suffer instead of seeing another suffer, loving not just friends but also enemies. With these principles Christ's true followers would be utterly set apart, and He could say to them just minutes before He faced all the torment that Satan could unleash upon Him, "Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." [^29]

It was a night for Him to reveal hidden mysteries of the kingdom. They would soon be persecuted as the devotees of an executed criminal, and He needed to prepare them. While He was with them, He could comfort and bless them, give them courage when they faltered. And now He promised, "I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you." If they loved Him and kept His commandments, He would send them another Comforter that would abide with them forever—"Even the Spirit of truth; . . . for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you." [^30] What extraordinary and powerful comfort this was can be seen in the later lives of those who listened intently to His words. Peter, that very night, would retreat in fear and deny that he knew the Lord, but only days later at Pentecost, when he received the Holy Ghost—this Comforter—he became mighty and unshakable.

Then Thomas, thinking of his Lord's imminent departure, asked, "Lord, we know not whither thou goest." How will we find you when you are gone? Jesus answered, "I am the way, the truth, and the life." "In my Father's house are many mansions. . . . I go to prepare a place for you." [^31]

They sang together with the last cup of their Passover meal, sang perhaps in a circle, as if offering a prayer. Then with whispered conversation they came out of the gate of the city, down the steep hill, and through the Kidron Valley, the sound of running water from a swift brook filling the air. Behind them were the oil lights of a celebrating city, ahead just a few hundred feet the dark specter of the Mount of Olives, where olive trees still grow in healthy abundance, the very image He needed for further teaching about their relationship to Him.

"I am the vine," He said, "ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing." [^32] What, nothing? Despite our pretended self-sufficiency, without Christ we are as worthless as a branch broken from a tree, withered, dry, and utterly useless. And who were these eleven without Him "but unschooled Galileans, some of them fishermen, one a publican, the rest of undistinguished attainments, and all of them weak mortals?" [^33] Therefore, if, like us all, they were wandering, unsure, and helpless without Him, He implored, "Ask." "If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you." [^34] Again, "Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you." [^35]

Ask the Father in my name. "For the Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me." [^36] For them as for us all, He would be their intercessor with the Father, plead their cause, advocate their case. Because they had believed on Him, and therefore on the Father who had sent Him, He would no longer call them His servants but His friends. "I have loved you," He said. "I have loved you." [^37]

Then He explained what He would do because of this love. He would give His very life: "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends." [^38] For their love for Him they would weep and lament in the next days, weep while the world rejoiced, but He who has the power to promise said, "Your sorrow shall be turned into joy. A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow, because her hour is come: but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world." [^39]

Still, discipleship for them would not be without its terrible costs. The world would hate them as it had hated Him. They would be excommunicated, turned out of the synagogues, and become social outcasts. He said, "Whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service. And these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the Father, nor me." He told them of this shadowed future not to dismay or unnerve them, not to make them shiver in the night, but to strengthen them, that when these things "shall come, ye may remember that I told you of them." [^40]

Then Jesus lifted up His eyes to heaven to pray, pleading with His Father not for Himself but for His loyal followers who would in the next cruel hours lose His sustaining presence. "I pray for them . . . which thou hast given me. . . . I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil." [^41] In that long night and the years to come, they would need this prayer.

An eerie, cloud-streaked moon shines over Absalom's Tomb in the Kidron Valley near where Christ and his apostles walked on their way to Gethsemane after the last supper. This picture was taken on the anniversary of the very night, based on the Jewish lunar calendar. Since the tomb was probably already standing in Christ's day, this is likely the scene the Lord would have viewed just before His anguish in the garden.

The Lord and His apostles crossed this brook in the Kidron Valley on their way to Gethsemane that last night of His life. The Kidron is a narrow wadi nearly three miles long lying between Jerusalem and the Mount of Olives. This place would have been walked many times by the Master, since He went to Gethsemane often with His disciples for retreat from the hostility of Jerusalem.

They crossed the Kidron brook, the light of a nearly full moon illuminating the way, and climbed the Mount of Olives to the Garden of Gethsemane, a place where they had often retreated together. This garden was actually an olive vineyard, its name Gethsemane meaning "place of the olive press," and in this hour there would be inconceivable, heartrending pressing for the Lord. Taking only Peter, James, and John beyond the garden entrance, He "began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy," [^42] saying to them, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: tarry ye here, and watch with me." Then removing Himself about a stone's throw, in the depths of anguish He "fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me," [^43] "nevertheless not my will, but thine be done." [^44] "Abba," [^45] He called, using the intimate personal word for "Father" used particularly in family circles.

An olive press in ancient Israel was used to crush the bitter olives under mighty pressure until they yielded sweet oil for light and healing. So was the Lord crushed under mighty pressure for the same reason. "Is any sick among you?" asked James. "Let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord." This same oil, used in the healing of the sick, anoints with symbolic power from Gethsemane.

The intense agony Jesus faced in the garden was not from fear of death or the pain of crucifixion. As the Son of an eternal Father, no one could take His life from Him. But in these midnight hours He would face the ultimate contest with all the powers of darkness as He took upon Himself the pain, sin, infirmities, and anguish of a corrupted world. "It was not physical pain, nor mental anguish alone, that caused Him to suffer such torture as to produce an extrusion of blood from every pore; but a spiritual agony of soul such as only God was capable of experiencing. No other man, however great his powers of physical or mental endurance, could have suffered so; for his human organism would have succumbed, and . . . produced unconsciousness and welcome oblivion. In that hour of anguish, Christ met and overcame all the horrors that Satan, 'the prince of this world' could inflict." [^46]

In modern revelation, Jesus says of the event, "I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent; but if they would not repent, they must suffer even as I; which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup and shrink." [^47]

Some of the olive trees still standing in the traditional Garden of Gethsemane on the Mount of Olives are at least 1,800 years old and may have been silent witnesses to the Lord's agony. "God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." Tradition says that the angel who appeared to strengthen Jesus in the garden was, appropriately, Michael, who, as Adam, had brought about the fall.

In complete anguish of body and spirit, Christ endured the unendurable, "and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground." "There appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him. And being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly." [^48] This obedient Son whose communication with His Father was so perfect that He could say, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father," [^49] prayed yet more earnestly. What words He must have said in that impassioned prayer, as He in some way incomprehensible to mortal minds took upon Himself the punishment for all the sins of the world, however loathsome, paying the price, the incalculable debt for our weaknesses that we could not pay. He paid the price, with an infinite atonement, for all who would repent in His name and be at one again with the Lord. Since all things past, present, and future are continually before the Lord, [^50] in some way we cannot understand, even the sins we will yet commit added to the agony Christ faced in Gethsemane.

Without this bitter cup, the drinking of whose dregs was the weightiest task in all the universe, we would be spiritually dead. Once having sinned, we would be unclean, unable to return to our Heavenly Father, debtors faced with an impossible debt. Without repentance, the day will come when with absolute clarity we will stand before the bar of God and "shall have a perfect knowledge of all our guilt, and our uncleanness, and our nakedness." [^51] With repentance, made possible by a perfect Son, a sacrificial Lamb, paying a price that was not His, our staggering burdens of sin and guilt can be lifted, and we can be given new life. Who in this heart-breaking world of self-disappointment does not need this gift? When in the sorrow of our hearts we cry out, "O Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy on me, who am in the gall of bitterness," [^52] there is One who hears with mercy because of this night in Gethsemane.

One who saw this scene in vision records, "I seemed to be in the Garden of Gethsemane, a witness of the Savior's agony. I saw Him as plainly as ever I have seen anyone. Standing behind a tree in the foreground, I beheld Jesus, with Peter, James and John, as they came through a little wicket gate at my right. . . . As He prayed the tears streamed down his face, which was toward me. I was so moved at the sight that I also wept, out of pure sympathy. My whole heart went out to him: I loved him with all my soul, and longed to be with him as I longed for nothing else. . . . The Savior, with the three Apostles, . . . were about to depart. . . . I could endure it no longer. I ran from behind the tree, fell at his feet, clasped Him around the knees, and begged him to take me with him. I shall never forget the kind and gentle manner in which He stooped, raised me up, and embraced me. . . . I felt the very warmth of his body, as he held me in his arms and said in tenderest tones: 'No, my son, these have finished their work; they can go with me; but you must stay and finish yours.' Still I clung to him. Gazing up into his face—for he was taller than I—I besought him fervently: 'Well, promise me that I will come to you at the last.' Smiling sweetly, He said, 'That will depend entirely upon yourself.'" [^53]

Trunk of this ancient olive tree in the Garden of Gethsemane seems to be twisted in pain in memory of what happened here. "I stand all amazed at the love Jesus offers me, Confused at the grace that so fully he proffers me. I tremble to know that for me he was crucified, That for me, a sinner, he suffered, he bled and died. Oh, it is wonderful that he should care for me enough to die for me! Oh, it is wonderful, wonderful to me!"

As all things were created to bear record of the Savior, so Gethsemane, the oil press, bears silent testimony of that grueling night. Olive oil was the very essence of life for Israel. Light came in a dark night because olive oil filled the lamps. Balm and healing came because olive oil was poured into wounds. Olive mash was fuel. But olive oil was obtained from the olives only by subjecting them to extraordinary pressure, crushing them under a stone press. Under this relentless weight, the olive, which is bitter, produced oil, which is sweet. So it is with the atonement. From the bitterness of that night came all that is precious and sweet about life, all that gives light in the the darkness. When we are anointed with consecrated oil, it is through Christ's sacrifice that we are healed, given balm from the olive press He faced for our wounds.

The oil from olive trees like this one in the Garden of Gethsemane was ancient Israel's source of light. Without the glow from oil lamps, at night Israel would have been swallowed up in darkness. Christ's atonement in the garden keeps all of humanity from being swallowed in darkness. "The light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehendeth it not." "Comprehendeth" means that the darkness cannot overcome or extinguish the light.

He had asked His apostles Peter, James, and John to watch with Him, but twice when He arose from prayer He found them "sleeping for sorrow." [^54] Jesus said, "What, could ye not watch with me one hour?" Then He added in sympathy, "The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak." [^55] Finally, the third time He came and found them asleep, He said, "Sleep on now, and take your rest: it is enough; . . . behold, the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners." [^56]

Perhaps even at that minute He could already see the string of torchlights coming up the mount, a multitude of armed soldiers led by Judas. "Mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, hath lifted up his heel against me." [^57] Approaching Jesus, Judas greeted Him and "not only kissed [him], but covered Him with kisses, kissed Him repeatedly, loudly, effusively." [^58] Defending Jesus against the arrest, Peter raised his sword and cut off the right ear of Malchus, the high priest's servant. Touching the ear, Jesus healed it, saying, "Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?" [^59] But now was the time for divine restraint as He allowed Himself to be taken captive that the scriptures might be fulfilled.

As the soldiers took Jesus, "they saw before them nothing but a weary unarmed man, whom one of His own most intimate followers had betrayed, and whose arrest was simply watched in helpless agony by a few terrified Galileans" [^60] who finally fled in panic. This was the beginning of a long and terrible night of inquisition. First, He was led to degenerate Annas, the former High Priest for seven years, the money-hungry usurper of Jewish power. One of the abominable men of the earth, He appointed and controlled the High Priest, who would have slavishly followed his word.

Ancient stone steps dating back to the time of Christ. They lead to the possible site of Caiaphas' palace. These are likely the stone steps Christ climbed on his way to a night of brutal interrogation. In reality, once Annas had decided that Christ should be murdered, the other trials were but a sham.

Next, in exhaustion, He was led bound to Caiaphas, the legal High Priest in whose palace at least a quorum of the Sanhedrin was gathered. They had before them a prisoner innocent of any crime. "Their dilemma was real, for they themselves were sharply divided on all major issues save one—that the man Jesus must die." [^61] However, since they needed to find a charge, they sought false witnesses. Many were eager to bare false witness, but "their testimony was so false, so shadowy, so self-contradictory, that it all melted to nothing." [^62] Through all their hopeless argument, Jesus listened in majestic silence, which only confounded them more until Caiaphas, enraged, hurled this question: "Answerest thou nothing? . . . I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God." Jesus answered, for it had never been a secret, "Thou hast said." [^63]

Meanwhile, Peter waited in the courtyard below, mingling with the crowd and listening to malcontents tell stories of the arrest. The damsel who had admitted him to the palace said, "Art not thou also one of this man's disciples?" "I am not," [^64] he said. Later another maid said, "This fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth." This time Peter, more threatened, denied with an oath, saying, "I do not know the man." [^65] Then later as Peter was warming himself by the fire, another said, "Surely thou art one of them," [^66] and "Did not I see thee in the garden with him?" [^67] Peter cursed and swore with an oath, "Man, I know not what thou sayest." [^68] Just then the cock crew, and the Lord, probably being led out a suffering prisoner, turned and looked upon Peter. Seeing that face of love, those suffering eyes, and knowing his own desperation, Peter went out and wept bitterly.

After the Savior's interview with Caiaphas, Christ's captors spit in His face and buffeted Him and made up a cruel game. Blindfolding Him, they slapped Him with the palms of their hands and then taunted, "Prophesy, who is it that smote thee?" When, at last, the lingering hours of the night had passed, Jesus was brought before the Sanhedrin for the sham of a trial, which would be in flagrant violation of their own laws. The charge was blasphemy against the only one who could not commit blasphemy—the Lord Himself. "What need we any further witness?" [^69]

Ancient flagstones that were once a part of a paved square in the Antonia Fortress where Christ came before Pilate. Games once played by idle Roman soldiers are still seen scratched into the surface. The soldiers never played a crueler sport than when they tortured the Lord. "All they that see me laugh me to scorn."

They were, however, bent on His death, and being subject to Roman overlords, they could not impose it themselves. So, followed by a riotous mob, they led Him bound to Herod's magnificent palace, where Pilate, the Roman procurator, was keeping a wary watch over the Passover rabble. This being a Gentile house with leavened bread, the fastidious Jewish leaders would not defile themselves and enter, though ironically they found no defilement in seeking to kill the innocent. Thus it was that Pilate came out to them, asking, "What accusation bring ye against this man?" It was a hard question from a practical politician, and they had searched for and found the charge—not blasphemy, which would mean nothing to a Roman. No, this time they charged Him with sedition. He is a traitor to Caesar. He calls Himself the king of the Jews! Of all those who examined Jesus, Pilate was the least guilty of malice toward Him. Something about the Lord touched the man, and after questioning Him he said frankly, "I find in him no fault at all." [^70] To this the chief priests responded in a clamor of accusations, among which a single word stood out: "Galilee." Pilate thought he saw a way out. With relief, he sent the Savior on to Herod, whose jurisdiction included the green hills of Galilee.

Jerusalem appears to be smoking with destruction as pillars of clouds climb over the eastern city wall. Against his own impressions Pilate willfully chose to send an innocent man to death. How well Isaiah described the Lord: "He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him."

Herod had killed John the Baptist, so before the cruel and insolent questioning of this despot, Jesus said not a word. For the weak, the sick, the child, the sinner, Christ had soothing, loving tones, but for the tyrant He had only silence, all the more infuriating to Herod, for he had longed to see a miracle performed.

Replica at Caesarea of a stone bearing an inscription of the names of Emperor Tiberius and Pontius Pilate. This is the only archaeological evidence ever found of Pilate's existence. Though he normally lived in Caesarea, he came to Jerusalem to help control the political passions easily inflamed during Passover. It is said that his life ended in suicide.

The chief priests and rulers of the people were assembled, and the mocked, spat-upon, exhausted Jesus was once again brought before Pilate. Word of His arrest had spread through the streets of the city, and a mob of onlookers had gathered. To these Pilate made his pronouncement: "Ye have brought this man unto me, as one that perverteth the people: and behold, I, having examined him before you, have found no fault in this man." [^71] This could have been enough; the Roman leader had spoken. But the pack of fanatics before him thirsted for blood. Pilate's pity for the Lord was crushed under his cowardice, for Pilate had that most inconvenient of burdens, a guilty past. Several times before, he had ignited Jewish fury against Him. One time, for instance, he had confiscated money from the sacred treasury to build an aqueduct and then had sent soldiers in Jewish costume among the people carrying hidden daggers to punish those who had opposed him. Now he was caught; for past sin, he would sin again, violating his own best instincts.

So he tried another kind of appeasement. It was the custom at Passover to release a criminal. Here were two men, perhaps even standing before the mob as Pilate spoke. One was Barabbas, the leader of an insurrection, a murderer. The other was Jesus, the proclaimer of peace, who raised the dead. "Whom will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus which is called Christ?" [^72] Some in that crowd had been healed by the Lord, some had heard His healing words, but the chief priests moved among the people stirring them up until they shouted, "Barabbas. Release Barabbas."

Pilate would have released Jesus, and his feelings were even more stirred when his wife came to him pleading, "Have thou nothing to do with that just man: for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of him." [^73] Whatever these flickerings of conscience, Pilate sent Jesus to be scourged. The soldiers wove a crown of thorns and jammed it on that tired head; they placed a purple robe on His shoulders and then, gloating and leering, they smote Him and spit upon Him, saying, "Hail, king of the Jews!" [^74] Consider this humiliation, this stinging injustice, and know that He who has suffered all things can succor us in every hour.

Now Pilate brought the bleeding, wounded Jesus again before the crowd. "Behold the man!" he said. Was there even now no stirrings of pity for Him? Where was the man or woman who would speak up? Where were all those who were waving palms just five days before? Their hosannas had vanished on a fickle wind. No, there was only Pilate's corrupt voice repeating, "I find no fault in Him." It was still early morning when Pilate gave in: "Shall I crucify your King?" and the people answered, "Away with him, crucify him. . . . We have no king but Caesar." [^75]

"When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person." And the people shouted, "His blood be on us, and on our children." [^76] So Jesus, numbered with the transgressors, carried His cross to the place of the skull, Golgotha, until He collapsed under the weight and mounting misery. The men along the road were silent; some women wept. The cross was raised between two thieves, and at noon the earth turned dark in shame.

The Lord was crucified outside the city wall at Golgotha, meaning "place of a skull." This rock, with its curves and caves much resembling a skull, has been suggested as the possible site. Though Christ's crucifixion has been painted as if it were on a hill, Roman tradition was to crucify along the road that all passersby might see, adding to the victim's humiliation.

For capital punishment, the Jews stoned, burned, beheaded, or strangled, but the Romans chose the cruelest punishment of all—crucifixion. It was a lingering death for its tortured victims. "The unnatural position made every movement painful; the lacerated veins and crushed tendons throbbed with incessant anguish; the wounds, inflamed by exposure, gradually gangrened; . . . there was added to them the intolerable pang of a burning and raging thirst," [^77] dizziness, cramp, starvation, sleeplessness, and shame. In Jerusalem, a charitable women's group administered a mixture of wine and drugs to dull the pain as the victim was stretched on the ground and nailed to the crossbeam, but this Jesus refused.

Stripped, He was raised on the cross with a mocking sign over His head: "JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS." [^78] As the soldiers beneath Him cast lots for what was probably His only material possession, a coat without seam, He asked in their behalf, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do." As He hung in anguish, the rulers and people gaped and cursed and condemned Him, taunting, "He saved others; let him save himself." [^79] Through the anguish, He had only loving words. To His mother, Mary, who must have felt the pangs of near-death in her own body, it was concern that she be cared for. To the beloved John He said, "Behold thy mother," [^80] and from that hour John took her into his own home. To the thief who would repent, He gave hope. At noon the heavens grew black for three hours, as if the universe itself were weeping for the agony of the Creator. In that time all the infinite agonies and merciless pains of Gethsemane returned, and His Father's spirit itself withdrew that the victory might be His. At the ninth hour, 3:00 P.M., "Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, . . . My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" [^81] In that eerie midafternoon darkness, someone ran and filled a sponge with vinegar. Having received the vinegar, Jesus said, "Father, it is finished, thy will is done." [^82] As He died, the veil of the temple was rent, and the earth quaked and rocks were rent as if to say with a nearby centurion, "Truly this man was the Son of God." [^83]

Darkening purple sky backdrops an unusual tree at Golgotha. After Christ had died, the soldiers pierced his side with a sword, and water gushed forth. "And when I think that God, his Son not sparing, Sent him to die, I scarce can take it in, That on the cross my burden gladly bearing He bled and died to take away my sin. Then sings my soul, my Savior God, to thee, How great thou art! How great thou art!"

While His body yet hung from the cross and then was placed in the tomb of Joseph of Arimathea, Jesus' immortal spirit performed a mission of utmost importance to the plan of salvation. An early Christian asked Peter, "Shall those be wholly deprived of the kingdom of heaven who died before Christ's coming?" [^84] Or in any generation, shall those who died without knowledge of the gospel of Jesus Christ be cast out? It is a question that haunts Christian writing and was answered by Christ's visiting the spirit world while His body was entombed.

Through an arched tree like a gate, steps ascend toward the light at Banias near the headwaters of the Jordan. Christ's visit to the spirit world opened the gate for those who died in their sins without a knowledge of the truth or rejected the prophets. In one early source Christ tells the Twelve, "I have received all authority from my Father, so that I might lead out into light those who sit in darkness. You shall become fellow-heirs with me."

In the world of spirits were gathered an innumerable host of those who had departed this life, "who had been faithful in the testimony of Jesus while they lived in mortality" and were awaiting His coming to open the gates that bound them. And "they were filled with joy and gladness, and were rejoicing together because the day of their deliverance was at hand." While these spirits were waiting, "the Son of God appeared, declaring liberty to the captives who had been faithful; and there he preached to them the everlasting gospel, the doctrine of the resurrection and the redemption of mankind from the fall, and from individual sins on conditions of repentance." All "bowed the knee and acknowledged the Son of God as their Redeemer and Deliverer from death and the chains of hell. Their countenances shone, and the radiance from the presence of the Lord rested upon them." [^85] For those faithful, who had been for so long without their bodies, they would soon follow the Lord to resurrection as "the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose." [^86]

But "the Lord went not in person among the wicked and disobedient" while among the spirits, "but behold, from among the righteous, he organized his forces and appointed messengers, clothed with power and authority, and commissioned them to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness, even to all the spirits of men; and thus was the gospel preached to the dead." [^87] Since baptism was a necessary step to enter the kingdom, the early Christians had been taught to baptize for the dead by proxy. Paul understood this doctrine: "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all?" [^88]

First light of morning touches the edge of the sepulchre in the Garden Tomb and the track where the large stone was rolled to seal it. On Friday, Christ's body had been hastily taken from the cross and placed in the tomb because Jewish Sabbath began at sundown. The entrance was sealed and guards watched until an angel "with a countenance . . . like lightning" rolled back the stone, "and for fear of him the keepers . . . became as dead men." Later these guards would be bribed to say Christ's disciples had stolen the body.

While it was yet dark on the morning of Sunday after the crucifixion, Mary Magdalene and other women arrived at the tomb of Jesus to mourn and anoint with spices the hastily entombed body. To their utter surprise and sadness, when they looked in the tomb Jesus' body was not there. Mary immediately ran to tell Peter and John of their findings: "They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not where they have laid him." This news caused the disciples to run speedily to the tomb to see for themselves, "for as yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again from the dead." As they looked in the tomb, something in John leaped with joy, and he "believed." [^89] Yet he and Peter returned to their residences. As Mary and other women lingered by the tomb, "behold, two men stood by them in shining garments," and "they said unto them, Why seek ye the living among the dead?" [^90] "Fear not ye; for we know that ye seek Jesus who was crucified. He is not here; for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where the Lord lay." [^91]

Golden interior of the empty Garden Tomb, symbol of all the graves that will one day be empty because of the Lord's free gift of resurrection. "I know that my Redeemer lives. What comfort this sweet sentence gives! He lives, he lives, who once was dead. He lives, my everliving Head. He lives to bless me with his love. He lives to plead for me above."

As yet, Mary Magdalene did not understand the words of the angels, for her sorrow at the loss of her beloved Lord was so stinging. Mary turned herself away from the tomb and saw someone in the garden whom she did not recognize. He asked her, "Woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest thou?" Supposing Him to be the gardener, she boldly said, "Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away." Mary's love for the Lord was so powerful that she offered to physically take the body by herself and see to its proper burial. Now came one of the greatest moments in all of history, for this man was not the gardener—it was Jesus Christ with a resurrected body of flesh and bone. And He made Himself known by simply calling her by name in tones so familiar: "Mary." Now she saw, becoming the first witness of the risen Lord. Her tears of sorrow turned to joy as she exclaimed, "Rabboni," [^92] which means "My beloved master."

Though the Garden Tomb has not been verified as the actual site of the Lord's burial, it meets all of the scriptural qualifications. The site must be outside of the city wall; it must have anciently been near a garden; it must have had a large, heavy stone to seal the entrance with a track to roll in; it must be large enough to walk into; it must be near a place of execution. The Garden Tomb meets all these qualifications.

What joy to this woman and to all of humanity! "But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept. . . . For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." [^93] Mary Magdalene reached forward to worship and love the Lord. Jesus said to her, "Hold me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father." [^94] Whether this meant for her not to keep Him long or whether she was not to physically touch the Lord is unknown. Perhaps the Lord was reserving His first embrace as a glorified and perfected being for His own Father in Heaven, also a glorified and perfected being.

Light spills over ancient steps in the Garden Tomb. It may have been somewhere near this place that Jesus and Mary met. So great and wondrous was the coming forth of the Lord from the tomb that the day was marked and overshadowed the celebration of creation's rest. After the resurrection, the holy Sabbath was changed from the seventh day of the week, Saturday, to the first day of the week, Sunday, and was specifically called the Lord's Day.

When Mary told the apostles that she had seen the living Lord, her "words seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not." [^95] Later Jesus appeared to Peter, His chief apostle, who perhaps may have wondered that the Master would ever again call him His servant. This was a day never to be forgotten. Ancient witnesses declare its truth in the holy records, and witnesses today have it borne to their souls by the power of the Holy Ghost: "He is risen! He is risen! Tell it out with joyful voice. He has burst his three days' prison; Let the whole wide earth rejoice. Death is conquered, man is free. Christ has won the victory." [^96]

An empty tomb in a garden reminds us that the Lord lives today with a resurrected, glorified body, and the same promise is offered to all. Resurrection is His free gift. "O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?" "Come," he invites everyone who thirsts, "come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come buy and eat; yea, come buy wine and milk without money and without price."

On that same day of resurrection, two of the disciples set out from Jerusalem to Emmaus, some five miles distant. Only one topic coursed between their heavy hearts: their hopes for a mighty Messianic reign now dimmed by their Master's death. In that late afternoon, another wayfarer joined them, Jesus Christ, "but their eyes were holden that they should not know him." He asked them plainly why they were so sad. One of them, Cleopas, answered, "Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the things which are come to pass there in these days?" Jesus continued to query, "What things?" "And they said unto him, Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, . . . and how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him to be condemned to death, and have crucified him." Jesus then began to teach them quietly and powerfully: "Ought not Christ to have suffered these things? . . . And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself." Arriving at the village, they pleaded: "Abide with us, for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent." As He dined at their table, He blessed the bread "and brake, and gave to them." Perhaps there was something in His tender voice, or perhaps in the manner of blessing the bread, but in a moment "their eyes were opened, and they knew him; and he vanished out of their sight." "Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?" [^97] they recounted. Shouldn't we have known?

Winding road through a pine forest on hills outside of Jerusalem leads to Moza, one of the possible candidates for the ancient village of Emmaus. As they walked with the Lord, the two disciples did not recognize Him. "Then in a moment to my view The stranger started from disguise. The tokens in his hands I knew; the Savior stood before mine eyes."

Now these two hurried to Jerusalem and found the eleven apostles meeting behind closed doors, for fear of the Jews, and brought their glad tidings to them. "And as they thus spake, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you." As they gazed upon the Lord, they were terrified, supposing Him to be a spirit. But He calmed them: "Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." The disciples yet "believed not for joy, and wondered," but to further show them His corporeal nature, "he said unto them, Have ye here any meat?" [^98] And they brought Him some food, which He ate before them all.

---
Notas:
[^1] 2 Nephi 25:23.
[^2] John 21:5.
[^3] John 1:1, 14.
[^4] John 17:5.
[^5] See Job 38:7.
[^6] Abraham 3:24-25.
[^7] See 1 Nephi 15:34; Alma 40:26, Ephesians 5:5.
[^8] Alma 13:12.
[^9] Alma 34:10.
[^10] Moses 4:2.
[^11] Mosiah 3:17; see also Acts 4:12.
[^12] D&C 45:5.
[^13] See Isaiah 14:12.
[^14] Moses 4:1.
[^15] Isaiah 14:13, 14.
[^16] Moses 4:3.
[^17] Revelation 12:7-9.
[^18] Jeremiah 1:5.
[^19] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, compiled by Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1986), 1:90.
[^20] D&C 138:39.
[^21] D&C 138:37.
[^22] D&C 138:38.
[^23] Abraham 3:22-23.
[^24] Alma 13:3, 6.
[^25] See Romans 8:25.
[^26] 1 Peter 1:7.
[^27] John 1:3.
[^28] D&C 104:17.
[^29] Job 38:4, 5.
[^30] D&C 88:7-10.
[^31] Moses 6:63.
[^32] See Genesis 1:14.
[^33] Moses 1:39.
[^34] Genesis 2:16-17.
[^35] Genesis 2:23.
[^36] Jolene Edmunds Rockwood, "The Redemption of Eve," in Sisters in Spirit, ed. Maureen Ursenbach Beecher and Lavina Fielding Anderson (Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1987), p. 18.
[^37] Moses 2:28.
[^38] Moses 4:6, 10-11.
[^39] Moses 4:23, 25.
[^40] Moses 5:11.
[^41] Moses 5:9.
[^42] Moses 7:4.
[^43] Joseph Smith Translation, Genesis 14:30-31. Hereinafter Joseph Smith Translation is referred to as JST.
[^44] Moses 7:13.
[^45] Abraham 2:8, 10-11.
[^46] Romans 4:20-21.
[^47] Genesis 22:2.
[^48] See Hugh Nibley, Nibley on the Timely and the Timeless (Provo, Ut.: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1978), p. 134.
[^49] Genesis 22:11-12.
[^50] Abraham 2:7.
[^51] Romans 8:28.
[^52] Genesis 39:2-3; 41:33, 38.
[^53] Genesis 42:2.
[^54] Exodus 3:5, 7.
[^55] Exodus 3:13-14.
[^56] Moses 1:2, 9-10.
[^57] JST Matthew 9:18-19.
[^58] Galatians 3:24.
[^59] Jacob 4:5.
[^60] 1 Nephi 17:41.
[^61] Jacob 4:4.
[^62] 1 Nephi 13:24, 26.
[^63] Isaiah 7:14.
[^64] 2 Nephi 9:8, 20.
[^65] 1 Nephi 11:31.
[^66] Psalm 22:1, 7-8, 16, 18.
[^67] Isaiah 9:6.
[^68] See Numbers 24:17.
[^69] Isaiah 47:4.
[^70] Isaiah 5:1-2.
[^71] Jacob 5:7.
[^72] 3 Nephi 17:4.
[^73] Psalm 137:1.
[^74] Alfred Edersheim, The Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah (Iowa Falls, Iowa: World Bible Publishers, 1971), 1:132.
[^75] Luke 1:17, 20, 62.
[^76] Luke 1:30, 34-35, 38, 43.
[^77] Luke 1:46-47.
[^78] Matthew 1:19, 20.
[^79] Luke 2:7.
[^80] JST Luke 2:7.
[^81] Matthew 8:20.
[^82] Luke 2:6.
[^83] Alma 7:10.
[^84] Luke 2:7.
[^85] Luke 2:9.
[^86] JST Luke 2:10-14.
[^87] Luke 2:15.
[^88] Matthew 2:2.
[^89] JST Matthew 3:6.
[^90] Matthew 2:8.
[^91] Luke 2:26, 29.
[^92] JST Luke 2:35.
[^93] Frederic W. Farrar, The Life of Christ (Portland: Fountain Publications, 1964), p. 61.
[^94] Matthew 2:18.
[^95] From "The Protevangelion of James," in The Lost Books of the Bible (New York: Alpha House, 1926), pp. 35-36.
[^96] Exodus 4:22.
[^97] Matthew 2:15.
[^98] D. Kelly Ogden, Where Jesus Walked (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991), p. 152.
