Scot Facer Proctor, Maurine Jensen Proctor, Source of the Light: A Witness and Testimony of Jesus Christ, the Savior and Redeemer of All ( 1992)

Section 5:

THEN SHALL THEY KNOW THAT I AM THE LORD

Clouds gather over the Jezreel Valley, where in a day to come soldiers will clash. Armageddon is a Greek transliteration of the Hebrew Har Megiddon, "Mountain of Megiddo." Megiddo is an ancient city that stood at the strategic head of the valley and was the scene of several violent and crucial battles in ancient times. It will yet be the place of the most decisive war in the history of the earth.

The apostles went home to Galilee, to the sea they knew, as they waited for the Lord to come to them again. As seven of them gathered together one day, Peter said, "I go a fishing," to which the others answered, "We also go with thee." They fished through the long hours of the night, hoping to feed their families, but they caught nothing. Undoubtedly bone-weary, their nets empty for their effort, they approached the shore. In the dim light of early morning, they did not recognize Jesus as He called to them, "Children, have ye any meat?" When they answered, "No," He said, "Cast the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find." When they did, they were not able to draw the net up for the multitude of fishes. This abundant giving was an immediate sign to John. "It is the Lord," [^1] he said. Who else gives like this?

Sunrise touching the waters at the north shore of the Galilee near Capernaum. The multitude of great fishes that the apostles brought in at this shore likely weighed between one and three tons. The Lord's tender care for His flock is so evident in his caring for Peter. The Lord said to him, "Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat: but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not." Then the Lord gave Peter the pattern for all of us: "And when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren."

Impulsive Peter put on his fisher's coat and scrambled into the water while the others followed in the ship, dragging the net of fishes. On shore, the Lord, always meeting the smallest need, had prepared a fire of coals where fish were broiling for the hungry men. "Come and dine," He said. After they had eaten, Jesus asked Peter a question that must have wrung his very heart: "Lovest thou me more than these?"—more than the fish, more than the fear of men, more than life itself? Did Peter remember his three denials as he answered, his broken promise that he would never be offended because of the Lord? "Yea, Lord: thou knowest that I love thee." Then Christ said, "Feed my lambs." Then a second time, "Lovest thou me?" and Peter answered again, "Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee." And Christ said, "Feed my sheep." A third time the question was repeated, and "Peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time, Lovest thou me?" [^2]

He must have wondered if the Lord distrusted him. Yet this repeated question showed the utmost sensitivity from the Lord. Peter bore three wounds in his heart from his cowardly denials of the Lord. Now he was able to affirm three times that he loved the Lord, each proclamation of devotion a healing for his soul. He would now wear out his life in spreading the Lord's gospel and finally follow his master to crucifixion.

Sunset washes light over the mountains to the west of Mt. Arbel in the Galilee. Jesus repeatedly reminded the disciples that after the resurrection he would meet them in the Galilee. Surely word spread quickly after the risen Lord had been seen that there would be a meeting in the Galilee. Paul records that "he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once," not counting women and children, and likely this refers to that special meeting.

The gospels give us only the merest hint of the appearances of the Risen Lord to His beloved followers, only the merest taste of His teachings during the forty-day ministry immediately following the resurrection. Perhaps they were too deep to share, for John tells us, "Many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book." [^3] It was a higher and holier teaching given to those who had proved themselves worthy. Early Christian records describe it as secret, the last and highest revelation, a knowledge given only to those who ask for it, accompanied by specific rites and ordinances. [^4] The apostles who had been fearful and vacillating before the Lord's death went forth after these forty days bold and mighty in knowledge and testimony.

One of the Lord's most significant appearances during this time was to a group of at least five hundred men and an uncounted number of women and children on a mountain in Galilee. The instructions given there clearly burst old boundaries. No longer was the gospel to be preached only to the Jew, only to the house of Israel. Now the mission was sweeping: "Go ye . . . and teach all nations." [^5]

The direction was echoed on that final day on the Mount of Olives when, in His last words to the apostles, the Lord instructed, "Ye shall be witnesses . . . unto the uttermost part of the earth." [^6] Then He was taken up, and a cloud received Him out of their sight.

Soon after, as promised, He went to "other sheep . . . which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice." [^7] These were the Nephites, a branch of the house of Israel, who had left Jerusalem in 600 B.C. and settled in the Americas, a people whose prophets had told them of the Lord's coming and had yearned for the day. Clothed in a white robe, the Lord descended from heaven toward a multitude of them, and He came down and stood in their midst. As they pressed forward by His invitation to feel the prints of the nails in His hands and in His feet, He said, "I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world." [^8]

Sun begins to break through the thick clouds of morning on the road to Damascus. Five or six days of travel would be required to take the 130-mile trip from Jerusalem to Damascus. Ananias, who lived on the street called Straight, was concerned about the Lord's sending Saul to him. "I have heard by many of this man, how much evil he hath done," he said. But the Lord replied, "He is a chosen vessel unto me."

The resurrection of Jesus Christ did not end the persecution of His followers. If anything it was heightened as well-educated Pharisees like Saul of Tarsus breathed out "threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord" [^9] and burst into houses, raising havoc and bringing men and women bound to prison. For those who would follow the Lord, the price was unspeakably dear. With Saul consenting, Stephen was stoned to death with these words as his last: "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit." [^10] Then as Saul was on his way to Damascus, bearing letters authorizing persecution of the Christians, "suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven: and he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest." [^11] Trembling and three days blind, Saul went to Damascus on a different errand—to be instructed in the gospel and then, converted and called Paul, to teach the word through all the Roman Empire.

Cornelius of Caesarea was a centurion of the Italian band, a devout man who, with all his house, feared God. An angel came to him in vision, telling him to send men to Joppa and ask for Peter at the seaside home of Simon the tanner. The next day, about noon, Peter was on the housetop praying when he became very hungry and would have eaten. While he prepared, he fell into a vision and saw a great sheet knit at four corners which was let down to the earth. In the sheet "were all manner of fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air. And there came a voice to him, Rise, Peter; kill, and eat." Could anything have been more repugnant to Peter than these things, all considered by the Jews to be common and unclean? But the message became clear: "What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common." Though it had been unlawful for a Jew to keep company with or to teach one of another nation, the message was sure: people like Cornelius must be taught. "I should not call any man common or unclean." [^12]

Traditional site celebrated as the house of Simon the tanner in Joppa on the Mediterranean coast. Peter was praying about noon when he saw the great vision that taught him that the Lord desired to take the gospel message to all nations. As Peter was pondering what the vision meant, the men who were sent from Cornelius were standing at the gate of the home. The Spirit told Peter, "Go with them, doubting nothing: for I have sent them."

While a prisoner for preaching of Christ, Paul pleaded his case in Caesarea before King Agrippa, telling his history and claiming, I witness "none other things than those which the prophets and Moses did say should come. That Christ should suffer, . . . and that he should rise from the dead." [^13] Callous Agrippa, who had been eager to hear Paul, said, "You think it will not take much . . . to make a Christian of me." [^14] Paul, Peter, and the other apostles had no illusions that their efforts would be richly rewarded and that the kingdom of God would roll forth triumphant in their day.

Theater at Caesarea on the Mediterranean Sea built by Herod the Great. Part of Paul's mission was to testify before kings, and this is where Paul testified before King Agrippa, saying, "Believest thou the prophets? I know that thou believest." To Agrippa's noncommittal response Paul exclaimed, "I would to God, that . . . all that hear me this day, were . . . such as I am."

When Christ had ascended into heaven, two men clothed in white had stood by the onlookers, saying, "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." [^15] Yes, the Lord would come again, next time in triumph, but "that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first," [^16] wrote Paul to the Thessalonians. The apostles did not expect that the church they formed would survive their generation. Sometimes they were quite somber at the thought. "Never is there any mention of relief on the way, of happy times ahead, of final victory for the cause, or of the consoling thought that generations yet unborn will call one blessed." [^17] Instead, as Paul writes "we are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed." [^18]

Their hope was not for today but for another world. Critics would make a heyday over Christ's failure to convert the world and His seeming inability to protect devotees from pain and persecution. To join the Church in that day was to be prepared to die. Yet it was exactly as He had said it would be. If the world had not accepted Him, it would not accept His disciples.

How would this falling away happen? "The apostasy described in the New Testament is not desertion of the cause, but perversion of it, a process by which 'the righteous are removed and none perceives it.'" [^19] The vineyard is not attacked from without; it is seized by the husbandmen and the ancient church fades away.

Detail of Roman capital on ruins in city of Capernaum. Paul warned of the impending apostasy of the church: "I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them."18 He further warned about these "having a form of godliness; but denying the power thereof: from such turn away."

Northwestern wall of settlement of Masada intact at the top of sheer cliffs with a Roman ramp visible in the background (a road cuts across it). As the city was about to fall to the brutal Roman forces, Eleazar, the leader of these Zealots, said, "Let us destroy our money and the fortress by fire; . . . and let us spare nothing but our provisions; for they will be a testimonial when we are dead that we were not subdued for want of necessaries; but that, according to our original resolution, we have preferred death before slavery."

"O Jerusalem, . . . your house is left unto you desolate." [^20] Christ had so prophesied, and so it would be. Who could have believed it amid the peace and prosperity Jerusalem enjoyed? Yet in A.D. 66, the mad Roman emperor Caligula attempted to have his image installed in the temple, and extremist groups stirred the nation to revolt. Titus led a long and bitter Roman siege upon the city, made worse because opposing Jewish factions fought each other, killing priests at the altar in the temple, leaving carcasses and pools of blood on the marble floor. The temple was burnt to ashes, its sacred relics carried off to Rome, and Titus, infuriated against the Jews, undertook the task of well-nigh exterminating them—crucifying them by the hundreds, selling them into slavery, starving them until they turned on each other. Josephus says that immediately after the siege, if a Jew had come upon the city suddenly, however well he had known it before, he would have asked, "What place is this?" Nothing remained of the beauty of Judea.

Remains at Masada of the oldest synagogue in the world. Masada is in a remote region at the extreme south end of the Dead Sea. So that the Romans would not take away their freedom, the Zealots took their own lives. "Let our wives die before they are abused," Eleazar pleaded, "and our children before they have tasted of slavery, . . . and why are we afraid of death, while we are pleased with the rest that we have in sleep?" Here 953 people were killed.

God's covenant people had been scattered, their nation destroyed by A.D. 73. They had missed their King when He had come. The ancient Christian church faced its own problems. As one by one the apostles were killed, by the end of the first century something was lost. Priesthood power was taken from the earth. Doctrines were transformed or invented, having no scriptural basis, until the light flickered out altogether. The early church fathers who followed Christ's apostles felt this loss. A lamenting touches much of their writing: "There will come a time when you will call upon me and I shall not hear you." [^21] Other dispensations had ended with apostasy brought on by wickedness. This time it was no different. The heavens were closed, revelation had ceased for wickedness, and for generations a deep spiritual sleep fell upon the people. Many claimed to act for the Lord, even did atrocities in His name, but His teachings had been perverted. Salvation without works. No miracles, no signs, no prophets, no revelation. It was indeed a dark age.

Waves crash into a reef on the Mediterranean Sea coast about twenty miles to the south of Haifa. Those who use the Bible as a pattern to try to find the true church that Christ established will have to find one with twelve apostles and prophets; the priesthood offices of deacon, teacher, priest, elder, seventy, and high priest; spiritual gifts such as healings and speaking in tongues; the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost; saving ordinances for the dead; and a mission to take the gospel to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people.

Yet Jesus had promised that He would come again to the earth, this time to reign in glory. How could this happen without a "restitution of all things," [^22] the keys, knowledge, and spiritual gifts that had been part of the ancient church? The heavens must again be opened and spiritual knowledge be poured out upon the earth that a generation could be ready to meet Him when He came. Certainly many people over the centuries, longing for the light, had looked for such a day. So it was that on a spring morning in 1820 in Palmyra, New York, a boy named Joseph Smith walked into a grove of trees to pray. He had a serious question. Having investigated the sects of his day with their warring doctrines, he simply wanted to know for himself. Which church should he join? Then, suddenly, he said, "I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!" [^23] The restoration had begun, and God established His Church once again upon the earth. [^24]

When will the Lord return? It is a question always on the minds of the faithful. When His apostles asked this as they sat together on the Mount of Olives the last week of His life, Jesus answered, "Now learn a parable of the fig tree; when his branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh." [^25] The signs are clear. So it would be with the Lord's second coming. Though He would not tell them the exact day or hour of His return, "in that day when they shall see all these things, then shall they know that the hour is nigh" [^26]

For those whose eyes do not see signs and wonders, His return will come as a surprise. As it was in the days of Noah, when people were "eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, . . . and knew not until the flood came, and took them all away," so will it be for the spiritually blind when the Lord comes again. It will be sudden, unexpected, like a thief in the night. In that day, "shall two be in the field; the one shall be taken, and the other left. Two women shall be grinding at the mill; the one shall be taken, and the other left." [^27] Watch and pray therefore, the Lord advised, lest at anytime you are overtaken with the cares of life and the day come upon you unaware.

Detail of olive-oil lamps burning brightly in the night on part of an ancient olive press near Bethlehem. The Lord gives modern revelation to interpret the parable of the ten virgins: "They that are wise and have received the truth, and have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived—verily I say unto you, they shall not be hewn down and cast into the fire, but shall abide the day."

"The kingdom of heaven," said the Lord, "[shall] be likened unto ten virgins, which took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom." Hebrew wedding ceremonies were held in the evening, and it was the custom in the East to carry lamps filled with olive oil to light the way as they went out to join the bridal procession. In this parable, the Lord uses oil to represent spiritual preparation, something that cannot be borrowed at the last minute. Five foolish virgins took their lamps and brought no oil with them. "But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps." While they waited for the bridegroom, they slept. Then suddenly at midnight (a most surprising time, when one would least expect it) the bridegroom came. All the virgins arose to trim their lamps, but the foolish cried, "Give us of your oil; for our lamps are gone out." The wise answered, "Not so; . . . go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves. And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that were ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut." [^28]

Beautiful leaves of a fig tree bathed in light at Tel Dan in the north of Israel. "Ye look and behold the fig trees, and ye see them with your eyes, and ye say when they begin to shoot forth, and their leaves are yet tender, that summer is now nigh at hand." The Lord taught this to his disciples so that they might know that when all the signs began to be manifest, His coming would be nigh at hand.

Before the Lord comes again, the powers of evil will be unleashed as never before. It will be a day when evil will be taken for good and good, evil, when people take darkness for light and light for darkness. [^29] False systems of belief and religion will so cover the earth with power and pomp, with the sway of mass opinion, that even if possible the very elect may be deceived. In that day many will say, "Do this, or do that, and it mattereth not." They will deny the power of God, saying that miracles have ceased. They will harden their hearts and oppress their neighbors.

Standing on the edge of the hills of Nazareth looking southwest into the Jezreel Valley. The Lord talks of the cry of the rich in the last days, those who have not given of their substance to the poor: "Your riches will canker your souls; and this shall be your lamentation in the day of visitation, and of judgment, and of indignation: The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and my soul is not saved!"

It will be a time of "wars and rumors of wars, and the whole earth shall be in commotion, . . . and the love of men shall wax cold." [^30] "And there shall be earthquakes also in divers places, and many desolations; yet men will harden their hearts against me." "And they shall see signs and wonders. . . . And they shall behold blood, and fire, and vapors of smoke. And before the day of the Lord shall come, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon be turned into blood, and the stars fall from heaven." A desolating scourge shall cover the land. Amid this misery, hounded on every side by war, famine, and pestilence, "men's hearts shall fail them, and they shall say that Christ delayeth his coming." Still the Lord gives this comfort: "Be not troubled, for, when all these things shall come to pass, ye may know that the promises which have been made unto you shall be fulfilled." [^31] He will come to put an end to all pain.

Yet before He comes, the gospel must be preached to all the earth, and the dispersed and scattered remnants of Israel will be gathered together. The lost ten tribes will return, bringing their records, and Zion will be built. Then in the final scenes, Israel will be under siege by an army of two hundred million with destructive weapons as have never before been seen. The focus of the worldwide conflict will be the valley of Armageddon. Jerusalem will be taken and pillaged, her women ravished. When the battle seems all but lost, with the two prophets who have been defending Jerusalem for three and a half years lying dead in the street—then the great God, Jesus Christ, will put His foot on the Mount of Olives and save His covenant people.

To speak of the Lord's second coming is to speak of many appearances, some private, some public. At Adam-ondi-Ahman, in western Missouri, He will come to an assembly of faithful Saints, joined together from every dispensation. There they will return their keys and give an accounting of their stewardships. He will appear with 144,000 high priests on Mt. Zion. He will come quietly to the temples in Jerusalem and in Zion. At that critical moment during the final war of Armageddon when Jerusalem is overrun, He will set foot on the Mount of Olives, and the earth will split open with a thunderous, roaring earthquake, sending upheavals worldwide. This will be part of the tumult that causes every valley to be exalted and every mountain to be made low. Then, at long last, many of the Jews will recognize Him. "And they shall look upon [him] whom they have pierced." "And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands?" He shall answer, "Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends." [^32]

Rare heavy moisture in early morning fills valleys around the hills of Jerusalem. When the Lord comes, He "shall be red in his apparel, and his garments like him that treadeth in the wine-vat. . . . And his voice shall be heard: I have trodden the wine-press alone." The prophecies are "that unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear" that "Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father."

Then, "let the floods clap their hands; let the hills be joyful." [^33] That day will arrive when Jesus, who once came as a fragile infant, will return as the glorified king before all the people of the earth. "For as the light of the morning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west, and covereth the whole earth, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be." [^34]

Angelic trumpets will herald the word, choirs will sing in praise and adoration, and, with a host of resurrected Saints, Christ will return in clouds of glory and devouring fire. The burnings will melt the mountains like wax, melt the very elements of the earth, and the wicked will be scorched as stubble.

This will be the end of the world, that oppressive, exploiting, abusing world, but not the end of the earth. The righteous, with the yoke of the world removed from their shoulders, will be caught up to meet the One who had always borne their afflictions. Of those it is said, "Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty." [^35] Their millennial inheritance is the joy of a new heaven and a new earth.

View of the lush, beautiful earth, looking from the top of Mt. Tabor toward a portion of the Jezreel Valley. The earth longs to be freed from the sins and stains of man, to bring forth in all her abundance and glory. Truly we shall sing with renewed meaning in the day of the Lord Jesus, "How blessed the day when the lamb and the lion Shall lie down together without any ire, And Ephraim be crowned with his blessing in Zion, As Jesus descends with his chariot of fire! We'll sing and we'll shout with the armies of heaven, Hosanna, hosanna to God and the Lamb! Let glory to them in the highest be given, Henceforth and forever, Amen and amen!"

The heavens have smiled upon [the earth]; and she is clothed with the glory of her God; for he stands in the midst of his people." [^36] In that millennial day for which we yearn, Jesus Christ, who once walked the earth blessing with a word or a touch, then will dwell with the righteous for a thousand years. Gone will be scarcity, the fear that haunts our sleep, the loneliness that makes us feel like strangers here. Forgotten will be enmity, the pride that drives us to best a brother, the anger that turns to violence and war. Only the dimmest memory will be disease, death, tears shed for the long absence of a loved one. All that has been pain, grief, and disappointment will be swallowed up in His loving presence. "He is come!" we will shout in glad hosannas. "He is come."

The Lord's second coming will herald the morning of the first resurrection when the just shall arise from their graves. The little graves of children, the forgotten tombs of generations past—these will burst open and give forth their dead. "Awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust." [^37] Amid new harmonies loved ones will fall on each others' necks in unspeakable joy. In that day, "the spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form," each "raised to happiness according to his desires of happiness." [^38]

Released from oppression, the earth will be as Eden, giving bounteously. Then will begin the thousand years of peace that all the faithful have prayed for when they have said, "Thy kingdom come." [^39] Worldly political regimes with their ambitions and intrigues will have been toppled, and Christ will reign personally upon the earth. Satan will be bound by the righteousness of the people, and they will not "learn war any more." [^40] The mighty military arsenals that have sapped the wealth of nations will be beaten into plowshares. [^41] The Lord said, "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly." [^42] Then will be the time of abundance in spirit, joy, love, and knowledge such as we who dwell in a fallen world can scarcely comprehend. The Lord who once came to us as the babe in Bethlehem is the author of it all. This is "written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name." [^43]

"Now I am no more in the world. . . .Keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are." (John 17:11.)

"And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent."

(John 17:3.)

---
Notas:
[^1] 2 Nephi 25:23.
[^2] John 21:5.
[^3] John 1:1, 14.
[^4] John 17:5.
[^5] See Job 38:7.
[^6] Abraham 3:24-25.
[^7] See 1 Nephi 15:34; Alma 40:26, Ephesians 5:5.
[^8] Alma 13:12.
[^9] Alma 34:10.
[^10] Moses 4:2.
[^11] Mosiah 3:17; see also Acts 4:12.
[^12] D&C 45:5.
[^13] See Isaiah 14:12.
[^14] Moses 4:1.
[^15] Isaiah 14:13, 14.
[^16] Moses 4:3.
[^17] Revelation 12:7-9.
[^18] Jeremiah 1:5.
[^19] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, compiled by Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1986), 1:90.
[^20] D&C 138:39.
[^21] D&C 138:37.
[^22] D&C 138:38.
[^23] Abraham 3:22-23.
[^24] Alma 13:3, 6.
[^25] See Romans 8:25.
[^26] 1 Peter 1:7.
[^27] John 1:3.
[^28] D&C 104:17.
[^29] Job 38:4, 5.
[^30] D&C 88:7-10.
[^31] Moses 6:63.
[^32] See Genesis 1:14.
[^33] Moses 1:39.
[^34] Genesis 2:16-17.
[^35] Genesis 2:23.
[^36] Jolene Edmunds Rockwood, "The Redemption of Eve," in Sisters in Spirit, ed. Maureen Ursenbach Beecher and Lavina Fielding Anderson (Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1987), p. 18.
[^37] Moses 2:28.
[^38] Moses 4:6, 10-11.
[^39] Moses 4:23, 25.
[^40] Moses 5:11.
[^41] Moses 5:9.
[^42] Moses 7:4.
[^43] Joseph Smith Translation, Genesis 14:30-31. Hereinafter Joseph Smith Translation is referred to as JST.
