Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 2 ( 1964)

Preface

Volume 2 of Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants is a continuation of a commentary on the Doctrine and Covenants from the writings and sermons of the prophets, seers, and revelators of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. This volume contains Sections 42 through 76, with material derived principally from the recorded general conference sermons of the brethren quoted.

As indicated in the Preface to Volume 1, the prophets, seers, and revelators are the members of the First Presidency, the Twelve Apostles, and the Patriarchs to the Church. In this calling they have a special right to receive the inspiration to explain scripture, to instruct, and to counsel the Saints. This responsibility is similar to that which was received by Oliver Cowdery at the beginning of the dispensation. (D&C 28:1-6.) It should be noted however, that only the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints may receive revelation for the Church. (D&C 28:2, 43:3-7; 90:9, 12-16; 107:8, 65-66, 91-92.)

On March 27, 1836, the Prophet Joseph Smith called upon the congregation at the dedicatory services of the Kirtland Temple to sustain the First Presidency in their calling as prophets and seers. He wrote:

I then called upon the quorums and congregation of Saints to acknowledge the Twelve Apostles, who were present, as Prophets, Seers, Revelators, and special witnesses to all the nations of the earth, holding the keys of the kingdom, to unlock it, or cause it to be done, among them, and uphold them by their prayers, which they assented to by rising. (History of the Church 2:417.)

The First Presidency and the Twelve hold the keys of the dispensation. The Twelve labor under the direction of members of the First Presidency, who counsel them as their leaders. (D&C 112:30-32.)

In consideration of the foregoing and of additional information found in the Preface to Volume 1, the instruction received from the prophets, seers, and revelators, divinely inspired, is like "a lighthouse in the ocean, or a finger-post which points out the road we should travel." The acceptance of the General Authorities as the leaders in temporal and spiritual matters has made the Latter-day Saints a people whose accomplishments are known throughout the world. Only those who accept the words of the living prophets as coming from the Supreme Leader may fully understand the happiness and security that is possible through obedience to the Lord's representatives on the earth. President Stephen L. Richards wrote this wise comment concerning the Latter-day Saints' acceptance of their leaders:

There are some, perhaps who may feel that it is subversive of individual freedom of thought and expression to be controlled by the interpretations of our leaders. I wish to assure them that any feeling of constraint will disappear when once they secure the genius and true spirit of this work. Our unanimity of thought and action does not arise, as some suppose, from duress or compulsion in any form. Our accord comes from universal agreement with righteous principles and common response to the operation of the Spirit of our Father. It is actuated by no fear except one. That is the fear of offending God, the Author of our work. (Conference Report, October 1938, p. 116.)

Volume 2 contains revelations received from February 9, 1831, to February 16, 1931. The thirty-five revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants received during this period came while the Prophet Joseph Smith was in the state of Ohio, with the exception of three received while he was in Missouri. This period was one that saw an unusual increase in Church growth in the Ohio Valley and also the opening up of a new gathering place for the Saints. The problems incident to this rapid growth, as well as the desire of the members to learn the answers to doctrinal questions and of their individual places in the growing kingdom of God, made this a fruitful period.

Students of the Doctrine and Covenants will recognize in Volume 2 that some notable revelations were received during this period. Beginning with Section 42, known as "The Law," and ending with Section 76, "The Vision," this volume contains two of the most informative and basic revelations.

Included in Section 42 is the first revelation explaining a socio-economic order, the law of consecration, which eventually will govern faithful Latter-day Saints.

Latter-day Saints have found comfort and faith in Section 76, which reveals the important truth that God is solicitous for all of the earth's inhabitants, but each will receive according to how well he has lived to the light and knowledge received while in mortality. Man's great potential to become, if faithful, equal with Christ, is revealed in this marvelous "transcript from the records of the eternal world."

Also discussed by the latter-day prophets in this segment of the revelations is a series of admonitions that will assist the Latter-day Saint to keep from being deceived by the adversary. (Examples: Sections 43, 46, 49, 50, and 52.) Many revelations were received for the benefit of individuals, but the counsel given has application to people of any period. (Examples: Sections 53, 54, 55, and 66.) The second coming of Christ and the signs that indicate the imminence of his coming are also plainly explained. (Examples: Sections 43, 45, 49, and 63.)

Wise counsel on the law of Sabbath day observance and the responsibility of parent to child gives helpful guidance to the members of the Church. (Section 59.) The principle of forgiveness of the Lord to man and of man to man is also commented upon by the latter-day inspired prophets. (Section 64.)

To the satisfaction and joy of the Saints throughout the dispensation, the Lord revealed that his church and kingdom begun in 1830 would never be lost to the earth, but would eventually fill the whole earth. (Section 65.) The attempts of the adversary's agents to thwart the Lord's work would be fruitless. (Section 71.)

These great revelations for the temporal and spiritual welfare of man and other guideposts for lighting the way in a dark world are commented upon by those ordained with a special calling as prophets, seers, and revelators.

May the reader seek prayerfully for that Spirit which will confirm the words of the prophets, living and dead. (D&C 46:7-10; 50:21-24; 2 Nephi 33:1.)
