Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 2 ( 1964)

Section 47

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, in Kirtland, Ohio, March 8, 1831. Prior to this time Oliver Cowdery had acted as Church historian and recorder. John Whitmer had not sought an appointment as historian, but, being desired to serve in this capacity had said that he would obey the will of the Lord in the matter. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 166.—John Whitmer designated as the keeper of the history of the Church.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

The same day that I received the foregoing revelation [Sec. 46], I also received the following, setting apart John Whitmer as a historian, inasmuch as he is faithful: [Sec. 47, follows.] (HC 1:166, March 8, 1831, Kirtland, Ohio.)

SCD&C 47 1D&C 47 2D&C 47 3D&C 47 4Anthon H. Lund: 1-4

SCD&C 47 1D&C 47 2D&C 47 3D&C 47 4Oliver Cowdery was the first historian of the Church. Afterwards the Lord, in revelation, appointed John Whitmer as the historian. John Whitmer was one of the eight witnesses of the Book of Mormon. He was very zealous in helping the prophet. In the later days of the translation of the Book of Mormon he acted as scribe, and afterwards he helped the prophet in preparing the revelations to be printed, and he went to Missouri for that purpose. He felt how important the work was that the Lord had commenced, and if he had only kept the spirit with him he would not have met the fate he did, that of being excommunicated from the Church. But love of worldly things took possession of him and he left the Church. But I want to say this to his credit, he never denied the testimony which he subscribed to when the Book of Mormon was printed. Once when he was in company with a lot of Missourians, enemies of the Church, they brought up the question of the Book of Mormon. He boldly declared that he knew the contents of that book to be true, for he had seen the plates from which it was translated. And shortly before his death he testified to John C. Whitmer, a nephew of his, that he knew the book to be true. Still he died outside of the Church, but what he had seen he could not deny, and the fear of men did not cause him to waver in his testimony. And we can say the same of all the witnesses of the Book of Mormon. Several of them were not faithful to the end, yet they were always ready to bear testimony to the truth of that which they had subscribed their name as witnesses.

SCD&C 47 1D&C 47 2D&C 47 3D&C 47 4John Whitmer was released to go to Missouri, in 1835, and we have Oliver Cowdery again as the Church historian, and in a short time afterwards George W. Robinson, John Corrill and Elias Higbee became Church historians. In 1841 Robert B. Thompson was appointed Church historian, and did faithful work in the office, but his life was cut short. He died ten months after his appointment. Brother James Sloan then took the place of historian and general recorder, and kept this position until his death in 1854. George A. Smith then became the General Church Historian and General Church Recorder, and ably conducted the affairs of these offices during a longer period of time than any other incumbent up to that time or since. In 1871, owing to his duties as one of the counselors to President Young and the Trustee of the Church, he was released from his position as Historian and Albert Carrington took his place. Three years afterwards Orson Pratt became the Historian, and kept the office until his death in 1881, after which Brother Wilford Woodruff was sustained as Church Historian until 1889, when he was chosen President of the Church. Franklin D. Richards then became the Church Historian and remained in that position until his death, which occurred December 6, 1899. The double office of historian and general Church recorder was first bestowed upon Willard Richards, and the double office has been kept ever since by the one that has been sustained as historian. There have been several brethren sustained as assistant historians in the Church. The first one was Wilford Woodruff; others were Albert Carrington, Franklin D. Richards, John Jacques, Amos Milton Musser, Charles W. Penrose, Andrew Jenson, Brigham H. Roberts, Orson F. Whitney, Joseph F. Smith, Jr., and A. William Lund. President Joseph F. Smith also devoted much time in the Historian's office and did a splendid work. (CR, October 1917, pp. 10-12.)
