Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 2 ( 1964)

Section 49

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Sidney Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt and Leman Copley, at Kirtland, Ohio, March, 1831. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 167. Leman Copley had embraced the Gospel, but still held to some of the teachings of the Shakers, or Shaking Quakers, of whom he had formerly been one. Many of these people were honest-hearted, and the Lord directed his servants to labor amongst them.—Exact time of the Lord's advent not to be revealed prior to the great event—Sanctity of marriage as a law of God unto man—Complete abstinence from meat not required—Development of Lamanites and establishment of Zion to precede the coming of the great day of the Lord.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

At about this time came Leman Copley, one of the sect called Shaking Quakers, and embraced the fullness of the everlasting Gospel, apparently honest-hearted, but still retaining the idea that the Shakers were right in some particulars of their faith. In order to have more perfect understanding on the subject, I inquired of the Lord, and received the following: [Sec. 49, follows.] (HC 1:167, March 1831, Kirtland, Ohio.)

D&C 49 1Joseph Fielding Smith: 1

D&C 49 1The Shakers

D&C 49 1The Shakers, or "The United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing," had their origin in England in a Quaker revival in 1747, of which Jane and James Wardley were the leaders, but it is due to the activity of Ann Lee that the Society has been perpetuated. This organization is a celibate and communistic sect, which did not prohibit marriage but refused to accept it as a Christian principle. The Shakers believed in "a life of innocence and purity, according to the example of Jesus Christ and his first true followers, implying entire abstinence from all sensual and carnal gratifications.

D&C 49 1"The leading authority of the society is (or was in 1831) vested in a ministry, generally consisting of four persons, including both sexes. These, together with the elders and trustees, constitute the general government of the society in all its branches." The society is divided into several branches commonly called families, so divided for convenience. There were in the days when this revelation was given, fifteen societies of Shakers in the United States located in the following places: Alfred, New Gloucester, and Poland, Me; Canterbury and Enfield, N. .H.; Shirley, Harvard, Tyringham, and Hancock, Mass.; Enfield, Conn.; Watervliet and New Lebanon, N.Y.; Union Village and Watervliet, Ohio; Pleasant Hill and South Unions, Ky. They claimed a membership in 1842 of six thousand.

D&C 49 1Under the leadership of "Mother" Ann Lee a band of six men and two women came to America, August 6, 1774. "A group of Shakers came out of the Kentucky revival in 1800-02, and from this the branches in Kentucky and Ohio were formed. The Shakers held that God was both male and female, that Adam, having been created in the image of God, had in him the nature of both sexes, that even angels and spirits are both male and female. Christ, they believe, was one of the superior spirits and appeared in Jesus, the son of a Jewish carpenter, representing the male principle. In Mother Ann, daughter of an English blacksmith, the female principle in Christ was manifested, and in her the promise of the second coming was fulfilled. Christ's kingdom on earth began with the establishment of the Shaker communities." (Encyc. Brit., Art. Shakers.) In 1874, there were 58 Shaker communities with 2,415 souls. In 1905 they were reduced to about one thousand members. Their "families" were composed of from 30 to 90 individuals. Each "family" has its own house, the stories being divided between the men and the women. The Shakers "derive their name from the manner of worship, which is performed by singing, dancing, and clapping their hands in regular time, to a novel, but rather pleasant kind of music." (Hayward's Book of Religion.) (CHMR, 1947, 1:191-92.)

D&C 49 3Parley P. Pratt: 3

D&C 49 3Some time in March, I was commanded of the Lord, in connection with S. Rigdon and L. Copley, to visit a people called the Shakers, and preach the gospel unto them.

D&C 49 3We fulfilled this mission, as we were commanded, in a settlement of this strange people, near Cleveland, Ohio; but they utterly refused to hear or obey the gospel. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, 1950, p. 61.)

D&C 49 5Charles W. Penrose: 5

D&C 49 5We should understand this, that Jesus the Christ came into the world, in the Meridian of Time, to be the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh. That is a doctrine established in this Church, and we have received it by revelation so we can put aside any doubts or speculations or contentions in regard to it. That was when he came and tabernacled, being in the image of his Father, the "express" image of his Father before he came into the world [Heb. 1:1-3]; and with power, as the heir of all things, God honored him and loved him, and he knew the faithfulness in the work entrusted to him, and knew before hand what he would do when he came on the earth to be the Redeemer of mankind. . . . Jesus as we call him, the Nazarene, the son of Mary, of the offspring of David, therefore the Son of man was the Son of God, who is the Father of his spirit. So, in the beginning he was with God and was the firstborn of this great family [Sec. 93:21], and on the earth he was the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh. [Sec. 29:42.] (CR, April 1921, pp. 10-11.)

D&C 49 6James E. Talmage: 6

D&C 49 6The Son of Man . . . descends on the earth

D&C 49 6I have heard it said that the predictions relative to the coming of the Christ are to be explained in a figurative way, that he is to dwell in the hearts of men and that is the second advent. Verily, the Christ shall come in person and shall be seen of the righteous and shall stand upon the earth and reign as rightful King and Lord, and shall send forth the law for the government of the world. (CR, October 1916, p. 76.)

D&C 49 7Charles A. Callis: 7

D&C 49 7The event [second coming of Christ] is certain though the time is concealed.

D&C 49 7"But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, but my Father only." (Matthew 24:36.)

D&C 49 7"Watch therefore": was the solemn behest, "for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come." (Matthew 24:42.)

D&C 49 7In the present age the Father has said, [Sec. 49:7, quoted]. . . .

D&C 49 7The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has been brought forth and established by the power of God and dedicated to the mission of preparing the way for the glorious coming of the Son of God to reign in the earth in truth and righteousness and peace.

D&C 49 7Would to God this glorious second coming of the Messiah might be in our day, but let it be sooner or later, in it we will rejoice.

D&C 49 7Truly, God will descend from the heavens in incomparable power and glory with all His holy angels, and He will stand upon the earth at the latter day. Then heaven and earth will meet. (Fundamentals of Religion, 1945, pp. 36, 40.)

D&C 49 8Joseph Fielding Smith: 8

D&C 49 8The reference to the need of repentance by all men, except those which I have reserved unto myself, holy men that we know not of, may require some explanation. The Shakers felt that they were living lives approaching perfection, or at least, free from sin in their celibacy, etc. The Lord informs us that all men in their mortal state are subject to sin and all who have not repented and received the remission of their sins in baptism are subject to repentance and baptism for the remission of sin. The Shakers did not believe in baptism. "Holy men that ye know not of," who were without sin, and reserved unto the Lord, are translated persons such as John the Revelator [Sec. 7] and the Three Nephites [3 Nephi ch. 28], who do not belong to this generation and yet are in the flesh in the earth performing a special ministry until the coming of Jesus Christ. (CHMR, 1947, 1:191-92.)

D&C 49 9Daniel H. Wells: 9

D&C 49 9We bear testimony that it [the Gospel] has been restored. It is not a new Gospel—it is that which existed from the beginning, and which was devised before the world was made for the salvation of those who should come to dwell upon the face of the earth.

D&C 49 9It is true that the terms of the Gospel are inexorable. Every son and daughter of Adam will have to bend the knee to this plan of salvation, either here or somewhere else. (JD, October 6, 1873, 16:240.)

D&C 49 10Brigham Young: 10

D&C 49 10When Jesus comes to rule and reign King of Nations as he now does King of Saints, the veil of the covering will be taken from all nations, that all flesh may see his glory together, but that will not make them all Saints. Seeing the Lord does not make a man a Saint, seeing an Angel does not make a man a Saint by any means. A man may see the finger of the Lord, and not thereby become a Saint; the veil of the covering may be taken from before the nations, and all flesh see His glory together, and at the same time declare they will not serve Him. . . .

D&C 49 10When the nations shall see the glory of God together, the spirit of their feelings may be couched in these words, "I will be damned if I will serve You. . . ."

D&C 49 10What will they do? They will hear of the wisdom of Zion, and the kings and potentates of the nations will come up to Zion to inquire after the ways of the Lord, and to seek out the great knowledge, wisdom, and understanding manifested through the Saints of the Most High. They will inform the people of God that they belong to such and such a Church, and do not wish to change their religion.

D&C 49 10They will be drawn to Zion by the great wisdom displayed there, and will attribute it to the cunning and craftiness of men. It will be asked, "What do you want to do, ye strangers from afar." "We want to live our own religion." "Will you bow the knee before God with us?" "O yes, we would as soon do it as not;" and at that time every knee shall bow, and every tongue acknowledge that God who is the framer and maker of all things, the governor and controller of the universe. They will have to bow the knee and confess that He is God, and that Jesus Christ, who suffered for the sins of the world, is actually its Redeemer; that by the shedding of his blood he has redeemed men, women, children, beasts, birds, fish, the earth itself and everything that John saw and heard praising in heaven. [Rev. 5:11-14.] (JD, July 8, 1855, 2:316-17.)

SCD&C 49 11D&C 49 12D&C 49 13D&C 49 14LeGrand Richards: 11-14

SCD&C 49 11D&C 49 12D&C 49 13D&C 49 14From the date of the organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, admission to membership has been through baptism by immersion for the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. In the revelation last referred to [Sec. 49:11-14] the Lord, through the Prophet Joseph Smith, instructed the elders of the Church to go among the people and instruct the people as did Peter of old. Let us examine the holy scriptures to ascertain what Peter did instruct the people to do.

SCD&C 49 11D&C 49 12D&C 49 13D&C 49 14On the day of Pentecost when there was an outpouring of the Spirit of the Lord, those who heard the preaching of Peter—

SCD&C 49 11D&C 49 12D&C 49 13D&C 49 14. . . were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?

SCD&C 49 11D&C 49 12D&C 49 13D&C 49 14Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.

SCD&C 49 11D&C 49 12D&C 49 13D&C 49 14For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. (Acts 2:37-39.)

SCD&C 49 11D&C 49 12D&C 49 13D&C 49 14Wherein does this instruction from Peter differ from that given to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery by John the Baptist; and subsequently, by Peter, James and John; and in the revelation of the Lord to the elders of the Church through the Prophet Joseph Smith?

SCD&C 49 11D&C 49 12D&C 49 13D&C 49 14In this Biblical account of Peter's sermon, the only thing lacking is the statement wherein he promises them that they shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, that they shall receive it by the laying on of hands. This omission was undoubtedly an inadvertence of brevity in reporting this event, for the scriptures are definite enough in the statement that Peter understood the Holy Ghost was bestowed by the laying on of hands. This is evident in Peter's participation in the ordinance of "laying on of hands" for the bestowal of the Holy Ghost in the case of those baptized by Philip at Samaria. [Acts 8:5-20.]

SCD&C 49 11D&C 49 12D&C 49 13D&C 49 14How could this truth be stated with greater plainness? How did the people of Samaria receive the word of God? By being baptized! Why were Peter and John sent unto them? Because the people had not yet received the Holy Ghost—they had been baptized only in the name of the Lord Jesus. Why did Philip not bestow the Holy Ghost upon them? Because, presumably, he was authorized to exercise only the functions of the Aaronic Priesthood, as was John the Baptist, who explained to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery that the Aaronic Priesthood "had not the power of laying on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost"! [Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith—History 70.] (A Marvelous Work and a Wonder, 1950, pp. 97-99.)

SCD&C 49 15D&C 49 16D&C 49 17Joseph Fielding Smith: 15-17

SCD&C 49 15D&C 49 16D&C 49 17The statement in relation to marriage in Section 49, was given to the Church several years before the revelation known as Section 132 [plural marriage] was revealed. Hence it is worded, as we find it here, according to the law of the Church in 1831. This statement in relation to marriage was given to correct the false doctrine of the Shakers that marriage was impure and that a true follower of Jesus Christ must remain in the condition of celibacy to be free from sin and in full fellowship with Christ. (CHMR, 1947, 1:192.)

SCD&C 49 15D&C 49 16David O. McKay: 15-16

SCD&C 49 15D&C 49 16With the divinity of our marriage covenant, and the responsibility of parenthood ever in our minds, with temple marriage as ideal for every worthy couple in the Church, we associate with courtship and marriage the most sublime ideals that influence human relations.

SCD&C 49 15D&C 49 16That youth may experience in anticipation and realization all the joy that can be found in a congenial and heaven-blessed home life, they and we should be guided by the following safeguards:

SCD&C 49 15D&C 49 16First, substitute the present tendency toward a low view of marriage by the high ideal which God has given it. Choose your mate not alone for physical attraction, but for congenial and spiritual companionship.

SCD&C 49 15D&C 49 16Second, let us teach the young of both sexes the sacredness of the ideals of marriage, so that they may realize that marriage involves obligations and is not an arrangement to be terminated at pleasure. In this regard, it is the duty of parents to set an example in the home that children may see and absorb, as it were, the sacredness of family and the responsibility associated with it.

SCD&C 49 15D&C 49 16Third, instruct young girls in the fundamental arts of housekeeping so that when the responsibilities of wifehood come, they may be free from the difficulties and perplexities which arise from ignorance and inexperience.

SCD&C 49 15D&C 49 16Fourth, let the marriage be so solemnized, as far as possible, at the place of residence, which will minimize the evils that follow runaway marriages. For members of the Church the temple should be the chosen place in which this sacred obligation is assumed.

SCD&C 49 15D&C 49 16Fifth, foster the spirit of true religion from the very beginning of home life.

SCD&C 49 15D&C 49 16Sixth, teach the young that the foundation of a happy marriage is laid before the bride and bridegroom kneel at the altar. Keep the spring of life pure and the stream will more likely flow on unpolluted. (CR, April 1935, p. 115.)

D&C 49 15Rudger Clawson: 15

D&C 49 15Marriage is ordained of God unto man

D&C 49 15There are two kinds of marriage, the civil marriage and the Temple marriage. Is the civil marriage a good marriage? Yes, it is a good marriage, a legal marriage. It is good as far as it goes. It is a bond, however, that has no force or virtue after death. [Sec. 132:13-15.]

D&C 49 15The Temple marriage is different. When a couple is united by the ordinance of God's house they are married for time and all eternity, and thus is perpetuated the great principle of fatherhood and motherhood. . . . Oh, how very important is this matter! Young men in Israel be careful, young women be careful. In seeking this blessing, be sure to get the best there is. The best is what God offers, and not what is given by man. (CR, April 1935, p. 68.)

D&C 49 17Charles W. Penrose: 17

D&C 49 17It is a very great privilege to dwell on the earth in this last dispensation. I believe with all my heart that this has been arranged by our heavenly Father. I believe in the doctrine of predestination—not that doctrine as it is taught in some of the so-called "Christian" sects, but I believe in the doctrine taught in the old scriptures [Acts 17:26] as well as the new, that before the foundations of the earth were laid, plans were prepared in regard to the peopling of the earth and the accomplishment of the divine purpose in sending the sons and daughters of God to dwell on the earth in the flesh. I believe in the doctrine taught by the Apostle Paul, on Mars' Hill, "that God hath made of one blood all nations of men, for to dwell upon the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed and the bounds of their habitation." [Acts 17:26.] So that we did not come here by chance but by design. (CR, October 1913, p. 15.)

D&C 49 20Joseph F. Smith: 20

D&C 49 20Every individual should be in a position to add something to the wealth of the whole. Everyone should be increasing, improving, and advancing in some way, and accomplishing something for his or her good and for the good of the whole.

D&C 49 20Then again, it is written that "It is not given that one man should possess that which is above another." Of course, there is some allowance to be made for this expression. A man who has ability superior to another man, and who is able to manage and control larger affairs than another, may possess far more than another who is not able to control and manage as much as he. But if they each had what they were capable of managing and of using wisely and prudently, they would each have alike. It is like the quart and the pint measures. You cannot put a quart into a pint measure; but you can put a pint into a quart measure, and then you can duplicate it. If the pint measure is full, that is all it has capacity to hold; if the quart measure is full, it can hold no more; and they are equal, so far as their capacity is concerned. . . . I expect to see every man a steward over his inheritance, and I expect to see every man manage his inheritance according to the light and wisdom that he possesses and in accordance with his capacity for managing. If his capacity is greater than another's he will have more than another, because he cannot be curtailed in his liberties or rights to do good and to magnify, to enlarge, to increase, to be greater and better, because there is another that cannot be as great or as good as he. What is meant then by this passage which says that it is not given that one man should possess that which is above another? I take it that in part at least it means this: It is not right for one man because of superior advantages that he may possess in a social or financial way, or in any other way, to take advantage of another and to deprive him of that which naturally and rightfully belongs to him. I understand too that it is not right for men to combine together in order to oppress their fellow beings and to take advantage of them. The Spirit of the Lord forbids this, and commands that it shall not be in the midst of the Latter-day Saints. Furthermore, the Lord requires that when men have abundance they shall be as humble, as economical and as prudent in the management of their abundance as the man who possesses much less is expected to be prudent and economical in the management of that which is given to him. (CR, October 1898, pp. 23-24.)

D&C 49 20James E. Talmage: 20

D&C 49 20Another of our Lord's parables contrasting ingratitude with thanksgiving, through clearing with other related phases of life, is that of the laborers, recorded in the twentieth chapter of Matthew. The story is that of men engaged to work in a vineyard. Some of them were hired in the early morning and went immediately into service on specified wages—they were to be paid at the rate of a penny a day. As the hours passed it was plain that more laborers would be needed; so about the third hour the master went out into the market-place where he found men waiting alertly on the chance of getting work. Yet others were called into the vineyard at later hours. At the end of the day all received their pay, and thereby hangs one of the most instructive parts of the story. . . .

D&C 49 20The paymaster began with those who had been engaged at the eleventh hour; and to each of them he gave a denarius, or Roman penny, worth from fifteen to twenty cents in our money, the usual wage for a day's work at that time. This was the amount for which those who had begun earliest had severally bargained; and as these saw the workers who had served but one hour receive each a penny, they probably exulted in the expectation of receiving a wage proportionately larger, notwithstanding the stipulation. But each of them received a penny and no more. Then they complained; not because they had been underpaid, but because the others had received as much as they. The master answered in kindness, reminding them of their agreement. Could he not be just to them and charitable to the rest if he so chose? The money was his own; could he not do with it as he would?

D&C 49 20But now, do you think that all those laborers were paid alike? True, each of them received a penny; but the grumblers went away each with his penny and much bitterness of spirit. The later comers went home each with his penny and a rich measure of happiness and thanksgiving. Too many of us today become grumblers, not because we have not enough but because some others have more. (Sunday Night Talks by Radio, 1931, pp. 488-90.)

D&C 49 21Joseph Smith: 21

D&C 49 21We crossed the Embarass River and encamped on a small branch of the same about one mile west. In pitching my tent we found three massasaugas or prairie rattlesnakes, which the brethren were about to kill, but I said, "Let them alone—don't hurt them! How will the serpent ever lose his venom, while the servants of God possess the same disposition, and continue to make war upon it? Men must become harmless, before the brute creation; and when men lose their vicious disposition and cease to destroy the animal race, the lion and the lamb can dwell together; and the suckling child can play with the serpent in safety." [Isa. 11:6-9.] The brethren took the serpents carefully on sticks and carried them across the creek. I exhorted the brethren not to kill a serpent, bird, or an animal of any kind during our journey unless it became necessary to preserve ourselves from hunger.

D&C 49 21I had frequently spoken on this subject, when on a certain occasion I came up to the brethren who were watching a squirrel on a tree, and to prove them and to know if they would heed my counsel, I took one of their guns, shot the squirrel and passed on, leaving the squirrel on the ground. Brother Orson Hyde, who was just behind, picked up the squirrel, and said, "We will cook this, that nothing may be lost." I perceived that the brethren understood what I did it for, and in their practice gave more heed to my precept than to my example, which was right. (HC 2:71-72, May 26, 1834.)

D&C 49 21Heber C. Kimball: 21

D&C 49 21I do not think that many ever suppose that animals are going to be resurrected. When God touched Elijah's eyes, and he looked on the mountain, he saw chariots and horses, and men by thousands and millions. Where did they come from? There is nothing on this earth but what came from heaven, and it grew and was created before it grew on this earth: the Bible says so. . . . [Gen. 2:4-5; Moses 3:4-5.]

D&C 49 21Let us be merciful to the brute creation. (JD, August 2, 1857, 5:137-38.)

D&C 49 22Joseph Fielding Smith: 22

D&C 49 22The mention of the second coming of Christ and that no man knows the day nor the hour, and that he "cometh not in the form of a woman," also the reference to eating of meat and to marriage, etc., in this revelation [Section 49], are given for the benefit of the missionaries about to go forth to the Shakers, and to correct the false doctrines held by their religious sect. (CHMR, 1947, 1:192.)

D&C 49 23Parley P. Pratt: 23

D&C 49 23From these verses [Isaiah 40:1-5] we learn, first, that the voice of one shall be heard in the wilderness, to prepare the way of the Lord, just at the time when Jerusalem has been trodden down of the Gentiles long enough to have received, at the Lord's hands, double for all her sins, yea, when the warfare of Jerusalem is accomplished, and her iniquities pardoned. Then shall this proclamation be made as it was before by John [the Baptist], yea, a second proclamation, to prepare the way of the Lord, for His second coming, and about that time every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low, and crooked shall be made straight, and rough places plain, and then the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. . . .

D&C 49 23Having restored the earth to the same glorious state in which it first existed—leveling the mountains, exalting the valleys, smoothing the rough plaes, making the deserts fruitful, and bringing all the continents and islands together, causing the curse to be taken off, that noxious weeds and thorns, and thistles shall no longer be produced, the next thing is to regulate and restore the brute creation to their former state of peace and glory, causing enmity to cease from off the earth. But this will never be done until there is a general destruction poured out upon man, which will entirely cleanse the earth, and sweep all wickedness from its face. (Voice of Warning, 1846, pp. 95-97.)

D&C 49 23First Presidency (Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards): 23

D&C 49 23Be not deceived

D&C 49 23Beloved Brethren,—When the Savior was upon the earth, and his disciples questioned him concerning the sign of his coming, referring to the latter-days, Jesus answered them on this wise: There shall arise false Christs and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders: saying, lo here! and lo there! so that if it were possible they shall deceive the very elect: Go not after them, neither believe them for as the light of the morning cometh out of the East, and shineth even unto the West, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. [Matt. 24:23-24, 27.]

D&C 49 23Many of the signs and wonders, and false Christs and false Prophets referred to, have already been exhibited, insomuch that many have declared the day when the Son of man would make his appearance; and many have believed on their testimony and been disappointed. (MS, January 15, 1852, 14:17-25.)

D&C 49 25Wilford Woodruff: 25

D&C 49 25Zion shall . . . rejoice upon the mountains

D&C 49 25On Sunday night the Prophet called on all who held the Priesthood to gather into the little log school house they had there. It was a small house, perhaps 14 feet square. But it held the whole of the Priesthood of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who were then in the town of Kirtland, and who had gathered together to go off in Zion's camp. That was the first time I ever saw Oliver Cowdery, or heard him speak; the first time I ever saw Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, and the two Pratts, and Orson Hyde and many others. There were no Apostles in the Church then except Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. When we got together the Prophet called upon the Elders of Israel with him to bear testimony of this work. Those that I have named spoke, and a good many that I have not named, bore their testimonies. When they got through the Prophet said, "Brethren, I have been very much edified and instructed in your testimonies here tonight, but I want to say to you before the Lord, that you know no more concerning the destinies of this Church and kingdom than a babe upon its mother's lap. You don't comprehend it." I was rather surprised. He said, "It is only a little handful of Priesthood you see here tonight, but this Church will fill North and South America—it will fill the world." Among other things he said, "It will fill the Rocky Mountains. There will be tens of thousands of Latter-day Saints who will be gathered in the Rocky Mountains, and there they will open the door for the establishing of the Gospel among the Lamanites, who will receive the Gospel and their endowments and the blessings of God. This people will go into the Rocky Mountains; they will there build temples to the Most High. They will raise up a posterity there, and the Latter-day Saints who dwell in these mountains will stand in the flesh until the coming of the Son of Man. The Son of Man will come to them while in the Rocky Mountains."

D&C 49 25I name these things because I want to bear testimon before God, angels and men that mine eyes behold the day, and have beheld for the last fifty years of my life, the fulfillment of that prophecy. (CR, April ] 898, p. 57.)

D&C 49 24Orson Pratt: 24

D&C 49 24There is one thing which I am now about to read which has not yet been fulfilled, and which we must fulfill before Zion is redeemed. I will read it—"Behold, saith the Father, I will bring the fulness of my Gospel from among them (Gentiles), and then will I remember my covenant which I have made unto my people, O house of Israel, and I will bring my Gospel unto them. . . ." (3 Ne. 16:10-11.)

D&C 49 24This people—the Latter-day Saints, before they can ever return to build up the waste places of Zion and receive their inheritances in Jackson County, Missouri [Sec. 101:17-19], have got to exert themselves to bring the remnants of Joseph to a knowledge of the truth. (JD, February 7, 1875, 17:299.)

D&C 49 24Heber J. Grant: 24

D&C 49 24The Lamanites shall blossom as the rose

D&C 49 24God gave us the Book of Mormon and the chief reason, as set forth in one of the revelations, is that it shall be the means of bringing to the descendants of Father Lehi the knowledge of the Redeemer of the world, and to establish them in the faith of their fathers. I bear witness to you that nothing on earth shall ever bring them out of their thraldom save the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. I rejoice, therefore, that the day dawn is breaking, the night is dispelling, and the day of their redemption cometh. (CR, October 1926, p. 40.)

D&C 49 24Spencer W. Kimball: 24

D&C 49 24The Lamanites shall blossom as the rose

D&C 49 24The Lamanites must rise in majesty and power. We must look forward to the day when they will be "white and delightsome" [2 Ne. 30:6], sharing the freedoms and blessings which we enjoy; when they shall have economic security, culture, refinement, and education; when they shall be operating farms and businesses and industries and shall be occupied in the professions and in teaching; when they shall be organized into wards and stakes of Zion, furnishing much of their own leadership; when they shall build and occupy and fill the temples, and serve in them as the natives are now serving in the Hawaiian Temple where I found last year the entire service conducted by them and done perfectly. And in the day when their prophet shall come, one shall rise . . . mighty among them . . . being an instrument in the hands of God, with exceeding faith, to work mighty wonders. . . . (2 Nephi 3:24.)

D&C 49 24Brothers and sisters, the florescence of the Lamanites is in our hands. (CR, October 1947, p. 22.)

D&C 49 25Heber J. Grant: 25

D&C 49 25There are those that know not God. There are those that think the Latter-day Saints are a mistaken people, that they are deluded and that they have no faith in the supernatural; but I say here today that I know the mantle of Joseph Smith fell upon the Prophet Brigham Young. . . . We are here today what the Prophet Joseph said we should be, "a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains." I will read to you the exact language of the prophecy uttered by Joseph Smith with reference to the Latter-day Saints coming to these mountains. "I prophesied that the Saints would continue to suffer much affliction, and would be driven to the Rocky Mountains; many would apostatize; others would be put to death by our persecutors, or lose their lives in consequence of exposure and disease, but more would live to go and assist in making settlements and building cities and see the Saints become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains." Now I have read this in your hearing, and I desire particularly to call the attention of all Israel to this prophecy, and to the fact that it has been fulfilled. (CR, October 1898, pp. 86-87.)

D&C 49 25Joseph F. Smith: 25

D&C 49 25Zion is, indeed, flourishing on the hills, and is rejoicing on the mountains, and we who compose it are gathering and assembling together unto the place appointed. I now ask this congregation if they cannot see that this prediction, "which was made many years before the idea prevailed at all among this people that we should ever migrate and gather out to these mountain valleys," has been and is literally being fulfilled? If there were no other prophecy uttered by Joseph Smith fulfillment of which could be pointed to, this alone would be sufficient to entitle him to the claim of being a true Prophet. (JD, April 6, 1884, 25:97-98.)

D&C 49 26Spencer W. Kimball: 26

D&C 49 26Repent of all your sins

D&C 49 26We are all sinners. We all need to repent. We all need to change our lives and to make them more righteous, and become valiant as the children of Enoch were valiant, so that we may receive the blessings which are promised to us and which we are striving for. Many of us have not yet surrendered, or if it has been a surrender it has been a conditional surrender, with many reservations. (CR, April 1951, p. 106.)
