Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 2 ( 1964)

Section 53

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Algernon Sidney Gilbert, at Kirtland, Ohio, June, 1831. The Prophet had inquired of the Lord as to Gilbert's work and appointment in the Church.—Gilbert to be ordained an Elder—Also to be an agent unto the Church as the Bishop shall appoint.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

Shortly after the foregoing was received [Sec. 52], at the request of Algernon Sidney Gilbert, I inquired, and obtained the following: [Sec. 53, follows.] (HC 1:179, June 1831, Kirtland, Ohio.)

D&C 53 2George Q. Cannon: 2

D&C 53 2You shall forsake the world

D&C 53 2Do you not believe that we ought to be born again? Do you not believe that we should become new creatures in Christ Jesus, under the influence of the Gospel? All will say, yes, who understand the Gospel. You must be born again. You must have new desires, new hearts, so to speak, in you. But what do we see? We see men following the ways of the world just as much as though they made no pretensions to being Latter-day Saints. Hundreds of people who are called Latter-day Saints you could not distinguish from the world. They have the same desires, the same feelings, the same aspirations, the same passions as the rest of the world. (CR, October 1899, p. 50.)

D&C 53 5George Q. Cannon: 5

D&C 53 5It was on the 19th day of June, 1831, that Joseph Smith departed from Kirtland, Ohio, to go up into Missouri, the place promised as an inheritance for the Saints and at which the New Jerusalem should sometime be established. The Prophet was accompanied by Sidney Rigdon, Martin Harris, Edward Partridge, W. W. Phelps, Joseph Coe and A. S. Gilbert and wife. (Life of Joseph Smith, 1907, p. 96.)

D&C 53 7Francis M. Lyman: 7

D&C 53 7I want us to discover the fact that this Church, with its order, its organization, perfection and authority, is most admirably planned and arranged by our Heavenly Father for the salvation of the children of men, for their training, their bringing up, and for preparing us for salvation in His kingdom; not only intended for our entrance into the kingdom, but to maintain our standing, fellowship, and growth therein, so that, though we are very enthusiastic, very devout and faithful in the beginning, that we shall continue in that condition until the finish of our contract with the Lord; that is, to the end, and the end is when we die; that is the end of our obligation, taking us finally into the presence of God, with our sins forgiven and blotted out. We are not there yet, but we will get there very soon, one at a time, or a few at a time, as we came into this world. (CR, October 1911, p. 31.)
