Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 2 ( 1964)

Section 54

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to Newel Knight, at Kirtland, Ohio, June 1831. Members of the Church in the branch at Thompson, Ohio, were divided on certain questions of Church administration, and selfishness was manifest amongst them. Newel Knight and other Elders had come to the Prophet asking how to proceed. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 180.—Some who had entered the Church had broken their covenants—Newel Knight to journey to Missouri.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

The branch of the Church in Thompson, on account of breaking the covenant, and not knowing what to do, they sent in Newel Knight and other Elders, to ask me to inquire of the Lord for them; which I did; and received the following: [Section 54, follows.] (HC 1:180, June 1831, Kirtland, Ohio.)

SCD&C 54 1D&C 54 2D&C 54 3D&C 54 4D&C 54 5D&C 54 6D&C 54 7D&C 54 8D&C 54 9Joseph Fielding Smith: 1-9

SCD&C 54 1D&C 54 2D&C 54 3D&C 54 4D&C 54 5D&C 54 6D&C 54 7D&C 54 8D&C 54 9The Saints from New York, principally the Colesville Branch, on their arrival in Ohio were located at a place called Thompson, about sixteen miles from Kirtland, where they were organized according to the law of the Lord. [See Sec. 51:1-15.] Leman Copley, recently converted and formerly a Shaker, owned a tract of land which he agreed to turn over to the Colesville Branch to occupy in the manner of stewardship, which was to be held for a "little season," or until the time should come for these people to move to Missouri. The leading Elders had been commanded to go to Missouri (Sec. 52:1-2), where the next conference of the Church was to be held. This was to prepare the way for the gathering of the Saints after the preliminary plans were arranged. It was not intended that any of the branches in Ohio should go to Missouri at that early date, but it appears that Copley, who had not been fully converted, and some others in Thompson violated their covenants, which caused confusion among the Colesville Saints and placed them at the mercy of their enemies. In their distress they sent Newel Knight, who was in charge of this branch, to the Prophet to learn what they should do. The Lord spoke to them by revelation (Sec. 54) saying since their covenant was broken and of no effect, they would have to flee to Missouri or their enemies would be upon them. He further said that it would have been better for one who was responsible for the offense, "had he been drowned in the depth of the sea." Nevertheless, blessed were they who were not responsible for this sin. Because of this broken covenant the Saints were released from the commandment to live according to the Lord's law, of having things in common, and therefore they were to take their journey to the borders of the Lamanites, and therefore, the Lord said, "seek a living like unto men, until I prepare a place for you." In other words they were to seek a living as other men and not attempt to live in the united order until the Lord should command them. Almost immediately because of the word of the Lord and the pressure brought against them by enemies, they took up their journey to the "borders of the Lamanites." (CHMR, 1947, 1:187-88.)

D&C 54 10Francis M. Lyman: 10

D&C 54 10The Lord has laid down His life and shed His blood and prepared the way for His people. He has done this for everybody, not for Latter-day Saints alone, but for every one of the children of God. There is not one born in the earth but what is entitled to receive and enjoy salvation, and the Lord will bless and redeem and save all that can be saved. As long as men will repent arid reform and do better, the Lord will remember them; He will not forget them; and they will never be lost sight of; but, blessed are they who seek the Lord early and walk uprightly before Him. . . "He that seeketh me early shall find me and shall not be forsaken." [Prov. 8:17.] That is the word of the Lord. What a fine thing it is when the boys and girls seek the Lord early and where they commence in early life to serve Him regularly. It comes so natural for them when they are taught by their parents and led by the example of their parents and the Spirit of the Lord. For His Spirit is conferred upon them early in life; it is about the first thing they are entitled to receive, the Spirit of the Lord, at the hands of His servants, when they start life. (CR, April 1910, pp. 33-34.)

D&C 54 10Richard L. Evans: 10

D&C 54 10Be patient in tribulation

D&C 54 10The Church is going forward, worldwide—in the building of buildings, in missionary endeavor, and in all else—and in our private and personal lives, young and old, we must also individually have the faith to go forward. It takes courage; it takes prayer and planning and work and faith; but there are glorious eternal opportunities; and we must not wait in uncertainty or succumb to it. The theories and the facts will all ultimately be reconciled; the questions will all be ultimately answered, the problems will all ultimately be resolved; and the promises will all be fulfilled, and we must plan and prayerfully pursue our plans and go ahead with our lives on solid and firm foundations, with faith, with cleanliness of conduct, with balanced living, with devotion, with the keeping of the commandments. (CR, October 1960, pp. 111-12.)

D&C 54 10Joseph F. Smith: 10

D&C 54 10They . . . shall find rest to their souls

D&C 54 10The ancient prophets speak of "entering into God's rest" [Isa. 14:3, Heb. 4:3, ; what does it mean? To my mind, it means entering into the knowledge and love of God, having faith in His purposes and in his plans to such an extent that we know we are right, and that we are not hunting for something else; we are not disturbed by every wind of doctrine or by the cunning and craftiness of men who lay in wait to deceive. We know of the doctrine, that is of God, and we do not ask any questions of anybody about it; they are welcome to their opinions, to their ideas and to their vagaries. The man who has reached that degree of faith in God that all doubt and fear have been cast from him, he has entered into "God's rest" and he need not fear the vagaries of men, nor their cunning and craftiness, by which they seek to deceive him and mislead him from the truth. I pray that we may all enter into God's rest from doubt, from fear, from apprehension of danger, rest from the religious turmoil of the world; from the cry that is going forth, here and there—lo, here is Christ; lo, there is Christ; lo, He is in the desert, come ye out to meet him. (CR, October 1919, p. 8.)
