Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 2 ( 1964)

Section 55

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, to William W. Phelps, at Kirtland, Ohio, June, 1831. William W. Phelps and his family had just arrived at Kirtland; and the Prophet sought of the Lord information concerning him.—William W. Phelps designated as one called and chosen—Directed to be baptized and confirmed—Ordination as an Elder to follow—Appointed to assist Oliver Cowdery in literary work for the Church.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

About the middle of June, while we were preparing for our journey to Missouri, William W. Phelps and his family arrived among us—"to do the will of the Lord," he said: so I inquired of the Lord concerning him and received the following: [Section 55, follows.] (HC 1:184-85, June 1831, Kirtland, Ohio.)

John A. Widtsoe: Introduction

WiIliam W. Phelps, one of the most competent of the early converts, was an editor, writer, and politician. His hymns are favorites among the Latter-day Saints. (Joseph Smith, 1957, p. 143.)

SCD&C 55 1D&C 55 2D&C 55 3George F. Richards: 1-3

SCD&C 55 1D&C 55 2D&C 55 3There are, I may say, two principal incentives for men to yield obedience unto the Gospel in order to obtain salvation. We may say the one is the external and the other the internal evidences of the Gospel. If we ever attain to a fulness of glory it must be by the keeping of the commandments of the Lord, by living by every word that proceedeth forth from His mouth. We must have faith in order to do so. Faith is the first principle of revealed religion, the foundation of all righteousness, and the moving cause of all action. Faith comes by the word of God. Hence we preach and teach, that men and women may have faith, that they may repent of their sins, yield obedience unto the laws and ordinances of the Gospel, and through the atonement of Jesus Christ obtain eternal life and exaltation.

SCD&C 55 1D&C 55 2D&C 55 3The internal evidences of the Gospel are experienced by those who have received the Gospel, and they have the benefits of the external evidences as well; while those who are non-members of this Church have practically but the external evidences.

SCD&C 55 1D&C 55 2D&C 55 3When I speak of internal evidences, I regard the Holy Ghost as the soul of Mormonism, and Mormonism is the Church and Kingdom of God established on the earth, with the everlasting gospel restored in these last days. . . .

SCD&C 55 1D&C 55 2D&C 55 3When a person has had faith to repent of his sins, and yielded obedience in the waters of baptism, and had hands laid upon him by those having authority, for confirmation to membership in the Church, and received the Holy Ghost, it is his right, through continued faithfulness, to have the companionship of the Holy Ghost with him all the time, to be, as it were, a lamp to his feet and a light to his path through life, to know the course that he should pursue, and have strength and power to pursue that course. (CR, October 1940, pp. 51-52.)

D&C 55 3Lorenzo Snow: 3

D&C 55 3And on whomsoever you shall lay your hands

D&C 55 3When receiving the baptism of the Holy Ghost I know I was immersed in a divine principle that filled my whole system with inexpressible joy; and from that day to the present have blessings crowned my labors. And when baptizing people and administering the ordinances of this holy priesthood, God has confirmed those administrations by imparting the Holy Ghost, giving a knowledge to the individuals to whom I administered, convincing them that the authority was delegated from heaven. And every Elder who has gone forth to preach this everlasting Gospel, and acted in the spirit of his calling, can bear the same testimony, that through their administrations in these holy ordinances the glory and power of God has been made manifest in a convincing manner upon the heads of those to whom they have administered. (CR, April 1880, pp. 81-82.)

D&C 55 4John A. Widtsoe: 4

D&C 55 4Scarcely had the Church been organized before he [Joseph Smith] began to provide for common schools for children. At that time public schools were few on the frontier. In June, 1831, a year after the organization of the Church, Oliver Cowdery and W. W. Phelps were appointed a committee to select and write books for the schools. (Joseph Smith, 1957, p. 223.)

D&C 55 4Reed Smoot: 4

D&C 55 4Schools in this church

D&C 55 4Joseph Smith was the author of such sayings as these:

D&C 55 4"The glory of God is intelligence." [Sec. 93:36.]

D&C 55 4"It is impossible to be saved in ignorance." [Sec. 131:6.]

D&C 55 4"Seek learning, even by study and also by faith." [Sec. 88:118.]

D&C 55 4"Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection.

D&C 55 4"And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage, in the world to come." [Sec. 130:18-19.]

D&C 55 4The Prophet was true to his principles. He established schools and championed the cause of education. . . . Education meant to him the leading out of all the latent potential powers of the individual, the training to perfection of every divine attribute in man, as the child of God and as a god himself, in embryo. He stood for the full and complete development of the soul, body, and spirit combined—mental, physical, moral, and spiritual education—the education contemplated and inculcated by the Gospel of Jesus Christ. (CR, October 1933, p. 108.)

D&C 55 4Wilford Woodruff, in behalf of the Twelve Apostles: 4

D&C 55 4Schools in this church

D&C 55 4ln the organizations which have been established among our people in all our settlements in these mountains, the advancement and training and benefit of all classes are amply provided for. Among no people of whom we know anything have provisions been made for the salvation and care of the members of society of all ages as among the Latter-day Saints. If we and our children do not progress in intelligence and in the knowledge of all principles pertaining to life here and life hereafter, it is because we do not avail ourselves of the facilities which are placed within our reach. We have the Primary Associations provided for the benefit of the young children of our Church, and their instruction in those simple principles which they can understand. (Pamphlet, Church Historical Library, October 1888, p. 4.)

D&C 55 5George Q. Cannon: 5

D&C 55 5He [William W. Phelps] had not yet been baptized, but he was promised the remission of his sins and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, if he would submit to the ordinances with the proper feeling, and he was to be ordained to do the work of printing for the Church; and for this cause was required to take his journey with Joseph and Sidney Rigdon to the west. (Life of Joseph Smith, 1907, p. 96.)
