Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 2 ( 1964)

Section 62

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, on the bank of the Missouri River, August 13, 1831. On this day the Prophet and his Counselors met several Elders who were on their way to the land of Zion, and, after joyful salutations, received this revelation to the encouragement of all.—Labors of faithful Elders commended—Those on their way to Zion told of their prospective return in continuation of their ministry.

George Q. Cannon: Introduction

After three days of rowing down the Missouri, Joseph and Sidney and Oliver were directed to journey by land speedily to Kirtland, while the others were instructed to proceed with the canoes.

On the day following this division, the 13th of August, [1831] Joseph met several elders who were on their way to Independence. A meeting was held in which joy abounded. [Section 62, received on the bank of the Missouri River.] After this the elders parted, the Prophet and his two companions continuing their journey and the other advancing toward the land of Zion.

It was on the 27th day of August, 1831, that the Prophet and Sidney and Oliver reached Kirtland. During their eventful absence they had enjoyed the Spirit of inspiration to a great extent and had witnessed many manifestations of God's power. Their faith had been strengthened, and the purposes of the Almighty had been made more clear to their comprehension. They had also gained greater knowledge of the effort which Satan was making to hide the light from the eyes of mankind. The Lord had said to them: [Sec. 62:3, quoted.] (Life of Joseph Smith, 1964 ed., pp. 123-24.)

D&C 62 3Joseph F. Smith: 3

D&C 62 3A testimony of the truth is more than a mere assent of the mind, it is a conviction of the heart, a knowledge that fills the whole soul of its recipient. (JI, October 15, 1903, 38:624.)

D&C 62 5Matthew Cowley: 5

D&C 62 5Declare glad tidings

D&C 62 5I tell you . . . if you want to have something come into your lives that will fill you with faith through all eternity, get into this missionary work and get the spirit of it, and joy will come into your heart. . . . (Matthew Cowley Speaks, 1954, p. 412.)

D&C 62 5First Presidency (Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards): 9

D&C 62 5 I am with the faithful always

D&C 62 5The meek and lowly in heart are always satisfied. To them the work of the Father progresses just fast enough. To them the work could not be bettered, though it should move faster or slower. Why? Because they live by their faith in every word that proceedeth from the mouth of God. They have renounced their own righteousness, knowing that they cannot of themselves survey the end from the beginning, and consequently cannot judge of the things of God only by the Spirit of God. (MS, January 14, 1854, 16:17.)
