Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 2 ( 1964)

Section 69

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Hiram, Ohio, November, 1831. The compilation of revelations intended for early publication had been passed upon at the special conference of November 1st. On the 3rd the revelation herein appearing as Section 133 was added to the Doctrine and Covenants, and called the Appendix. By action of the conference, Oliver Cowdery was appointed to carry the manuscript of the compiled revelations and commandments to Independence, Missouri, for printing. He was also to take with him moneys that had been contributed for the building up of the Church in Missouri. The course of travel would lead him through a sparsely settled country to the frontier. A traveling companion was desirable. See History of the Church, vol. I, p. 234.—John Whitmer to accompany Oliver Cowdery, for the latter's safety and sake—John Whitmer to continue his duties as historian and recorder—Reports and accounts from the traveling Elders to be forwarded to the land of Zion, of which Independence, Missouri, was the center place.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

The Book of Commandments and Revelations was to be dedicated by prayer to the service of Almighty God by me; and after I had done this, I inquired of the Lord concerning these things, and received the following: [Section 69, follows.] (HC 1:234, November 1831, Hiram, Ohio.)

SCD&C 69 1D&C 69 2D&C 69 3D&C 69 4D&C 69 5D&C 69 6D&C 69 7D&C 69 8Joseph Fielding Smith: 1-8

SCD&C 69 1D&C 69 2D&C 69 3D&C 69 4D&C 69 5D&C 69 6D&C 69 7D&C 69 8In this commandment [Sec. 69] the Lord declared that it was not wisdom that Oliver Cowdery should make the journey alone. The journey was about one thousand miles and through a sparsely settled country. There were many dangers on the way. The revelations were considered to be priceless and then, besides, Oliver carried with him sums of money to assist in the work in Missouri. John Whitmer was therefore appointed to accompany Oliver. This was not to relieve him, however, of his duty to write history, for he had been called to keep the historical record of the Church. [Sec. 47.] He was to observe and make a record of all the important things which he should observe and know concerning the Church. John Whitmer was also to receive counsel from Oliver Cowdery and others. The word was also declared that the accounts of the stewards were also to be carried up to Zion, "For," said the Lord, "the land of Zion shall be a seat and a place to receive and do all these things." John Whitmer was also appointed to travel "many times from place to place, and from church to church, that he may the more easily obtain knowledge." What the Lord said to him, in large measure, should be noticed by others who are appointed to keep the history of the Church, in wards and stakes and organizations. (CHMR, 1947, 1:21.)

D&C 69 8Orson Pratt: 8

D&C 69 8For the rising generations

D&C 69 8If every elder had, during the last nineteen years kept a faithful record of all that he had seen, heard, and felt of the goodness, wisdom and power of God, the Church would now have been in possession of many thousand volumes, containing much important and useful information. How many have been miraculously healed in this Church, and yet no one has recorded the circumstances. Is this right? Should these miraculous manifestations of the power of God be forgotten and pass into oblivion? Should the knowledge of these things slumber in the hearts of those who witnessed them? . . . We should keep a record because Jesus has commanded it. We should keep a record because the same will benefit us and the generations of our children after us. We should keep a record because it will furnish many important items for the general history of the Church which would otherwise be lost. (MS, May 15, 1849, 11:152.)
