Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 2 ( 1964)

Section 70

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, November, 1831. The documentary history written by the Prophet states that four special conferences were held from the 1st to the 12th of November, inclusive. In the last of these assemblies the great importance of the Book of Commandments, later called the Doctrine and Covenants, was considered; and the Prophet refers to it as being the foundation of the Church in these last days, and a benefit to the world, showing that the keys of the mysteries of the kingdom of our Savior are again entrusted to man. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 235.—Management of printing and distributing the books entrusted to the Prophet and the other Elders named—Any surplus means accruing from the undertaking to be consecrated for the benefit of the Church—Provision to be made for the temporal support of the ministry—The diligent laborer worthy of his hire, whether appointed to temporal or spiritual duties.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

My time was occupied closely in reviewing the commandments and sitting in conference, for nearly two weeks; for from the first to the twelfth of November we held four special conferences. In the last which was held at Brother Johnson's, in Hiram, after deliberate consideration, in consequence of the book of revelation, now to be printed, being the foundation of the Church in these last days, and a benefit to the world, showing that the keys of the mysteries of the kingdom of our Savior are again entrusted to man; and the riches of eternity within the compass of those who are willing to live by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God—therefore the conference voted that they prize the revelations to be worth to the Church the riches of the whole earth, speaking temporally. The great benefits to the world which result from the Book of Mormon and the revelations which the Lord has seen fit in His infinite wisdom to grant unto us for our salvation, and for the salvation of all that will believe, were duly appreciated; and in answer to an inquiry, I received the following: [Section 70, follows.] (HC 1:235-36, November 1831, Kirtland, Ohio.)

SCD&C 70 1D&C 70 2D&C 70 3D&C 70 4D&C 70 5D&C 70 6D&C 70 7D&C 70 8D&C 70 9Joseph Fielding Smith: 19

SCD&C 70 1D&C 70 2D&C 70 3D&C 70 4D&C 70 5D&C 70 6D&C 70 7D&C 70 8D&C 70 9At the conference held November 12, 1831, the Lord issued a proclamation to the inhabitants of Zion, and to all members of the Church, anouncing that he had made Joseph Smith, Jun., Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, John Whitmer, Sidney Rigdon, and William W. Phelps, stewards of the revelations and commandments which he had given, and which were yet to be given, and the members of the Church were to hearken to these brethren. An account of the stewardship of these brethren would be required of them in the day of judgment. Not only were these brethren held responsible for the care of the revelations, which the Lord valued so highly, but also for the printing and distribution of the books when they were printed. These books were to be sold, not given away, and all surplus was to be given into the hands of the bishop and placed in the Lord's storehouse where it would be consecrated to the inhabitants of Zion, "inasmuch as they become heirs according to the laws of the kingdom."

SCD&C 70 1D&C 70 2D&C 70 3D&C 70 4D&C 70 5D&C 70 6D&C 70 7D&C 70 8D&C 70 9The Prophet commenting on the word of the Lord and the commission which had been given, says: "Brother Oliver had labored with me from the beginning in writing, etc. Brother Martin had labored with me from the beginning and Brother John Whitmer and Sidney Rigdon also for a considerable time, and as these sacred writings are now going to the Church for its benefit, that we may have claim on the Church for recompense—if this conference think these things worth prizing to be had on record to show hereafter—I feel that it will be according to the mind of the Spirit, for by it those things were put into my heart which I know to be the Spirit of truth." (HC 1:236.) It was voted that the Prophet dedicate and consecrate these brethren and the sacred writings and all they have entrusted to their care, to the Lord, which was done accordingly. It was also approved that "in consequence of the diligence of our brethren, Joseph Smith, Jun., Oliver Cowdery, John Whitmer and Sidney Rigdon in bringing to light by the grace of God these sacred things, (they) be appointed to manage them according to the laws of the Church and the commandments of the Lord. And also that in consequence of the families of Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Peter Whitmer, Christian Whitmer, Jacob Whitmer, Hiram Page and David Whitmer, administering to their wants in temporal things and also (because of) the labors of Peter Whitmer, Jun., William Smith and Don Carlos Smith," it was voted and carried that these brethren be remembered to the bishop in Zion as being worthy of inheritances among the people of the Lord, according to the laws of the Church. (CHMR, 1948, 2:39.)

D&C 70 4Brigham Young: 4

D&C 70 4What is our duty? It is our duty to improve upon every blessing the Lord gives to us. If He gives us land, improve it; if He gives us the privilege of building houses, improve it; if He gives us wives and children, try and teach them the ways of the Lord, and exalt them above the dark, degraded, and sunken state of mankind, etc; if He gives us the privilege of gathering together, let us sanctify ourselves. In His providence He has called the Latter-day Saints from the world, has gathered them from other nations, and given them a place upon the earth. Is this a blessing? Yes, one of the greatest the people can enjoy, to be free from the wickedness of the wicked, from the calamities and clamor of the world. By this blessing we can show to our Father in Heaven that we are faithful stewards; and more, it is a blessing to have the privilege of handing back to Him that which He has put in our possession, and not say it is ours, until He shall say it from the heavens. (JD, June 3, 1855, 2:304-5.)

SCD&C 70 10D&C 70 11D&C 70 12D&C 70 13D&C 70 14D&C 70 15D&C 70 16D&C 70 17D&C 70 18Joseph Fielding Smith: 10-18

SCD&C 70 10D&C 70 11D&C 70 12D&C 70 13D&C 70 14D&C 70 15D&C 70 16D&C 70 17D&C 70 18It was stated in the revelation [Sec. 70:10-11] that none was exempt from the law of consecration. We learn from this and other revelations that all who went up, or who contemplated going up, to Zion, were bound by the law of consecration by which Zion was to be built. They were also commanded to be equal in temporal things, and not enter into the covenants grudgingly. To be equal did not mean that all should have the same amount of food, but each should have according to his needs. For instance, a man would receive in proportion to the number in the family, not according to the nature of his work. He was to have, "for food and for raiment; for an inheritance; for houses and for lands, in whatsoever circumstances I, the Lord, shall place them." (CHMR, 1948, 2:39-40.)

D&C 70 12John A. Widtsoe: 12

D&C 70 12Official service in the church is unpaid. Therefore it is necessarily part-time service. The officer must earn his living while he serves the church. For the government of the church of nearly a million people, very few persons are called to give their full time to the church, and most of these for short periods of time. Missionaries abroad may give two or three full years to proselyting, but at their own expense. The work of the church may be said correctly to be done by an unpaid ministry. Nevertheless, those who serve the church in this manner of sacrifice unanimously declare that the spiritual reward from the service is far greater than any material reward that might be offered. And, besides, it has been found that active participation in church affairs gives experience which is of real value in the world of affairs outside of the Church. (Gospel Interpretations, 1947, pp. 104-5.)
