Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 2 ( 1964)

Section 73

Revelation given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, and Sidney Rigdon, at Hiram, Ohio, January 10, 1832. Since the early part of the preceding December, Joseph and Sidney had been engaged in preaching, and by these means much was accomplished in allaying the excited feelings that had been aroused through the publication of scandalous communications to the press. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 241.—Elders instructed to continue their preaching and exhortation—Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon to resume the work of translation.

409Joseph Smith: Introduction

From this time [Dec. 1831] until the 8th or 10th of January, 1832, myself and Elder Rigdon continued to preach in Shalerville, Ravenna, and other places, setting forth the truth, vindicating the cause of our Redeemer; showing that the day of vengeance was coming upon this generation like a thief in the night; that prejudice, blindness and darkness filled the minds of many, and caused them to persecute the true Church, and reject the light; by which means we did much towards allaying the exciting feelings which were growing out of the scandalous letters then being published in the Ohio Star, at Ravenna, by the before-mentioned apostate, Ezra Booth. [Section 64:15-16.] On the 10th of January, I received the following revelation making known the will of the Lord concerning Elders of the Church until the coming of the next conference. [Section 73, follows.] (HC 1:241, January 10, 1832, Hiram, Ohio.)

SCD&C 73 3D&C 73 4Joseph Fielding Smith: 3-4

SCD&C 73 3D&C 73 4While residing at Hiram, Joseph Smith was engaged in the revision of the Bible, which work was commenced in Fayette [Sec. 37], but had been delayed by command of the Lord until this time because of other duties. Sidney Rigdon, who also had located in Hiram, continued to write for him. In course of time the Prophet went through the Bible, topic by topic, revising as he was led by revelation. The work was never fully completed, for he had intended, while at Nauvoo, a number of years later, to finish the work, but was cut off by his enemies. Nevertheless, many plain and precious things were revealed which throw great light upon many subjects. (Essentials in Church History, 1950, pp. 138-40.)
