Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 2 ( 1964)

Section 74

By revelation to Joseph Smith the Prophet, this explanation of the First Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, chapter 7, verse 14, was given, at Hiram, Ohio, January, 1832.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

Upon the reception of the foregoing word of the Lord [Section 73], I recommenced the translation of the Scriptures, and labored diligently until just before the conference, which was to convene on the 25th of January. During this period, I also received the following, as an explanation of the First Epistle to the Corinthians, 7th chapter, 14th verse: [Section 74, follows.] (HC 1:242, January 1832, Hiram, Ohio.)

SCD&C 74 1D&C 74 2D&C 74 3D&C 74 4D&C 74 5D&C 74 6D&C 74 7Josepn Fielding Smith: 1-7

SCD&C 74 1D&C 74 2D&C 74 3D&C 74 4D&C 74 5D&C 74 6D&C 74 7It is very fortunate that so many of the epistles of Paul have been preserved. . . . It appears that he wished those in the ministry, if they were single, to remain in that state rather than to marry, for "He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord; but he that is married careth for the things that are of the world, how he may please his wife." (1 Cor. 7:32-33.) Perhaps this was true among the Greeks.

SCD&C 74 1D&C 74 2D&C 74 3D&C 74 4D&C 74 5D&C 74 6D&C 74 7Some of these teachings, evidently, are the view of Paul the man, but when he spoke by the inspiration which the Lord placed upon him, he commanded that certain officers in the Church must by all means be married men. (1 Tim. 3:2, 12; and Tit. 1:6.) Then how truly he declared that "nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord." (1 Cor. 11:11.) It was while studying these teachings of Paul that the elders were led to inquire of the Prophet as to Paul's meanings in 1 Cor 7:14. The Prophet asked the Lord and got the answer. In this saying: [Sec. 74:1, quoted], Paul spoke not by commandment, but of himself. His intent, as explained in Section 74, being that where there were mixed families in the Church, the teachings of the Law of Moses and the doctrines which were fulfilled, should not be maintained. Male children in such families were not to be circumcised, and they would be holy. It was the doctrine of the Jews that unless this were done children were unholy. This Paul wished to correct. It was very difficult for the Jewish members of the Church to forsake all of their traditions and turn from the Law of Moses, and from circumcision which were fulfilled. (CHMR, 1948, 2:44-45.)

D&C 74 5George Q. Cannon: 5

D&C 74 5A believer should not be united to an unveliever

D&C 74 5Not infrequently there is some case that comes up to us for counsel where women have made alliances of this character [marriage to non-LDS]; and women among us have been more apt to do it than men. There have been a few instances of men marrying strange women, losing the faith, and becoming alienated from the Church of God, but it has not been of such frequent occurrence among us with men as it has been with women. The alliances which our daughters, our sisters or our female relatives have formed of this character have been attended with the worst results, and it is a matter that should receive attention from us as a people; our minds should be directed to this. It should be the aim of every father in Israel to have his daughters married to those who are of the right lineage, who have a claim upon the blessings of God, through their descent, added to their own faithfulness in keeping the commandments of God. I deem it of great importance to us as a people, that we should look to this. When I hear of girls in our Church marrying those who are not of us, who have not our faith, I have said to myself—and my experience in watching these matches has warranted me in the thought—that such a proceeding was sure to be attended with trouble to those who entered upon it. (JD, November 16, 1884, 25:365.)

D&C 74 7Parley P. Pratt: 7

D&C 74 7Hence Christ said, "Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven." [Mark 10:14.]

D&C 74 7All little children (being redeemed by Jesus Christ) are saved and counted holy, without any faith, repentance, baptism, or anything else. Hence the doctrine of little children being "desperately wicked, deceitful, depraved, etc., and that they must be born again, changed, be converted, experience religion, be regenerated, etc.," is a doctrine of devils, or of foolish and inconsiderate man. [Moro. 8:8-23.] (MS, June 1841, 2:21.)

D&C 74 7Melvin J. Ballard: 7

D&C 74 7The Latter-day Saint conception of salvation is not like the conception of the world. I remember a shocking incident that occurred in that first missionary experience. Coming one morning to the home of a woman in mourning, I learned that during the night her little girl, not yet a year old, had died. She, herself, was a member of the Roman Catholic Church, but she had neglected to have her child christened or baptized, as she called it, and had sent for the priest, but he came too late. It was her intention to have this ordinance performed before the death of the child, but he had arrived too late, and now burial in her own church, by the minister of her church, was denied, and burial in the Christian cemetery was denied because this was an unbaptized one. She was in great distress and wanted to know, since I was a minister, if I could throw any light upon her problem and give her any comfort. I showed her the plan of Christ that contemplated the salvation of little children without the ordinance of baptism, for it was for the remission of sin, and this innocent child was without sin, for of such was the kingdom of heaven. I explained that it was a mockery, a thing abominable in the sight of God, to baptize little children. She was much comforted through our long conversation and explanation, and asked me if I would conduct the funeral. I cheerfully consented; I remember that afternoon, by a little open grave under a cedar tree, outside of the cemetery, with the rain pouring down, my companion held the umbrella over me while I conducted the services, and again tried to comfort the heart of this sorrow-stricken mother. The thing that shocked me was that two weeks afterwards the same minister was called to the cell of a condemned man who had never been a Christian at all, but who had debauched himself, had lived a riotous life, and now had taken the life of a fellow man and had been condemned to death. His execution was to take place in a few days, and he wanted now to set himself right with God and sent for the priest who heard his confession, administered the sacrament of baptism by sprinkling of a few drops of water upon him, pronounced him a Christian, and allowed his remains to come into the church denied to the little, innocent child, and he was buried in the cemetery denied to her also. It deeply stirred me, as I am sure it would any other honest-thinking man or woman. I said to the people of that community, on another occasion, referring to this incident, that if the innocent child by any means had to be condemned to hell, it would be heaven wherever innocent children are, for the Master himself, said "Of such are the kingdom of heaven." And if this criminal who was condemned had been suddenly brought into the presence of God, it would be hell to him to have to look upon the face of the pure and the innocent, and he would be uncomfortable and would like to get away from that situation as soon as possible. [Mormon 9:3-5.] (Sermons and Missionary Services of Melvin J. Ballard, 1949, 212-13.)

D&C 74 7Wilford Woodruff: 7

D&C 74 7There is no infant or child that has died before arriving at the years of accountability, but what is redeemed, and is therefore entirely beyond the torments of hell, to use a sectarian term. . . . I will say again they are redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ, and when they die, whether of Christian, pagan, or Jewish parentage, their spirits are taken home to God who gave them, and never go to suffer torments of any kind. (JD, May 14, 1882, 23:126.)

D&C 74 7Lorenzo Snow: 7

D&C 74 7Now, this little boy [four-and-one-half-year-old son of Heber J. Grant] has not lived through the years that others have, and that he might have lived, provided, as I think, that it was in the providence of God. Well, he goes back there, having been cut short of living as long as the usual time of people. He will receive as much honor and as much glory and be welcomed there as having accomplished that for which he came into the world. That is all that could be required, and wherein could there possibly be any loss? I can see none, and I am just as positive that in time to come or in eternity this little fellow will not be cut short in its powers. It may require a great many years, it may go into the thousands, but you will see that Iittle fellow growing up and becoming enlarged, his capacity increasing as opportunities are furnished him, and he will start a kingdom, and that kingdom will increase. His posterity will increase, and become as numerous as the sands on the seashore, or as the stars in the firmament, and he will rule over them, and give them instructions; as the Lord now governs and controls us, His offspring, so he will govern and control his offspring. I am sure of these things. (MS, June 20, 1895, 57:387.)
