Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

FOREWORD

This book is the out-growth of a series of articles which appeared in the Church Section of the Deseret News during the years 1934 and 1935. They were suggested by Samuel O. Bennion, manager of the Deseret News, who has lent the author every encouragement and assistance.

In compiling this history I soon learned, when I began searching through the source material in the Church Historian's Office, that Brigham Young had told his own story far better than anyone else would or could, and I quickly determined that the proper method of procedure was to quote copiously from his Journal, his sermons and his letters. It was all related there by himself, in his own words.

From the time President Young joined the Church in 1832, he seemed to sense that he was making history. He carefully kept a Journal of his daily activities, for a period of twelve years, until the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith. After that time, and when he succeeded the Prophet as President of the Church, he appointed others to record the principal happening and events, which work was continued throughout his life-time, and is known as the History of Brigham Young.

In addition to this great history, which extends through many volumes, there is the magnificent Journal History of the Church, which is a day to day record since April, 1830, and which many willing hands have assisted in compiling, during the past twenty-five years. Then there are the files of the Deseret News, the Millennial Star, the Journal of Discourses, and numerous other Church publications.

Out of this wealth of material I have gleaned the sayings, sermons and letters which are printed in this volume. The references given up to the death of the Prophet are mostly found in the files of the Millennial Star and the Journal of Discourses. After that time, all quotations for which references are not given, may be found in the great Journal History, or in the files of the Church Historian's office, under the dates specified.

This book is written primarily for Latter-day Saints, who, it is presumed, will already have a general knowledge of the life of the great Pioneer President.

The only plan I have followed in writing this history has been to record events and incidents as they transpired in his life, from day to day, month to month, and year to year.

If this volume gives any person a better understanding of the high motives which animated President Brigham Young, and the glorious object to which he dedicated his life, that of "building up here upon earth the Church and Kingdom of God," all that I have sought to attain will have been accomplished.

PRESTON NIBLEY,

Salt Lake City, Utah,

October 6th, 1936.
