Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER TWO

AFTER Brigham's visit with the Prophet, where he "received the sure testimony, by the spirit of prophecy, that he was all that any man could believe him to be, as a true Prophet," Brigham returned to his home in Mendon and began preparations for his second missionary journey. His own account of the same follows:

"In company with my brother Joseph I started for Kingston, upper Canada, on foot, in the month of December, the most of the way through snow and mud from one to two feet deep. In crossing from Gravelly Point to Kingston on the ice which had frozen the night previous, the ice was thin and bent under our feet, so that in places the water was half a shoe deep, and we had to separate from each other, the ice not being capable of holding us. We traveled about six miles on the ice, arrived in Kingston and found a friend who was going that evening near the place where we were first to call. We commenced preaching and bearing our testimony to the people. Proceeding to West Loboro, we remained about one month, preaching the Gospel there and in the regions round about. We baptized 45 souls and organized the East Loboro and other branches. In the month of February, 1833, we started for home, crossing from Kingston on the ice just before it broke up."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 439.

Twenty-seven years later, in a sermon delivered in Salt Lake City, Brigham again referred to this early missionary journey. The hardships of it had evidently made a lasting impression on his mind.

"The second time I went to Canada, which was after I was baptized, myself and brother Joseph traveled two hundred and fifty miles in snow a foot and a half deep, with a foot of mud under it. We traveled, preached and baptized 45 people in the dead of winter. When we left there the Saints gave us five York shillings with which to bear our expenses two hundred and fifty miles on foot, and one sister gave me a pair of woolen mittens two-thirds worn out. I worked with my own hands and supported myself."—Journal of Discourses, Vol. 6, p. 229.

"I worked with my own hands and supported myself." That has a ring of the true Brigham Young in it. Although he was poor and was giving his time unselfishly to a great and glorious cause, yet he was not going to be an object of charity to anyone. This was a hard and fast principle of his life which he splendidly enunciated years later.

"My experience has taught me, and it has become a principle with me, that it is never any benefit to give, out and out, to man or woman, money, food, clothing or anything else, if they are able-bodied and can work and earn what they need, when there is anything on the earth for them to do."—Journal of Discourses, Vol. 11, p. 297.

In my study of Brigham Young I have often wondered how this carpenter-farmer boy, with practically no book learning or school education, could suddenly turn preacher, stand up before the people and plead his cause. It was like Peter being called from his fishing nets to expound the doctrines of the meek and lowly Master. Brigham must, at first, have had a severe time of it. He says:

"When I began to speak in public I was about as destitute of language as a man could well be. . . . How I have had the headache when I have had ideas to lay before the people, and not words to express them; but I was so gritty that I always tried my best."—Journal of Discourses, Vol. 5, p. 97.

There again you have the true Brigham Young, strong, virile, "gritty," always determined to do his best. "Grit" is an old-fashioned word, now much out of use, but it was once full of meaning, and signified "unyielding courage," which certainly was a dominant attribute of Brigham's life. Any man who will walk two hundred fifty miles in the dead of winter, through snow and mud, to plead an unpopular cause like "Mormonism" then was, is "gritty," to say the least, and his career can well afford to be watched with interest.

In the spring of 1833 Brigham went again on a missionary journey to Canada, visiting Lyonstown, Theresa and Indian River Falls, baptizing twenty people and organizing several branches of the Church. In July he gathered together some of his converts and went with them to Kirtland, assisting in locating them there. He relates that he remained in Kirtland a few weeks "enjoying the society of the Prophet," before returning to his home in Mendon.

Brigham's active participation in the affairs of the Church should perhaps be dated from September, 1833.

"In the month of September, in conformity to the counsel of the Prophet, I made preparations to gather up to Kirtland, and engaged passage for myself and two children with Brother Kimball, and sent my effects by canal and lake to Fairport. We arrived in Kirtland in safety, traveling by land, where I tarried all winter and had the privilege of listening to the teachings of the Prophet, and enjoying the society of the Saints, working hard at my former trade."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 440.

II

If I were asked to point out one of the principal causes to which Brigham Young's rise in the Church can be attributed, I should say that it was his absolute and unqualified loyalty; loyalty to the Prophet Joseph; loyalty to every principle and doctrine he taught; loyalty to his brethren around him. He had not cast his lot with the Latter-day Saints to disprove their doctrines nor thwart their purposes. He had accepted the newly revealed Gospel completely and whole-heartedly as the one thing needful and essential for his temporal and eternal salvation. Consequently there was but one purpose in all his efforts: "to build up the Church and Kingdom of God." Witness this:

"In the fall of 1833, many of the brethren had gathered to Kirtland, and not finding suitable employment, and having some difficulty in getting their pay after they had labored, several went off to Willoughby, Painesville and Cleveland. I told them I had gathered to Kirtland because I was so directed by the Prophet of God, and I was not going away to Willoughby, Painesville, Cleveland, nor anywhere else to build up the Gentiles, but I was going to stay here and seek the things that pertained to the Kingdom of God, by listening to the teachings of his servants, and I should work for my brethren, and trust in God and them that I would be paid. I labored for Brother Cahoon and finished his house, and although he did not know he could pay me when I commenced, before I finished he had paid me in full. I then went to work for Father John Smith and others, who paid me, and I sustained myself in Kirtland, and when the brethren who had gone out to work for the Gentiles returned, I had means, though some of them were scant."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 454.

In February, 1834, at Kirtland, Brigham married Mary Ann Angell, who proved truly to be an angel in his household. During the following fifteen years, in the wanderings of the Saints, many trying and bitter experiences came to Brigham and his family, but his heroic wife endured all in the knowledge that they were laboring in a great and glorious cause. Also, during the greater part of this time Brigham was absent on missions, preaching the Gospel in this and in foreign lands, and the responsibility of rearing a family alone was upon her. Too much cannot be said in praise of such characters as Mary Ann Angell.

Throughout the year 1834 Brigham was almost constantly at the side of the Prophet Joseph, loyally sustaining him in all his plans and labors. It was in this year that Zion's camp was organized and the memorable march of 205 men was made from Kirtland to Missouri to aid the suffering and persecuted Saints there. In calling Brigham and his brother the Prophet said, "Brother Brigham and Brother Joseph, if you will go with me in the Camp to Missouri and keep my counsel, I promise you in the name of the Almighty, that I will lead you there and back again and not a hair of your heads shall be harmed." This promise was fulfilled, and Brigham made the trying trip and difficult march of two thousand miles to Missouri and return without any resultant harm, though several of his brethren died on the journey and at times the whole camp was in danger of annihilation by the Missouri mob.

In the Fall and Winter of 1834 Brigham relates that he "tarried in Kirtland, quarrying rock, working on the Temple, and finishing off the printing office and school room."

On the 8th of February, 1835, the Prophet Joseph called Brigham to his residence in Kirtland and said, "I wish you to notify all the brethren living in the branches, within a reasonable distance from this place, to meet at a general conference on Saturday next. I shall then and there appoint twelve Special Witnesses, to open the door of the Gospel to foreign nations, and you will be one of them." (History of the Church, Vol. 2, page 181.) Thus Brigham came into prominence for the first time as one of the Church leaders. Heretofore his office and calling had been that of a humble elder, but he had so striven to magnify this position that he was now to take his place in the leading council of the Church, next to the Presidency. His ability and devotion had been recognized. In defining the functions of the newly organized quorum the Prophet said:

"They are the Twelve Apostles, who are called to the office of the Traveling High Council, who are to preside over the churches of the Saints among the Gentiles, where there is a presidency established; and they are to travel and preach among the Gentiles, until the Lord shall command them to go to the Jews. They are to hold the keys of this ministry, to unlock the door of the Kingdom of Heaven unto all nations, and to preach the Gospel to every creature. This is the power, authority and virtue of their apostleship."—History of the Church, Vol. 2, p. 200.

From this time henceforth, until the death of the Prophet in 1844, the greater part of Brigham's time was spent in the ministry. He was an indefatigable worker, traveling and paying his own way, spreading the truths of the Gospel.

About two months after his ordination to the apostleship, Brigham, with his brethren of the Twelve, undertook a mission to the Eastern States. Conferences were held at Westfield and Freedom in western New York. On the 5th of June at Lyonstown, Brigham left the party and returned to Kirtland as witness in a trial of the Prophet Joseph before the county court. In his history Brigham relates that as soon as he was "liberated" he again started east and "joined the Twelve in holding conferences, preaching and baptizing, regulating and organizing the churches throughout the eastern country." On September 25th, he, with the others, returned to Kirtland.

Recorded in Brigham's history is the following:

"I remained at home during the fall and winter, occasionally going out and preaching to the neighboring branches. In the course of the winter there was a Hebrew school started, which I attended until February 22nd, 1836, when I was called upon by the Prophet to superintend the painting and finishing of the Temple, upon which I labored until March 27th, when the Temple was so far finished as to be dedicated to the Lord by the Prophet, with the assembled quorums of the Church, and so many members as could possibly be accommodated. On this occasion the power of God was displayed as recorded in the history of Joseph Smith.

"I attended the solemn assembly and, with my brethren of the Twelve, received my washings and anointings and was privileged to listen to the teachings and administrations of the Prophet of God."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 471.

Observe here how Brigham's whole heart and soul was in his work. At this time he was only in his 35th year, but he was already one of the stalwarts of the young and growing Church, and able to contribute splendidly to its advancement.

Brigham's "license" as an elder, which is also a certificate of character, was given him about this time by the Prophet Joseph, and is well worth recording.

"To Whom It May Concern."

"This certifies that Brigham Young has been received into the Church of Latter-day Saints, organized on the sixth of April, one thousand eight hundred and thirty, and has been ordained an elder according to the rules and regulations of said Church, and is duly authorized to preach the Gospel, agreeably to the authority of that office.

"From satisfactory evidence which we have of his good moral character, and his zeal for the cause of righteousness, and diligent desire to persuade men to forsake evil and embrace truth, we confidently recommend him to all candid and upright people as a worthy member of society.

"We, therefore, in the name and by the authority of this Church, grant unto this our worthy brother in the Lord, this letter of commendation as proof of our fellowship and esteem; praying for his success and prosperity in our Redeemer's cause.

"Given by the direction of a conference of the elders of said Church, assembled in Kirtland, Geauga county, Ohio, the third day of March, in the year of our Lord, one thousand eight hundred and thirty-six."

JOSEPH SMITH, JR., Chairman.

F. G. Williams, Clerk.

Kirtland, Ohio, March 30th, 1836."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 473.

III

During the entire summer of 1836 Brigham was again engaged in missionary labors in the Eastern States. He traveled and preached in New York, Vermont, Massachusetts, Maine, Rhode Island and Connecticut; everywhere laboring diligently and winning converts to his religion. In September he returned to Kirtland, where, he says, "I remained through the fall and winter, laboring with my hands to sustain my family, and preaching to the Saints."

The next year, 1837, proved to be a bitter and trying time for the Church in Kirtland. Brigham relates that "the spirit of speculation, disaffection and apostasy imbibed by many of the Twelve, and which ran through all the quorums of the Church, prevailed so extensively that it was difficult for any to see clearly the path to pursue." But it does not seem to have been difficult for Brigham to ascertain what course he was to pursue. He had abandoned everything for his chosen religion and the leadership of his beloved Prophet, and now of all times was the opportunity for him to show his loyalty and sincerity. That he did not fail is attested by the following:

"On a certain occasion several of the Twelve, the witnesses of the Book of Mormon, and others of the authorities of the Church, held a council in the upper room of the Temple. The question before them was to ascertain how the Prophet Joseph could be deposed, and David Whitmer appointed President of the Church. Father John Smith, brother Heber C. Kimball and others were present who were opposed to such measures. I rose up, and in a plain and forcible manner told them that Joseph was a Prophet, and I knew it, and that they might rail and slander him as much as they pleased, they could but destroy their own authority, cut the thread that bound them to the Prophet of God, and sink themselves to hell."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 487.

The worth of such a man as Brigham to the young Prophet Joseph and to the Church at this critical and uncertain time can hardly be estimated. A few stalwarts like himself stood firm, brooking all opposition. "This was a crisis," Brigham relates, "when earth and hell seemed leagued to overthrow the Prophet and Church of God. The knees of many of the strongest men in the Church faltered." Regarding his own position there was no uncertainty.

"During this siege of darkness I stood close to Joseph, and, with all the wisdom and power of God bestowed upon me, put forth my utmost energies to sustain the servant of God and unite the quorums of the Church."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 487.

Twenty-seven years later, in addressing the Saints at Salt Lake City, and relating incidents of those early Kirtland days, he said:

"Some of the leading men in Kirtland were much opposed to Joseph the Prophet, meddling with temporal affairs. They did not believe that he was capable of dictating to the people upon temporal matters, thinking that his duty embraced spiritual things alone, and that the people should be left to attend to their temporal affairs without any interference whatever from prophets or apostles. Men in authority there would contend with Joseph on this point, not openly, but in their councils. After awhile, the matter culminated into a public question; it became so public that it was in the mouth of almost everyone. In a public meeting of the Saints, I said: 'Ye elders of Israel, Father Smith is present, the Prophet is present, and here are his counselors; here are also high priests and elders of Israel. Now, will some of you draw the line of demarcation between the spiritual and the temporal in the Kingdom of God, so that I may understand it.' Not one of them could do it. When I saw a man stand in the path before the Prophet, I felt like hurling him out of the way, and branding him as a fool."—Desert News, Vol. 14, No. 10.

Brigham was not alone able to render moral aid to the cause. He was also able to render aid with his strong right arm if necessary. It was not safe to antagonize such a man too far. He could fight if he were forced to, to vindicate the truth which had been impressed upon his soul. I cannot refrain from relating an interesting circumstance recorded in Brigham's history which occurs at this time. He says:

"A man named Hawley, while plowing his field in the State of New York, had an impression rest down on his mind with great weight, that he must go to Kirtland and tell Joseph Smith that the Lord had rejected his as a Prophet. . . . He went through the streets of Kirtland one morning after midnight and cried, 'Woe! Woe! unto the inhabitants of this place.' I put my pants and shoes on, took my cowhide, went out, and laying hold of him, jerked him around and assured him that if he did not stop his noise and let the people enjoy sleep without interruption, I would cow-hide him on the spot, for we had the Lord's Prophet right here and we did not want the Devil's prophet yelling around the streets."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 487.

During the spring and summer of 1837 Brigham filled two short missions to the Eastern States. Leaving Kirtland on March 13th, he traveled through Ohio, Pennsylvania, New York and Massachusetts. In the latter part of May he returned home "by stage, the ice being still on the lake." Late in July he left again for the east accompanying the Prophet Joseph, his brother Hyrum, David W. Patten and Thomas B. Marsh, who were on their way to Canada. At Buffalo, Brigham parted with his friends and went on to Albany and New York City. In the latter place he held meetings and preached wherever opportunity afforded. On August 19th, he was again at Kirtland.

The spirit of apostasy and evil speaking against the Prophet was at its height in Kirtland during the latter part of 1837 and Brigham's entire time was spent in trying to hold the Church together. It was indeed a dark and trying time for the faithful. Brigham's life was repeatedly threatened by his enemies. Finally, he relates:

"On the morning of December 22nd, I left Kirtland in consequence of the fury of the mob and the spirit that prevailed in the apostates, who had threatened to destroy me because I would proclaim, publicly and privately, that I knew, by the power of the Holy Ghost, that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of the Most High God, and had not transgressed and fallen as the apostates declared."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 518.
