Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER THREE

WHEN Brigham Young left Kirtland "in consequence of the fury of the mob," he never again returned there to make his home. He made his way slowly, through the winter, toward the scattered settlements of the Saints in Missouri, with the intention of joining them, and residing there permanently. A few days after leaving Kirtland he was joined by the Prophet and several of the leading brethren, who were also fleeing from their enemies. The trip to Missouri was a difficult one. They were all destitute of money. At Dublin, Indiana, the Prophet made inquiry "concerning a job at cutting cord wood and sawing logs." Brigham, however, relieved the stringency by obtaining a loan from one of the Saints who resided there. On reaching the Mississippi river Brigham describes their troubles as follows:

"After stopping a few days and resting, we proceeded to Quincy, where we found the river frozen over, though it had been broken up. Joseph and I went down to the river and examined the ice. We soon learned that by going through the flat boat, which lay at the end to the shore, and placing a few planks from the outer end on the ice, we could reach the heavy ice, which had floated down the river a few days previous, sufficient to bear up our teams. We hauled our wagons through the flat boat and onto the ice by hand, then led our horses onto the solid ice, and drove across the river by attaching a rope to the wagon and to the team, so that they would be some distance apart. The last horse which was led on to the ice was Joseph's favorite, Charlie. He broke the ice at every step for several rods."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 519.

This and many similar trying and dangerous experiences were the lot of Joseph and Brigham until they arrived at Far West, Missouri, March 14th, 1838.

Brigham, with his characteristic energy immediately set to work. He purchased a small farm in the vicinity of Far West, which he proceeded to fence and cultivate. He was also active in his Church duties. A few weeks after his arrival, at a conference in Far West, he was sustained as an "assistant president" to Thomas B. Marsh, who temporarily presided over the Saints there.

There is no doubt but that Brigham hoped to reside permanently in Missouri, but it was destined to be otherwise. Within less than a year after his arrival, he, with the majority of the Saints, was fleeing from that state before a wicked and murderous mob. The history of the trouble there is too long to relate, but it will always be a black page for Missouri. It is a pity the Saints ever had to settle among such desperate neighbors.

Concerning this fateful year of 1838, Brigham relates as follows:

"As soon as the Missourians had laid by their corn, as they call it, they commenced to stir up the old mob spirit, riding from neighborhood to neighborhood, making inflammatory speeches, stirring up one another against us. Priests seemed to take the lead in this matter as related in history. I had no communication, correspondence or deal with the Missourians, consequently they did not personally know me, which gave me a good opportunity to learn their acts and feelings unsuspected. I knew men, in the course of the fall, to gather up their flocks and herds, and take their families into their wagons, and then burn up their houses and leave for other parts. I afterwards saw their names attached to affidavits, stating that the Mormons had driven them from their homes and burned their houses. This was quite effectual in raising prejudice against us.

"At the time that the exterminating army of Governor Boggs, commanded by Generals Lucas and Clark, came in sight of Far West, I observed their approach and thought that it might be the militia of the state which had come to the relief of the citizens; but to my great surprise I found that they were come to strengthen the hands of the mobs that were around us, and which immediately joined the army. . . .

"Many Saints were wounded and murdered by the army, and several women were ravished to death. I saw brothers Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt, Lyman Wight and George W. Robinson, delivered up by Colonel Hinkle to General Lucas, but expected they would have returned to the city that evening, or the next morning, according to agreement, and the pledge of the sacred honor of the officers that they should be allowed to do so, but they did not return at all.

"The next day, General Lucas demanded and took away the arms of the militia of Caldwell County, (which arms have never been returned) assuring them that they should be protected; but, as soon as they obtained possession of the arms, they commenced their ravages by plundering the citizens of their bedding, clothing, money, wearing apparel, and everything of value they could lay their hands upon, and also attempting to violate the chastity of women in sight of their husbands and friends, under the pretense of hunting for prisoners and arms. The soldiers shot down our oxen, cows, hogs and fowls, at our own doors, taking away part and leaving the rest to rot in the streets. The soldiers also turned their horses into our fields of corn."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 535.

Brigham was present when General Clark said, that the Mormons "must not be seen as many as five together." "If you are," said he, "the citizens will be upon you and destroy you; but you should flee immediately out of the state. There is no alternative for you but to flee. You need not expect any redress; there is none for you."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 551.

II

Two events now transpired which brought about Brigham's rapid rise in the Church. In the first place Thomas B. Marsh, the president of the Twelve, found himself unable to withstand the persecutions and abandoned the Saints to their enemies. Then David W. Patten, who still remained as Brigham's senior in the Quorum, was killed in a battle with the enemy on Crooked river. With the loss of these two men Brigham, by right of seniority, succeeded as president of the Twelve. From this time on he was a powerful factor in the management of the affairs of the Latter-day Saints.

At the particular time of which I am writing it became Brigham's task to assume the direction of the whole Church, as the Prophet Joseph was imprisoned in Liberty Jail, in Clay County. What a desperate task it was. There were between twelve and fifteen thousand people being driven like a pack of sheep before hungry and blood-thirsty wolves. What to do, where to go, and how in poverty and penury to go at all? These were questions which Brigham had to decide. It was while engaged in these arduous labors that word came to him that his own life was in danger. He was forced to flee, like hundreds of his brethren had done before him. His history of February 14th, 1839, says, "I left Missouri, with my family, leaving my landed property and nearly all my household goods, and went to Illinois, to a little town called Atlas, Pike county, where I tarried a few weeks; then moved to Quincy."

In the six and a half years that Brigham had now been a follower of the Prophet Joseph, he had been driven twice out of his own home by wicked and murderous mobs. Those who claim that he joined the Church to further his own ambition or for personal aggrandizement are about as far from the truth as they could possibly be. No question should ever be raised regarding Brigham Young's sincerity. His chosen religion was all to him, and he was ready to give his all to abide by it and in it.

Arriving at Quincy and finding shelter for his family, he was at once active in rescuing the Saints, especially the poorer ones, from their desperate plight in Missouri. Under date of March 17th, 1839, he relates:

"I held a meeting with the brethren of the Twelve and members of the Church in Quincy, Illinois. A letter was read to the people from the committee in behalf of the Saints in Far West, requesting teams and money to be sent back to remove fifty families of the Saints, who were left destitute of the means to move with, from there to Quincy. Though the brethren were poor and stripped of almost everything, yet they manifested a desire to sell their hats, coats and shoes to accomplish the object. We broke bread and partook of the Sacrament; at the close of the meeting fifty dollars was collected in money, and several teams were subscribed to go and bring the brethren. Among the subscribers was widow Warren Smith, whose husband and son had had their brains blown out and another son shot to pieces at the massacre at Haun's Mill. She sent her only team on this charitable mission."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 567.

Again the following day we have this:

"March 18th, 1839.—I met in council with several of the Twelve Apostles, and advised them all to locate their families in Quincy for the time being, that we might be together in council. A letter was read from Dr. Isaac Galland concerning the half-breed tract of land in Lee county, Iowa. I advised the brethren to purchase land there for we probably would move northward."

At this time there arose in Brigham's life an occasion for him to show the kind of metal he was made of. He had just been expelled from Missouri and had had to flee for his life. But one of the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph in July, 1838, the previous year, had commanded that the Twelve were to meet upon the Temple grounds in Far West on April 26th, 1839, lay the corner-stone of the building and take leave of the Saints before their departure "across the great waters" to proclaim the Gospel. How could they again return to Far West? It was like giving themselves up to cruel and murderous enemies. But the Lord had commanded, and Brigham was determined at all costs to obey. Huddled together at Quincy, in any kind of shelter, he called his brethren of the Twelve in assembly and presented the proposition before them. Here was the word of the Lord, given through his Prophet, that they, the Twelve, should lay the cornerstone of the Temple at Far West, Missouri, and depart for their missions, "April 26th next." How could they accomplish this? They had just been driven from that state.

"Many of the authorities considered in our present persecuted and scattered condition the Lord would not require the Twelve to fulfill his words to the letter, and under our present circumstances, he would take the will for the deed; but I felt differently and so did those of the Quorum who were with me. I asked them, individually, what their feelings were upon the subject. They all expressed their desires to fulfill the revelation. I told them the Lord God had spoken and it was our duty to obey and leave the event in his hands and he would protect us."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 567.

On April 18th, just eight days before the revelation was to be fulfilled, Brigham, riding with Orson Pratt and Wilford Woodruff, in the latter's carriage, set out for Far West, nearly 200 miles distant. In another carriage were John Taylor, George A. Smith and Alpheus Cutler. The fourth day out from Quincy,

"We met brother John E. Page and his family on a sideling hill, with his load turned bottom side upwards; among other things he had upset a barrel of soft soap, and he was elbow deep in the soap, scooping it up with his hands. I told him I wanted him to go to Far West with us. He replied that he did not see that he could as he had his family to take to Quincy. I told him his family would get along well enough, and I desired him to go up with us. He asked how much time I would give him to get ready. I answered, five minutes. We assisted in loading his wagon; he drove down the hill and camped, and returned with us."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 568.

People who knew Brigham Young well have told me that, with him, to think was to act. The above example of his quick action and courage is notable. The Twelve did lay the cornerstone of the Temple at Far West, and took leave of the Saints there as the revelation had commanded. On the 2nd of May they were back again with their families at Quincy.

III

There was good news to greet Brigham when he returned, for he learned that the Prophet Joseph and his brother Hyrum had escaped from prison in Missouri and had joined the main body of the Saints in Illinois.

"It was one of the most joyful scenes of my life to once more shake hands with the prophets and behold them free from the hands of their enemies. Joseph conversed with us like a man who had just escaped from a thousand oppressions and was now free in the midst of his children."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 184.

The great problem now confronting the youthful leaders of the Latter-day Saints was to find a suitable place of settlement for their stricken people. The Prophet, a few days after his arrival from Missouri, purchased and settled upon a farm in a small village named Commerce, about forty miles north of Quincy, where the Twelve had made their temporary headquarters. Brigham immediately began preparations to move thither. He records under date of May 16th, 1839:

"I left the committee room in Quincy, Illinois, and started for Commerce in company with Brother Woodruff. We crossed Bear Creek, and while rising a steep hill my near horse balked, allowing the wagon to back and it came near running off a deep dugway. I caught the hind wheel against my shoulder and held the wagon and load by main strength, until Brother Woodruff came to my assistance and blocked my wagon, after which we ascended the hill in safety. Traveled fifteen miles and camped. We arrived in Commerce on the 18th and called upon Brother Joseph and family. Brother Joseph had commenced laying out the city plot."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 585.

Not finding suitable quarters for his residence in Commerce, Brigham crossed the river to the village of Montrose Iowa, opposite Commerce, where he moved into "a room in the old military barracks." There was now a great deal of work to do and the Twelve held daily meetings with the Prophet to consider the welfare of the Saints. Under date of July 2nd, Brigham writes:

"Brothers Joseph, Hyrum and others came over the river to Montrose, and went out on the prairie and looked out the site of a city for the Saints, which was called Zarahemla. We dined at Brother Woodruff's; after dinner the Presidency, Twelve and a few others met at my house. . . . Brother Hyrum Smith gave the Twelve some good advice. Brother Joseph taught many important and glorious principles calculated to benefit and bless them on their mission, unfolding keys of knowledge whereby to detect Satan and preserve us in the favor of God."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 589.

One will note from the above the great enjoyment Brigham had in the teachings of the Prophet. I cannot overestimate this point, and one should never overlook it in the study of Brigham's life. The Prophet Joseph was his constant inspiration, and as the truths of the Gospel fell from his lips, they were stored and printed indelibly in Brigham's mind. Of all the followers of Joseph, none held him more highly nor appreciated him more than did Brigham Young. He would endure any inconvenience or any hardship to be near him and receive his teachings.

Many times throughout his life he made mention of his great admiration and love for the Prophet. On August 16th, 1868, he said:

"In the days of the Prophet Joseph, such moments were more precious to me than all the wealth of the world. No matter how great my poverty—if I had to borrow meal to feed my wife and children—I never let an opportunity pass of learning what the Prophet had to impart."

And again:

"I feel like shouting Hallelujah all the time when I think that I ever knew Joseph Smith, the Prophet, whom the Lord raised up and ordained, and to whom He gave keys and power to build up the Kingdom of God on earth and sustain it. These keys are committed to this people, and we have power to continue the work that Joseph commenced, until everything is prepared for the coming of the Son of Man. This is the business of the Latter-day Saints, and it is all the business that we have on hand."—Journal of Discourses, Vol. 3, p. 51.
