Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER FOUR

WHILE residing with his family "in a room in the old military barracks" at Montrose, Iowa, Brigham began preparations to depart for his mission to England, as he, with the other members of the Twelve had been commanded in the revelation of July 8th, 1838. For a time, he relates, "I was delayed by a general siege of sickness which swept over the entire community." It was a form of malaria, due to the low, wet lands along the Mississippi where the Saints had settled. "President Joseph Smith," relates Brigham, "had taken the sick into his house and dooryard until his house was like a hospital, and he had attended upon them until he was taken sick himself and confined to his bed for several days." Finally Brigham, too, was stricken with "chills and fever." But he determined to take his departure as most of the Twelve had preceded him.

It is interesting here to inquire into his condition at this time when he was leaving his home for England. In his history there is this brief mention, under date of September 14th, 1839.

"I started from Montrose on my mission to England. My health was so poor I was unable to go thirty rods to the river without assistance. After I had crossed the river I got Israel Barlow to carry me on his horse behind him to Heber C. Kimball's, where I remained sick till the 18th. I left my wife sick with a babe only ten days old, and all of my children sick and unable to wait upon each other."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 646.

All the above statements are corroborated by Brigham's friend and fellow apostle, Heber C. Kimball. His account follows:

"September 14th, President Brigham Young left his home at Montrose to start on the mission to England. He was so sick that he was unable to go to the Mississippi, a distance of thirty rods, without assistance. After he had crossed the river he rode behind Israel Barlow on his horse to my house, where he continued sick until the 18th. He left his wife sick with a babe only ten days old, and all his children were sick and unable to wait upon each other. Not one soul of them was able to go to the well for a pail of water, and they were without a second suit to their backs, for the mob in Missouri had taken nearly all they had."—Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 275.

While his family did not have a "second suit for their backs," Brigham scarcely had one for his. The cap he had on had been made "out of a pair of old pantaloons," and further, "I had not even an overcoat. I took a small quilt from the trundle bed and that served for my overcoat while I was traveling to the state of New York where I had a coarse satinette overcoat given to me." (J. D. 4:34.) Thus did Brigham Young fare forth on his mission to England, sick, penniless, in threadbare clothing, but within his breast there was the heart of a lion; a determination to do or to die.

Having no means with which to pursue his journey, except what he could earn or borrow along the way, Brigham and his companion, Heber C. Kimball, were helped by their friends. The first fourteen miles out of Nauvoo they were carried in a wagon by "Brother Hubbard's boy." The following day "Brother Duel carried us twelve miles." The third day, with the help of another brother and his team and wagon they arrived at Quincy, Illinois. Here Brigham remained a few days, "and began to recover" from his protracted illness, though it did not entirely leave him for many weeks. Proceeding from Quincy, Illinois, they were carried by team and wagon from one settlement to another, having a few dollars given to them here and there, until they reached Pleasant Garden, Indiana, where they took account of their finances and found they had between them $13.50. On the evening of November 3rd, they arrived at Kirtland, the old home of the Saints, and Brigham's old home, too, having completed a 400 mile journey from Nauvoo. "I had a York shilling left," Brigham tersely records in his history.

At Kirtland the missionaries had a pleasant visit with relatives and friends. Brigham's brother John and his sister, Nancy Kent resided there. In the neighborhood there still remained quite a large branch of the Church, and meetings were held in the Temple at which the visiting brethren spoke. Their finances being again somewhat replenished by friends and relatives, they proceeded, on November 22nd, towards Fairport where they took boat for Buffalo, arriving on the 27th. From Buffalo, they began making their way as best they could across the state of New York. Here is a note at this time from Brigham's journal.

"On arriving at Batavia we put up at the Genesee house, dedicated our room to the Lord and had a prayer meeting, asking the Lord to open up our way."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 654.

Being now in the country where he had spent his boyhood, Brigham found friends and acquaintances anxious to hear from him, consequently he remained in the vicinity during the month of December, visiting and preaching. It was the 3rd of January, 1840, before he reached Utica, having been carried there in a sleigh. From Utica his funds were sufficient to take him by train to Albany, but it was not until the 30th of the month that he reached New York, in company with George A. Smith, having spent nearly four and one-half months on the journey from Nauvoo. Arriving in New York, he relates:

"We left our trunks in the baggage room of the North American House, and soon found Brother P. P. Pratt and family, who lived at number 58 Mott Street. We were heartily received by the family and returned thanks to God for having preserved us and brought us in safety so far on our mission to the nations of the earth."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 696.

II

All the Twelve who accompanied Brigham on his mission to England were practically without money when they arrived in New York and it was necessary for them to remain in that vicinity until their finances could be replenished. They were not able to sail until the 9th of March, each doing whatever he could find to do in order to get ship money.

"We engaged our passages for Liverpool on board the Patrick Henry, a packet ship of the Black Ball line, Captain Delino, and paid eighteen dollars each for a steerage passage, furnished our own provisions and bedding and paid the cook one dollar each for cooking. Brother H. C. Kimball and myself occupied a lower berth, Brother Parley and Orson Pratt, the one over us, Brother George A. Smith and R. Headlock, an upper berth at their feet; two Englishmen occupied the berth below. The brethren in New York furnished us with an ample supply of provisions by donation. The sisters made us ticks and filled them with straw for our beds and filled some bags with straw for our pillows.

"A large number of Saints came down to the wharf to bid us farewell. When we got into the small boat to go out to the ship, the brethren sang, 'The gallant ship is under way;' we joined them as long as we could hear. . . . We set sail and by sunset lost sight of our native shore. I was sick nearly all the way and confined to my berth. For eight days we had a fair wind, from the eighth to the tenth day, a very heavy gale, from the eleventh to the thirteenth day, part of our bulwarks were washed away and the water ran down the hatches in large quantities."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 711.

On April 6th, the Patrick Henry came into dock at Liverpool, and Brigham climbed out of his steerage berth sick and almost penniless. It took his entire capital to buy a hat and pay his fare to Preston, where the headquarters of the mission was located. At Liverpool, however, the brethren "held a meeting, partook of the sacrament, and returned thanks to God for his protection and care exercised over us while on the waters, and asked that our way might be opened up before us to accomplish our mission successfully."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 712.

Six days after landing in England, Brigham with his characteristic energy, was delivering his message to the people.

"April 12th (Sunday), I met with several of the Twelve in the Cockpit, Preston, and bore testimony to a crowded assembly of the truth of the Gospel."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 712.

On the 15th and 16th of the same month a general conference of the Church was held at Preston. Brigham, in reporting the same to the Prophet at Nauvoo, wrote as follows: "To President Joseph Smith and Counselors:

"Dear Brethren: You no doubt will have the perusal of this letter and minutes of our conferences; this will give you an idea of what we are doing in this country.

"If you see anything in or about the whole affair that is not right, I ask, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you would make known unto us the mind of the Lord and His will concerning us.

"I believe that I am as willing to do the will of the Lord, and take counsel of my brethren, and be a servant of the Church as ever I was in my life; but I can tell you I would like to be with my old friends; I like new friends, but I cannot part with my old ones for them.

"Concerning the Hymn Book—when we arrived here, we found the brethren had laid by their old hymn books, and they wanted new ones; for the Bible, religion and all is new to them. When I came to learn more about carrying books into the states, or bringing them here. I found the duties were so high that we never should want to bring books from the states.

"I request one favor of you, that is, a letter from you, that I may hear from my old friends. I trust that I will remain your friend through life and eternity. As ever,

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

III

I shall not attempt to enumerate the details of the great success that attended Brigham and his companions while on this English mission. It was nothing short of marvelous, how the way was opened up for them and the eagerness with which the people heard and believed their message. When one contemplates that these young men had literally worked their way to England, sick and in dire circumstances, consuming more than six months' time in their journey, and arriving there were destitute strangers in a strange land, their accomplishments must be attributed to the Lord and his sustaining power. Brigham remained in England exactly one year and sixteen days, but never in the history of the Church was so much accomplished by a similar group of elders.

In later years Brigham was fond of relating the experiences of his English mission. I find the following taken from a sermon he delivered in Salt Lake City on the 31st of August, 1856:

"In company with several of the Twelve I was sent to England in 1839. We started from home without purse or scrip, and most of the Twelve were sick; and those who were not sick when they started were sick on the way to Ohio; Brother Taylor was left to die by the roadside, by old Father Coltrin, though he did not die. I was not able to walk to the river, not so far as across this block, no, not more than half as far; I had to be helped to the river in order to get into a boat to cross it. This was about our situation. I had not even an overcoat; I took a small quilt from the trundle bed, and that served for my overcoat, while I was traveling to the state of New York, where I had a coarse satinette overcoat given to me. Thus we went to England, to a strange land to sojourn among strangers.

"When we reached England we designed to start a paper, but we had not the first penny to do it with. I had enough to buy a hat and pay my passage to Preston, for from the time I left home I had worn an old cap which my wife made out of a pair of old pantaloons; but the most of us were entirely destitute of means to buy even any necessary article.

"We went to Preston and held our conference, and decided we would publish a paper; Brother Parley P. Pratt craved the privilege of editing it, and we granted him the privilege. We also decided to print 3,000 hymn books, though we had not the first cent to begin with and were strangers in a strange land. We appointed Brother Woodruff to Herefordshire and I accompanied him on his journey to that place. I wrote to Brother Pratt for information about his plans, and he sent me his prospectus, which stated that when he had a sufficient number of subscribers and money enough on hand to justify his publishing the paper he would proceed with it. How long we might have waited for that, I know not, but I wrote him to publish 2,000 papers and I would foot the bill. I borrowed two hundred and fifty pounds of Sister Jane Benbow, one hundred of Brother Thomas Kington and returned to Manchester, where we printed 3,000 hymn books and 5,000 Books of Mormon, and issued 2,000 Millennial Stars monthly, and in the course of the summer gave away rising of 60,000 tracts. I also paid from five to ten dollars a week for my board and hired a house for brother Willard Richards and his wife, who came to Manchester, and sustained them; and gave sixty pounds to Brother P. P. Pratt to bring his wife from New York. I also commenced the emigration in that year.

"I was there one year and sixteen days, with my brethren, the Twelve, and during that time I bought all my clothing except one pair of pantaloons, which the sisters gave me in Liverpool soon after I arrived there and which I really needed. I told the brethren in one of my discourses that there was no need of their begging, for if they needed anything the sisters could understand that. The sisters took the hint and the pantaloons were forthcoming.

"I paid three hundred and eighty dollars to get the work started in London and when I arrived home in Nauvoo, I owed no person one farthing. Brother Kington received his pay from the books that were printed, and Sister Benbow, who started to America the same year, left names enough of her friends to receive two hundred and fifty pounds, which amount was paid them, notwithstanding, I held her agreement that she had given it to the Church.

"We left two thousand five hundred dollars' worth of books in the office, paid our passages home, and paid about six hundred dollars to emigrate the poor who were starving to death, besides giving sixty thousand tracts; and that, too, though I had not a sixpence when we landed in Preston, and I do not know that one of the Twelve had."—Journal of Discourses, Vol. 4, p. 34.

Nothing could illustrate better than the above President Young's leadership, his business ability and his driving power in getting things done. But great as were his personal qualities, I find that his reliance was always upon the will of his Heavenly Father. On leaving Liverpool, on April 20th, 1841, to return home from his mission, he records the following in his journal:

"It was with a heart full of thanksgiving and gratitude to God, my Heavenly Father, that I reflected upon his dealings with me and my brethren of the Twelve during the past year of my life, which was spent in England. It truly seemed a miracle to look upon the contrast between our landing and departing from Liverpool. We landed in the spring of 1840, as strangers in a strange land and penniless, but through the mercy of God we have gained many friends, established churches in almost every noted town and city in the kingdom of Great Britain, baptized between seven and eight thousand, printed 5,000 Books of Mormon, 3,000 hymn books, 2,500 volumes of the Millennial Star, and 60,000 tracts, and emigrated to Zion 1,000 souls, established a permanent shipping agency, which will be a great blessing to the Saints, and have left sown in the hearts of many thousands the seeds of eternal truth, which will bring forth fruit to the honor and glory of God, and yet we have lacked nothing to eat, drink or wear; in all these things I acknowledged the hand of God."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 7.

The return ocean voyage occupied thirty days on the sailing ship Rochester, Brigham and his fellow travelers arriving in New York on the 20th of May. From there the trip homeward was made by way of Pittsburgh, down the Ohio to Cincinnati by boat, and thence to Nauvoo, arriving July 1st. Under that date Brigham records in his journal:

"We arrived in Nauvoo, and were cordially welcomed by the Prophet Joseph, our families and the Saints."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 71.
