Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER FIVE

ARRIVING in Nauvoo, Brigham at once resumed his activity in the affairs of the Church. The labor that he loved was "building up the Kingdom" as he so often expressed it in later years. It was only in spare time, when the Church did not demand him, that he looked after his personal affairs. The Prophet was no doubt aware of the sacrifices he had made, for I find this entry in Brigham's journal nine days after he arrived home, July 9th, 1841.

"President Smith called on me at my house, when he received the following revelation:

"Dear and well-beloved brother, Brigham Young, verily thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Brigham, it is no more required at your hand to leave your family as in times past, for your offering is acceptable; I have seen your labor and toil in journeying for my name, I therefore command you to send my word abroad, and take special care of your family from this time, henceforth and forever. Amen."—Doctrine and Covenants, Sec. 126.

The permission to devote some time to his family was no doubt very welcome to him. During his absence in England his family had managed somehow with temporary shelter, and on his arrival home he found them in very uncomfortable circumstances. He relates:

"On my return from England I found my family living in a small unfinished log cabin, situated on a low wet lot, so swampy that when the first attempt was made to plow it the oxen mired; but after the city was drained it became a valuable garden spot." And again, "although I had to spend the principal part of my time at the call of Brother Joseph in the service of the Church, the portion of time left me I spent in draining, fencing and cultivating my lot, building a temporary shed for my cow, chinking and otherwise furnishing my house, and as the ground was too damp to admit of a cellar underground, I built one with two brick walls about four or six inches apart arched over with brick. Frost never penetrated it, although in summer articles would mildew in it."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 88.

On the 15th of August, Brigham was in attendance at a conference held in the settlement of Zarahemla. The next day he presided at a special conference in Nauvoo. It was at this latter meeting that the Prophet Joseph inaugurated a new order of Church government which moved Brigham a little closer towards the important position he was to occupy within a few years. The Prophet said that:

"The time had come when the Twelve should be called upon to stand in their place next to the First Presidency and attend to the settling of emigrants and the business of the Church at the stakes, and assist to bear off the Kingdom victorious to the nations; and as they had been faithful and had borne the burden in the heat of the day, that it was right that they should have an opportunity of providing something for themselves and families."—History of Church, Vol. 4, p. 403.

Brigham, as President of the Twelve, now stood next to the First Presidency. In this capacity he was as usual extremely energetic. Under date of October 2nd, 1841, at Nauvoo, he records the following in his journal:

"I attended conference; much valuable instruction was given by the President, Joseph Smith.

"I addressed the conference with regard to the appointment of suitable missionaries, and in regard to the importance of teaching abroad the first principles of the Gospel, and letting alone those principles they did not understand, also on the propriety of many of the elders remaining at home and working on the Lord's House, and the necessity of more liberal consecrations and more energetic efforts to forward the work of building the Temple and Nauvoo House. The congregation was immense, and the greatest unanimity prevailed."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 104.

And again, under date of November 8th:

"I attended the dedication of the baptismal font in the Lord's House; President Smith called upon me to offer the dedicatory prayer. This is the first font erected and dedicated for the baptism for the dead in this dispensation."—Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 104.

Almost daily Brigham was in contact with the Prophet Joseph whom he loved more than any other man, and to whom he looked constantly for guidance and inspiration. Here are two brief mentions of this association from his journal:

"November 28th, 1841. Brother Joseph and the Twelve spent the day in council at my house."

"November 30th. Met in council with Joseph and the Twelve at my house, in relation to the Times and Seasons."

And so the year 1841 drew to a close in Nauvoo. The white blanket of winter was spread over the land. Peace and prosperity reigned amongst the Saints. Verily the kingdom was advancing and being built up, due to the noble, unselfish and splendid efforts of its leaders and members, not the least of whom was Brigham Young.

Christmas day was no doubt a time of rejoicing in Brigham's little home. It was a humble home, but he was there to enjoy the day with his wife and children, the first Christmas he had had with them in nearly three years. That he was also enjoying the society of his brethren is evident from the following, under date of December 25th: "I partook of a Christmas supper with the Twelve at Brother Hiram Kimball's."

II

Brigham's activities during 1842 were confined almost entirely to Nauvoo and the surrounding branches of the Church, with the exception of one short missionary trip, he made in September, and which took him as far as Springfield, Illinois. But he was extremely active at home. His duties as President of the Twelve kept him almost constantly engaged in Church work, and by Church work is meant, in this instance, supervision and regulation of all the activities of the Saints. Next to Joseph the burden of "building up the kingdom," was upon the shoulders of Brigham Young.

During January, February and March, Brigham was in daily conference with the Prophet and the Twelve regarding a variety of subjects. He bought the printing office of the TIMES AND SEASONS from Ebenezer Robinson, "at an exorbitant price." He went to Zarahemla and discontinued the stake organization there by order of the Prophet Joseph. Under date of February 21st, he relates:

"I wrote a letter calling upon the churches to forward their tithings and donations to the Trustee-in-Trust, that the Temple may go on, and the new translation of the Bible."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 119.

Also he was a member of the Nauvoo city council, which occupied a part of his time and attention.

Now, considering the above, it is interesting to learn that Brigham received no money nor material compensation for all his labors in the Church. He had to provide food and clothing for himself and family by the work he could do in his spare hours when the Church did not require him. I recall at this point, a sermon delivered in Salt Lake City, August 31st, 1856, in which he said:

"I came into this Church in the spring of 1832. Previous to my being baptized I took a mission to Canada at my own expense; and from the time that I was baptized until the day of our sorrow and affliction at the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum, no summer passed over my head, but what I was traveling and preaching, and the only thing I ever received from the Church, during over twelve years, and the only means that were ever given me by the Prophet, that I now recollect, was in 1842, when Brother Joseph sent me the half of a small pig that the brethren had brought to him."

That was the kind of service Brigham Young gave to the Church in its early struggling days, and his reward was—that he had the opportunity to do the work. For work there was to do in great abundance, but money to do it with was scarce, and no one entertained any thought, in those days, of being rewarded in money for what he could do to assist the growing kingdom.

At this point I desire to include a short description of Nauvoo, taken from the August number of the Millennial Star (1842) as it well describes the scenes of Brigham's labors during the time of which I write.

"Nauvoo has, in the short space of three years, become one of the largest towns in the west, containing within its corporation, something like 10,000 inhabitants, while many thousands more are settled and are improving the country around, and hundreds and thousands more are arriving almost daily, as emigrants, from various states and nations; it is more than probable that in the course of twelve months this city will number from fifteen to twenty thousand inhabitants. The buildings are mostly temporary cabins, built of wood, and are very small, unfinished, and inconvenient; but they are such as are generally erected in the beginning of new settlements in every part of the country, and will soon give place to those of brick and stone. Indeed several brick buildings are already erected, and hundreds of others are in process of erection. The Temple which is now in progress, is built entirely of stone. It is designed to be about 128 feet long, 88 feet wide and 150 feet high to the top of the spire. The Nauvoo House is a building of stone and brick; it is designed as a hotel, or home for travelers and strangers. The streets are regularly laid out from north to south and from east to west; they are broad and pleasant, but not yet paved."—Millennial Star, Vol. 3, p. 67.

So much for Nauvoo, the "City of the Saints," situated on a beautiful bend of the Mississippi river, about two hundred and fifty miles above St. Louis, which, until the settlement of the Saints there in 1839, was considered nothing more than prairie.

Under date of May 4th, 1842, Brigham records in his journal:

"I met with Joseph, Hyrum, Heber, Willard, Bishops Whitney and Miller, and General James Adams in Joseph's private office, where Joseph taught the ancient order of things for the first time in these last days, and received my washings, anointings and endowments."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 134.

Again, on the 18th:

"I was appointed in connection with brothers H. C. Kimball, Hyrum Smith, and George A. Smith, as a committee to wait upon the immigrants, and give them counsel and aid in procuring them places on which to settle."

On the 26th, (Sunday) at Nauvoo:

"I addressed the Saints on the principle of union in building up the city, and sustaining the poor by providing labor for them. Six p.m. I attended council at brother Joseph's to take into consideration the situation of the pine country and lumbering business, and other subjects of importance to the Church; after which we spent a season in prayer, that the Lord would deliver us from the power of our enemies, and provide means for us to build houses, as He had commanded His people."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 135.

The Church in those days never seemed to be without serious trouble and the summer of 1842 was darkened by the apostasy of John C. Bennett, mayor of Nauvoo, and one who stood high in the councils of the Church. Never did a more bitter and vindictive enemy turn loose calumny and vituperation upon an innocent people. This man seemed to be the very incarnation of Satan. He went about writing for newspapers, lecturing and effectively poisoning the public mind against the Prophet and the people. His book, "Mormonism Exposed," I regard as the bitterest attack ever made against the Church, even to this day.

The brethren were so aroused in Nauvoo that they had to bend their entire activities to offset Bennett's tirade of abuse. Brigham was there, ready to defend the Church with all the power that was in him. The following from his journal shows with what zeal he labored. Beginning under date of August 26th, 1842:

"Met in the evening in council with the Prophet Joseph and some of the Twelve. We received much good instruction and counsel from Joseph, relative to the situation of the Church, and the policy to be pursued in sending many elders through the states to preach the Gospel and disabuse the public mind in relation to the false statements of Dr. J. C. Bennett.

"The Prophet also directed us to call a special conference on Monday next, and nominate the elders to go on this important mission, and give them their instructions; and that we should also get the affidavits against Dr. Bennett published, so that the elders might have authentic and strong testimony to lay before the public in relation to those matters.

"27th—Engaged with Presidents Joseph and Hyrum in securing affidavits for the press.

"29th—Conference convened. Presidents Joseph and Hyrum Smith addressed the Saints; 80 elders volunteered to go immediately on the contemplated mission.

"September 6th—With Elders Kimball and Lyman, I called upon the Prophet to counsel concerning our mission to the branches and people in the states.

"9th—I attended city council, and gave in my notification of absence, and started on my mission and went to Lima.

"10th—I preached in Lima. Here Brothers H. C. Kimball, George A. Smith, and Amasa Lyman overtook me. We remained over Sunday, the 11th, and preached to a large congregation at the Grove, in Lima, and showed the falsity of Bennett's statements. We ordained nineteen elders and baptized twelve.

"17th and 18th—Elders Kimball, Smith, Lyman and myself held a conference at Quincy, in the courthouse. We exposed the course of Bennett and the mobocrats, and disabused the public mind, to some extent, of the prejudices recently imbibed. Governor Carlin attended one meeting.

"24th and 25th—Attended conference at Payson; Elder Kimball and myself preached.

"I endeavored to get the affidavits against Dr. J. C. Bennett inserted in the Whig and Herald, at Quincy, but they refused to print them on any terms. I returned to Nauvoo, and had a number of them struck off as hand bills for circulation.

"I proceeded to Atlas and found Elder Kimball. We preached in Col. Ross' brick house.

"October 8th and 9th—Attended conference at Pittsfield. Elders Kimball, Smith, Lyman and myself preached. We proceeded to Glasgow, and held a two-days' meeting. I sharply reproved Elder Howard Smith, the presiding elder, for his indolence and folly. He attempted to instruct me how to preach, in a foolish, braggadocio manner.

"15th and 16th—We attended conference at Apple creek. Elders Kimball, Smith, Lyman and myself preached. Brother Kimball and I stayed at Esq. Walker's.

"Elder Kimball and I went to Jacksonville, and preached. We proceeded to Springfield, and preached. From thence we returned to Jacksonville, and attended a two-days' meeting in the courthouse, which Elders George A. Smith and Amasa Lyman also attended. We went to Morgan City, and held a two-days' meeting; stayed with Brother Augustus Farnham. Nearly all these conferences and meetings were numerously attended. We continued preaching from place to place until November 4th, when I returned to Nauvoo with Elder Kimball."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, pp. 151, 152.

This strenuous campaign undertaken by the brethren to offset the bitter attacks of Bennett undoubtedly proved too much for Brigham's health. I find this in his journal under date of November 26th, a few weeks after his return home:

"I was suddenly attacked with a slight fit of apoplexy. Next morning I felt quite comfortable; but in the evening, at the same hour I had the fit the day before, I was attacked with the most violent fever I ever experienced. The Prophet Joseph and Elder Willard Richards visited and administered unto me; the Prophet prophesied that I should live and recover from my sickness. He sat by me for six hours, and directed my attendants what to do for me. In about thirty hours from the time of my being attacked by the fever, the skin began to peel from my body, and I was skinned all over. I desired to be baptized in the river, but it was not until the fourteenth day that Brother Joseph would give his consent for me to be showered with cold water, when my fever began to break, and it left me on the 18th day. I laid upon my back, and was not turned upon my side for eighteen days.

"I laid in a log house, which was rather open; it was so very cold during my sickness, that Brother Isaac Decker, my attendant, froze his fingers and toes while fanning me, with boots, great coat and mittens on, and with a fire in the house, from which I was shielded by a blanket.

"When the fever left me on the 18th day, I was bolstered up in my chair, but was so near gone that I could not close my eyes, which were set in my head—my chin dropped down and my breath stopped. My wife, seeing my situation, threw some cold water in my face; that having no effect, she dashed a handful of strong camphor into my face and eyes, which I did not feel in the least, neither did I move a muscle. She then held my nostrils between her thumb and finger, and placing her mouth directly over mine, blew into my lungs until she filled them with air. This set my lungs in motion, and I again began to breathe. While this was going on I was perfectly conscious of all that was passing around me; my spirit was as vivid as it ever was in my life, but I had no feeling in my body."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 167.

III

On January 18th, 1843, Brigham was able to leave his house for the first time following his illness. It was the occasion of a "feast" at the home of the Prophet Joseph, to celebrate two events in the Prophet's life; his release from the "Missouri writ," by the United States district court, and the fifteenth anniversary of his marriage. The Prophet records in his history:

"President Brigham Young was present, although very feeble. This was the first time he had been out of his house since he was taken sick."—History of Church, Vol. 5, p. 253.

Two days after this event, however, Brigham began meeting regularly with his quorum. On the 18th, he directed a letter to the branch at La Harpe, asking that the Saints there bring into Nauvoo their surplus provisions and donate them to the Prophet, so that he would be free to devote his whole time to Church affairs.

On March 1st, a similar letter was sent to the branch at Ramus. On March 11th, Brigham accompanied the Prophet to Ramus to hold meetings there on Sunday, the 12th. The Prophet spoke in the forenoon and Brigham in the afternoon. On the 14th, they returned to Nauvoo "after a severely cold ride in a heavy snowstorm."

On Monday, April 10th, a special conference of Elders was held at Nauvoo and many were set apart to fill missions. Brigham, as president of the Twelve, was called upon to address them. His sermon on this occasion (he was still a young man but forty-one years of age) is so full of practical common sense and wisdom, which marked him as a great leader in later years, that I desire to copy it as it was written down that day.

"President Young instructed the elders not to go from church to church for the purpose of living themselves, or begging for their families or for preaching, but to go to their places of destination, journeying among the world and preaching by the way as they have opportunity; and if they get anything for themselves, they must do it in those churches they shall build up, or from the world, and not enter into other men's labor.

"Several elders have been presented to us having traveled extensively the past season, preaching but little or none, living on the brethren and begging for their own emolument. Such elders, be they where they may, far or near, are instructed to repair forthwith to Nauvoo and give an account of their stewardship, and report the amount of leg service performed by them and on their return be sure to keep out of the churches.

"It is wisdom for the elders to leave their families in this place when they have anything to leave with them; and let not the elders go on their missions until they have provided for their families. No man need say again: 'I have a call to travel and preach,' while he has not a comfortable house for his family, a lot fenced, and one year's provisions in store, or sufficient to last his family during his mission or means to provide it.

"The Lord will not condemn any man for following counsel and keeping commandments; and a faithful man will have dreams about the work he is engaged in. If he is engaged in building the Temple, he will dream about it; and if in preaching, he will dream about that; and not, when he is laboring on the Temple, dream that it is his duty to run off preaching and leave his family to starve. Such dreams are not of God.

"When I was sick last winter some of the sisters came and whispered in my ear, 'I have nothing to eat.' Where is your husband? 'He is gone a preaching. 'Who sent him,' said I; 'for the Lord never sent him, to leave his family to starve.'

"When the Twelve went to England, they went on a special mission, by special commandment, and they left their families sick and destitute, God having promised that they should be provided for. But he does not require the same thing of the elders now, neither does he promise to provide for their families when they leave them contrary to counsel. The elders must provide for their families.

"I wish to give a word of advice to the sisters, and I will give it to my wife. I have known elders who had by some means got in debt, but had provided well for their families during their contemplated mission; and after they had taken their departure, their creditors would tease their wives for the pay due from their husbands, till they would give them the last provision they had left, and they were obliged to subsist on charity or starve till their husbands returned. Such a course of conduct on the part of the creditor is anti-Christian and criminal, and I forbid my wife from paying one cent of my debts while I am absent attending to the things of the kingdom; and I want the sisters to act on the same principle."—History of Church, Vol. 5, p. 350.

That is the kind of practical and plain advice that Brigham was giving to the Saints in the days of the Prophet Joseph. His wisdom was sound. He knew exactly what should be done by the people "to build up the Church and Kingdom" and he was willing to shoulder his part of the responsibility, though little did he dream, I fancy, that in slightly more than a year hence, the entire burden of leadership would be upon him.

On May 26th at Nauvoo, there was another important event in Brigham's life. He records in his journal:

"Met with the Prophet Joseph, the Patriarch Hyrum, Brothers Kimball and Richards, Judge James Adams and Bishop N. K. Whitney, receiving our endowments and instructions in the Priesthood. The Prophet Joseph administered to us the first ordinances of endowment, and gave us instructions on the Priesthood, and the new and everlasting covenant."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 184.

This will be readily understood by all members of the Church, and the great significance of it in Brigham's life is known to them.

On the 31st of the same month there is this item which gives us practical insight into his manner of living:

"I moved out of my log cabin into my new brick house, which was 22 feet by 16, two stories high, and a good cellar under it, and felt thankful to God for the privilege of having a comfortable though small habitation."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 184.

I have visited this little house in Nauvoo, and was told there by President Joseph F. Smith, that Brigham did most of the carpenter work on it himself.

On June 1st, (Brigham's forty-second birthday) he made arrangements to visit the neighboring branches of the Church to solicit funds for the building of the Temple and the Nauvoo House. The Prophet gave him a written recommendation in which he referred to him as "one of the Lord's noblemen." And again,

"I can fervently say, may the Lord bless his way before him, and bless him, and bless those that obey his teachings wherever they are with ears to hear and hearts to feel. He is worthy to be received and entertained as a man of God."

On July 7th, Brigham departed from Nauvoo on a mission to the eastern branches of the Church, accompanied by his brethren of the Twelve, and all making their way as best they could without funds or support from the Church. This mission was to occupy his time until late in October.

On the 8th of July, he was at St. Louis "and called on the Saints." On the 12th he reached Louisville, Ky., where he remained until the 17th. On the 16th (Sunday) his journal relates:

"In the afternoon we visited the Licking branch in Kentucky, where the Saints were in a very backward state, their hearts being more engaged in the welfare of ten or fifteen acres of strawberries than in the things of the Kingdom of God."

And again on the 19th:

"Visited Brother David Martin, who never asked our names; we stayed with him over night, and lay on a bedstead that creaked so dreadfully that we could neither sleep nor dream."

IV

Brigham was intensely sincere and earnest in all his labors, but he did not lack in sense of humor. I dare say that he and Brother Woodruff had a good laugh over that creaking bedstead. Brigham was extremely human withal and no doubt greatly enjoyed life, taking it as it came. But always and forever the labor of "building up the Church" was foremost in his mind.

On July 20th, "we walked fifteen miles to Cincinnati," and on the 22nd, "we took steamer for Pittsburgh." It appears that there was quite a large branch of the Church at Pittsburgh, just how many I have been unable to learn, but Brigham was busily occupied there, holding meetings and speaking to the people until August 1st. Addressing the Saints on Sunday, July 30th, he said, among other things:

"Who is the author of this work and gathering? Joseph Smith, the Prophet, as an instrument in the hands of God, is the author of it. He is the greatest man on earth. No other man at this age of the world, has power to assemble such a great people from all the nations of the earth, with all their varied dispositions, and so assimilate and cement them together that they become subject to rule and order. This the Prophet Joseph is doing. He has already gathered a great people who willingly subject themselves to his counsel, because they know it is righteous."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 247.

"He is the greatest man on earth." There, in brief is Brigham's opinion of the Prophet, and I should say that it is proof of Brigham's greatness, that he was able to recognize in Joseph Smith, his fellow mortal, with whom he was in constant association, the greatness which the world is gradually beginning to accord him.

On August 1st, Brigham and his companion, Wilford Woodruff, pushed on to Alleghany City, and on the next day "Charles Beck gave us $48 to help us to Baltimore." From Baltimore they traveled "by railroad to Newcastle, and thence by steamboat to Philadelphia, where we arrived at 4 o'clock in the morning of the 5th." Next afternoon, Sunday, the 6th,

"We met with about 300 Saints in the Cananite church. I preached at considerable length and said that a man or woman may ask of God, and get a witness and testimony from God concerning any work or messenger that is sent unto them; but if a person ask for a thing that does not concern him, such as governing the Church, as a member of the Church, inquiring concerning the duty of a presiding elder, what the Prophet or the Twelve ought to do, he will not get an answer; if he does it will not be from God."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 263.

That is another sample of Brigham's wise and practical advice to the Saints. On the 10th, there is this interesting note:

"In company with Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith, I visited the State House and the Independence Hall, where the patriots signed the Declaration of Independence. We sat in the chair which John Hancock occupied when he signed that instrument. We saw a statue of George Washington, the portraits of LaFayette and others and the painting presented by Benjamin West to the city corporation, representing the situation of Paul and Barnabas when they were set apart to the ministry."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 279.

On the 18th of August, Brigham with other members of the Twelve departed for New York, traveling by steamer or by coach, as occasion required. At Bordertown, New Jersey, there was this event, which Brigham treats humorously:

"Brother George A. Smith and I stayed over night with Brother Atkinson who lived in a very large frame house, said to have stood 150 years, and which was so infested with bedbugs that we could not sleep. Brother George A. gave it as his legal opinion that there were bedbugs there which had danced to the music at the battle of Trenton, as their heads were perfectly grey."

Reaching New York City on the 26th, they attended the same day a meeting of the Saints at Columbian Hall, Grand street. Brigham addressed the meeting "upon the importance of building the Nauvoo House and the temple, also upon the subject of the priesthood, showing it was a perfect system of government." The following day he notes in his journal, "my health is feeble, never having wholly recovered from my last winter's illness."

From September 5th to 29th, Brigham labored in Boston and vicinity and was busily engaged proclaiming his message to the Saints and their friends. On the 30th, he began his return journey to Nauvoo, stopping and holding meetings in New York and Philadelphia. He passed through Pittsburgh on the 8th of October, Cincinnati on the 12th, and arrived in Nauvoo on the 22nd, having been away nearly four months. The next day,

"With Elders H. C. Kimball and George A. Smith I visited the Prophet Joseph, who was glad to see us. We paid him every cent of the means we had collected for the Temple and Nauvoo House. He taught us many principles illustrating the doctrine of celestial marriage, concerning which God had given him a revelation, July 12th."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 311.

During November and December, Brigham was busily engaged with his duties at home. On November 7th he was made a member of a committee of the Twelve, who were appointed "to raise $500 to procure paper on which to print another edition of the Doctrine and Covenants." This gives us an idea of the straightened condition of the Saints.

On December 10th, he records the following, which to me is extremely significant for this man of faith:

"I attended prayer meeting in the Assembly Room. President Joseph Smith being absent I presided and instructed the brethren upon the necessity of following our file leader, and our Savior, in all his laws and commandments, without asking any questions why they were so."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 311.

At a meeting at the home of Wilford Woodruff on December 28th, Brigham relates:

"I exhorted the Saints to be subject to the powers that be; said our sufferings are permitted that we may learn by experience the contrast between good and evil, in order to obtain power; "never suffer anger to find a seat in your breast, never get angry, treat all mildly, govern yourselves, control your passions and it will give you power."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 312.

And so ended the year 1843, which was to be the last of Brigham's apprenticeship.

V

During January and February of 1844, Brigham was actively engaged in his ministry in Nauvoo and the surrounding settlements of the Saints. "The grand object before us," he told the people "is to build the Temple this season." But there was another object before the brethren which was to have a great and far reaching effect. This was the move to the Rocky Mountains, already contemplated by the Prophet Joseph. In Brigham's history under date of February 21st, 1844, I find this item.

"I met in council. Brother Joseph directed the Twelve to select an exploring company to go to California to select a location for the settlement of the Saints; Jonathan Dunham, David Fulmer, Phinehas H. Young and David D. Yearsley, volunteered to go, and Alphonzo Young, James Emmett, George D. Watt and Daniel Spencer were selected to go.

"February 23rd—I met with the Presidency and the Twelve in relation to the Rocky Mountain Expedition; eight more volunteers gave in their names. Brother Joseph gave instructions in relation to the fit out needed. It was agreed that the company should number twenty-five."

This information may come as a surprise to some that it was not Brigham Young who devised the westward move of the Latter-day Saints. But the facts are here that such a move was contemplated and discussed by the Prophet Joseph. Upon Brigham, however, was to fall the task of leadership in this tremendous undertaking.

Another factor entered into the lives of the Saints during this critical period. The year 1844 was a presidential year and politics were being discussed on every side. At a meeting of the leading brethren held January 29th, it had been decided that the Saints could support neither Martin Van Buren nor Henry Clay. Both had refused to do anything to help them obtain redress for the wrongs done them in Missouri, Clay's reply being, "You had better go to Oregon for redress." Consequently it was natural that Willard Richards should put a motion before the brethren—

"That we will have an independent electoral ticket and Joseph Smith be a candidate for the next Presidency; and that we use all honorable means in our power to secure his election."—History of Church, Vol. 6, p. 188.

At the April conference, 244 elders volunteered to go throughout the states and present the Prophet's name and his "views on the powers and policy of the government of the United States" to the people. Brigham had under his direct supervision the activity of these elders and their assignments to their fields of labor. In his instructions to them he said, that they were to seek diligently to get electors who would vote for Joseph Smith for the presidency, and also they were to be faithful "in preaching the Gospel in its simplicity and beauty, in all meekness, humility, long-suffering and prayer-fulness; and the Twelve will devote the season to traveling, and will attend as many conferences as possible."—History of Church, Vol. 6, p. 340. Thus the work for the summer of 1844 was laid out before him. During the latter part of April and the early part of May he was busily occupied making preparations to leave. Finally on May 21st, he records in his journal:

"I started on my mission to the east in company with Elders H. C. Kimball and L. Wight on board the steamer Osprey."

Little did Brigham realize when he waved "good-bye" to the brethren on shore that never again in this life would he look upon the face of his beloved Prophet. The tragedy at Carthage was only five weeks away.

May 22nd, the following day, Brigham was at St. Louis; on the 26th, he had reached Cincinnati and on the 30th, Pittsburgh. From Pittsburgh he made a short side trip to Kirtland, where for several days he visited with his brother John and his sister Nancy Kent. Proceeding onward he went through Buffalo and Albany, arriving in Boston on June 16th. Nine days later, on June 27th, there is this note from his journal:

"Spent the day in Boston with Brother Woodruff, who accompanied me to the railway station, as I was about to take cars for Salem. In the evening, while sitting in the depot waiting I felt a heavy depression of spirit, and so melancholy I could not converse with any degree of pleasure. Not knowing anything concerning the tragedy enacting at this time in Carthage jail I could not assign any reason for my peculiar feelings."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 343.

It was not until the 9th of July that Brigham heard rumors of the death of the Prophet. But thinking them to be rumors only he continued on with his missionary work, and went with Orson Pratt to Petersboro, N. H. There on the 16th, he records the following:

"While at Brother Bement's house in Petersboro, I heard a letter read which Brother Livingston had received from Mr. Joseph Powers, of Nauvoo, giving particulars of the murder of Joseph and Hyrum. The first thing I thought of was whether Joseph had taken the keys of the kingdom with him from the earth; Brother Orson Pratt sat on my left; we were leaning back on our chairs. Bringing my hand down on my knee I said, 'The keys of the kingdom are right here with the Church."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 359.

Brigham no doubt was stunned and dismayed on hearing the terrible news of the death of his beloved Prophet and yet his first thoughts were for the Kingdom. Would it all end now, that which he had labored, sacrificed and suffered for, for twelve years? No, "the keys of the Kingdom are right here with the Church," and it not doubt flashed across Brigham's mind at that moment that the burden of leadership was upon him. For while many were confused and uncertain as to the proper course to pursue, Brigham's mind grasped the situation instantly and the duty before him was clear.

On the following day, July 17th, Brigham arrived in Boston; Wilford Woodruff, who was there, records the event as follows:

"Elder Brigham Young arrived in Boston this morning. I walked with him to 57 Temple Street, and called upon Sister Vose; Brother Young took the bed and gave vent to his feelings in tears,"—History of the Church, Vol. 7, p. 195.

The great, stout heart of the man was broken by the news of the death of his beloved Prophet, and he had to give "vent to his feelings in tears." I fancy that he never bore such love for any other man as he did for the Prophet Joseph. His devotion to him had almost amounted to worship, and now he was gone, and Brigham was left alone. But he arose from that bed of tears with one great and overpowering determination, and that was to carry on the work which the Prophet had been the instrument in the hands of God in founding. The Kingdom must, and would, continue to move forward. To that activity Brigham dedicated all the strength and resources at his command.
