Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER SIX

ON July 23rd, 1844, Brigham, with the other members of the Twelve, who had sorrowfully gathered at Boston, began their return journey towards Nauvoo. Their thought centered now on quickly returning home. They "took cars for Buffalo," where they arrived on the evening of the 25th. From Buffalo they went by lake steamer to Detroit, and from Detroit to Chicago, where they arrived on the afternoon of August 1st. They continued on by stage to Galena, "traveling all night," and from Galena they went aboard a river steamer for Nauvoo, where they arrived "about eight o'clock in the evening" of August 6th.

"When we landed in the city," wrote Wilford Woodruff, "a deep gloom seemed to rest over Nauvoo, which we never experienced before."

The first thing that came to Brigham's attention on his arrival was the fact that Sidney Rigdon, who had long been Joseph Smith's counselor, was in Nauvoo endeavoring to succeed Joseph as head of the Church, with the title of "Guardian." In fact, the day after Brigham's arrival, a meeting of the Saints had been called, in order that Sidney might submit his claim. It was fortunate that Brigham arrived in time to attend this meeting. Sidney was a contender for Joseph's position as leader of the Church, but he proved to be a weak contender when matched against Brigham.

At the meeting in the afternoon of August 7th, Sidney said, among other things, "I propose to be a guardian to the people; in this I have discharged my duty and done what God commanded me, and the people can please themselves whether they accept me or not." In his strong characteristic manner, Brigham replied:

"I do not care who leads the Church, even though it were Ann Lee; but one thing I must know, and that is what God says about it. I have the keys and the means of obtaining the mind of God on the subject.

"I know there are those in our midst who will seek the lives of the Twelve as they did the lives of Joseph and Hyrum. We shall ordain others and give the fullness of the priesthood, so that if we are killed, the fullness of the priesthood may remain.

"Joseph conferred upon our heads all the keys and powers belonging to the Apostleship which he himself held before he was taken away, and no man or set of men can get between Joseph and the Twelve in this world or in the world to come.

"How often has Joseph said to the Twelve, 'I have laid the foundation and you must build thereon, for upon your shoulders the kingdom rests.'

"The Twelve, as a quorum, will not be permitted to tarry here long; they will go abroad and bear off the kingdom to the nations of the earth, and baptize the people faster than mobs can kill them off. I would like, were it my privilege, to take my valise and travel and preach till we had a people gathered who would be true.

"My private feelings would be to let the affairs of men and women alone, only go and preach and baptize them into the Kingdom of God; yet, whatever duty God places upon me in His strength I intend to fulfill it.

"I want to see this people, with the various quorums of the priesthood, assembled together in special conference on Thursday next at 10 a.m."—History of Church, Vol. 7, p. 230.

The key to Brigham's life's work is given in this speech, namely this, "Whatever duty God places upon me, in his strength I intend to fulfil it." Who could say or do more than that?

On the following day at ten in the forenoon, a vast concourse of Saints assembled around a temporary platform, near the Temple. Sidney Rigdon mounted a wagon, and for over an hour and a half harangued with the people, presenting his claims for the position of Guardian. His arguments met with no response, but Brigham presented his case to the people:

"The first position I take," he said, "in behalf of the Twelve and the people is to ask a few questions. I ask the Latter-day Saints: do you, as individuals, at this time, want to choose a Prophet or Guardian. Inasmuch as our Prophet and Patriarch are taken from our midst, do you want some one to guard, to guide and lead you through this world into the Kingdom of God, or not? All that want some person to be a guardian or a Prophet, a Spokesman or something else, signify it by raising the right hand." No hands were raised and Sidney Rigdon's hopes for a Guardianship were doomed.—History of Church, Vol. 7, p. 232.

In the afternoon, Brigham addressed the assembly in behalf of himself and the Twelve, and from that day on, his leadership was unquestioned with the Mormon people. He rose to the occasion and presented a case that brooked no opposition. The Saints were convinced: a vote was taken and the Twelve were sustained.

Among the many things that Brigham uttered on this momentous occasion, I have chosen a few for the edification of the reader:

"For the first time in my life, and for the first time in your lives, for the first time in the Kingdom of God in the nineteenth century, without a Prophet at our head, do I step forth to act in my calling in connection with the Quorum of the Twelve, as Apostles of Jesus Christ unto this generation—Apostles whom God has called by revelation through the Prophet Joseph, who are ordained and anointed to bear off the keys of the Kingdom of God in all the world. . . .

"The Twelve are appointed by the finger of God. Here is Brigham, have his knees ever faltered? Have his lips ever quivered? Here is Heber and the rest of the Twelve, an independent body who have the keys of the priesthood—the keys of the Kingdom of God to deliver to all the world: this is true, so help me God. They stand next to Joseph and are the first Presidency of the Church. . . .

"I do not know whether my enemies will take my life or not, and I do not care, for I want to be with the man I love. . .

"I have spared no pains to learn my lessons of the Kingdom in this world, and in the eternal worlds; and if it were not so, I could go and live in peace; but for the Gospel and your sakes I shall stand in my place. . . .

"Brother Joseph, the Prophet, has laid the foundation for a great work and we will build upon it. . . . There is an almighty foundation laid, and we can build a kingdom such as there never was in this world."—History of Church, Vol. 7, p. 234.

And so, when this 8th day of August, 1844, ended, Brigham Young, ninth child of poor John Young, who had grown to manhood with only "eleven days schooling" but with a master spirit, born to command, stood before the world as the successor to Joseph Smith, and as leader of a great religious people.

Brigham was now in the prime of his life. On the previous first of June, while he labored as a missionary in the eastern states, he had passed his forty-third birthday. Since April, 1832, for over twelve years, he had followed the standard of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He had labored and sacrificed and given his all for the cause of the Saints. But it had been a great school for him, and he had learned his "lessons of the Kingdom." Now he was fit to command. He stepped forth and did command; confidence was restored; order was restored; the Kingdom moved forward again.

In speaking before the Saints at Nauvoo at this time he said:

"I have traveled these many years, in the midst of poverty and tribulation, and that, too, with blood in my shoes, month after month, to sustain and preach this Gospel and build up this Kingdom, and God forbid that I should now turn round, and seek to destroy that which I have been laboring to build up."—Millennial Star, Vol. 5, p. 100.

II

After Brigham was sustained as leader of the Saints, his course before him was clear, and the objects he sought to attain were definite in his mind. "We will carry out all the measures of Joseph," he said. He did not attempt to originate anything new. He maintained that the Gospel in its purity and fullness had been revealed through the Prophet, and that the foundations of the Kingdom had been laid. He and his followers would build upon that foundation. Under date of August 15th, there is this from his history:

"The Quorum of the Twelve Apostles met at my house. Many matters were talked over. The council resolved to bear off the Kingdom of God in all the world, in truth, honesty, virtue, and holiness, and to continue to set their faces as flint against every species of wickedness, vice, and dishonesty in all its forms."—History of Church, Vol. 7, p. 249.

The first object Brigham had in view was the completion of the Nauvoo Temple.

"We want to build the Temple in this place," he said, "if we have to build it as the Jews built the walls of the temple in Jerusalem, with a sword in one hand and the trowel in the other. How easily some men are scared. I have not been frightened yet."—History of Church, Vol 7, p. 256.

It was this sort of leadership that inspired the hearts of the Saints. The work on the Temple was resumed. In Brigham's history under date of September 17th, he says, "In company with Elders Kimball, Woodruff and others, I went on to the Temple walls, viewed the country and encouraged the workmen." Everywhere he labored to encourage the people, build them up, and spread the doctrine of optimism and hope.

At the semi-annual conference, held in Nauvoo, October 6th, Brigham carefully proceeded with the organization of the Church in order that it would again properly function. The Twelve were sustained as the First Presidency of the Church. Eighty-five men were selected to go and preside over various mission districts of the United States and Wilford Woodruff was appointed to preside over the European mission. Much business was transacted to set the Kingdom in order and all was done with dispatch and thoroughness.

It was about this time also while carrying on the work of building the Temple, that the following dramatic incident occurred, as related by Brigham many years later in Salt Lake City:

"A few months after the martyrdom of Joseph, the Prophet, in the autumn and winter of 1844 we did much hard labor on the Nauvoo Temple, during which time it was difficult to get bread and other provisions for the workmen to eat. I counseled the committee who had charge of the Temple funds to deal out all the flour they had, and God would give them more; and they did so; and it was but a short time before Brother Toronto came and brought me twenty-five hundred dollars in gold. The bishop and the committee met, and I met with them; and they said, that the law was to lay the gold at the apostles' feet. Yes, I said and I will lay it at the bishop's feet; so I opened the mouth of the bag and took hold at the bottom end, and gave it a jerk towards the bishop, and strewed the gold across the room and said, 'Now go and buy flour for the workmen on the Temple and do not distrust the Lord any more; for we will have what we need.'"—Roberts History, Vol. 2, p. 472.

The fateful year of 1844 came to a close. The people were busily engaged in building up the city and in "carrying out all the measures of Joseph." Among other projects which the Prophet had undertaken was the construction of Seventies Hall. This was a commodious structure built as a meeting place for the organization of missionaries known as the Seventies. About the middle of December the building neared completion and on the 26th of the month (the day after Christmas), it was dedicated with solemn ceremonies, President Young offering the dedication prayer. "It is doubtful," writes B. H. Roberts, "if Brigham Young ever did anything better in oral expression than this beautiful and timely prayer." As it reveals the strength and simplicity of his faith, I desire to quote it in full, as it was given that day:

"Thou God who dwellest in the midst of thine own kingdoms, and doeth thy pleasure in the midst of the same, we realize that we are thy children, although we have long wandered from thee. Yet we feel that it is thy good pleasure to bless us, when we come unto thee with hearts of humility. Therefore we desire to present ourselves before thee as dutiful children to an earthly parent, knowing that we are thine and ask thee for those things we need. We feel, our Father, that we are in a world of darkness, and trouble, and death, where we cannot behold thy glory; yet we come unto thee in the name of Jesus Christ, thy Son, and ask thee to forgive our sins and past offenses. Fill us with thy Spirit, and accept our praise, while we dedicate ourselves unto thee, and as we have approximated to behold this beautiful morning, the day in which begins a new year, do thou, our Heavenly Father, look down in compassion upon us, the creatures of thy care and protection, who dwell upon thy footstool. Increase our knowledge, wisdom and understanding, that we, thy servants may be enabled to administer salvation to thy people, even as thou hast committed a dispensation of the same unto us; and while we call on thy name we desire union in thy presence, our Father, to dedicate unto thee this hall, the ground upon which it stands, and all things that appertain unto it. We ask thee to let thy blessing rest upon thy servant, Edward Hunter, our beloved brother, who has donated to us the ground upon which this sacred edifice has been erected. We pray thee to enrich him and his family, not only with the good things of this world, but with the riches of eternity also. We ask thee, our Father, to accept the dedication of our hearts this morning and may we feel the prelude of that power and authority with which thy servants shall be clothed, when they shall go forth and open the door of salvation to the nations and kingdoms of the earth; even thy servants, the Seventies, upon whom the burden of thy kingdom does rest, and to whom the keys of the same shall be committed from time to time. We now dedicate this hall unto thee, our Father, and ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to sanctify it and make it holy, and may no foul spirit be suffered to enter it, but may it be filled with thy Spirit that it may be called the gate of heaven and may all who enter within its doors be made to feel thy love and power. We ask thee to pour out thy Spirit upon the presidency of the Seventies; wilt thou endow them with knowledge and understanding that they may be enabled to instruct thy servants over whom they are called to preside; and do thou let the same blessings flow freely upon each quorum, that all thy servants may be filled with thy Spirit, and become mighty men before thee that they may go forth and gather the pure in heart, Zion redeemed and Jerusalem rebuilt. Help us, O Lord, to separate ourselves from all iniquity, that evildoers may not exist in our midst, but may this people become a holy people, peculiar to thyself, to show forth thy praise in all the world. Our Father in heaven, we humbly beseech thee to shield and protect us in this city; provide for and sustain us by thy power, that we may be enabled to accomplish the work which thou hast commanded us to do. Assist us to build the temple and Nauvoo House; that the truth and light of the everlasting Gospel may shine forth from this place, to the honor, praise and glory of thy name. Regard in mercy the Quorum of the Twelve, at whom the arrows of the destroyer are directed. Preserve them, O Lord, by thine own omnipotent power, that they may stand in holy places and be enabled to disseminate the knowledge of thy kingdom to the inhabitants of the earth; wilt thou sustain us, our Father, that we may perform and accomplish the mighty work whereunto we are called.

"We feel to lament and mourn the loss of our beloved brothers, Joseph and Hyrum, the Prophet and Patriarch, whom thou hast suffered to be martyred for the testimony of the truth; but we thank thee, our Father, that although they have been taken from us for the present, yet that same spirit which animated their bosoms, the fruits of which are peace and charity, still remains among thy people. We now commit ourselves into thy care, and ask thee to guide and control us by the counsel of heaven, through all the shifting and various scenes of mortality, that the numbers of our days may be filled up in usefulness, and we be prepared for that exalted station and rest that remains for the people of God, and the honor, praise and glory of our salvation, we will ascribe unto thee; for thine is the kingdom, power and glory, worlds without end. Amen."

III

By the beginning of 1845 it was abundantly evident that Brigham had all matters pertaining to the Church well in hand. He was entirely fearless, not afraid to speak his mind on any issue or on any occasion. In his history under date of Sunday, January 5th, 1845, at Nauvoo, he writes:

"I went to the stand and addressed the Saints on the necessity of having more order and putting down iniquity, and exhorted the brethren to rise up en masse, and put down the thieving, swearing, gambling, bogus making, retailing, spirituous liquors, bad houses, and all abominations practiced in our midst by our enemies, who, after they could not live among us any longer, would go out to the world and publish that these things were practiced by us. I severely rebuked the civil authorities of the city for their want of energy in the discharge of their duty, and censured parents and guardians for not keeping their children from prowling around the streets at night, and remarked that if we did not as a people uproot such things, they would uproot us, and we would have to leave before we had done the things the Lord had commanded us to do."—History of Church, Vol. 7, p. 350.

It was in this same month of January, 1845, that the subject of the great move of the Saints westward began to take definite form. This plan of a move to the Rocky Mountains had been for several years contemplated by the Prophet Joseph Smith, but no practical opportunity had been afforded for its realization. Now it was becoming increasingly evident to Brigham that he should remove the body of the Saints to a place where they would be free from persecution. His general interest was towards California, the name given to all that vast country in the southwest lying between the Pacific Ocean and the Rocky Mountains. At this time it was vaguely held as a possession of Mexico, but as a result of the war with Mexico which began the following year, in 1846, it was soon to be ceded to the United States.

In Brigham's history, under date of January 1st, 1845, there is the following:

"In company with Elders Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, Willard Richards and Amasa M. Lyman, I spent the afternoon and evening with our wives, at Hiram Kimball's; had a pleasant time. The propriety of settling a new country was discussed."

Again two days later on the 7th, there is another entry:

"I met in council with my brethren of the Twelve. The subject of sending a company to California was further discussed; also, the propriety of sending to the branches of the Church abroad for teams to help the expedition."

Thus the great enterprise, which resulted in the founding of an empire in the west, began to be formulated in the minds of Brigham Young and the other Church leaders. But the actual beginning of the move was to be delayed yet another year.

Meanwhile the work on the Temple, which was directly under Brigham's supervision, went rapidly forward. Writing to Wilford Woodruff in England under date of February 11th, 1845, he said:

"The stone is nearly hewn for the temple; a stone font is about to be erected; the woodwork is progressing rapidly under a temporary roof in the basement story, and we hope to commence the endowments next fall or early in the winter."

The spirit of persecution, which had brought about the death of Joseph and Hyrum Smith in Carthage jail, was now again spreading over the land. The Hancock county settlers seemed determined that the Saints should be driven out of Illinois and writs for the arrest of Brigham and others of the brethren, on some trumped up charge, were issued. Speaking on this subject before the Saints at Nauvoo on Sunday, March 16th, he said:

"I swear by the God of heaven that we will not spend money in feeing lawyers. All the lawsuits that have been got up against the Saints, have been hatched up to fee lawyers, tavern keepers, etc. I would rather have a good six-shooter than all the lawyers in Illinois."—History of Church, Vol. 7, p. 386.

That was plain language, but it was language that the Hancock county mob understood. They soon began to realize that in Brigham Young, they had a man they could not fool with.

On June 27th, 1845, Brigham addressed a letter to Wilford Woodruff in England detailing events as they were transpiring in Nauvoo. This beautiful letter exemplifies Brigham's true spirit. His heart and soul were in the progress of the work of God. His pride was in the accomplishments that were going on, as he often termed it, "the building up of the Kingdom." I shall quote it in part:

"Dear Brother Woodruff,

"We sit down to acknowledge the receipt of your letters, and it being one year this day since the massacre of our beloved brethren, Joseph and Hyrum, we have concluded to spend the day in conversation, counsel and prayer, and also to write answers to your letters, well knowing that a little information from this place must be acceptable to you at all times, for we feel it as a source of comfort to us to hear of your prosperity. We have met from time to time to offer up our prayers and thanksgivings before the Lord for the salvation and peace of the Saints, and that the Lord would enable us to finish the Temple and the Nauvoo House, that the brethren might obtain their endowments, for this we have supplicated by night and by day, and hitherto we have been prospered in a manner beyond our most sanguine expectations. Another subject for which we have constantly supplicated is the welfare and success of our dear brethren in England, Brother Parley P. Pratt in New York, and the brethren on the Islands of the Pacific; these with our petitions for the sick in our midst, and that God will preserve us from internal broils, have been the theme of our prayers from time to time, and we are happy to say that God has heard and answered our prayers, and has done all things well. The most perfect union, peace and good feeling has invariably prevailed in our midst and still continues. It seems like a foretaste of celestial enjoyment and Millennial glory. . . . . .

"The capstone of the Temple was laid by the Twelve on Saturday morning the 24th of May, at 6 o'clock, in the presence of many Saints. It would have pleased you to have heard the hosannas on that occasion, and to have witnessed the short but interesting ceremony. The framework of the roof is on the building, and the next week the brethren expect to put on the shingles; the framework around the foundation of the tower is all up, and the first timbers for the tower itself were raised this day. The new stone front is mostly cut, and the first stone was laid today at about four o'clock. We expect in about five or six weeks the attic story of the temple and the font will be finished and ready for dedication, and just as soon as they are ready we shall dedicate them. We have all the timbers for the Temple on the ground, and above one hundred thousand shingles for the roof. The lead for the eaves and the tin for the dome of the tower are also bought. We have paid nearly $4,000 this spring for lumber (pine boards, etc.) and near $1,000 for lead and tin, and have as yet lacked nothing. There is the most perfect union prevailing among the Saints, and every man seems determined to do all he can to roll on the work of the Temple as fast as possible. Elder Hyde started east, about ten days ago to purchase the cloth for the tabernacle; and Elder Egan has gone to St. Louis to buy about $125 worth of hemp to make cords for it.

"The brethren are clearing the ground around the Temple, and we expect to have the tabernacle reared, so as to be ready to meet in this fall.

"We are building a stone wall around the Temple block, eight feet high and about five feet thick at the base, the wall on the north side is nearly built, the most of the woodwork for the Temple is finished, all the window frames and sashes are made, and the glaziers are ready to set the glass, which we expect here in a few days, the frame and ornamental work of the tower is all ready to be put up, and the whole is far on the way of completion. The Nauvoo House committees have reorganized, and the Saints have appointed Elders A. Lyman and George A. Smith on that committee, in the place of Lyman Wight and J. Snider. A large quantity of brick is already made for the Nauvoo House, and considerable means are on hand to prosecute the work. We calculate to have it covered in before winter. The arsenal is ready for the roof timbers and the timbers on the ground. There are many good buildings erecting in different parts of the city, there is not much sickness in the place, and there never was a more prosperous time, in general, among the Saints, since the work commenced. Nauvoo, or more properly, the 'City of Joseph,' looks like a paradise. All the lots and land, which have heretofore been vacant and unoccupied, were enclosed in the spring and planted with grain and vegetables, which makes it look more like a garden of gardens than a city; and the season has been so favorable, the prospect is, there will be enough raised within the limits of the corporation to supply the inhabitants with corn, potatoes, and other vegetables. Hundreds of acres of prairie land have also been enclosed, and are now under good cultivation, blooming with corn, wheat, potatoes, and other necessaries of life. Many strangers are pouring in to view the Temple and the city. They express their astonishment and surprise to see the rapid progress of the Temple, and the beauty and grandeur of Mormon looks. Many brethren are coming from abroad, who seem highly delighted with the place and all its appendages.

"We now conclude with our best wishes and prayers for your health and prosperity with that of your family, and those associated with you. Please remember us to Brothers Clark, Hadlock and families, and those of all the brethren with you, and believe us as ever, yours in the bonds of truth and righteousness.

"(Signed), "BRIGHAM YOUNG."

"P. S. Sunday, June 29th.—This day the twenty-eighth quorum of the Seventies has been organized, and is nearly full. There are twenty-seven quorums duly organized and all appear united in the same interest, and firm in the faith. Brother Milton Holmes is remembered by us in his station, he has been appointed one of the presidents of a quorum of Seventies."—Church History, Copy of Letter, Vol. 7, p. 430.

While the foregoing letter gives a very comprehensive view of what was going on in Nauvoo and vicinity in the month of June, by September conditions had changed somewhat and persecution was breaking loose again. Many homes of the brethren in the outlying districts from Nauvoo were burned by the mob and the inhabitants were forced to flee for their lives. Brigham advised all who could, to come into the confines of the city and bring their livestock and grain with them. It was becoming increasingly evident that a move would have to be made in the spring. Meantime the brethren were meeting often and obtaining all the information about the west that was available. They had the published account of John C. Fremont's travels, and an accompanying map, which was extremely useful. Perhaps it was from information obtained in this book that they decided to investigate the Salt Lake Valley. In Brigham's history, under date of September 9th, 1845, I find the following:

"Two p.m. General Council met. Resolved that a company of fifteen hundred men be selected to go to Great Salt Lake Valley and that a committee of five be appointed to gather information relative to emigration, and report same to the council."—History of the Church, Vol. 7, p. 439.

And again two days later:

"The Twelve met in council: Prayers were offered up that the Lord would give us wisdom to manage affairs with the mob, so as to keep them off till we can accomplish what he requires at our hands in completing the Temple and Nauvoo House, also for wisdom to manage affairs in regard to western emigration. A selection was made of members of the council to start westward next spring."—History of Church, Vol. 7, p. 440.

From this time on there were two dominant issues in Brigham's mind; one was to bring the Nauvoo Temple to completion so that the Saints might have their endowments, and the other was to prepare for the westward emigration the following spring. To these two tasks he now devoted himself with all his magnificent energy, and they were indeed tasks that called for the greatest generalship and ability. On October 1st, Brigham met in Nauvoo with Judge Stephen A. Douglas and John J. Hardin to discuss the westward emigration of the Saints. Both of these men advised that the Saints should settle on Vancouver's Island. "Judge Douglas said Vancouver's Island was claimed by the United States, and he felt sure there would be no objection to its settlement, or to the settlement of Oregon."

As plans for the westward emigration went on, also with unceasing diligence, the Saints continued their work on the Temple until it was sufficiently completed for occupancy during the October conference. Under date of October 5th, 1845, Brigham writes:

"Through the indefatigable exertions, unceasing industry, and heaven-blessed labors, in the midst of trials, tribulations, poverty, and worldly obstacles, solemnized in some instances by death, about five thousand Saints had the inexpressible joy and great gratification to meet for the first time in the House of the Lord in the City of Joseph. From mites and tithing, millions had risen up to the glory of God, as a Temple, where the children of the last kingdom could come together and praise the Lord.

"It certainly afforded a holy satisfaction to think that since the 6th of April, 1841, when the first stone was laid, amidst the most straightened circumstances, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints had witnessed their bread cast upon the waters, or more properly, their obedience to the commandments of the Lord, appear in the tangible form of a Temple, entirely enclosed, windows in; with temporary floors, pulpit and seats to accommodate so many persons preparatory to a general conference, no general conference having been held for three years past, according to the declaration of our martyred Prophet:

"There shall be no more baptisms for the dead, until the ordinance can be attended to in the font of the Lord's House; and the Church shall not hold another general conference, until they can meet in said house. For thus saith the Lord."

"I (Brigham Young) opened the services of the day by a dedicatory prayer, presenting the Temple, thus far completed as a monument of the Saints' liberality, fidelity, and faith, concluding: 'Lord, we dedicate this house and ourselves, to thee.' The day was occupied most agreeably in hearing instructions and teachings, and offering up the gratitude of honest hearts, for so great a privilege, as worshiping God within, instead of without, an edifice, whose beauty and workmanship will compare with any house of worship in America, and whose motto is: 'Holiness to the Lord."—History of the Church, Vol. 7, p. 457.

IV

At this great conference, the last to be held in Nauvoo, Brigham was the presiding officer at all sessions. On the opening day he was sustained by the people as President of the Twelve, and given a vote of confidence. In his usual able manner, all the affairs of the Church were properly handled. The gist of the sermons given was an expression of joy and satisfaction that the Temple was so nearly completed, and a working out of plans for the removal of the Saints westward in the following spring.

Brigham, while he was an intensely serious man, was not without a fine element of humor, as this little extract from his sermon the closing day of conference shows:

"When we first preached in the grove, I charged the brethren not to let their cattle get into the gardens of the widows and the sick, and if the widows shot them, I would stand between them and harm, and someone, on the Friday following, shot my only cow. I would have given five half eagles to bring her back again. She was reared by my wife while I was on a mission to England, and was so gentle that my children could sit under her and milk her, and play between her horns without fear of being hurt."—History of Church, Vol. 7, p. 476.

During the latter part of October and all of November the Saints in Nauvoo were constantly being harassed by their enemies. Homes were burned on the farms in the outlying districts and the inhabitants were forced to flee to Nauvoo for safety. On more than one occasion Brigham went into hiding as he knew his life was being sought by the mob. Meantime, with unceasing energy the brethren continued their efforts for the construction of the Temple and preparations for the move westward. Here are a few extracts from Brigham's history under date of November 30th, 1845:

"At 10 a.m. I went to the attio story of the Temple. . . . I requested William Clayton to keep minutes. I then offered up prayer and dedicated the attic story of the Temple and ourselves to God, and prayed that God would sustain and deliver us his servants from the hands of our enemies, until we have accomplished his will in this house.

"Hans C. Hanson, the doorkeeper, reported that there were two officers waiting at the foot of the stairs for me. I told the brethren that I could bear to tarry here where it was warm as long as they could stay in the cold waiting for me."—History of the Church, Vol. 7, p. 535.

And again this item regarding the exodus, which gives a fine picture of what was going on and expresses Brigham's abiding faith. It is also under date of Nov. 30th:

"Every hundred have established one or more wagon shops: wheelrights, carpenters and cabinetmakers are nearly all former wagon makers, and many not mechanics are at work in every part of the town preparing timber for making wagons. The timber is cut and brought into the city green; hub, spoke, and felloe timber boiled in salt and water, and other parts kiln dried; shops are established at the Nauvoo House, Masonic Hall, and Arsenal, nearly every shop in town is employed in making wagons.

"Teams are sent to all parts of the country to purchase iron; blacksmiths are at work night and day and all hands are busily engaged getting ready for our departure westward as soon as possible.

"Very few sales of property are being made, the citizens of the country around instead of aiding us to sell our property, are using their influence to discourage sales and the authorities constantly haunt us with vexatious writs; efforts are making to bring us into collision with the authorities of the United States by means of vexatious writs from the federal courts. The brethren are doing their utmost to prepare amidst all the discouragements that surround us for a general exodus in the spring; but from the manner that our neighbors have kept their faith, it is very apparent that as soon as the strength of Israel is gone, that the remainder will be in danger of violence, from our cruel persecutors, the promises of governors, generals, judges, conventions of citizens, and mob leaders, and their hounds, to the contrary notwithstanding; but we trust in God, we praise him that we have been thus far able to prepare his Temple for the ordinances of the priesthood, and we feel full of confidence that he will hear our prayers and deliver his unoffending people from the power of their enemies, and lead us to a land where we can enjoy peace for a season."—History of Church, Vol. 7, p. 535.

During the winter months of December and January Brigham spent his time, almost day and night, in the Temple, assisting the people in receiving their endowments. During this time his life was frequently in danger. One of the elders, William Miller, who bore striking resemblance to Brigham, was mistaken for Brigham, arrested and taken to Carthage by the officers, on the trumped up charge of manufacturing bogus money. Miller had presence of mind enough not to reveal his identity until he was in Carthage and the officers were much chagrined to find that they had the wrong man. On December 31st, 1845, (the last day of this momentous year) Brigham records:

"Elder Heber C. Kimball and I superintended the operations in the Temple, examined maps with reference to selecting a location for the Saints, west of the Rocky Mountains, and read various works written by travelers in those regions."—History of Church, Vol. 7, p. 558.

The evacuation of Nauvoo was now only a matter of days. Brigham and the other Church leaders were ready to seek their new home in the West.
