Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER SEVEN

ON February 15th, 1846, Brigham, with his family in a wagon, with his teams and cattle, and what possessions he could carry away, left his comfortable brick home in Nauvoo, his farm, his stores and city lots, the beautiful Temple which had almost cost him his life's blood, the graves of his beloved friends, the Prophet and Patriarch, and ferried across the river to the Iowa side. It was a cold, bitter day. Before him was the great west, stretching 2,000 miles to the Pacific ocean, with its vast plains and mountains, its deserts and unhabitable wastes, its roving tribes of Indians, its wild beasts and reptiles; a region little known and explored, except by the daring spirits who went forth in search of furs and skins of wild animals. Somewhere in this vast region he hoped to find a place of security, a resting place, for his long harrassed and persecuted people. From maps, charts and reports he had read and studied, he had fastened somewhat vaguely on the Salt Lake Valley, just beyond the Rocky Mountains, in the center of the Great Basin. Other than this he knew not of his destiny. But Brigham faced the future unafraid; his faith taught him that all was well. No picture in America is more sublime to me than that of this rugged man of faith, this strong man of God, going forth into the wilderness at the head of his little band of Saints, to found an empire. The camp journal of February 15th, relates:

"President Brigham Young crossed the Mississippi river with his family, accompanied by Willard Richards and family and George A. Smith. They traveled four miles when they came to the bluffs. President Young would not go on until he saw all the teams up. He helped them up the hill with his own hands. At dusk he started on and reached Sugar Creek about 8 p.m., having traveled nine miles. The roads were very bad."

Two days later he called the camp about him and gave them some practical advice which is entirely characteristic of him:

"Attention, the whole camp of Israel! Some of the brethren have been here nearly two weeks, and according to counsel I should have been here sooner, if I had had to come without a shirt on my back. I wish the brethren to stop running to Nauvoo, hunting, fishing, roasting their shins, idling away their time. They should fix nosebaskets for their horses and save their corn and fix comfortable places for their wives and children to ride. Never borrow without asking leave and return what has been borrowed . . . we will have no law in this camp we cannot keep, but we will have order in the camp. If any want to live in peace when they leave this place, they must toe the mark."

For fifteen days, Brigham remained at Sugar Creek, suffering with the others in the severe weather. On February 24th, the thermometer stood at twelve degrees below zero. On the 28th the camp historian records, "President Young was so afflicted with rheumatism that it was with difficulty he could walk." But he kept cheerfully at his work as best he could. He addressed a letter to the governor of Iowa, asking for the privilege of growing crops on the public lands. This was to sustain those who would come along in the fall. They could reap what the first company had sown.

On March 1st, while the weather was still cold and there were three or four inches of snow on the ground, Brigham ordered the camp to move forward to some new location. "We are too close to Nauvoo," he said, "and the brethren are always running back." Five hundred wagons, Brigham at their head, accordingly took up the journey. From five to ten miles a day was all they could make through the soft, muddy soil. On March 5th, the camp journalist records:

"President Young advised the camp they had better eat all their provisions as they needed, except biscuits, crackers and parched corn meal; this would lighten their load, and when they got to the Missouri river they would go to work and get flour and provisions for their journey over the mountains."

On March 9th, the camp halted at Richardson's Point, fifty-five miles from Nauvoo. Brigham wrote back to his brother, Joseph, who had remained at Nauvoo to dispose of some of his property.

"It is a matter of doubt about any of the Twelve returning to Nauvoo very soon. It is not the place for me any more until this nation is scourged by the hand of the Almighty who rules in the heavens. . . . Do not think, brother Joseph, that I hate to leave my house and home. Far from that. I am so free from bondage at this time that Nauvoo looks like a prison house to me. It looks pleasant ahead, but dark to look back."

While still at Richardson's Point on March 16th, he wrote to Orson Hyde at Nauvoo:

"The severe rains of the tenth and eleventh produced so much mud and raised the water in the creek so high that it has not been wisdom for us to change our location," and then adding a bit of advice about the doctrines of James J. Strang, which were springing up at that time, he said, "Let Strangism alone. It is not worth the skin of a flea."

On March 18th, with Brigham at the head, the camp again moved forward. The weather was cold, with snow covering the ground. It was reckoned that about three thousand people were now in the caravan. There were no roads, only the trails in the soft mud of those who had gone ahead. At the small frontier settlements along the way, corn and cattle were traded for. William Clayton records that he traded his best set of dishes (which he had brought from England, no doubt) for provisions for his family. Progress was slow, sometimes only two or three miles a day. On March 23rd, Shoal Creek was reached, "in a hail storm." On March 27th, Brigham and the advance guard came to Chariton River and halted. Brigham computed that the camp had traveled, during the month of March, "about one hundred miles" with the roads "nearly impassable most of the time."

On April 1st the "Camp of Israel," as it was now generally known, moved forward again. Steady, persistent progress was being made. The camp journalist has a few notes worthy of being recorded here:

April 1st—Camp moved forward at 9 from Chariton Creek.

April 3rd—Arrived at Locust Creek.

April 4th—President Young rode down the creek in search of a dryer camp ground. He returned after dinner and decided to stay where he was. The President was engaged in the forepart of the day in cutting wood, and fixing about his tent.

April 6th—President Young was in the rain all day arranging the wagons, pitching tents and chopping wood until all were comfortable.

April 10th—President Young recommended to the captains of companies to select a steady, fatherly man in each tent to act as teacher and see that prayers were offered in their season in all the tents.

Sunday, April 19th—At a meeting of the camp, President Young said, "I have never felt a sweeter spirit than that which I have enjoyed since we started."

April 24th—The camp reached Grand River (Garden Grove) 150 miles from Nauvoo.

A halt of fourteen days was made at Garden Grove. It was decided here that a settlement should be made, and that crops should be planted for those who were to come along later. On Sunday, May 3rd, at the regular religious service, President Young spoke to the people of the caravan. "He referred to the travels of the brethren from place to place and how they would continue to be led about and wasted away unless they would be united and look after each other's cares and bear each other's burden." Speaking of himself he said, "I am reduced in flesh so that my coat that would scarcely meet around me last winter now laps over twelve inches." On May 5th, while at Garden Grove, the camp historian writes, "President Young shouldered his axe and engaged in chopping and raising the bridge until about 11 o'clock."

On May 13th, the camp left Garden Grove and started for the next location, which had been designated as Mount Pisgah, on the Grand River. This spot had been selected by Parley P. Pratt, who was traveling in advance of President Young. It was determined that a settlement should be made here also, and that crops should be planted for later companies of Saints. At a meeting held May 24th, at Mount Pisgah, the camp historian writes, "President Young addressed them and told the people that the time had come when he should command them what to do, inasmuch as they were not willing to harken to counsel."

While at Pisgah, Brigham and the brethren of the Twelve retired three miles from camp and offered prayer. "They returned with renewed assurances that the Lord was with them, and they were comforted." On June 21st, the caravan left Mount Pisgah, crossed the river, and after making slow but steady progress the succeeding twelve days, arrived on June 14th at the Indian Agency at Council Bluffs, on the Missouri River. Lacking one day, Brigham had been four months in crossing the State of Iowa. The first objective of the great march westward had been attained. Here on the Missouri River the Saints were to remain until a definite place for settlement had been selected "somewhere beyond the Rocky Mountains."

II

Arriving at the Missouri River, Brigham had no sooner pitched his tent and made camp than the startling news reached him that war had broken out between the United States and Mexico. On June 30th, Captain James Allen of the United States army, with headquarters at Fort Leavenworth, arrived in camp and asked for an interview with President Young. He bore a letter from General Kearney asking whether the Saints would enlist among their number, "four or five hundred able bodied men" to march into California, and take possession there. His argument was that the government would see the men through to the Pacific coast, pay them a small monthly sum, provide them rations and at the end of their journey give them their arms and accoutrements. From many a standpoint the arrangement looked favorable to Brigham, but he knew that the loss of this man power would greatly weaken his camp and that he would have a fearful responsibility in caring for the dependents who were left behind. After exacting a promise from Captain Allen that the Saints would be allowed to remain "on the Indian lands" while preparing for their westward journey, and after deliberating with the Twelve, he replied, dramatically, "Captain, you shall have your men." That is the history of the origin of the famous Mormon Battalion and their unparalleled march of 2,000 miles on foot, across the barren desolate waste of the southwestern part of the United States. Their accomplishment stands to this day as a mark of honor and fidelity to their Church and country.

On the afternoon of July 1st, in addressing the Saints at the Bluffs, Brigham said:

"I propose that five hundred volunteers be mustered, and I will do my best to see that all their families are brought forward, so far as my influence can be extended, and to feed them when I have anything to eat myself. Captain Allen has assumed the responsibility of saying that we may locate at Grand Island, until we can prosecute our journey. This is the first offer we have ever had from the government to benefit us."

Brigham immediately threw the weight of his influence into raising the required number of volunteers. Going about in his carriage among the camps of the Saints, he requested the men, wherever they could be spared, to enlist. He journeyed back over the trial 100 miles as far as Mount Pisgah, and worked incessantly until the 16th day of July, when the task was completed. On that day the camp journalist records "the Battalion was made up and mustered into service."

After the Battalion had marched away, between July 16th and 22nd, Brigham immediately began the task, which was one of the greatest he ever undertook, of organizing the thousands of Saints on both sides of the Missouri, into comfortable, or passable winter quarters. It was a task to dismay any but the strongest men. Here were between 3,000 and 4,000 men, women and children, (which number was to be increased before winter to 12,000) huddled together in wagons and tents, or with no shelter at all, facing a bitter winter on the prairie, with no help available or possible. What could be done? It was Brigham Young who encouraged them and told them that they would be able to take care of themselves and survive.

On Sunday, August 16th, at a meeting of the Saints on the west side of the river, he said, "that if the brethren would follow counsel, five years would not roll away before there would not be a poor man in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." It was at this time also that he declared, showing again his great leadership "that it will be wisdom and necessary to establish schools for the education of children during the coming winter in this region."

Worn out by incessant labors, Brigham took to his bed during the last week of August, but on the 28th he felt well enough to cross the river and address the Omaha Indians, who had assembled to hear his request that the Saints be allowed to remain on their lands while preparing for the westward journey. His speech to the Omahas is reported to us as follows:

"We are on our journey to California, and the United States has called on us for soldiers and left us without teamsters, and with your permission we would like to winter here. We can do you good. We will repair your guns, and make a farm for you, and aid you in any other way that our talents and circumstances will permit. We should also like to get some honorable men to watch our cattle. We will assist you for any favors you may be willing to confer on us. Can you furnish some one who will watch our cattle and keep them safe? Have you any objections to our getting timber, building houses and staying here until spring or longer? The government is willing if you are. Would you like to have some of our mechanics repair your guns? Do you feel disposed to be on amicable terms with us? Are you willing we should sow wheat here this fall and plant corn next year? I will be glad to have you express yourselves freely on these subjects."

Chief Big Elk of the Omahas, replied:

"My son, thou hast spoken well. I have all thou hast said in my heart. I have much I want to say. We are poor. When we go to hunt game in one place, we meet an enemy, and so in another place our enemies kill us. We do not kill them. I hope we will be friends. You may stay on these lands two years or more. Our young men may watch your cattle. We would be glad to have you trade with us. We will warn you of danger from other Indians."

I must not forget to mention, that it was here, on the banks of the Missouri, during the months of July and August, 1846, that Brigham made the acquaintance of a man who was destined to become his life-long, loyal friend, Colonel Thomas L. Kane. Colonel Kane had come west from his home in Philadelphia early in July with the intention of joining the Battalion in their march to California. But while the Battalion was being formed he became very ill with malaria fever and lay many weeks at the point of death. He was nursed back to life through the devotion and care of the Saints, and never forgot their kindness. We shall see later on in this narrative how he was able to do a great service for the Saints in another time of desperate need, and how in his old age he came to Utah and spent a winter pleasantly in St. George with President Young.

During the month of September of this year 1846, while the Battalion was marching away towards California in the service of their country, armed mobs were driving the remnant of the Saints out of Nauvoo, out of their own homes and from their own fields, with rifle and cannon. Brigham called for volunteers to go back to Nauvoo and bring the poor and stricken people to the camps of the Saints on the river and sent six of his own teams for this purpose. What should Brigham think of a government which would allow such outrages, while his own men were going forward as soldiers for the government to prosecute war in a foreign land?

It was during this same month of September that a selection was made of a suitable site for settlement of the Saints during the winter; a spot designated as "Winter Quarters" which was located about six miles north of the present city of Omaha. It was felt by Brigham and the brethren in charge that this location would perhaps be more suitable for the Saints than along the river bottoms where so many had been ill. On September 24th, President Young and others went to work surveying the streets and lots and blocks, and by the first of October settlers began to converge towards this point. Hundreds of men were at work chopping down trees and sawing logs and in an incredibly short time a miniature city raised itself in the wilderness. On September 12th in writing back to Nauvoo, Brigham said:

"Our present design is to settle our families at this point in such a manner that we can leave them one season or more if necessary, send out a company of able men with our best teams and seeds at the earliest moment in the ensuing spring for the Bear River Valley, find a location, plant our seeds and build our homes."

It will be noted from the above that Brigham had already determined in his mind that somewhere in the Salt Lake Valley or Bear River Valley he intended to locate.

Using his best endeavors to maintain friendly relations with the Omaha Indians, Brigham wrote the following letter on November 6th, to Chief Big Elk:

"Winter Quarters, Camp of Israel,

November 6th, 1846.

"To Big Elk, Chief of Omaha Indians,

"Brother: According to promise I send you by George D. Grant one barrel of powder and about one hundred pounds of lead to prepare for your hunt. May you prosper and get plenty of buffalo, and I want you to counsel your men not to kill any more cattle. If you want some guns repaired for your hunt, send me word when and where, by George, and I will try to get a smith to do something for you.

"From your brother,

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

On Sunday, November 8th, President Young met with the Presidents of Seventies at Winter Quarters "in my new house, with doors but with no windows, and with chimneys built of brick obtained from the ruins of the old fort at Council Bluffs."

In writing to Charles C. Rich at Mount Pisgah under date of November 15th, Brigham said:

"We are building a water mill near the camp to grind our own grain through the winter and also to grind the grain necessary for a fit out for the Pioneer company to start early next spring for a country west of the mountains. We consider it wisdom to leave our families here and none but able-bodied men go next season, and we are confident if we do this a company can start from here early enough to cross the mountains and be ready to put in summer crops, build houses, mills, etc., and thus prepare something tangible for our families and the Saints when they follow after."

By the first of December, when winter had settled down in earnest over the region of Winter Quarters, the Saints on the west side of the river were at least preserved from frost and cold. A total of 538 log houses and 83 sod houses, harboring 3,483 people, had been constructed within the space of two months. Brigham states that there was not "an hour of the day or night in which I could not hear the axe or the hammer or the saw."

On November 26th, Winter Quarters was divided into 22 wards with bishops over each. On Sunday, December 13th, in preaching to the people the Camp Historian records that President Young said as follows:

"He exhorted the High Council to faithfulness in their duties, told them to have a list of the bishops to read over and see that they attended meetings, and if not to drop them. For it would not do for the people to go into the wilderness and forget their God."

If ever there was a remarkable people, who did not "forget their God," it was this group of Latter-day Saints, under the leadership of Brigham Young, huddled together along the banks of the Missouri river in the winter of 1846 and 1847.
