Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER EIGHT

ON the morning of January 1st, 1847, a cannon was fired over the settlement at Winter Quarters betokening the arrival of a new year. It was a clear cold day. The thermometer registered two degrees below zero. But the Saints were holding their own against the elements and the health of the community generally, was better than it had been for some time. The 4th of January fell on Sunday, and during this day Brigham took occasion to write a letter to Elder Charles C. Rich who was in charge of the Saints at Mount Pisgah. Part of this letter I have copied as follows:

"Our Council met at Christmas and decided to send on a Pioneer company as early as possible, with plows, seeds, grain, etc., and make preparations for eatables at the foot of the mountains on this side and when the grass starts we will follow as many as can go. . . . Your name is among the number and we want you to go with us. . . . Gird up your loins, Brother Rich, put on your armor, cheer up your heart, and being filled with Almighty faith, prepare for the battle as fast as possible. If you are sick, be made well. If you are weak, be made strong. Shake yourself like a mighty man; make the forest echo to the sound of your voice and the prairies move at your presence. Teach the Saints wisdom and knowledge, that they may come to understanding, and exercise themselves in faith, patience, meekness, brotherly love, kindness, hope, charity and endurance unto the end and they shall be saved, and whether they remove from hence, this season or next, it mattereth not, for if they abide counsel it shall be well with them."

In this wonderful letter the true Brigham Young is made manifest. "Shake yourself like a mighty man." What a thrilling command, and how it would inspire its recipient. Also let the reader note the splendid injunctions which Brigham gave for teaching the Saints. How well he knew the necessary precepts which he should put forth as leader of the Church.

On January 7th, the cold had increased at Winter Quarters and the thermometer stood at eight degrees below zero. On this day Willard Richards in behalf of the "General Council" wrote a letter to Elders John Taylor and Orson Hyde in England, part of which is as follows:

"We have upwards of seven hundred houses in our miniature city, composed mostly of logs in the body covered with puncheon, straw and dirt, which are warm and wholesome; a few are composed of turf, willows, straw, etc., which are very comfortable this winter but will not endure the thaws, rain, or sunshine in spring like stone, burnt clay or even hickory." And then adding this fine tribute to the leadership and activities of Brigham he says, "Our President sleeps with one eye open and one foot out of bed and when anything is wanted he is on hand, and his counselors are all of one heart with him in all things."

On the 14th, after prayer and consultation with his brethren, Brigham dictated and gave out to the Saints at Winter Quarters, Section 136 in the Doctrine and Covenants known as "The Word and Will of the Lord, given through President Brigham Young, at the Winter Quarters of the Camp of Israel, Omaha Nation, west bank of the Missouri River near Council Bluffs, January 14th, 1847." In this revelation, a plan was set forth for organizing the people to journey over the mountains, and advice and counsel were given them which certainly stood for their temporal and spiritual salvation. Nothing more potent and beautiful ever came from the lips of Brigham Young than this revelation. I shall reproduce it in full:

"The word and will of the Lord concerning the Camp of Israel in their journeyings to the West.

Let all of the people of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and those who journey with them, be organized into companies, with a covenant and promise to keep all the commandments and statutes of the Lord our God.

Let the companies be organized with captains of hundreds, captains of fifties, and captains of tens, with a president and his two counselors at their head, under the direction of the Twelve Apostles. And this shall be our covenant, that we will walk in all the ordinances of the Lord.

Let each company provide themselves with all the teams, wagons, provisions, clothing and other necessaries for the journey that they can.

When the companies are organized, let them go to with their might, to prepare for those who are to tarry.

Let each company with their captains and presidents decide how many can go next spring; then choose out a sufficient number of able-bodied and expert men, to take teams, seeds, and farming utensils, to go as pioneers to prepare for putting in spring crops.

Let each company bear an equal proportion according to the dividend of their property, in taking the poor, the widows, the fatherless, and the families of those who have gone into the army that the cries of the widow and the fatherless come not up into the ears of the Lord against this people.

Let each company prepare houses, and fields for raising grain, for those who are to remain behind this season, and this is the will of the Lord concerning his people.

Let every man use all his influence and property to remove this people to the place where the Lord shall locate a stake of Zion;

And if ye do this with a pure heart, in all faithfulness, ye shall be blessed; you shall be blessed in your flocks, and in your fields, and in your houses, and in your families.

Let my servants, Ezra T. Benson and Erastus Snow organize a company;

And let my servants, Orson Pratt and Wilford Woodruff organize a company.

Also, let my servants, Amasa Lyman and George A. Smith organize a company;

And appoint presidents, and captains of hundreds, and of fifties, and of tens.

And let my servants that have been appointed go and teach this my will to the Saints, that they may be ready to go to a land of peace.

Go thy way and do as I have told you, and fear not thine enemies; for they shall not have power to stop my work.

Zion shall be redeemed in mine own due time.

And if any man shall seek to build up himself, and seeketh not my counsel, he shall have no power and his folly shall be made manifest.

Seek ye and keep all your pledges one with another, and covet not which is thy brother's.

Keep yourselves from evil to take the name of the Lord in vain, for I am the Lord your God, even the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob.

I am he who led the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt, and my arm is stretched out in the last days to save my people Israel.

Cease to contend one with another, cease to speak evil one of another.

Cease drunkenness, and let your words tend to edifying one another.

If thou borrowest of thy neighbor, thou shalt return that which thou hast borrowed; and if thou canst not repay, then go straightway and tell thy neighbor, lest he condemn thee.

If thou shalt find that which thy neighbor has lost, thou shalt make diligent search till thou shalt deliver it to him again.

Thou shalt be diligent in preserving what thou hast, that thou mayest be a wise steward; for it is the free gift of the Lord thy God, and thou art his steward.

If thou art merry, praise the Lord with singing, with music, with dancing, and with a prayer of praise and thanksgiving.

If thou art sorrowful, call on the Lord thy God with supplication, that your souls may be joyful.

Fear not thine enemies, for they are in mine hands, and I will do my pleasure with them.

My people must be tried in all things, that they may be prepared to receive the glory that I have for them, even the glory of Zion and he that will not bear chastisement is not worthy of my kingdom.

Let him that is ignorant learn wisdom by humbling himself and calling upon the Lord his God, that his eyes may be opened that he may see, and his ears opened that he may hear.

For my Spirit is sent forth into the world to enlighten the humble and contrite, and to the condemnation of the ungodly.

Thy brethren have rejected you and your testimony, even the nation that has driven you out;

And now cometh the day of their calamity, even the days of sorrow, like a woman that is taken in travail; and their sorrow shall be great, unless they speedily repent; yea, very speedily.

For they killed the prophets, and them that were sent unto them, and they have shed innocent blood, which crieth from the ground against them.

Therefore marvel not at these things for ye are not pure; ye cannot yet bear my glory; but ye shall behold it if ye are faithful in keeping all my words that I have given you from the days of Adam to Abraham; from Abraham to Moses; from Moses to Jesus and his apostles; and from Jesus and his apostles to Joseph Smith, whom I did call upon by mine angels, my ministering servants; and by mine own voice out of the heavens to bring forth my work.

Which foundation he did lay, and was faithful and I took him to myself.

Many have marveled because of his death, but it was needful that he should seal his testimony with his blood, that he might be honored, and the wicked might be condemned.

Have I not delivered you from your enemies, only in that I have left a witness of my name?

Now, therefore, hearken, O ye people of my Church; and ye elders listen together; you have received my kingdom.

Be diligent in keeping all my commandments, lest judgment come upon you, and your faith fail you, and your enemies triumph over you. So no more at present. Amen and Amen."

The "Word and Will of the Lord" was read to the Saints at Winter Quarters and in the surrounding branches and approved and accepted by them. It was Horace Eldredge who remarked of this revelation, that it proved to be "the temporal salvation of the Saints."

II

On Monday the 18th of January, the thermometer at Winter Quarters registered 20 degrees below zero, which was the coldest day of winter. The same evening President Young preached to a group of Saints at the log Council House. Among other things "he warned all that intended to proceed to the mountains, that iniquity would not be tolerated in the camp of Israel. . . . He knew that every man who put forth his means to build up this kingdom would receive an hundred fold."

On the evening of the 23rd a celebration and dance was held in the Council House. The camp historian records the event as follows:

"President Young told the brethren and sisters he would show them how to go forth in the dance in an acceptable manner before the Lord. President Young then knelt down and prayed to God in behalf of the meeting, imploring his blessings upon those present and dedicating the meeting and house to the Lord. At the sound of music the President then led forth in the dance."

President Young knew the value of recreation to the Saints and more than one entertainment was indulged in in the Council House during this lonely winter on the banks of the Missouri, but it is beautiful to see that in all his activities he carried on, "as ever in his great Task-Master's eye."

During the early part of February, wagons were being made ready for the trip over the mountains and supplies were being gathered to be taken on the journey. On February 18th, Brigham, in writing to his nephew Feramorz Little at St. Louis, said, "the Saints are enjoying peace at Winter Quarters and making every preparation they can to move in the spring; and they are anxiously awaiting the time when they can once more settle down in some lone valley and quietly enjoy the fruits of their labors." On the same day, in writing a letter to Joseph A. Stratton at St. Louis, he said, "I want you to bring me one-half dozen of Mitchell's new map of Texas, Oregon and California and the regions adjoining, or his accompaniment to the same for 1846, or rather the latest edition and best map of all the Indian countries in North America. The pocket maps are best for our use. If there is anything later or better than Mitchell's bring it. I want the best."

Under date of February 26th, he wrote to Elder Jesse C. Little in Boston:

"I expect to start for the mountains before you arrive, as it is necessary for a pioneer company to be on the way as early as possible to insure crops ahead, and I know of no better way than for me to go with the company, and if the brethren love me as I do them, they will not be long behind. I feel like a father with a great family of children around me, in a winter storm, and I am looking with calmness, confidence and patience, for the clouds to break and the sun to shine, so that I can run out and plant and sow and gather in the corn and wheat and say, Children, come home, winter is approaching again and I have homes and wood and flour and meal and meat and potatoes and squashes and onions and cabbages and all things in abundance, and I am ready to kill the fatted calf and make a joyful feast to all who will come and partake."

This letter, written simply and frankly as it is, reveals, as well as any document I have found, the great, true heart of the man. Brigham now felt his leadership, wholly and completely, and the Saints, who in their trials and troubles, were driven almost to desperation, had found in him an early protector, and a father. "Children, come home, winter is approaching. I will kill the fatted calf and make a feast for you." No wonder the Saints come to lean upon him and worship at his word.

Closing the letter to Elder Little, and referring to the situation of the Saints at Winter Quarters, he continued:

"We have done all we could here and are satisfied it will be all right in the end, for we are sure our Father will do all that is necessary to be done, when the strength of his children fails."

Meantime, preparations for the journey "over the mountains" went on with unabated diligence. Under date of March 3rd, the camp historian writes, that:

"Accompanied by his brother Joseph, President Young went to the office. His brother thought one hundred pounds of provisions very little for each pioneer. President Young said he did not want any to go who had not faith to start with that amount."

As the time approached, to begin the long, fearsome journey, Brigham more and more felt the weight of his responsibility, and his dependence on the God of Heaven. On Sunday, March 14th, he preached to the Saints at Winter Quarters as follows:

"President Young instructed the brethren to cease dancing and commence prayer meetings and administer the sacrament. . . . He asked them to pray for him and his brethren, that they might be able to bear off the Kingdom of God triumphantly."

No one realized better than he did the great responsibility of finding out a home for the Saints, "in some secluded valley of the Rocky Mountains," and of conveying there, twelve to fifteen thousand poor people in safety.

Brigham felt some considerable concern for those who were being left at Winter Quarters, as they were dangerously near their old enemies in Missouri. He said on March 24th:

"If mob violence should render it necessary for all to remove, take your cows, put your loads on their backs, and fasten your children on top. Where the Saints do all they can, the Lord will do the rest."

And now, with the approach of warm April weather, the great and historic journey westward was about to begin.
