Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER NINE

ON Monday, April 5th, 1847, six teams belonging to Heber C. Kimball, under the command of able teamsters, and equipped for a long journey, moved leisurely out of Winter Quarters, and traveled in a westerly direction about four miles, where they camped for the night. These teams were to form the nucleus for the Pioneer company which, under the leadership of Brigham Young, was to journey to the Rocky Mountains and search out a harbor of safety, a resting place, a place of refuge for the Latter-day Saints.

On Wednesday, April 7th, Brigham Young, Orson Pratt and Wilford Woodruff arrived on the camping ground with their accompanying men and teams, which brought together about twenty-five wagons, with as many men. President Young remained at the camp one night, but the following day he returned to Winter Quarters to meet with Apostle Parley P. Pratt, who had just arrived from England. Elder Pratt brought money and valuable astronomical instruments which were greatly needed for the journey.

The following day, Friday, about 3 p. m., President Young arrived in camp again and gave orders for the wagons to move forward. The great march had begun. There were now sixty-four wagons and carriages in camp. [^1] One by one they got under way, and the journey continued until 7:30 p. m. when they "encamped for the night in the open prairie." The camp historian relates that "President Young and Elders Kimball and Richards went to work cutting grass for their cattle with knives." On Saturday, April 10th, the Elkhorn river was reached and on the Monday following President Young returned again to Winter Quarters to confer with Elder John Taylor, who had also lately arrived from England. In the evening Brigham dictated a letter to Orson Spencer, who had been left in England to preside over the European mission. Part of the same follows:

"We left sixty-nine pioneer wagons and teams on the west side of the Elkhorn this morning, prosecuting their journey for the Great Basin, in search of a location for a stake of Zion. We expect to overtake them in two or three days, and point the site as the Spirit dictates, and return in the spring following, to take out our families."

On Wednesday, April 14th, Brigham again joined the camp on the Elkhorn. They now numbered one hundred forty-three men, three women and two children. The following evening the camp historian relates, "President Young called the Pioneer camp together and addressed the members on the necessity of being faithful, humble, and prayerful on the journey. He also exhorted the camp to vigilance and informed the men that he had intimations to the effect that the Pawnee Indians had been advised by enemies of the Saints to rob the camp. The President advised the pioneers to go to bed early, to rest on the Sabbath, and to act in a manner that they could claim the blessings of heaven."

Two days later, at an encampment on the Platte river, Brigham again addressed his fellow travelers:

"After we start from this point, every man must carry his loaded gun or else have it in his wagon where he can seize it at a moment's notice. If the gun is a cap lock, he should take off the cap and put on a piece of leather to exclude the moisture and dirt; if a flint lock he must take out the priming and fill the pan with tow or cotton. The wagons must now keep together while traveling and not separate as heretofore. Every man is to keep beside his wagon and is not to leave it except by permission."

Thus, almost in military formation and under the guiding genius of Brigham Young, the Pioneers moved out across the plains towards the setting sun.

I find on looking closely into the records of this trip, that Brigham rode horseback most of the way, at the head of his caravan, to select the safest and most feasible route. He led the way; always in the foreground; a natural leader. Day after day the camp journalist records:

"President Young rode on ahead to select the route for the camp."

Progress was slow but steady, from five to twenty miles a day being made, Sundays excepted. Early in the morning a bugle would sound. The brethren would arise, prepare their breakfasts, harness their teams or yoke up their oxen, and then push forward. They traveled entirely along the north bank of the Platte, making their own road. On April 21st, they halted in sight of the "Pawnee Village," where, fearing the Indians might commit some depredations, a strong guard was maintained throughout the night, Brigham himself standing with gun in hand until midnight. On Sunday, April 25th, they halted and held services. The camp journalist records that, "President Young gave some instructions in reference to the folly of conforming to gentile customs on an expedition of this nature." On May 4th, they met with some trappers from the west, returning to St. Louis with furs. One, Charles Beaumont, a Frenchman, consented to carry letters back to the brethren at Winter Quarters, and Brigham wrote a few items and instructions to those who were to follow:

"We are about two hundred fifty miles from Winter Quarters according to our reckoning, and from five to ten above the head of Grand Island. . . . The brethren are well, and never was a company more united in the best of feelings.

And then this advice to those who were to follow:

. . . . Organize and keep up strict discipline; bring all the cannon and take care of yourselves."

About the middle of May the camp came upon great herds of buffalo grazing peacefully upon the hills, moving northward slowly, and it was with difficulty that Brigham restrained the brethren from killing numbers of them for the sport that was in it. He summoned the camp about him on May 18th, and requested them "not to kill any more game as we have more on hand now than we can take care of. . . . There are men among us in responsible positions who care no more for the interest of the camp than the horses they ride. The spirit of the hunter, as now manifested, will lead them to kill all the game within a thousand miles."

Pushing steadily forward, they arrived on the 26th at Chimney Rock, which later became a famous land mark on the old Pioneer Trail.

Three days beyond Chimney Rock, Brigham called the camp around him and gave them a very vivid and pointed talk on their behavior as "servants of God going forth to seek out a resting place for the Saints."

In his history, Brigham describes the meeting as follows:

"I called the camp together and remonstrated with those brethren who were giving way to trifling, dancing, and card playing. I warned them in the name of the Lord against the spirit which many of the camp possessed, and called upon them to cease their folly and turn to the Lord their God, with full purpose of heart to serve him. The brethren of the Twelve, the High Priests, the Bishops, the Seventies, all covenanted to humble themselves, repent of their follies and remember their former covenants. I then told the few who did not belong to the Church that they were not at liberty to introduce cards, dancing or iniquity of any description, but they should be protected in their rights and privileges while they conducted themselves well and did not seek to trample on the priesthood nor blaspheme the name of God."

After this great speech, which is given in full in Clayton's journal, the camp traveled along in a subdued manner for several days. They knew they had a master at their head.

II

On June 1st, Brigham's forty-sixth birthday, the caravan came in sight of Fort Laramie. William Clayton computed that the distance between Winter Quarters and Fort Laramie was five hundred forty-three and one-fourth miles, which they had made in seven weeks, lacking one-half day. He records further: "We have been prosperous on our journey. The camps are all in better health than when we left Winter Quarters and we see daily that the Lord directs the movements of this camp as seemeth Him good."

Under date of June 2nd, at Laramie, Brigham wrote a letter to the Saints at Pueblo (Colorado), the Mississippi Company, and the Battalion members who had wintered there. He asked them to follow the pioneers, and,

"If experience has not already taught you, we would say, keep a sharp lookout for buffalo, Indians and bears, all of which may be met and endanger the life and liberty of men, women and children, beasts and property. Be wise, and watch as well as pray continually, and having done all you possibly can, and exercised all the skill, wisdom and prudence and care and strength that you possess, should you be overtaken with accidents or losses of any kind, take the spoil thereof patiently and cheerfully, and murmur not for Christ's sake. Let the unity of the Spirit and brotherly love abide in every heart, be made manifest in every action and reciprocated by every word, and our blessings, and the blessings of our Heavenly Father shall abide with you continually and you shall prosper."

It was now necessary for the brethren to cross the Platte and pursue their journey on the south side of the river. The ferrying was accomplished on June 4th. Under this date Brigham writes: "I visited Mr. James Bordeaux at the Fort and paid him $15.00 for the use of the flat boat. He said this was the most civil and best behaved company that had ever passed the Fort."

After leaving Ft. Laramie the brethren continued their journey, traveling near two small companies of Missourians who were on their way to Oregon. One week after leaving Laramie they reached the second difficult crossing of the Platte. Here they were forced to construct rafts to ferry over and remained until the 19th. Nothing further of special interest transpired until June 28th, when on the headwaters of the Sweetwater river, James, or Jim Bridger, as he was familiarly known, rode into camp. Bridger was one of the picturesque characters of the West; perhaps the greatest scout of all. As trapper, scout, guide and trader, he had roamed the western country for twenty-five years. Among his many accomplishments he is reported to have been the first white man to look upon the waters of the Great Salt Lake. Brigham tersely records his meeting with Bridger as follows:

"Met Captain James Bridger who said he was ashamed of Fremont's Map of this country. Bridger considered it imprudent to bring a large population into the Great Basin until it was ascertained that grain could be raised; he said he would give one thousand dollars for a bushel of corn raised in the Basin."

William Clayton, one of the pioneers who was present at this interview with Bridger, gives a more extensive account of it in his journal under date of June 28th, as follows:

"We then proceeded on, expecting to go about eight miles farther, but after traveling a little over a mile we were met by Elder George A. Smith who introduced us to Mr. Bridger of Bridger's Fort, on his way to Fort John in company with two of his men. Mr. Bridger being informed that we had designed to call at his place to make some inquiries about the country, etc., he said if we would turn off the road here and camp, he would stay with us till morning. A camping place being selected we turned off from the road about a quarter of a mile and formed our encampment near the Sandy at six o'clock, having traveled this afternoon one and three-quarters miles, exclusive of allowance for leaving the road, and during the day fifteen and a quarter miles. We have pretty good feed here, enough to fill the teams well. A while after we camped, the Twelve and others went to Mr. Bridger to make some inquiries concerning our future route, the country, etc. It was impossible to form a correct idea of either from the very imperfect and irregular way he gave his descriptions, but the general items are in substance as follows:

"We will find better grass as we proceed farther on. His business is to Fort Laramie. His traders have gone there with robes, skins, etc., to fill a contract, but having started later than they intended the men at Laramie have taken advantage of the delay and he is going to see to the business himself. There is no blacksmith shop at his fort at present. There was one but it was destroyed. There have been nearly a hundred wagons gone on the Hastings route through Weber's Fork. They cross the Blacks Fork and go a little south of west from his place and pass below the mountains which cross Green River. . . . From Bridger's Fort to the Salt Lake, Hastings said, was about one hundred miles. He has been through fifty times but can form no correct idea of the distance. Mr. Hastings' route leaves the Oregon route at his place. We can pass the mountains farther south, but in some places we would meet with heavy bodies of timber and would have to cut our way through. In the Bear River valley there is oak timber, sugar trees, cottonwood, pine and maple. There is not an abundance of sugar maple but plenty of as splendid pine as he ever saw. There is no timber on the Utah Lake only on the streams which empty into it. In the outlet of the Utah Lake which runs into the Salt Lake there is an abundance of blue grass and red and white clover. The outlet of the Utah Lake does not form a large river, neither a rapid current but the water is muddy and low banks. Some of his men have been around the Salt Lake in canoes. They went out hunting and had their horses stolen by the Indians. They then went around the lake in canoes hunting beaver and were three months going around it. They said it was five hundred fifty miles around it. The Utah tribe of Indians inhabit the region around the Utah Lake and are a bad people. If they catch a man alone they are sure to rob and abuse him if they don't kill him, but parties of men are in no danger. They are mostly armed with guns. There was a man opened a farm in the Bear River valley. The soil is good and likely to produce corn were it not for the excessive cold nights which he thinks would prevent the growth of corn."

Thus went the account of Captain James Bridger, who perhaps was better acquainted with the western country than any other man, and yet he was willing to offer $1,000 for the first bushel of corn grown in the Great Basin. In later years Brigham was fond of telling this story and of describing his own reactions to Bridger's statements. On June 7th, 1860, at Wellsville, Utah, he said:

"Until the Latter-day Saints came here, not a person among all the mountaineers and those who had traveled here, so far as we could learn, believed that an ear of corn would ripen in these valleys. We now know that corn and wheat produce abundantly here, and we know that we have an excellent region wherein to raise cattle, horses, and every other kind of domestic animal that we need. We also knew this when we came here thirteen years ago this summer. Bridger said to me, 'Mr. Young, I would give a thousand dollars if I knew that an ear of corn could be ripened in these mountains. I have been here twenty years, and have tried it in vain, over and over again.' I told him if he would wait a year or two we would show him what could be done."

No better example of Brigham's faith is known to me in all his history than this event. Here he was, face to face with one who knew the intermountain region better, perhaps, than any other man; he had wandered through it for a quarter of a century; and his words to Brigham were that the very valley he was intending to settle his people in would not grow corn. But Brigham's faith told him, although he had never seen the "Great Basin," that Bridger was wrong. Brigham had a certain knowledge, built upon his mighty faith, that the people of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, over whom he presided, would not perish, but would grow and become strong in the recesses of the Rocky Mountains.

III

On June 30th, two days after the visit of Bridger, the brethren arrived at the crossing of Green river. Here young Samuel Brannan rode into camp from California and related to Brigham his story of his long trip around Cape Horn and his forming a settlement at San Francisco bay. Brannan did everything within his power to persuade President Young to continue on to California, but the President had set his plans to halt in "some secluded valley in the Great Basin," and he was not to be changed. Speaking about this incident some years later, he said:

"When the pioneer company reached Green River we met Samuel Brannan and a few others from California, and they wanted us to go there. I remarked: 'Let us go to California, and we cannot stay there over five years; but let us stay in the mountains, and we can raise our own potatoes and eat them; and I calculate to stay here.'"

One week beyond the crossing of Green river, on July 7th the brethren arrived at Fort Bridger on Black's Fork. Here they remained until the 9th, trading with the Indians and repairing their wagons. Continuing, they arrived on the 12th at the crossing of Bear river. Under this date, Howard Egan records:

"President Young was taken sick this forenoon. After resting two hours, all the camp, except eight wagons, proceeded on their journey. President Young, not being able to go on, Brother Kimball's three wagons remained behind."

This was the beginning of Brigham's attack of "mountain fever," which delayed his entrance into Salt Lake valley. He was forced to remain in his wagon at the Bear river for three days, until he felt well enough to be transferred to Wilford Woodruff's carriage, and journey slowly forward on the afternoon of the 15th. On the Weber river, two days later, the camp halted again, "in consequence of President Young being too ill to travel." The following day:

"The camp was called together before breakfast, at Dr. Richards' wagon when Brother Kimball addressed them. He told them that President Young was very sick, and it was his mind that the brethren should stay in the camp and not go out hunting or fishing, but have a meeting, and offer up our prayers in behalf of President Young and others who were sick and afflicted. It was motioned that the brethren meet at ten a.m., the meeting to be conducted by the bishops. We had a very good meeting.

"It was decided that the camp move on in the morning, except a few wagons to remain with Brother Young; and the first good place they could find they were to put in seeds, such as potatoes, in order to save the seed—buckwheat and all kinds that would grow this season of the year."

On the 20th, Howard Egan records: "President Young's health continues to improve and it is thought best to travel in the cool of the morning, so we started about 5:30." On the afternoon of the 23rd, Brigham, still riding in Wilford Woodruff's carriage, was able from the summit of Big Mountain, to catch his first glimpse of Salt Lake valley. His record of that day states:

"I ascended and crossed over Big Mountain; when on its summit I directed Elder Woodruff, who had kindly tendered me the use of his carriage, to turn the same half way round, so that I could have a view of a portion of Salt Lake valley. The spirit of light rested upon me and moved over the valley, and I felt that there the Saints would find protection and safety."

Years later, in a sermon delivered at Salt Lake City, (July 24th, 1880), Wilford Woodruff gives us this dramatic account of Brigham's entrance into the Salt Lake valley on July 24th, 1847:

"On the twenty-fourth I drove my carriage, with President Young lying on a bed in it, into the open valley, the rest of the company following. When we came out of the canyon, into full view of the valley, I turned the side of my carriage around, open to the west, and President Young arose from his bed and took a survey of the country. While gazing on the scene before us, he was enwrapped in vision for several minutes. He had seen the valley before in vision, and upon the occasion he saw the future glory of Zion and Israel, as they would be, planted in the valleys of the mountains. When the vision had passed, he said, 'It is enough. This is the right place. Drive on.' So I drove to the encampment already formed by those who had come along in advance of us."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. A word of explanation should be given here about the difference between wagons and carriages, which terms were often used interchangeably by the brethren. The carriage of the day was really a light strong wagon, such as President Young's carriage now on exhibition in the Utah State Capitol.
