Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER TEN

IT is entirely characteristic of Brigham Young that he did not claim any honor for having led the pioneers into Salt Lake Valley. For the deliverance of the Saints from their enemies and for their establishment in these peaceful habitations he gave credit to a higher power. In a sermon on August 21st, 1856, he said:

"I do not wish men to understand that I had anything to do with our being moved here; that was the providence of the Almighty, it was the power of God that wrought out salvation for this people. I never could have devised such a plan."

It is true that the Prophet Joseph conceived the idea of locating the Saints "in the midst of the Rocky Mountains," but it fell to Brigham's lot to carry out that vast plan and from the death of the Prophet until that memorable 24th day of July, 1847, the accomplishment of this object was continuously in his mind.

The day after Brigham's arrival in Salt Lake Valley, July 25th, fell on Sunday, consequently there was no work done by the brethren. It was a day of much needed rest, both for men and animals, at the conclusion of their one thousand mile journey from Winter Quarters. Two meetings were held at the camp during the day. At the one in the afternoon, Brigham, though still feeble and scarcely able to stand on his feet, addressed a few words to the brethren. They are reported to us by Wilford Woodruff:

"He told the brethren that they must not work on Sunday; that they would lose five times as much as they would gain by it. None were to hunt on that day; and there should not any man dwell among us who would not observe these rules. They might go and dwell where they pleased, but should not dwell with us. He also said that no man who came here should buy land, that he had none to sell, but every man should have his land measured out to him for city or farming purposes. He might till it as he pleased, but he must be industrious and take care of it."

The immediate proposition now before the brethren was to explore the valley and its surroundings where they had chosen to make their homes. Accordingly on Monday, the 26th, Brigham, with a few of his brethren, mounted horseback, climbed to the top of what is now known as Ensign Peak, where they were afforded an excellent view of the valley. On the following morning they journeyed towards the Salt Lake, in which, later in the day, they bathed, then continued on to what is now known as Tooele valley. They camped there for the night, returning to headquarters on City Creek the following day, Wednesday, the 28th. His record for this day states:

"Some of the brethren talked about exploring the country further for a site for a settlement. I replied that I was willing that the country should be explored until all were satisfied, but every time a party went out and returned I believe firmly they would agree that this is the spot for us to locate."

It was on this same afternoon, when, walking between the forks of City Creek with some of the brethren, that Brigham remarked, "Here is the site for the Temple. The city can be laid out perfectly square, north and south, east and west."

"Here is the site for a Temple." How inspiring to consider that, today, the magnificent Mormon temple, in all its grandeur, stands upon this very spot.

During the evening, at a meeting of the camp, Brigham stated further "that he was determined to have all things in order, and righteousness should be practiced in the land. We had come here according to the direction and counsel of Brother Joseph, before his death, and Joseph would still have been alive if the Twelve had been in Nauvoo when he re-crossed the river from Montrose." It was also voted at this meeting that the city should be laid out in ten acre blocks, eight lots to the block and that the streets should be eight rods wide.

On Thursday, the 29th, Brigham with a few of his brethren rode to the mouth of Emigration Canyon to meet the on-coming Battalion members, numbering about one hundred forty, who had wintered in Pueblo. Brigham felt very kindly towards these men and appreciated the sacrifices they had made. Speaking to them on the evening of the 30th, the camp journalist records:

"President Young directed his remarks more particularly to the soldiers. He considered that the brethren of the Battalion had been the means of saving the Saints from destruction, and felt kindly disposed towards them for the sacrifices they had made."

Sunday, August 1st, Brigham was ill again and remained all day in bed in his wagon. He had not entirely recovered from his attack of "mountain-fever." Meantime the activity of exploring the valley continued and preparations were being made for the welfare of the on-coming Saints, hundreds of whom were on the plains, wending their way wearily towards Salt Lake Valley. On August 2nd, writing a letter back to Charles C. Rich, who was with his company of emigrants, somewhere near Fort Laramie, Brigham said:

"Would circumstances permit, we would gladly meet you some distance from this, but our time is very much occupied, notwithstanding we think you will see us before you see our valley. Let all the brethren and sisters cheer up their hearts, and know assuredly that God has heard and answered their prayers, and ours, and led us to a goodly land."

II

On the 6th of August, President Young proposed to his brethren of the Twelve and other members of the camp, that they renew their covenants by baptism, and accordingly a small dam was built in City Creek which formed a reservoir.

"Towards evening," Wilford Woodruff writes, "President Young went down into the water and baptized all his brethren of the Twelve present. He then confirmed us and sealed upon us our apostleship, and all the keys, powers and blessings belonging to that office."

The example set by the Twelve in "renewing their covenants by baptism," was followed by nearly all the pioneers in the valley.

On Saturday, August 7th, Brigham selected his homesite in the proposed city, choosing "the block east of the Temple." Here subsequently he did make his home, and it stands firm and strong, even to this day.

The following day, Sunday, Brigham addressed a letter to the members of the Battalion in California. This letter was to be carried back to California by Captain James Brown and Samuel Brannan, who were about to start on horseback for the San Francisco Bay region:

"When you receive this and learn of our location, it will be wisdom for you all, if you have got your discharge as we suppose, to come directly to this place, where you will learn particularly who is here. If there are any men who have not families among your number, who desire to stop in California for a season, we do not feel to object; yet we do feel that it will be better for them to come directly to this place, for here will be our headquarters for the present, and our dwelling place, as quick as we can go and bring up our families which we have left behind this season for the purpose of bringing on yours that you might meet them here; and we want to see you, even all of you, and talk with you, and throw our arms around you and kill the fatted calf and make merry. Yes, brethren, we want to rejoice with you once more."

The following eighteen days that Brigham remained in the valley he devoted to physical labor, working from daylight till dark on the construction of four small adobe houses or rooms which were to be part of the fort. During this time the pioneers who were anxious to return to Winter Quarters in order to get their families, began to depart in small or large groups. To Shadrack Roundy, who was in charge of one group, Brigham said:

"Do not give way to an over anxious spirit so that your spirits arrive at Winter Quarters before the time that your bodies can possibly arrive there . . . let your cattle rest and fill themselves, that they may be prepared to go over the barren portion of the country."

The last Sunday that Brigham was in the valley, August 22nd, he called the camp about him and gave them some good practical advice, which was so characteristic of him.

"I wish this people may grow and increase and become a great nation, but you do not know what dangers surround you at present. It is necessary that the adobe yard be secured so that Indians cannot get in. To accommodate those few who shall remain after we return, it would only be necessary to build one side of the fort, but common sense teaches us to build it all around. By and by men of means will be coming along, and they will want rooms, and the men who build them, will be entitled to their pay. Make your walls four and one-half feet high, so that they can keep the cattle out. Build your houses so that you will have plenty of fresh air in them, or some of you will get sick, after being used to sleeping in your wagons so long. . . . We desire you to live in the stockade until we come back again and raise grain next year."

By the 26th of August, the four adobe houses being sufficiently completed to form a crude shelter, Brigham moved in some of the members of his family, his few "effects" that he had brought with him, mounted his horse in front of his door yard, called out "good-bye to all who tarry. I feel well," and rode away towards Emigration canyon, beginning his one thousand mile return journey to Winter Quarters. His great task of selecting a location for the Saints was completed.
