Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER ELEVEN

NOW that Brigham Young had succeeded in locating a place of refuge, a harbor of safety, for the Saints, in the beautiful Salt Lake valley, "which," he said, "is to be our headquarters until the Lord commands us to go elsewhere," it was his desire to return to the settlements on the Missouri river as rapidly as possible. He intended to take the winter there to wind up his affairs, and then, with his brethren, "bring out our families in the spring."

Reaching the rendezvous on the Bear river the fourth day out from Salt Lake valley, Brigham, with the members of the Twelve who accompanied him, all riding horseback, made camp and organized the returning brethren. The entire company consisted of one hundred three men, thirty-six wagons, forty-two horses and thirty-five mules, which was a considerably smaller number than the one which had left Winter Quarters in the spring. It was here on the Bear river that Ezra T. Benson, who had been sent back by President Young to find out how many of the Saints were on the plains, rode into camp and presented the names of between thirteen and fifteen hundred who were making the toilsome journey westward towards Salt Lake valley.

Leaving the camp on Bear river on the morning of the 31st of August, Brigham and the returning brethren pushed rapidly forward and by night reached Fort Bridger. The following morning they were up early again, and by forced marches, reached Hamm's fork in the evening, a distance of thirty-two miles. Two days later, on the Big Sandy, "we met Daniel Spencer's company, consisting of about fifty wagons." This was the first company following the Pioneers in the great exodus of the Saints from the Missouri river. Brigham, Heber C. Kimball and others addressed the members of the camp in the evening, gave them a description of Salt Lake valley, and advised them how to proceed. Traveling seven miles farther, the next day, Sept. 4th, they met Parley P. Pratt's company, consisting of seventy wagons and camped for the night with them. It was learned that Elder Pratt had not followed the instructions left by the brethren at Winter Quarters for those who were to pursue their journey across the plains, but had formed methods and plans of his own. The camp historian relates:

"President Young sharply reproved Parley P. Pratt. Among other things he said: 'When we set apart one or more of the Twelve to go and do a certain work, they will be blessed in doing that work, and the quorum will back up what they do. But when one or more of the quorum interfere with the work of the majority, they burn their fingers and do wrong . . . President Young said further that he felt the weight of eternity resting upon him, being overburdened with work and responsibilities.'"

On Sept. 5th, the brethren continued on twenty-four miles to Pacific Springs where they met the third group of emigrants bound for the valley, led by John Taylor. There was a joyful meeting, some of the returning brethren finding their families in this company. On the 7th there was a slight snowstorm in the morning, but this did not deter the ardor of the emigrants, who had decided to give President Young and his fellow travelers a dinner. What could be more appropriate after the stirring and trying months of the past summer? Brigham relates:

"We sat down to a feast of roast and boiled beef, pies, cakes, biscuits, etc. The ceremonies of the afternoon concluded with a dance which passed off in fine style to the satisfaction of all parties."

John Taylor, who had charge of the event, related some years later:

"We felt as though it was a time to rejoice. Our hearts were gladdened and we prepared a feast for them, and spread a table in the wilderness, on the tops of the mountains, at which one hundred thirty of them sat down to partake. We mutually felt edified and rejoiced. We praised the Lord and blessed one another and in the morning we separated, they to pursue their weary course, and we to come to our present location."

After "the feast in the wilderness," the pioneers pushed on twelve miles and came to the Jedediah M. Grant company. As this was the last company of emigrating Saints, Brigham dictated a long letter of instructions and advice to the Saints in the Salt Lake valley. There is one paragraph of this remarkable letter that I desire to reproduce here. It touches on a subject which was always dear to Brigham's heart, the training and teaching of children. He writes:

"As soon as you are located within the fort let a sufficient number of rooms be appropriated for schools, furnished with the best teachers, or furnish your children with teachers at home, and give every child among you an opportunity of commencing his education anew, and see that he attends to it, and that individual who has the opportunity to educate his children and does not, is not worthy to have children. Teach your children the principles of the kingdom, that they may grow up in righteousness."

The following morning, September 9th, the brethren were due to a bitter disappointment. During the night a band of Sioux Indians had run off twenty-eight of their horses, which they had left rather carelessly unguarded "feeling a sense of security." The camp historian writes:

"The brethren in order to continue the journey divided up the remainder of the animals between them and a number of horses that had been brought along loose were harnessed up. By this, President Young, H. C. Kimball and a few other brethren who had been accustomed to ride horseback were debarred of that privilege."

Brigham, with his characteristic leadership and energy, said: "I called upon all the returning brethren, except the teamsters, to take a walk with me to Winter Quarters." Winter Quarters was about seven hundred miles eastward and the journey was through desolate, Indian-infested country, but Brigham, with his riding horse gone, was ready to walk, if there were no other way to get there.

Despite the loss of their horses, the brethren now pushed along steadily, making from fifteen to twenty-five miles a day. On the 18th there is a record of this event:

"After camping in the evening, President Young, H. C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Ezra T. Benson, and others, had quite an interesting encounter with a bear, which after being wounded by some of the brethren, turned upon them and they found it necessary to retreat in great haste to a neighboring cliff."

On the 24th, the brethren reached Fort Laramie, where President Young immediately called upon the proprietor, Mr. Bordeaux, requesting his support in the recovery of the stolen horses. Bordeaux held out little hope for finding the Indians and taking the animals away from them, but agreed, when the Indians came to the Fort to trade, he would see what could be done.

The situation with the brethren was now more or less desperate, as they were short of both food and horses. On October 3rd, seven days out from Fort Laramie, Brigham writes:

"Most of the brethren are depending on game for subsistence, being entirely destitute of flour and other provisions."

And again on the 13th:

"Each morning of late the brethren have had to assist five of the horses to rise to their feet. Several others are obliged to be driven loose and most of the rest are very weak."

On the 17th, it was decided that they could go no farther in their present condition. He writes:

"A number of our horses having given out, we decided to remove our wagons to the Platte river, hunt buffalo, dry the meat and continue our journey to Winter Quarters as best we could."

As the darkest hour is always before the dawn, so on this occasion, for on the following day sixteen men with food and fresh animals from Winter Quarters rode into camp. They were out looking for the returning brethren, and found them in their desperate plight.

The going to Winter Quarters was now comparatively easy, comprising only eleven days. This note is from Brigham's journal of October 31st, 1847:

"When we were about one mile from Winter Quarters the wagons of the Twelve came to the front, when I remarked: 'Brethren, I will say to the Pioneers, I wish you to receive my thanks for your kindness and willingness to obey orders. I am satisfied with you; you boys have done well. We have accomplished more than we expected. Out of one hundred forty-three men who started, some of them sick, all of them are well. Not a man has died; we have not lost a horse, mule, or ox but through carelessness; the blessings of the Lord have been with us. If the brethren are satisfied with me and the Twelve, please signify," which was unanimously done. "I feel to bless you all in the name of the Lord God of Israel. You are dismissed to go to your homes."

". . . We drove into the town in order about an hour before sunset. The streets were crowded with people to shake hands as we passed through the lines. We were truly rejoiced to once more behold our wives, children and friends after an absence of over six months, having traveled more than two thousand miles, sought out a location for the Saints to dwell in peace, and accomplished the most interesting mission in this last dispensation. Not a soul of our camp died, and no serious accident happened to any, for which we praise the Lord."
