Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER TWELVE

AMONG the problems which Brigham found to be pressing upon his return to Winter Quarters, according to the historian, B. H. Roberts, were "the removal of the Saints from the Omaha Indian lands, urged by the Indian agents, which involved the abandonment of Winter Quarters; the condition of the Saints scattered in the branches of the Church throughout the United States; the Church in the British Isles and elsewhere; the forwarding of a printing press to the mountains; laying plans for the education of the youth of the community, soon to be gathered to the mountains; the reorganization of the First Presidency of the Church, the maintenance of land holdings of the Saints in Iowa, and their political relationship to the people of Iowa." All these called for the generalship and ability of a man of Brigham's character. One by one he solved his problems, capably and faithfully.

Five days after his return from the West, Brigham dispatched a letter to the faithful trustees who had been left in charge of the affairs of the Saints at Nauvoo, earlier in the year, requesting them to wind up their business and join the Saints on the river. Among other things he told them to "leave the keys to the Temple in the care of Judge Owens and the building itself in the hands of the Lord." The building had been built and dedicated to the Lord; the Saints had been driven away from it; therefore it was in His keeping and care alone, no other power being helpful or available.

Meetings were held during the month of November, a few weeks after Brigham's return, relative to the emigration of the Saints in the spring, and organizations were formed to make preparations for the exodus. But the principal event of those winter months of 1847, as far as this history is concerned, was the reorganization of the First Presidency of the Church, after the pattern given by the Prophet Joseph Smith, with Brigham Young as President, and Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards as Counselors. This object was accomplished at the home of Orson Hyde at Kanesville, Iowa, on December 5, 1847, by Brigham, and eight of his fellow apostles.

The necessity of a complete Church organization had long been apparent to Brigham. On October 12th, while on his return trip across the plains, he had broached the subject to Wilford Woodruff. The latter records in his journal on this date.

"I had a question put to me by President Young, what my opinion was concerning one of the Twelve Apostles being appointed as President of the Church, with his two Counselors. I answered that a quorum like the Twelve, which had been appointed by revelation, confirmed by revelation from time to time—I thought it would require a revelation to change the order of that quorum, but, whatever the Lord inspires you to do in this matter I am with you."

The subject must have been fully discussed by the brethren of the Twelve, for at the meeting on December 5th at Orson Hyde's house, Orson himself put the motion "that Brigham Young be the President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and that he nominate his two counselors, and they three form the First Presidency." This motion was seconded and carried unanimously. Brigham named his counselors as stated above, and the re-organization was accomplished. Since the death of the Prophet, on June 27th, 1844, nearly three and a half years previously, the guidance and direction of the Church had been carried on by the Twelve as a quorum.

Relative to these events there is a very splendid letter to Orson Spencer in England written by President Young during this period and dated at Winter Quarters, January 23rd, 1848, which gives an intimate picture of his activities, and the condition of the Saints in the camps on the Missouri river. I shall reproduce it here in full.

It is taken from the Millennial Star, Vol. 10, page 114, and is as follows:

"Dear Brother: Yours of the first of November, 1847, came to hand on the 11th instant. I was much pleased to hear of the prosperity of the work in the British Islands—of your good health and your desires to labor in the vineyard. Brother Heber and myself called upon your family, read your letter, found them all well and in lively spirits; the house and the children were clean and neat, and they presented a comparatively comfortable aspect. The difficulty of getting grinding this winter has in a great measure prevented us from being as comfortable as we otherwise might be, but another grist mill starts tomorrow, which will be the fourth run of stones in the city. I asked your children how they would like me to send you word to stay another year, as I thought it was best to do so, and take them with Brother Bullock's family over the mountains in the spring. Ellen replied, 'If I thought it was best, they would like it so, and they all said Amen to it for they wanted to do the best.' I told Ellen to buy a good milch cow, and I would pay for it, and reminded her of my saying last winter, that if she lacked anything she was to let me know. It is thought advisable for you to stay another year, and I will take your family on in the spring.

"We anticipate sending Brother Orson Pratt and several other Elders to England, who will leave here when we leave for the mountains, and of sending Brother Woodruff to Nova Scotia, Canada, etc., at the same time. Brother George A. Smith is having some log cabins built on the other side of the river, and intends in a few days to remove over there, and stay for a year or two among the brethren, as those who do not go onward must vacate this place and go over to the Pottawattamie purchase. Orson Hyde will stay there also, and with Brother George will take care of the branches and push the Saints westward.

"In December last we appointed a day to hold a conference on the other side of the river, in a large double, block house, occupied by one of the brethren, where the Saints congregated in such large numbers that we found it impracticable to continue our conference, the house being so crowded and many shouting at the windows to get in, so that we adjourned for three weeks to build a house capable of holding the Saints. Accordingly, on the 24th, we convened again at the 'Log Tabernacle,' which they erected in a short time, during the severest weather we have had this winter. It is a well constructed, capacious log house, sixty by forty feet inside, and will seat one thousand persons, with a recess or stand twenty by ten feet for the priesthood and a clerk's bench; it is certainly an ornament to this new country, and shows a little of 'Mormonism.' I told them at the conference that the brethren had built, fenced, and made as many improvements in the short time they had been there (about a year) as they would in Missouri in about ten years; and it is a fact, and they have raised a crop equal to any we used to raise in Illinois.

"At this conference we suggested to the brethren the propriety of organizing the Church with a First Presidency and a Patriarch, as hinted at in our general epistle, and the expediency of such a move at this time was so clearly seen by the brethren, that they hailed it as an action which the state of the work at present demanded, and as a means to liberate the hands of the Quorum of the Twelve, who now feel at liberty to go abroad and herald the truth to the ends of the earth, and build up the kingdom in all the world. Accordingly, Brigham Young was nominated to be the First President of the Church, and he nominated Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards to be his two counselors, which nominations were seconded and carried without a dissenting voice. Father John Smith was then nominated to be patriarch of the whole Church, in the same capacity as Father Joseph Smith was, and also Brother Hyrum—seconded and carried unanimously. The Spirit of the Lord at this time rested upon the congregation in a powerful manner, insomuch that the Saints' hearts were filled with joy unspeakable; every power of their mind and nerve of their body was awakened and absorbed; a dead stillness reigned in the congregation while the President spoke. He said: 'This is one of the happiest days of my life; it's according as Heber prophesied yesterday, our teachings today have been good. I never heard better. Is not the bliss of heaven and the breezes of Zion wafted here? Who feels hatred, malice or evil? If you come to the door with a bad spirit, it would not come in with you; no, it could not mingle here; but when you enter, your feelings become as calm and gentle as the zephyrs of paradise; and I feel glory, Hallelujah. Nothing more has been done today than what I knew would be done when Joseph died. We have been driven from Nauvoo here, but the hand of the Lord is in it—visible as the sun shining this morning; it is visible to my natural eyes; it's all right; and I expect when we see the result of all we pass through in this probationary state, we will discover the hand of the Lord in it all, and shout Amen—it's all right! We shall make the upper courts ring; we have something to do before then. I don't calculate to go beyond the bounds of time and space where we will have no opposition—no devils to contend with; and I have no fault to find with the providences of the Lord, nor much fault to find with the people; and if the devils keep out of my path I will not quarrel with them. As the Lord's will is my will all the time; as he dictates so I will perform. If he doesn't guide the ship, we'll go down in the whirlpool. Joseph told the Twelve, the year before he died, 'There is not one key or power to be bestowed on this Church to lead the people into the celestial gate, but I have given you, showed you, and talked it over to you; the kingdom is set up, and you have the perfect pattern, and you can go and build up the kingdom, and go in at the celestial gate, taking your train with you.'

"The instrumental band was then called upon to perform, when its heavenly vibrations fell on the tender nerve of the ear, accompanied by the Spirit of God, and the Saints shouted, 'Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna to God and the Lamb. Amen, Amen, and Amen,' led by Brother George A. Smith. The conference lasted four days. We had indeed an excellent time, and on the 16th of January attended another meeting, convened by the Seventies, which they called a jubilee; but I told them it could not be considered a jubilee spoken of in the Revelations, for all bands were not broken, and I called it Jubilo—when the Saints assembled and spent the Sabbath in preaching and exhortation; and on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, had preaching and teaching concerning the organization of companies for traveling westward—music, and other recreations. We had a blessed meeting—all hearts were comforted and lifted up above our trials and persecutions, and went home rejoicing in the benefits and privileges of the liberty of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; and I pray they may thereby be stimulated to pursue the path of righteousness, and fill up the remainder of their days in promoting the kingdom of peace and happiness on the earth.

"We learn from Mr. Glenday, who has been to Oregon City, Williamette valley, this year from Missouri, and who came into camp on the 14th current, having seen some of our brethren at Fort Hall on the 15th of November last, that had been there buying meat and flour, and also saw three brethren working at Fort Bridger, one hundred fifteen miles from the valley, at which places he learned that the 'Mormons' in the valley, had got between two hundred and three hundred acres fall wheat sown, and that there was a company going to San Francisco Bay for seed wheat to sow in the spring, and there was plenty of provisions in the valley.

"The brethren in this region of country have been much more healthy this summer and fall than ever in Nauvoo, and this has been a great blessing, as you know disease and sickness have been a heavy tax on the Saints. The weather this winter has been very mild indeed; these two weeks past have been like the opening of spring, which favors us greatly, especially those who have to leave their farms and improvements here, recross the Missouri, and begin anew on the Pottawattamie lands.

"The brethren are busy fixing up their wagons, and making preparations for their journey, and having plenty of corn and fodder, their teams are doing well.

"The Omahas have been peaceable this winter, and have not killed any cattle, and our circumstances, in comparison with last winter, are very prosperous and good.

"Your brother in the Lord.

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

"Your brother in the Lord." Such President Young signed himself at the conclusion of this splendid letter to Orson Spencer, and such indeed he was to every member of the Church, a brother, a helper, a friend, a leader who merited and who had the full confidence of his people. Thus they sustained him in this meeting, "in the Log Tabernacle at Miller's Hollow," as President of the Church, and as the true successor to Joseph Smith, and they were ready to follow him and heed his counsel in every matter pertaining to the building up of the Kingdom.

II

During February, 1848, all those who were able to go with the companies to the valley, worked diligently at their preparations. Those who were to remain had been asked by the government to abandon their homes at Winter Quarters and remove to the lands on the east side of the river.

It was President Young's intention to remove to the Salt Lake valley as soon as possible in the spring, and to such an end he bent all his energy. Writing to Almon Babbit, who was still at Nauvoo, he said:

"I shall have to depend upon you to send wagons, teams, harness, or other property, as we talked, by some of your teamsters, or some of the brethren, so that they will be delivered safe here. I meant to have sent a man after them, but I have no one to send if I have to do without. We wish to start from here by the 24th of April so as to be over the Horn (Elkhorn river) and ready to start by the first of May. The brethren are busy making preparations to go, and the weather is extremely favorable, and we anticipate an early spring."

A few weeks later, under date of Feb. 28th, 1848, there is this interesting letter from President Young to a "brother Gladwin" at St. Louis. It is full of excellent and timely advice which was exactly adapted to the need of the brethren:

"The Saints who are not able to go over the mountains will come here to the Bluffs by steamboat from St. Louis and farm; also raise young cattle for teams, and make their own wagons, so as to enable them to go from this point to the valley. There is plenty of good land here on which we can establish pre-emption rights and sell them. It is a great deal more healthy than Illinois, so that a better chance is afforded here for poor Saints, than in any other quarter where we have hitherto located, and I say to you, as I do to all my brethren, be meek, humble and faithful before the Lord, and call upon him in fervent prayer, and the Holy Ghost will come and dwell with you, and the whisperings of the small still voice will point out to you the path of your duty, and keep your vision clear, on the work of the last days, so that you can see the hand of the Lord as it is outstretched in behalf of Israel, in the last days, for their good and gathering and for the confusion and destruction of the wicked and those who have molested and driven his people into the wilderness."

Again, under date of March 14th, writing to Brother Frederick Kesler,

"We wish all the Saints who can consistently go over the mountains this spring to do so, for this is the mind of the Spirit concerning them; and now brother Kesler, let me tell you, if your eye is single to the glory of God and the building up of his kingdom, if this is your element, then come on, for we will establish mills, manufacturies of all kinds, build up cities and establish homes for the poor and the oppressed and the meek of the earth, and we will build up temples and towers, and sanctuaries and fonts, and altars to the name of the most high God."

There was just one object in all of Brigham's words and in all his labors, as I have stated many times, and that was "to build up the Church and Kingdom of God." And he had a perfect faith that this object would be attained. Speaking for the last time in the log Tabernacle at Millers' Hollow, on April 6th, 1848, he said:

"The Lord God has reared up this kingdom thus far, and overruled and controlled all things to its advancement on the earth, and he will sustain it, until all things are consummated and the Church becomes triumphant."

By the middle part of April, heavily loaded wagons, drawn by oxen, horses or mules, and carrying most of the portable possessions of the Saints, wended their way slowly out of Winter Quarters westward toward the rendezvous on Elkhorn river. The great exodus of the Saints from their temporary homes and camps on the Missouri river was under way. Henceforth the Salt Lake valley was to be the scene of their activities. It was a time of intense labor for Brigham Young. The camp historian relates:

"President Young moves about giving directions for those ready to start for the mountains, and the others who should remain behind."

There was not a detail that he overlooked. He studied the comfort of every person, the fitness of every animal; whether the wagon was properly loaded, and whether it was built to stand the arduous trip. By the 26th of May his own wagons were ready; and after months of preparation he himself was ready. As he looked about that day he could see his miniature city of Winter Quarters, with its eight hundred log and sod houses, practically abandoned. The Saints who were to remain had moved to the east side of the river; those who were to go to the valley had taken up the march. Teamsters cracked their whips, wagons creaked over the ground; the great caravan moved toward the setting sun, with Brigham Young at its head. On this day he records in his journal:

"I started from Winter Quarters on my journey to the mountains, leaving my houses, mills and the temporary furniture I had acquired during our sojourn there. This was the fifth time I had left my home and property since I embraced the Gospel."
