Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

IT is interesting to me to note that when President Brigham Young began this, his second journey westward across the plains, that it proved to be his last. Never again did he return east; never again did he revisit his old habitations at Winter Quarters, Nauvoo and Kirtland. Henceforth his destiny was to preside over the Saints in the valleys, to build up the Kingdom there, and witness the Saints become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains, as the Prophet Joseph had foretold.

On May 26th, 1848, Brigham riding in his carriage, (the identical vehicle now on exhibition at the Utah state capitol) with his driver George D. Grant, moved out of Winter Quarters toward the rendezvous on the Elkhorn river, twenty-three miles westward. There for some weeks, the emigrants with their teams and wagons had been gathering. Arriving on the 28th, Brigham immediately began organizing the people into traveling groups of hundreds, fifties and tens, according to the pattern given in the revelation of the previous year. On the 30th he called the various groups around him and addressed them:

"President Young gave some general instructions about observing order in the camp; he told them not to abuse their cattle, but to take care of them; not to make noises or be up at nights; but to attend to prayers and go to bed at nine o'clock and put out the fires. He said it was best to tie up the cattle outside of the corral and the horses inside. Dogs should be tied up or shot; sheep should be taken care of, etc."

On June 1st (Brigham's forty-seventh birthday), his great company, which went on ahead of the others, was ready for the journey. By actual count it was found that there were "397 wagons, 1229 souls, 74 horses, 19 mules, 1275 oxen, 699 cows, 184 cattle, 411 sheep, 141 pigs, 605 chickens, 37 cats, 82 dogs, 3 goats, 10 geese, 2 beehives, 8 doves and 1 crow." Thus did the pioneers of Utah, like the Israelites of old, with wives and children, flocks and herds, journey forth into the wilderness. And at their head was a modern Moses, ready and able to lead them to a "Promised Land."

This second trip across the plains proved, in a measure, to be more wearisome and difficult than the first had been. The company was so large and cumbersome and progress so slow. But Brigham was everywhere, making all plans and preparations, looking after every detail for the comfort and safety of all members. On June 17th, the camp journalist records:

"We arrived at a deep ravine. President Young rode forward in his carriage, superintended the crossing, locking the wheels of the wagons, and cautioned the drivers to carefulness."

On the following day:

"President Young went on ahead in his carriage to look out for a camping ground."

And again on June 26th:

"The president and captains of companies met at President Young's wagon to consult about traveling. It was noted that the space of ten feet be left between the wagon tongues and the cattle, to preserve ourselves from their dirt and not to hitch our teams to the annoyance of our neighbors as some had done. President Young instructed the captains to see that all fires were out by nine o'clock, to assist their companies to corral, and not to scatter on the road, but to keep close together."

On July 17th, two days journey beyond Chimney Rock, and four hundred fifty-two miles west of Winter Quarters, President Young wrote a lengthy letter to Apostles Parley P. Pratt and John Taylor, which he sent on to them in Salt Lake valley by messenger. Detailing the events which had happened since he last saw them on the plains during the fall of the previous year, he continues:

"It is our intention to be at Green River on or about the 20th of August, at which place we shall be most happy to receive a wagon load of salt, which will be of very great benefit to those Saints who will have to return from that place with the teams to Winter Quarters. We shall also be very thankful for some salt ourselves, as we started with very little, anticipating meeting a goodly number of wagons, and some of them, we expected would have brought some salt with them. . . . .

"If it would be convenient for you to send out a number of teams to meet us at Green River, it would be quite an assistance to us, but if you cannot, we shall make arrangements to build a fort, leave the goods and the families with them and we will work ourselves into the valley, by the help and assistance of the Lord, as quick as we can; but if you send to us it will require one hundred wagons at least, well manned with teams and drivers, and well fitted up with covers so as to leave none behind. . . . .

"You must not be disappointed in not seeing the printing presses, type, paper, mill irons, carding machine, etc., as I had fully calculated on the teams that you sent from the valley bringing them on. But we have the poor with us; their cry was urgent to go to the mountains, and I could neither close my ears nor harden my heart against their earnest appeals. I could bring my carriage and horses with my swift teams and be with you in thirty days, but I cannot forsake the poor in the hour of need, and when they stand most in need of comfort. I am disappointed in not bringing the presses, but I could not avoid it. It is out of my power to do everything.

"I wish you to send us mail as speedily as possible, with fresh horses, so that we can forward the mail to Winter Quarters, giving the state of crops, improvements, health, etc. Great peace, love and union prevail in our midst. We have been blessed on this journey; not a soul nor an animal in my charge have died, or have been lost, since leaving the Elkhorn, and I can truly say, all is well with us."

"I earnestly desire to say to the Saints in the valley, they who want to serve the Lord, that they are in a good place; and it is my advice that they get cured of their California fevers as quick as they possibly can, and let neither them, nor any other fevers trouble them any more, for I am well assured that if you do, the Lord will bless you and prosper you; and may his choicest blessings rest upon you; may you be blessed by night and by day, in your outgoings and incomings, in your basket and in your store, and may the still whisperings of the Spirit be your constant companion, until I come, is the prayer of your affectionate brother in the Gospel of Jesus Christ."

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

On July 20th, after having been forty-eight days on the road, the great company arrived in sight of Fort Laramie, the half-way house of the journey, and accurately five hundred twenty-two miles west of Winter Quarters. Here they crossed the Platte river and laboriously pursued their way on an upgrade towards South Pass, the continental divide. Oh, it was a wearisome trip. Day by day yoking and unyoking the sweating oxen, packing and repacking the camp utensils, fording creeks and rivers, traveling in the dust and heat, and each day getting farther and farther away from the habitations of men. No wonder some of the timid members of the camp, as the long journey continued, whispered among themselves and complained that they were going too far away from their former homes.

As they approached the Sweetwater river, in what is now western Wyoming, an incident occurred which is well worth relating here. It was written by Mrs. Susa Y. Gates, a daughter of Brigham Young, and herself a brilliant writer and historian.

"When the company halted at Sweetwater, women were tired, men were discouraged. Day after day passed, and the discontent of the party grew with every passing hour. Among any other people there would have been mutiny and a sharp turn backward to the shelter of civilization. Always alert to the pressure of influences about him, President Young felt the resistance that manifested itself in silence, rather than in words. One afternoon he hitched up his coach and with the terse statement that he was 'going to the valley; if anybody wants to follow, the road is open,' the President put the whip to his horses and gave not a glance behind."

Brigham no doubt took this occasion to teach the reluctant and timid Saints a good lesson. He was going to the valley regardless of all difficulties. If the members of the camp wanted to follow, "the road is open." It is reported that he drove on alone for 18 miles and then waited for them to catch up to him.

On August 28th, at the "last crossing of the Sweetwater," Brigham's eyes and heart were gladdened by the timely arrival of his brother, Lorenzo D. Young and Abraham O. Smoot from the valley, accompanied by forty-seven wagons and one hundred twenty-four yoke of oxen, to give him help "over the mountains." At this point he was able to discharge and send back to Winter Quarters an equal number of wagons and oxen, belonging to the Saints who still remained on the Missouri, and who had loaned them to Brigham's company "to help out the poor." With the returning brethren, Brigham sent a letter to Orson Hyde, detailing his experiences of the trip thus far. Among other things he said:

"We have been sixty-three days in traveling from the Elkhorn to the last crossing of the Sweetwater at an average of 12 miles a day, resting 22, including Sundays to recruit and strengthen our cattle. The very dry season, the scarcity of grass, the heavy dragging, dusty roads, and inhaling so much of the alkali by breathing, eating and drinking has been the cause of our losing many of our cattle. . . .

"When we are all arrived in the valley, we shall make arrangements to send to Winter Quarters another mail by Captain Egan, Captain Roundy and others; then we shall be able to send letters to individual persons in addition to another general epistle in which we expect, by the blessings of heaven to say, 'Come ye that are weary and heavy laden, and ye that are seeking rest and peace for your souls.'"

Two days after leaving Sweetwater, on September 3rd, the camp journalist, Thomas Bullock, records this interesting happening:

"Two persons by the name of James B. Shockley and Richard P. Shockley with their families arrived from the valley with two wagons, three yoke of oxen and two cows on their way to Missouri. President Young gave them a very severe lecture on their going to serve the devil among our enemies. On finishing he told them to go in peace but never to return to the valley until they knew they were Saints indeed. He gave them twenty-five pounds of meat to feed them."

No one could deliver a more severe and caustic rebuke than Brother Brigham, if occasion required, and in this instance it filled him with righteous indignation to see these two families deserting the Church and going back "to our old enemies in Missouri."

With the help that had come from the valley to relieve the tired teams more rapid progress was now made. On September 7th, Green river was reached and forded, as the water was low. The following day, Thomas Bullock, the camp historian, relates:

"September 8th, I was invited to ride in the carriage with President Young and Daniel H. Wells, and I read three newspapers to them as I journeyed nearly the whole day with them."

On the 12th they arrived at old Fort Bridger and Brigham camped there for the night. Two days later, at the crossing of Bear river, the weather became suddenly quite cold, and snow fell until the ground was covered. On the 19th, Brigham, riding in his carriage with his brother, Lorenzo, crossed over the summit of Big Mountain, and the following day, from the mouth of Emigration canyon, he was able to behold his little growing city in the wilderness. He had been one hundred sixteen days on the journey from Winter Quarters.
