Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

ON his arrival in the autumn," says Historian Bancroft, "Brigham stirred the people up to the greatest activity."

The selection of a location for the Saints had been made, several thousand of them were already here, and many more in various parts of the world were preparing to join them; now Brigham would verily build up Zion in the wilderness. The making of an empire was all before him, and he was fit and qualified for every part of the work. He had the strength and the ability to carry it through. We shall see by this record, as we go along, with what consummate skill and energy he carried out his vast plans.

The first task that Brigham undertook was "to allot the people their inheritances." On his arrival in the valley the previous year, he had announced that "No man who came here should buy land, but every man should have his land measured out to him for city or farming purposes." Thus the city was divided into ten acre blocks with lots of one and one-quarter acres each, and the "Big Field" on the south of the city into acreage tracts, until eleven thousand acres had been subdivided.

Four days after Brigham's arrival in the valley, Sunday, September 24th, 1848, he records the following in his journal:

"I preached in the Bowery—Elder Kimball and I were appointed to apportion the city lots to applicants . . . also leave was granted to build on said lots this fall . . . it was agreed that the city buildings be erected at least twenty feet from the sidewalks."

Also he made a determined effort to start public works, as recorded in the following two items:

"September 30th. I proposed building a Council House by tithing and suggested bringing the waters of Big Cottonwood on the east of our big field to the city by a canal."

"October 1st, Sunday. In the afternoon I announced that our first effort to build a temple would be expended in erecting a large wall around the Temple Block."

Again showing his great activity, here are a few excerpts from a letter written to Ezra T. Benson at Kanesville on October 7th, 1848:

"I have been all the day crowded with an anxious inquiring people to allot them their inheritances, to set out their farming land, to oversee the building of a Clerk's Office and a Council House, to manage the adobe yards, to watch over the people and keep them from oppressing each other, to prepare houses for my family to occupy during the winter, and sending off part of my teams to different parts of the valley. This does not allow me much time to write to my friends in the states and I know that you will consider this a sufficient apology for me not writing a long letter to you."

But despite Brigham's splendid efforts to keep the people occupied and "building up Zion," as winter approached, and snow began to fall, the valley assumed a desolate aspect and many became discouraged. Most of the Saints were inadequately clothed and poorly housed. James Brown, one of the pioneers, who was here, has left his record of the events of that winter:

"Some of the inhabitants were living in log cabins, others in dugouts, and still others in wagons, while some who did not have the latter, had built brush sheds; almost everybody was living on short rations, crickets and grasshoppers having destroyed most of the crops. The whole face of the country was brown and dry, except small streaks along the water courses. There was no "provinder" for our stock, and we could only turn them out upon the range and trust them and ourselves to a kind providence. Timber for fuel was in the mountains, and higher up in these there was timber for fencing and building purposes. In order to get either, we had to make roads at great expense, building bridges and cutting dugways, sometimes going in armed companies to protect ourselves from the threatening Indian tribes. A long brush bowery was built in the town; we met there for religious services, and for all other purposes that made it necessary for people to be called together. On October 6th, 1848, a general conference of the Church was held, and the people as a rule felt blessed, although a few were very much discouraged, as rations grew short and the cold weather pinched more closely."—Autobiography of James Brown, p. 118.

Early in December snow began to fall, and continued until there were drifts, "from three to five feet deep." Isaac Haight, who was here has left us his record of that winter:

"On the 9th of December snow fell in the valley about ten inches deep. The weather continued cold, with but little variation during the month of December, and snow fell from one foot to a foot and a half in depth, which made it very hard to get a living, as but very little fodder had been cut. Some of the poorer cattle died. The faith of many of the Saints was sorely tried and some of them grew weak and wanted to return to the states. Others wished to go to the gold mines in California to dig gold, while many were willing to suffer the loss of all things for the Gospel's sake, and for the testimony of Jesus."

Brigham heard the complaints and the murmurings and immediately took his stand opposing any who wanted to withdraw from the valley. Under date of December 7th, he writes:

"Some few have caught the gold fever. I counseled such, and all the Saints to remain in these valleys of the mountains and make improvements, build comfortable houses and raise grain against the days of famine and pestilence with which the earth would be visited."

I shall here again quote from James Brown's autobiography. It tells the thrilling story of that winter, better than I have found it recorded elsewhere:

"The winter of 1848-49 was quite cold. Many people had their feet badly frozen. For one, the writer suffered so severely from this cause that he lost every nail from the toes of both feet. In February and March there began to be some uneasiness over the prospects, and as the days grew warmer the gold fever attacked many so that they prepared to go to California. Some said they would go only to have a place for the rest of us; for they thought Brigham Young too smart a man to try to establish a civilized colony in such a 'God-forsaken country,' as they called the valley. They further said that California was the natural country for the Saints; some had brought choice fruit pips and seed, but said they would not waste them by planting in a country like the Great Salt Lake Valley; others stated that they would not build a house in the valley, but would remain in their wagons, and in the spring would be going on to California, Oregon or Vancouver's Island; still others said they would wait awhile before planting choice fruits, as it would not be long before they would return to Jackson County, Missouri. . . . .

"It was at this time of gloom that President Young stood before the whole people, and said, in substance, that some people had misgivings, and some were murmuring, and had not faith to go to work and make their families comfortable; they had got the gold fever and were going to California. Said he: 'Some have asked me about going. I have told them that God has appointed this place for the gathering of his Saints, and you will do better right here than you will by going to the gold mines. Some have thought they would go there and get fitted out and come back, but I told them to stop here and get fitted out. Those who stop here and are faithful to God and his people will make more money and get richer than you that run after the god of this world; and I promise you in the name of the Lord that many of you that go thinking you will get rich and come back, will wish you had never gone away from here, and will long to come back, but will not be able to do so. Some of you will come back, but your friends who remain here will have to help you; and the rest of you who are spared to return will not make as much money as your brethren do who stay here and help build up the Church and Kingdom of God; they will prosper and be able to buy you twice over. Here is the place God has appointed for his people.

"'We have been kicked out of the frying pan into the fire, out of the fire into the middle of the floor, and here we are and here we will stay. God has shown me that this is the spot to locate his people, and here is where they will prosper; he will temper the elements for the good of his Saints; he will rebuke the frost and the sterility of the soil, and the land shall become fruitful. Brethren, go to, now, and plant out your fruit seeds.'

"Stretching his arms to the east and to the west, with his hands spread out, he said:

"For in these elements are not only all the cereals common to this latitude, but the apple, peach and plum; yea, and the more delicate fruits, the strawberry and raspberry; and we will raise the grapes here and manufacture wine; and as the Saints gather here and get strong enough to possess the land, God will temper the climate, and we shall build a city and a temple to the Most High God in this place. We will extend our settlements to the east and west, to the north and to the south, and we will build towns and cities by the hundreds, and thousands of the Saints will gather in from the nations of the earth. This will become the great highway of the nations. Kings and emperors and the noble and wise of the earth will visit us here, while the wicked and ungodly will envy us our comfortable homes and possessions. Take courage, brethren. I can stand in my door and can see where there is untold millions of the rich treasures of the earth—gold and silver. But the time has not come for the Saints to dig gold. It is our duty first to develop the agricultural resources of the country, for there is no country on the earth that is more productive than this. We have the finest climate, the best water, and the purest air that can be found on earth; there is no healthier climate anywhere. As for gold and silver, and the rich minerals of the earth, there is no other country that equals this; but let them alone; let others seek them, and we will cultivate the soil; for if the mines are opened first, we are a thousand miles from any base of supplies and the people would rush in here in such great numbers that they would breed a famine; and gold would not do us or them any good if there were no provisions in the land. People would starve to death with barrels of gold; they would be willing to give a barrel of gold for a barrel of flour rather than starve to death. Then, brethren, plow your land and sow wheat, plant your potatoes; let the mines alone until the time comes for you to hunt gold, though I do not think this people ever will become a mining people. It is our duty to preach the gospel, gather Israel, pay our tithing, and build temples. The worst fear that I have about this people is that they will get rich in this country, forget God and his people, wax fat, and kick themselves out of the Church and go to hell. This people will stand mobbing, robbing, poverty, and all manner of persecution, and be true. But my greater fear for them is that they cannot stand wealth; and yet they have to be tried with riches, for they will become the richest people on this earth.'"—Autobiography of James Brown, pp. 119-123.

Thus by the strength of his great personality, and by the inspirational words which flowed from his lips on this occasion, Brigham was able to stem the tide of discontent, to hearten the weary, to encourage the heavy-laden, to bless and comfort the believer, and to keep his people permanently in Salt Lake valley. On no other occasion in his life-time did Brigham Young show his striking qualities of leadership to more startling effect than on the 29th day of February, 1849, in the bowery in the Old Fort, while his audience stood before him in the snow, poorly clad, shivering in the cold weather.
