Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

AFTER Brigham had made it perfectly clear to the Saints that their destiny was to remain permanently in Salt Lake Valley, and not "go wandering off to California" or elsewhere, they began to till the soil, plant their seeds and build homes. The spirit of discontent was transformed into a spirit of work; and with renewed energy they set about to build up Zion in the wilderness. It was now decided to erect a Council House, by donation labor, to construct a bridge across the Jordan River and to build a Bowery suitable for meeting purposes, on the Temple Block. Nor was the ecclesiastical organization neglected. During the month of February, under President Young's supervision, the city was divided into nineteen wards, and bishops were selected to preside over each. The presidency of a Stake for the valley was chosen, and a local High Council was organized. Further, the civil organization was given Brigham's prompt and earnest attention. Early in March a state constitution was drafted and on the 12th of the month a general election of the Provisional State of Deseret was held, at which time Brigham was elected governor.

On April 9th, the first general epistle of the presidency from Salt Lake Valley was issued. As this document was largely dictated by President Young and as it contains some interesting items relative to the condition of the Saints in the spring of 1849, I shall quote a few paragraphs:

"In the fore part of February, the Bishops took an inventory of breadstuffs in the valley, when it was reported that there was little more than three-fourths of a pound per day for each soul, until the fifth of July; and considerable was known to exist which was not reported. As a natural consequence some were nearly destitute while others had abundance. The common price of corn since harvest has been two dollars; some have sold for three; at present there is none in the market at any price. Wheat has ranged from four to five dollars, and potatoes from six to twenty dollars per bushel; and though not to be bought at present, it is expected that there will be a good supply for seed by another year.

"Our public works are prosperous, consisting of a council house, forty-five feet square, two stories, building by tithing; also a bridge across the Western Jordan, at an expense of seven hundred dollars, and six or seven bridges across minor streams, to be paid by a one per cent property tax; also, a bath-house at the warm springs.

"A field of about eight thousand acres has been surveyed south of and bordering on the city, and plotted in five and ten acre lots, and a church farm of about eight hundred acres. The five and ten acre lots were distributed to the brethren by casting lots and every man is to help build a pole, ditch, or a stone fence as shall be most convenient around the whole field, in proportion to the land he draws; also a canal on the east side, for the purpose of irrigation. There are three grist mills, and five or six saw mills in operation, and several more in contemplation. Mill stone, equal to French burr, is found here.

"The location of a tannery and foundry are contemplated as soon as the snows leave the mountains.

"The forts are rapidly breaking up, by the removal of the houses on to the city lots; and the city is already assuming the appearance of years, for any ordinary country; such is the industry and perseverance of the Saints."

One of the predominating characteristics of President Young was that he had an extraordinary amount of perception and precaution. Before he made any important move he always looked about for every possible pitfall and consequence; and with this faculty he was able on more than one occasion to keep the Saints from serious difficulties. Witness this item in his history under date of April 18th, 1849, written to the little colony which had settled in Utah Valley:

"I wrote to John S. Higbee and the brethren settled on the Provo River, advising them to speedily complete their fort, to keep near the settlement, to place their cannon on top of the Fort, to gather a sufficient quantity of round stones for grape shot, to secure and guard their horses and cattle, to keep a vigilant guard at night, to look out for the Indians, not to make them any presents but, if they would be friendly, to teach them to raise grain, and to order them to quit stealing."

During the latter part of April the memorial for a territorial government was drawn up, and Dr. John M. Bernhisel was selected to carry it to Washington and present it to Congress. As this memorial is signed by President Young, I shall reproduce it:

"MEMORIAL

"To the Honorable Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled.

"Preamble

"Whereas, your Memorialists are residents of that portion of North America commonly called Eastern California, or are emigrating thither; and

"Whereas, we are so far removed from all civilized society and organized government, (say one thousand miles equi-distant on the four points of the compass) and also by natural barriers of trackless deserts, everlasting mountains of snow, and savages more bloody than either, so that we can never be united with any other portion of the country in Territorial or State Legislature, with advantage to ourselves or others; and

"Whereas, the soil is so sterile, that it is with the utmost exertion the laborer can procure a subsistence and the markets so distant, that merchandise is obtained at the greatest expense; and

"Whereas, with all the difficulties of a new, interior, desert country, the straggling Indians have already commenced their depredations on our flocks and herds; and

"Whereas, we have done more, by our arms and influence, than any other equal number of citizens to obtain and secure this country to the Government of the United States; and

"Whereas, a large portion of this Territory has recently been ceded to the United States;

"Therefore, we respectfully petition your honorable body, to charter for your Memorialists a Territorial Government of the most liberal construction authorized by our excellent Federal Constitution, with the least possible delay, to be known by the name of Deseret; including and covering all lands and waters, with all privileges, immunities and advantages thereunto belonging, lying between Oregon and Mexico, and between the Sierra Nevada and the 27th degree W. L."

On May 3rd, Dr. Bernhisel began his journey to the East. Before leaving, Brigham relates, "President Willard Richards blessed him in the name of Israel's God." The following day, Brigham and a few of the brethren accompanied the Doctor three miles up Emigration Canyon, and wished him success on his important mission.

Three days later, there is this very interesting item in the President's history:

"I met with President W. Richards and the Twelve, on the 6th. We spent the time in interesting conversation upon old times, Joseph, the plates, Mount Cumorah, treasures and records known to be hid in the earth, the gift of seeing, and how Joseph obtained his first seer stone, the driving from Missouri, angels visiting the earth, Joseph's death, place of burial, and resurrection. I stated that I felt it would not be long till we would have him again."

About the 12th of May, President Young received a letter from Louis Vasquez, who was James Bridger's partner at Fort Bridger, to the effect that an Indian had been killed by some traders who had recently been at the Fort. It was intimated that the "traders" were Mormons. Brigham said of the letter, "it is all froth," and regarded the report as an effort to stir up trouble between the Mormons and the Indians. The same day he recorded in his history:

"I believe I know that old Bridger is death on us and if he knew that 400,000 Indians were coming against us, and any man were to let us know, he would cut his throat. But Vasquez is a different man. I believe Bridger is watching every movement of the Mormons and reporting to Thomas Benton at Washington."

As the hot weather of summer approached the five thousand inhabitants of the valley came near to the end of their food supplies. Many families were entirely out of the necessities of life, and had to be assisted by friends. Others lived upon roots or plants native to the valley. The approaching harvest looked promising but it was still three or four weeks away. Under date of June 29th, Brigham records:

"In consequence of the scanty harvest of 1848, breadstuffs and other provisions, became very scarce in the valley, and many of the people were necessitated to eat raw-hides, to dig thistle and sego roots to subsist upon. Those persons who had, imparted measurably to those who had not, so that extremity of suffering from hunger was avoided."

During the summer a few scattered parties who became entirely discouraged left for the gold fields. It seems that there were a number whom President Young could not hold. In a sermon on July 8th he said:

"I hope the gold mines will be no nearer than eight hundred miles.

"If you Elders of Israel want to go to the gold mines, go, and be damned."

Brigham had said all he could say, and it was now up to the "Elders of Israel" to take his advice or leave it.

The outstanding event of this entire summer for the Saints in the valley was the approaching 24th of July, which Brigham decided should be celebrated in an appropriate manner as "Pioneer Day." It was now two years since they had first arrived in the valley, and these two years had been filled with trials, troubles and difficulties. Almost for the first time the Saints could settle back and take a breathing spell, if only for a day.

As the approaching harvest looked ample and even abundant, it was decided by the brethren to give every person in the valley a feast—all the varieties of foods that were available and in sufficient quantities so that all would be satisfied. Great tables were spread "in the Bowery" and thousands came to partake of the bounties. Thomas Bullock, who reported the events of the day, relates:

"The hour of intermission having arrived, Mr. Grant, (father of President Heber J. Grant) requested the escort to form in procession around the assembly, and the bishops of each ward to collect the inhabitants of their respective wards together, and march with them to the dinner tables, when several thousands of the Saints dined sumptuously on the fruits of the earth, produced by their own hands. They invited several hundreds of the emigrants, even all who were in the valley; and a company who came in during the dinner were stopped, dismounted, placed at one of the tables, and were astonished by the warmth of their reception; two or three score of Indians also partook of the repast; indeed such a feast of the body, coupled with a feast of the soul, has not been experienced on this continent for a length of time."

During the exercises of the day President Young spoke to the assembled multitude:

"President Young rose to rejoice with those that rejoiced, and were it beneficial, could weep for those that do not weep for themselves. He said, 'It is two years ago, this day, since I arrived in this valley; but from the multitude of principles, circumstances, and ideas that now crowd my mind, I shall have to take them lightly. Orson Pratt and Dr. Richards, with a great number of others, had been cutting the roads through the canyons while I was sick on the Weber river; I met with them here between four and five in the afternoon, and now we commemorate this day. Let us look back to the past; five years ago most of the Twelve were in the eastern States, and had just heard of the death of the Prophet Joseph, and when we returned to Nauvoo, thousands of men wore mourning on their arms, their heads, and their hearts; and every sister was veiled in mourning—for what? Why, in this boasted Republic, the governor, lieutenant-governor, sheriffs, officers, and subjects, priests and people, had succeeded in shedding the blood of Joseph and Hyrum, the Prophet and Patriarch. Did the persecution cease then? By no means! The sayings of the Prophet were verified, that when they had succeeded in killing him, they would next attempt to kill me and my brethren. Two years ago, many of the oldest, whitest-headed men now before me, and some of the young men were bearing the flag of the United States triumphantly through the States of Mexico. We had to leave the United States because we said that Joseph Smith was a prophet, and that the Book of Mormon was true."

II

The inhabitants of Salt Lake Valley felt better after the great celebration and "feast" of July 24th, and set about their tasks with renewed energy. That is, the great majority of them did, and those who did not, Brigham was after them like a taskmaster. The Journal History of July 29th, 1849, relates:

"In a public meeting President Young reproved those persons who were lounging around and wasting their time in trading and speculation while their families were in wretchedness, and their corn and wheat were dropping onto the ground, and requested them to go to work."

Brigham did not for one moment neglect the spiritual side of the kingdom. He knew that the doctrines that had held the people together thus far were true, and that it was the duty of the Saints to uphold them before the world. Speaking before the Saints on August 26th, he said:

"Our duty is to let our light shine, to hand out the words of eternal life, and save those that can be saved. The Lord Almighty has brought out this work and will carry it on. It requires perfect obedience to the law of God, which is the priesthood."

By September 1st, Brigham had made arrangements to visit the settlements north of Salt Lake City, particularly that at Brownsville (Ogden) where about thirty families were struggling to gain a foothold. It was Brigham's first trip into that vicinity, and as such, it has been extremely interesting to me to follow the diary of Thomas Bullock, who traveled with him and the visiting brethren.

I shall reproduce a part of his report of the trip and ask the reader to note that it was under President Young's direction that a site for the city of Ogden was selected:

"At 8 o'clock a.m. the brethren who were going to visit the Brownsville settlement (later Ogden) on the Weber, commenced to gather at the Council House, Great Salt Lake City, and when President Young's two carriages and coach, Willard Richards' carriage, Jedediah M. Grant's carriage, and Seth Taft's vehicle, (carrying the band) were filled, the band commenced playing some lively and animated airs. About nine a.m., President Brigham Young, Willard Richards, Jedediah M. Grant and ladies, Edmund Ellsworth and wife, William Kay, Thomas Bullock and the band left Great Salt Lake City and started for Brownsville. While driving down the street toward the Warm Springs the band continued playing. The company halted at Hot Springs a few minutes and then took the left-hand road traveling over a dusty and uneven road to the first settlement (Bountiful). Thence we again took the left-hand road to what is called the "barrens," passed over a long level flat—a place where the waters of the lake sometimes overflow. We continued our journey until we arrived at Haight's settlement. Crossed the creek at one p.m. and turned out our animals to feed on Brother Haight's hay. At this place John Young and lady arrived by another route, and in a short time Horace Eldredge drove up in another carriage. After stopping about an hour for refreshments we continued our journey over a barren country on which nothing grows but sage, greasewood and prickly pears. At length we reached a very sandy country, where hauling was very heavy. On descending a steep hill at three-thirty p.m., Heber C. Kimball and several other wagons came up. The road continued heavy all the way, until we came in view of the Weber River Valley, which presented a beautiful appearance from the distance, the timber and brush making a pretty ribbon down the valley. On reaching the bottom, we found the road uneven as it possibly could be, the carriages being on a continual roll. We crossed the Weber in a diagonal line, the river being about four rods wide, and deep enough to cover the axle of the carriages. We went through the wood and soon passed several houses, at one of which was a company of teamsters, who had been in the employ of the United States, and were driven away from the teams at Fort Hall, not being allowed their provisions or what belonged to them. We arrived at Captain Brown's at six-thirty p.m., where supper was provided for the whole company. After supper the band played and two or three cotillions were danced."

When asked by President Young about the yield of crops in that vicinity, Ezra Chase, one of the Brethren, replied humorously, "It will yield one hundred bushels of crickets to the acre, and about fifty bushels of mosquitoes." Brother Brigham would enjoy that; he would get a good laugh out of that. Continuing Bullock's account:

"On September 3rd, President Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Jedediah M. Grant, Thomas Bullock and others went on to the top of the sand hill to view out a location for a town. After staying about an hour they decided that the town should be laid out on the south side of Ogden's Fork at the point of bench land, so that the waters from Weber river and Ogden's Fork might be taken out for irrigation and other purposes."

Thus was the city of Ogden located and, later on named, after the river which traverses its borders.

After the successful trip to Brownsville (Ogden) it was decided before the winter weather should set in, to pay a similar visit to the small group of Saints who had settled at Utah lake under John and Isaac Higbee. Accordingly, on September 14th, President Young and counselors, with a number of the Twelve and friends, began the journey on the afternoon of that day, traveling leisurely toward the homes of the Saints on Big Cottonwood creek, where they spent the night.

As Thomas Bullock was along on this trip also, I shall let him tell the story:

"They took the West Temple road through the farm, crossing two bad sloughs, traveled over a tolerably good road, through large fields of corn and arrived at the south side of the farm at four p.m. Here they tarried about half an hour, eating melons. They resumed their journey, crossing Cottonwood creek and traveled over an uneven road to the Cottonwood settlement, where they arrived at five-thirty p.m. At seven p.m. the brethren and emigrants met in Bishop Crosby's house. The meeting was addressed by Erastus Snow, Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball. After the meeting the visitors were taken to the several houses of the Saints to spend the night."

On the following day:

"About seven o'clock a.m., President Brigham Young and his party resumed the journey. After crossing Little Cottonwood and ascending the hill they found the grass burned off. At Willow creek they watered their teams and then resumed their journey, traveling through a hot spring of pure water about eight feet wide at the top, the brethren found the water nearly boiling, with bubbles of air continually rising. West of this spring they found several other springs which ran into a lake, surrounded by tall grass. At twenty minutes to twelve o'clock noon they commenced ascending the hill, all persons walking, when a shower of rain and hail fell. Some portions of the road were very steep and very difficult to ascend, but they got up onto the table land in safety. "Here," writes Elder Bullock, "we had a splendid view of the Great Salt Lake Valley, and, on the south of Utah Valley with its timbers and beautiful lake. We descended to the Utah Valley in a diagonal line and soon reached Dry Creek (the present site of Lehi) which was fringed with willows and small trees. We continued on to the American Creek, along the banks of which stream many traveling California emigrants were scattered. After again watering our teams we traveled over a very dusty road, through small cottonwood brush, passed through an extensive swale, and over an extensive sage plain. We also passed three groves of cedar, which could be made a fine place of residence and resort. Here I discovered the mistletoe in several places. At length we came in sight of the grove, in which lies the Fort, when the old pioneer gun belched forth our introduction to the Fort. The brethren were collecting their cattle for the night when we arrived. On crossing the island, we saw some very beautiful timber. We then crossed the Provo river, a very fine stream, five rods wide and from sixteen to twenty inches deep. On reaching the opposite bank we were met by all the inhabitants at twenty minutes to five o'clock at the gate of the Fort. We drove inside and were hospitably welcomed by the people. In the Fort was raised a platform on which were four tables covered with the good things of the earth. We who had just arrived sat down to three tables and partook to our satisfaction. The visiting brethren were scattered in different houses for the night.

Monday, September 17th:

"At nine twenty-five a.m., President Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards and others rode out from Fort Utah in three carriages, accompanied by five men on horse back, to look out a location for a town. They found a very eligible place about two miles southeast of the Fort, where it was decided to build a city a mile square to be laid off in blocks of four acres each, divided into eight lots of half an acre each, reserving the center block of four acres for a chapel and school houses, streets to be five rods wide. The party then drove up onto the table land, Heber C. Kimball, Thomas Bullock and Bishop Higbee walking, and descending to the Spanish trail, which they followed for some distance, and then visited two beautiful springs of cold water, where they stayed a short time. When the party resumed the journey, a very heavy storm passed over the mountain. They made a complete circle and then took a new road back to the Fort. On passing through the timber a very heavy shower fell, soaking all before it. They also met a company of gold diggers, five of them on foot, and arrived at the Fort at one p.m. At two p.m. a great noise of a hurricane approaching was heard and a general rush was made to prepare for its coming. In a few minutes a portion passed over the Fort. The hail descending like a rapid succession of boys' large marbles, which nearly covered the ground, broke down the buckwheat, tore the corn leaves into strips and piled up in many places three or four inches deep. Such a severe storm never had been beheld before by many of the party.

"At early candle light the brethren met in Captain Hunt's house to converse about the southern country and the prospects of settling it. Many questions were asked in regard to routes, traveling, location, incidents, etc., and the prospects before the Saints caused quite a good feeling. About nine o'clock the company separated when a dance was commenced at Bishop Higbee's which was continued until midnight."

Under these circumstances then was the city of Provo located on the 17th of September, 1849, under the direction of President Brigham Young.

III

The October conference in 1849 was held in Salt Lake City, in the Bowery, on the Temple Block. On the opening day President Young addressed the Saints as follows:

"President Brigham Young gave some instructions about fixing the Bowery, etc., and said, 'I feel happy for this shelter from the rays of the sun and the blasts of winter; I feel well in my mind; my heart is full of joy; I realize we ought to bear off the kingdom to the nations of the earth; this people, as a whole, are a good people and I shall seek to do them good, and bring salvation to the whole house of Israel, for I want to see Zion built up.'"

At this conference it was voted to extend the settlements of the Saints north and south, to establish a Perpetual Emigration fund to bring the poor to the valleys and to prosecute the missionary work in foreign lands with renewed vigor. John Taylor was selected to carry the Gospel to France, Lorenzo Snow to Italy, Erastus Snow to Denmark and Franklin D. Richards to assist Orson Pratt in England.

In addressing the departing elders on October 9th, President Young:

"Instructed them to start without purse or scrip, to preach the first principles—faith, repentance, baptism, the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost; to walk humbly before the Lord and gather up Zion."

"He instructed them to start without purse or scrip."

Oh, what a difficult undertaking that was; to work themselves forward to those foreign lands, depending upon friends and strangers who were touched by the Spirit to aid and assist them.

On October 19th, President Young accompanied the departing missionaries to the mouth of Emigration canyon, where he wished them Godspeed and bade them an affectionate farewell.

The previous day, October 18th, the president had dictated the following letter to Isaac Higbee, the presiding elder over the little settlement of the Saints at Fort Utah (now Provo) who had written complaining of many thefts and intrusions of the Indians. Note the wise counsel and advice given in this letter:

"Stockade your fort and attend to your own affairs, and let the Indians take care of theirs. Let your women and children stay in the fort, and the Indians stay out; but, while you mix with them promiscuously, you must continue to receive such treatment from them which they please to give. This is what we have told you continually, and you will find it true.

"Let any man, or company of men, be familiar with Indians, and they will be more familiar; and the more familiar, you will find the less influence you will have with them. If you would have dominion over them, for their good, which is the duty of the elders, you must not treat them as your equals. You cannot exalt them by this process. If they consider that they are your equals, you cannot raise them up to you.

"You have been been too familiar with them, your children have mixed promiscuously with them, they have been free in your houses, and some of the brethren have spent too much time in smoking and chatting with them instead of teaching them to labor. Such a course has encouraged them in idleness and ignorance, the effects of which you begin to feel.

"You must now rid yourselves of these evils the best way you can by righting up everything and doing your first works, or probably what you would have done at first, if multiplied cares had not rested upon you, as is common in all new settlements.

"A steady and upright and persevering course may yet restore or gain the confidence of the Indians, and you be safe."

Bishop Edward Hunter had been selected to manage the Perpetual Emigration fund, and had gone east with the missionaries to buy oxen and wagons and bring out the poor in the spring, many of whom were still stranded on the banks of the Missouri. With Edward Hunter, President Young sent a letter to Orson Hyde, at Kanesville, of which the following is an extract:

"The Saints are prospering in this valley, which is a very natural result of their good endeavors to keep the commandments and work righteousness. The desire of the brethren to see Zion built up is constantly increasing, and their labors are tending more and more to this one great object."

In November, with some travelers, who were attempting to make a winter journey eastward across the plains, Brigham sent a letter to Bishop Hunter, mentioning a few of "the poor" in whom he was especially interested.

"I want you to help out a blind boy by the name of Truman Barlow. Also the following: Jonathan C. Wright, the widow of Vinson Knight; Andrew Gibbons; Wilmer S. Benson (who lives in St. Louis or Cincinnati); the widow of Aris Brown, (who lives in Missouri); Brother Fordsham or some good watch-maker, and the widow of Elijah Martin. I believe I did give you particular instructions to bring out David Fullmer's family. If I did not you will now take notice of it, as he is now on the exploring expedition south and will be back in the spring. I want you to bring his family to him without fail, that his soul may rejoice, and he may continue to do good. I also want you to bring Thomas Kington of Garden Grove."

I recall here with interest that it was Brother Thomas Kington who had loaned President Young one hundred pounds in England in 1840 to assist in the publication there of the Book of Mormon. Brother Kington was now in need of help himself and Brigham was not one to fail him. "I also want you to bring Thomas Kington of Garden Grove."

In November the weather grew cold in the valley, and there were frequent snow storms. The emigration of the year had added fourteen hundred, and there were now approximately sixty-four hundred inhabitants in the settlements. It was estimated that there were six hundred houses in and around Salt Lake City. Late in October, Isaac Morley and thirty brethren began a settlement in Sanpete valley which they named Manti.

Among the interesting visitors in Salt Lake valley during this winter of 1849 was Captain Howard Stansbury of the Topographical Engineers of the United States army. Captain Stansbury had been ordered to the valley by the government to make a survey of Great Salt Lake.

In his report to the government, published in book form a year or two later, he dwells at considerable length on the history and character of the Latter-day Saints, and with particular reference to their leader he writes:

"Intimately connected with them from their exodus from Illinois, this man (President Brigham Young) has indeed been their Moses, leading them through the wilderness to a remote and unknown land, where they have since set up their tabernacle, and where they are now building their Temple. Resolute in danger, firm and sagacious in counsel, prompt and energetic in emergency, and enthusiastically devoted to the honor and interests of his people, he has won their unlimited confidence, esteem and veneration, and holds an unrivalled place in their hearts."

And again:

"Upon the personal character of the leader of this singular people, it may not perhaps be proper for me to comment in a communication like the present. I may, nevertheless be pardoned for saying that to me, President Young appeared to be a man of clear, sound sense, fully alive to the responsibilities of the station he occupies, sincerely devoted to the good name and interests of the people over which he presides, sensitively jealous of the least attempt to under-value or misrepresent them, and indefatigable in devising ways and means for their moral, mental and physical elevation. He appeared to possess the unlimited personal and official confidence of his people; while both he and his two counselors, forming the Presidency of the Church, seemed to have but one object in view, the prosperity and peace of the society over which they preside."—Stansbury's Report, p. 184.
