Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

THE year 1850 dawned hopefully for President Young. He could look around him now at his little growing colony, "in the wilderness," and feel that the beginning had been successful. In four years from the time that he had left Nauvoo, he had witnessed the transplanting of the headquarters of the Saints from Illinois to the Great Basin, west of the Rocky Mountains, and nearly seven thousand Saints were already established there. Two crops had been planted and had grown to maturity, yielding sufficient food to sustain the inhabitants. Also the "Kingdom" was prospering and had begun to spread its branches abroad. Several of the apostles were on missions to the nations of Europe, and thousands of souls who had embraced the Gospel were preparing to emigrate to Zion. With one exception, the whole picture was pleasing and hopeful to Brigham, and he frequently expressed his gratitude to God "for overruling all things for our good." The situation that troubled him somewhat was this: He did not know what treatment his people would receive from the United States Congress then in session, whom they had petitioned for a teritorial government. Dr. John M. Bernhisel, an emissary of the Saints, was in Washington working for their welfare, but he stood alone against a wall of bigotry and opposition which confronted him on all sides. Brigham was helpless to assist, being so far away from the seat of government, but he did what he always had done; he went to his God and made known to him his anxiety. During January, February and March of this year, I find frequent mentions, such as this one under date of March 30th:

"At dusk, President Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, George A. Smith, Ezra T. Benson and Thomas Bullock met in President Young's upper room to pray."

What else could they do?

They depended for their strength upon the God of Israel.

Brigham did not allow the Saints to become discouraged. Their social activities were continued. On January 24th, Thomas Bullock records:

"President Brigham Young invited the wives of the Twelve Apostles and other elders who were on missions to dine at his house."

And again under date of January 29th:

"The band and a party of friends met in President Young's kitchen in the evening; dancing was continued until eleven o'clock."

As spring began to break the development of the community again went forward rapidly and consistently. Here is an interesting note from the recordings of Bullock:

"March 13th, the chancellor and regents of the University of the State of Deseret held their first meeting, at which a committee was appointed, in connection with the governor, to select a site for university buildings and also a location for buildings for a primary school."

By the beginning of April active preparations were made for holding the annual general conference. The Bowery on the Temple block was repaired on the sides and roof so that it would at least keep out a portion of the weather. Brigham was appreciative of it when it was ready.

"This is the most comfortable place that I have ever seen," he said, "for the Saints to hold their meetings in at our gathering place. When I have been abroad in the world, we have had splendid halls, but at the gathering place this is the best."

At the opening session he reproved again those "who were running off to the gold mines." "I would rather they would stay here and raise grain, and not run after the God of this world. When I see some of the brethren going away, I feel like a mother seeing her child in the midst of the ocean, or in the roaring flames."

"As I came here this morning—I said to my teams, rest—to my family, rest, while I go up to worship the Lord in this comfortable Tabernacle, and get the warming influence of the Holy Spirit, that we may be prepared to go to the nations of the earth and build up the Kingdom of our God. If you felt as I do you would want to come here, but not to hurry away again."

On the third day of conference, Brigham delivered a lengthy discourse, extracts from which were noted down by Thomas Bullock.

"With joy and gratitude to my Heavenly Father, I look upon this congregation. I rejoice to see my brethren and my sisters congregate together to worship the Lord. It is a feast to me to look upon the Saints. It is a joy and gladness to mingle in their society. I feel thankful for the goodly number that are safely landed in these mountains. I look forward to the day when scores of thousands will join us in our secluded retreat. In the midst of all our afflictions and privations we have the privilege that we never before had, of assembling ourselves unmolested from our oppressors. I can truly say, ten or fifteen years ago, I looked upon this people with the expectation that every man and woman would be worn to the grave, their lives spent in watching their houses and protecting their families, before we could enjoy the present privilege. It is all I could have anticipated, my life, my labor, all that I could anticipate eight or ten years ago, is now realized by me."

"I can say to all Israel, it is time we should awaken from our lethargy, from our drowsy and sleepy feelings; awaken to righteousness, and hasten the work that is upon us, for in a day and hour that we are not aware of, behold, the Son of Man cometh."

"I wish the brethren to listen to the principles set forth this morning on speculation and their daily walk; we are here and it is our duty to sustain ourselves in this place, and also those who will come to us. We have a duty to perform to our brethren. We are under holy Christian covenant to assist our poor brethren who are left in the states, until they are gathered here. Remember the poor who are yet in bondage and see what we can do for our poor brethren this season."

"I have a few words to say on Mormonism, as it is called, but to us the doctrine of salvation. I can say I know that it is true. I have known for years and years that Joseph was a Prophet. I did not embrace Mormonism because I hoped it was true, but because I knew it was that principle that would save all the human family that would obey it, and it would make them righteous. Joseph Smith lived and died a prophet, and sealed his testimony with his blood. He lived a good man, and died a good man, and he was as good a man as ever lived. I never pretended to be Joseph Smith. I am not the man who brought forth the Book of Mormon, but I do testify to the truth of it. I am an apostle, to bear the testimony to the Gentiles of this last dispensation, and also to the Jews. . . . My feelings are the same as they were when I was baptized; to do the will of my God."

Early in May, President Young made his second trip to the Provo settlement where the colony had had considerable trouble with Indians.

"President Young felt much chagrined at the conduct of the settlers, who had allowed their boys to wrestle, gamble, and run horses with the Indians—thereby placing themselves on a level with them."

On the 26th, he was back in Salt Lake City and speaking in the Bowery at Sunday meeting he reiterated his advice about going to California.

"He spoke of the folly manifested by the Saints in running after gold, and bartering their salvation for it, after having embraced the Gospel and gathered according to requirements. He told those who wanted to go to the mines that he would remain here, mind his own business, help to build up the Kingdom of God, and when they returned from the mines he would agree to count dollars with them."

One of the chief events of this year 1850 for the inhabitants of Salt Lake Valley took place in the month of June. It was the issuance of the first number of The Deseret News, a humble little weekly newspaper, with Willard Richards as its editor. It is from the files of this little paper that I have obtained a great part of my information for this history. Looking back across the years, I can certainly thank Willard Richards, for his painstaking and faithful efforts in preserving a record of the stirring events of those days and particularly concerning the activities of him about whom this history is written. The third copy of the "News" of July 6th, 1850, reports that President Young spoke "in the Bowery last Sunday." I have selected three or four paragraphs from his sermon as follows:

"To all those who consider us as outlaws, and worthless society, if they will only let those walls, (the Rocky Mountains) continue to separate us from them, it is an evident fact that we cannot injure them any more."

"In any other community the size of this, in any part of the earth, you would see several grog-shops, drunkenness, a little fighting in the streets, lawyers running about with books under their arms, and constables hailing men; but here there is no such thing."

"If all the world absolutely believed the word of God, swords would be made into plough-shares, spears into pruning hooks, and every man would be at peace, in his family, kingdom and country, and every man would meet a friend, love would abound, all contentions would cease, and the people would go and inquire of the Lord by the mouth of a Prophet, what the design of the Creator of this earth is, and they would seek to know more of their eternal state."

This was to the visiting emigrants who were passing through:

"Friends, help us to gather our harvest, and then you can have grain or flour to help you on your journey. Be kind to each other and take a good feeling with you, and be kind and familiar to each other, and, brethren, if a man is without bread, and you have only one meal of food, divide with the stranger, and don't let him go away hungry."

On July 3rd, Dr. Bernhisel was able to report from Washington to President Young that he had secured from President Zackary Taylor "your appointment as enumerator of census in the valleys." On July 14th, President Young again preached in the Bowery; with reference to Independence day on the 4th of July, he said:

"I want to say to every man, the Constitution of the United States, as formed by our fathers, was dictated, was revealed, was put into their hearts by the Almighty, who sits enthroned in the midst of the heavens; although unknown to them, it was dictated by the revelations of Jesus Christ, and I tell you it is as good as I could ever ask for."

And adding this practical advice:

"I say to you farmers, keep your wheat, for I foresee if you are not careful starvation will be upon your heels; preserve your grain, lest you suffer; preserve every kernel, and if we are prudent we will have enough."

Pioneer Day on July 24th was fittingly celebrated. The exercises continued from early morning until late at night, with an oration in the Bowery by Willard Richards. President Young also spoke briefly:

"President Brigham Young then rose to address a few words to those who profess the Christian religion; said he, it is an indispensable duty to acknowledge God in all our thoughts, exercises, and in every avocation of our life; to return Him thanks for all pleasures we enjoy, and the privileges bestowed upon us. God should be in all our thoughts and acts; further, it should be the case with every man and woman on earth: the God that we worship is filled with compassion to all his creatures, and he calls them to glory and to live in virtue; everything we do should be to His glory, and the destruction of sin and sorrow from the earth. We are this day assembled to celebrate the third anniversary of the arrival of the pioneers in this valley. Three years this day the camps came together and were located on City creek. We celebrate this day for our convenience, not as a national deliverance or independence. We crave the right to act as free men and free women, and it is our choice to remember that the Almighty delivered this people from peril, want, suffering, mobocracy, and desolation on every hand, and planted us in this peaceful valley, a people who are not afraid to own their God wherever they are. In our exercises this day, we shall take the liberty to exhibit in word our patriotism, independence and good feelings to that government which is said to be free, and extend the arm of protection to every man, woman and child within its corporate powers. Let us remember our obligations to one another, and our obligations to God, and by a life of good acts and deeds, we will accomplish our designs. Inasmuch as your hearts are right before the Lord, you shall be blessed, and I bless you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen."

Four days later in writing to Orson Hyde at Kanesville, among other things he said:

"It is a general time of health with the Saints and peace, and plenty of hard work, as every one has been so busy that they can hardly get time to eat or sleep."

Regarding their financial affairs:

"It is necessary that all tithing received should be expended on the public works in this place, as it is not to be applied in any way whatsoever upon our own or anybody else's private concern. It is the property of our Heavenly Father, for the use of the whole people, and every man must meet his own liabilities, without any reference to the matter of tithing whatsoever."

II

On Wednesday, July 31st, 1850, President Brigham Young with Heber C. Kimball and a few of the leading brethren began their first trip to Sanpete Valley to visit Father Morley and the families who had settled there. Towards afternoon of this day they drove in their carriages to the Cottonwood settlement where they remained over night. I shall let the historian, Thomas Bullock, who journeyed with them, relate the story of this trip in his own words:

"Thursday, August 1st, 1850. "President Brigham Young and party continued their journey. Within a few miles of Provo City, one of Elder Heber C. Kimball's horses gave out which caused some delay; but the company arrived at Fort Utah (Provo) about five o'clock p.m. A meeting was called in the evening at which President Young gave some good instructions to the brethren of that place. Remarks were also made by Heber C. Kimball, Newel K. Whitney and Isaac Higbee.

"Friday, August 2nd. Elder Heber C. Kimball having obtained some fresh horses, President Brigham Young and party left Fort Utah about eleven o'clock a.m. Within about two miles of the Fort they passed through a bad mud hole, in which the mules on the baggage wagon mired down. The double-tree of Brother Lemon's carriage broke, but the brethren tied it up, continued their journey and baited on Hobble creek, (the present site of Springville.) They continued the journey and encamped for the night on Peteetneet creek, (the present site of Payson), about eighteen miles from Fort Utah. The mosquitoes were very bad and disturbed the brethren very much during the night.

"Saturday, August 3rd. President Brigham Young and party continuing their journey, passed up through Juab Valley and found the road very good until they entered Salt Creek Canyon, up which they traveled over bad roads for about six miles. They encamped for the night at the last crossing of Salt Creek, a beautiful place. The brethren were all well and in good spirits.

"Sunday, August 4th. President Brigham Young and party entered Sanpete Valley in the morning. While passing down the Valley three Sanpete Indians, miserably clad, or scarcely clad at all, met the brethren, who gave them some bread and powder. The company baited at noon at a large spring and arrived at the Sanpete Fort, (now Manti), about 7 o'clock p.m. On their arrival they were saluted by the firing of cannon and welcomed heartily by the brethren of the Fort who extended to them their most liberal hospitality.

"Tuesday, August 6th. President Brigham Young and party spent a pleasant day in the Sanpete Fort. Some of them dined with James Brown; Newel K. Whitney and Dimick B. Huntington went a fishing and caught some fine trout.

"Wednesday, August 7th. About 2 o'clock p. m. President Brigham Young and party attended a picnic or feast, in the school house, in the Sanpete Fort, a sawed log building twenty by twenty-six feet, built for school purposes and public worship. Toward the close of the dinner, a gale of wind, accompanied by a little rain visited the Fort, which rendered the situation rather unpleasant, but cheerful hearts and the good feelings that prevailed overbalanced all obstacles. All were willing to hearken to counsel. About 4 p.m. the wind subsided, and all became calm and pleasant. At 5 o'clock p. m., the tables and dishes all being cleared away, a meeting was called at the school-house. President Brigham Young preached a sermon full of comfort and cheer to the brethren. Heber C. Kimball, Newel K. Whitney and Isaac Morley also made remarks, which seemed to be fully appreciated by all. A splendid good feeling prevailed."

"President Brigham Young preached a sermon full of comfort and cheer to the brethren" . . . How well Brother Brigham could do that, for he had the spirit of his work burning within him like a living fire. Oh, it was fortunate for those poor people, struggling in that rough frontier settlement, enduring—heaven only knows what hardships—that they had this leader who could inspire them, who could lift their spirits above the difficult and desperate circumstances which surrounded them.

Leaving Manti on August 8th, Brigham and his brethren, by comfortable travel, reached Salt Lake City on the 12th.

On the 27th of the month there was a "feast" at the home of Heber C. Kimball, given in honor of Captain Howard Stansbury and party, who had completed their survey work and were about to depart for the east. Brigham was in attendance and spoke appreciatively of what they had done. The following day he set out for Ogden to visit the growing settlement there. At a meeting in the evening he gave the Weber saints some timely advice:

"He counseled the brethren not to settle in the country, but to move on to the city lots, build good houses, school-houses, meetinghouses, and other public buildings, fence their gardens and plant out fruit trees, that Ogden might be a permanent city, and a suitable headquarters for the northern country."

The semi-annual conference this fall convened on September 6th, a month earlier than usual, as Orson Hyde, who was visiting in the valley, was anxious to depart for Winter Quarters before the winter snows should set in, and Brigham was equally anxious that he should have the privilege of attending the conference meetings. At the opening session, according to the conference minutes,

"President Brigham Young stated to the congregation that the morning would be occupied by exhortations, teaching, and preaching, and instructions through the day. The business before the conference will be concerning the different quorums and authorities of the Church; the propriety of strengthening the Sanpete settlement, and a call for volunteers to return with Father Morley; a delegation of elders to Germany, and the various states in that country; that he purposed, once more to lay the law of tithing before the people; praying that he might have the spirit to communicate, and the people to understand; and that on Saturday afternoon Elder Hyde would deliver a lecture on education, to the chancellor and regents of the university.

The report of the conference continues:

"Isaac Morley then expressed his thankfulness for this opportunity to meet the Saints: "My heart is full of blessings for the people—I want a company of good men and women to go to Sanpete, and I do say that no man shall dwell in that valley who is in the habit of taking the name of God in vain."

President Young said: "I have it in my heart to ask the congregation, if Father Morley shall have the right and privilege to select such men as he wishes to go there?"

"Moved that he have that privilege; carried.

Moved that he select one hundred men, with or without families; carried."

President Young then said: "It is as good a valley as you ever saw; the goodness of the soil cannot be beat; there is only one practicable road into it, and that is up Salt creek; the inhabitants there are No. 1; and when I was in that valley, I prayed to God that he never would suffer an unrighteous man to live there. . . . .

"I am going to bring before the people the necessity of keeping up the fund for the emigration of the poor. I declare openly and boldly, there is no necessity for any man of this community to go to the gold mines, to replenish the fund; we have more property and wealth than we are capable of taking care of. If a man is not capable of improving one talent, what is the use of his getting more? He is like the foolish child, that could hold but one apple in both his hands, and in reaching for more, he lost what he had. If men only knew how to control what they have, and were satisfied, they would do much better.

"I will commence at the north and go to the south settlements, and pick out twenty-five of our inhabitants as they average, and another man may take fifty of the gold diggers, off hand, and they cannot buy out the twenty-five who have tarried at home. Before I had been one year in this place the wealthiest man who came from the mines, Father Rhodes, with seventeen thousand dollars, could he buy the possessions I had made in one year? It will not begin to do it; and I will take twenty-five men in the United States who have stayed at home and paid attention to their own business, and they will weigh down fifty others from the same place, who went to the gold regions; and again, look at the widows that have been made, and see the bones that lie bleaching and scattered over the prairies. . . . .

"Brother Joseph suffered himself to be dragged about the country by a mob, and was dragged into something like forty-six or forty-eight lawsuits, yet he triumphed over all of them, and then they murdered him in cold blood, in Carthage jail, without any shadow of crime attached to him. I then swore that I never would fee a lawyer again, and we don't owe one dime but that we are able to pay at any moment.—If I can keep my credit good with the Almighty, I care not whether men speak evil of me, or not.

"I am much gratified to see the warmth of feeling for the poor, by Elder Hyde, and I think the best way to relieve ourselves of all our spare horses and cattle, is to put them into the Poor Fund. We shall not cease our exertions until Zion is redeemed, and all Israel is gathered.

"From the days of Joseph to the present moment, the prophecies were never fulfilled faster, and that too, upon natural principles; they are miracles and remarkable phenomena to us so long as we do not understand them.

"I wish it distinctly understood, that there is not an apostle of Jesus Christ who now lives, or ever did live, or ever will live, but that man's word is law and Gospel to the people, if he magnifies his calling.

"When we have an apostle abroad, who has not power to deal with a conference, we will call that man home, or send him to Texas, to join Lyman Wight, and then we will put another man in this place."

During October, November and December, 1850, Brigham was busily engaged in his various duties in Salt Lake City. One of his chief undertakings this fall was to select a large group of people under the leadership of Elder George A. Smith, who were instructed to travel several hundred miles south of Salt Lake, and in some fertile valley select a location for a settlement, which would serve as a half-way station between the Saints and the inhabitants of Los Angeles valley. The snows of winter on the mountain ranges effectually shut the Saints out from commerce with the people of the east for six months out of each year, but it had already been ascertained that the southern route to California, on account of the mildness of the climate, was always open. Therefore Brigham was anxious to form a chain of settlements along this route, and he was now about to begin with a settlement in Iron county. Following is a letter to "Brother George," directed to him on the Peteetneet creek (Payson, Utah county) as he had already begun his journey with his company.

"Great Salt Lake City,

"December 16th, 1850.

"Dear Brother George:

"The copy of the ordinance to provide for the organization of Iron County was forwarded to you by Brother Aaron Farr, which we have no doubt you have received ere this. Your letter by Brother Jackson Stewart was received yesterday evening, and in reply to a question, if there were any further instruction for Brother George, we say to you, that if the weather should unfortunately set in very severe before you are enabled to reach your destination, we would recommend to you, if you cannot get further than Salt Creek, that we want a good settlement there. If you can get as far as Beaver Creek and should get hemmed in with winter, we also want a good settlement there, and as soon as the winter disappears, you can then lead out for Iron County to fulfill your present instructions.

"Should you be hemmed in by winter at either of the before mentioned places, it will be well for you to build a fort, make yourselves secure, and when you leave in the spring, leave from ten to twenty men in each or either Fort until more assistance can reach them from this place. There is not the least fear but that your cattle will do well anywhere on the sides of the mountains, for feed is everywhere abundant and fuel can be obtained at a very short distance from any point. The reason that we are so very explicit is, that you may not hurry, or kill any of your cattle, but preserve them and yourselves, and accomplish all the good you can. And may the God of Israel bless and prosper you, in all that you put your hand to do, and that you may return in safety to the bosom of your family and the society of those whom you love dearly in the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.

"(Signed) "BRIGHAM YOUNG."

"P. S. Please make out a schedule of your camp and leave with James Pace at the Peteetneet to enable me to take the census."

There is another interesting letter during this month of December, dated the 23rd, two days before Christmas, from President Young to Elder Isaac Morley, who presided over the Saints in San Pete Valley. It is full of timely and practical advice.

"Dear Brother Morley:

"I have good reason to believe that several thieves, who started from the States for the Gold Mines in California, have been tarrying for some time in this place, and are now commencing preparations to leave this place (and no doubt with some of our animals) and proceed as far as your peaceful valley, where their intentions are to steal animals to pursue their journey after the god of this world, and it may be beneficial to you as a people to be on the continued watch for such characters; preserve your property from their grasp and help them from adding sin unto sin; so I continue to say unto all Saints: Watch as well as pray. I send you the brand sheets so that you can examine all their animals to see if branded ,and any animals that are branded with our brands you may safely set down as being stolen, and in such cases take measures to secure the animals and also those who have them in possession.

"It will also be well for you to fence your field, according to my former advice, and build you a fort, that you may have a place to flee to, in case the Indians should dare to make an attempt on you.

"You will do well to destroy all the wolves, foxes and bears that you reasonably can, this winter, as we find by experience that they increase yearly in the neighborhood of this valley, and are a sad nuisance to us.

"I send you a form of record for all baptisms of Saints in your valley, which will be of essential benefit to the people at large, and you will do well to keep a record of all occurrences that are daily transpiring in your midst, and I should also be glad if you would make out a list of all the inhabitants in your valley on the first of January, 1851, with the place and time of birth, and in what quorum they are now in.

"I am glad to hear of your prosperity in building schools and making improvement which evinces the zeal of a faithful people; and in regard to the labor tithing in your valley, you may proceed to make a good state road north across the swamp, ditching it well on each side, and building a bridge across the river, so that we can come in and out; we recommend you to build bridges across Salt Creek this winter, if possible, as we design to start a line of coaches as early in the spring as we can.

"The irons for Brother Charles Shumways mill will start immediately.

"I shall send to Brother Cook the leather he wishes for his elevations if it can be got in this city.

"(Signed) "BRIGHAM YOUNG."

The year 1850 closed as it had opened with conditions favorable to the growth and welfare of the Kingdom. The little settlements were thriving in the valleys. The missionaries abroad were prospering in their labors. Thousands of emigrants were looking towards the land of Zion, "in the midst of the Rocky Mountains," as their ultimate destination.
