Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

AS with 1850, so also the year 1851 dawned auspiciously for President Young and the colony of Saints in Salt Lake valley. During the afternoon of January 1st there was a New Year's party at the Warm Springs Bath House, recently completed, at which Brother Brigham and several of the Twelve were present. They knew how to enjoy themselves, with their families and friends.

On January 9th, Salt Lake City was formally incorporated, and J. M. Grant (President Heber J. Grant's father) was nominated to be its first mayor.

On Tuesday, January 20th, Brigham and a few of his brethren, struck out through the snow towards Ogden, to visit the Saints there and to organize what was to be the second stake in the valleys. It was a cold, long ride, as they traveled all day in their carriages, but towards evening they arrived safely, and were warmly welcomed. The following Sunday, the 26th, a conference was held in the Ogden settlement, and Lorin Farr, a young active and splendid man, was installed as stake president, also a high council and a bishop were selected. The following day, Monday, President Young began his return journey to Salt Lake City. He stopped at John Kay's home about noon where he met the members of "Kay's settlement" and organized a ward "with Brother Kay as bishop." Continuing his journey in the afternoon, Brigham was more than surprised to meet "at Judson Stoddard's farm" south of the Kay's settlement, "Major General Daniel H. Wells, with a large company of mounted men and the band from the city with the news of President Young's appointment by the President of the United States (Millard Fillmore) to the governorship of the Territory of Utah." Brigham was escorted to the city "amidst the firing of cannon and other demonstrations of rejoicing."

Thus Brigham Young, born in poverty, inured to hardship since youth, fighting his way forward, step by step, but always manfully, courageously, is not only president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, but by appointment of the President of the United States, is now governor of the great Territory of Utah. These two honors have come to him while he is yet a comparatively young man, (not quite fifty) but they have not come to him unmerited; he has merited and earned them by faithful and devoted years of service. See how well he will honor them as he goes along.

The news of Brigham's appointment to the office of governor had come into Salt Lake City in an unexpected manner. On the 27th of January, while Brigham was organizing the Saints on the Weber, "Henry E. Gibson of Jefferson Hunt's company of eight persons arrived in Great Salt Lake City from California, by the southern route, bringing letters and papers with a New York Tribune of October 11th, 1850, containing news of the following appointments, by the President of the United States, for the Territory of Utah; Brigham Young, governor; Broughton D. Harris of Vermont, secretary; Joseph Buffington of Pennsylvania, chief justice; Perry E. Brocchus of Atlanta, Georgia, associate justice; Zerubbabel Snow of Ohio, associate justice; Joseph L. Heywood, U. S. marshal; Seth M. Blair, U. S. Attorney."

I find, on looking into the history that on September 7th, 1850, the bill to establish a territorial government in Utah, was passed by both Houses of Congress and on September 20th the President made his appointments for territorial officers. But so slowly did news travel in those days, that although more than four months had passed, Brigham had heard nothing of it until "a New York Tribune of October 11th," had been carried into the city from southern California.

On scanning the president's list of appointments, Brigham found that he knew nothing whatever of Harris, Buffington or Brocchus. Snow, Heywood and Blair were all well known to him, and were members of the Church.

The securing of Brigham's appointment, had been through the able work and endorsement of Dr. Bernhisel, whom the Saints had sent east to work for a territorial government, and Col. Thomas L. Kane of Philadelphia, Brigham's admirer and friend. In recommending him to President Fillmore, Dr. Bernhisel had said,

"I have known Mr. Young for more than nine years, during all which time he has borne the highest character among our people for probity and intelligence. He is a native of New York or Vermont, I do not at this moment remember which, aged about forty-eight. He has strong natural abilities, possesses fine administrative talents, and enjoys the confidence of the people to such a degree that he was unanimously elected governor under the provisional government established in March, 1849, and has since exercised the functions of that office up to the present time."

On reading the bill which created the territory, Brigham found his own duties to be described as follows:

"The executive power and authority in and over said Territory of Utah, shall be vested in a governor, who shall hold his office for four years, and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed by the President of the United States. The governor shall reside within said territory, shall be commander in chief of the militia thereof, shall perform the duties and receive the emoluments of superintendent of Indian affairs, and shall approve all laws passed by the legislative assembly before they shall take effect; he may grant pardons for offenses against the laws of said territory, and reprieve for offenses against the laws of the United States until the decision of the President can be made known thereon; he shall commission all officers who shall be appointed to office under the laws of the said Territory, and shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed."

Brigham learned that his salary was to be $1500 per year, with $1000 additional which he was to receive as superintendent of Indian affairs. On February 3rd, before Justice Daniel H. Wells, he took his oath of office, and was duly qualified.

During March the weather began to break and spring came on, warm and clear. The April conference was held in the Bowery, but Brigham was ill with a cold and was unable to attend. It was at this conference, under the direction of President Heber C. Kimball, that the Saints resolved "to build a Temple to the name of the Lord our God in Great Salt Lake City."

The Fifth General Epistle of the First Presidency was issued on April 7th. Among other things it stated:

"So far as the Saints in the United States and Canada desire to see the work of the Lord prosper, let them arise as one man, and come to Deseret, where they can do more for Zion in one year than they can in many years where they are. Come on the Saints' route north of the Platte, as we stated in our last epistle, leaving the graveyards on the south of the Platte to a future resurrection. If all were agreed in this move, there need not be a Saint left in the states or Canada one year hence."

And continuing further:

"The Saints at home are making preparations to receive the Saints from abroad, and we feel grateful to our Heavenly Father that we can bear witness in truth that the choice blessings of the God of Abraham have rested upon his people, in the valleys of the mountains. Since we last wrote you, the winter has been mild, compared with most winters, and much business has been done. Several grain and lumber mills have been erected, in the various settlements, the past winter; many shingles have been made, and all that is wanting to bring them into immediate use is nails; and let the Saints coming hither remember this in particular. Chairs and various articles of furniture are multiplying in our midst. Two or three threshing machines have been in successful operation in our valley, the past fall and winter, which have saved the labor of many hundreds of days, which have been appropriated to other objects of improvement."

On April 22nd, 1851, President Young with a large number of his brethren, after days of careful preparation, set out to visit the southern settlements and make an exploration of the upper valleys of the Sevier. The brethren traveled leisurely, reaching the Provo settlement on the second day, and Manti on the fifth day, where "their ears were saluted with the roaring of cannon on the mountainside, the waving of banners, and the shouts of a joyous people." On April 30th they held a meeting with the Manti settlers, and selected a High Council. "The evening was occupied in singing, prayer and dancing, until about 10 o'clock, when all retired to their homes, highly gratified with the manner in which the day had been spent."

Pushing south from Manti the brethren made careful note of the possibilities of settlement on the upper Sevier. With difficulty they made their way through what is now known as Marysvale canyon. Near the vicinity of Panguitch they "crossed over the mountains" and on May 10th came in sight of the little colony at Parowan. Here they remained for upwards of a week, visiting with their friends, holding meetings and perfecting a Church organization. In a sermon there on the 16th, "President Brigham Young recommended that the brethren be united in their selection of public officers and stated that he was well satisfied with the plan of the Fort and the improvement made in the settlement. He wished to have sufficient men there to be secure from the children of the Gadianton Robbers, who had infested the mountains for more than a thousand years and had lived by plundering all the time."

Turning their teams northward from Parowan, they took careful note of Beaver valley, Chalk creek, Round valley and Salt creek, as suitable places for settlement. On May 24th they arrived at Salt Lake City.

"When the company reached the city the inhabitants were assembled in crowds and followed the President to his home. There he blessed the people in the name of the Lord God of Israel for their reception and joyful welcome, and the multitude dispersed under cheers from the band."

Brigham had been away from the city one month and two days.

On Sunday, June 1st, 1851, President Young celebrated his 50th birthday. It was a time of satisfaction for him. He had accomplished something. He had something to show for his fifty years. He was already known throughout the nation and in many parts of the world—if that meant anything. But what pleased him more than all else was that under his leadership the people of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints were prospering in their new-found home. The Gospel was spreading abroad. The honest in heart were being gathered and Zion was being built up in the midst of the mountains. That was the object that lay nearest his heart, and its accomplishment was the dream and the hope and ambition of his life.

About the first of July, 1851, the Buffalo Courier, a newspaper in the city of Buffalo, New York, printed a vicious attack on "Governor Brigham Young, of Utah Territory," "based on information of facts stated by a writer in the Rochester Daily Advertiser, recently returned from Salt Lake." Who this writer was, and the source of his so-called facts, I have been unable to learn, but I do know this, that his "facts" were falsehoods from beginning to end. Brigham was charged with levying unjust and high taxes in Salt Lake City, with being an "open abuser of democracy," with "leaguing with the Indians to harass people on the road to California," etc. The President of the United States, Millard Fillmore, took cognizance of this article, and under date of July 4, 1851, he wrote to Col. Thomas L. Kane, Brigham's friend, at Philadelphia, as follows:

"My Dear Sir: I have just cut the enclosed slip from the Buffalo Courier. It brings serious charges against Brigham Young, governor of Utah, and falsely charges that I knew them to be true. You will recollect that I relied much upon you for the moral character and standing of Mr. Young. You knew him and had known him in Utah. You are a Democrat, but I doubt not will truly state whether these charges against the moral character of Governor Young are true. Please return the article with your letter. Not recollecting your given name, I shall address this letter to you as the son of Judge Kane.

"I am in great haste,

"Truly yours,

"MILLARD FILLMORE."

To this letter Col. Kane replied under date of July 11th.

"The President:

"My Dear Sir: I have no wish to evade the responsibility of having vouched for the character of Mr. Brigham Young, of Utah, and his fitness for the station he now occupies. I reiterate without reserve, the statement of his excellent capacity, energy, and integrity, which I made you prior to his appointment. I am willing to say I volunteered to communicate to you the facts by which I was convinced of his patriotism and devotion to the interests of the Union. I made no qualifications when I assured you of his irreproachable moral character because I was able to speak of this from my own intimate personal knowledge.

"If any show or shadow of evidence can be adduced in support of the charges of your anonymous assailant, the next mail from Utah shall bring you their complete refutation. Meanwhile I am ready to offer you this assurance for publication in any form you care to indicate, and challenge contradiction from any respectable authority.

"I am, sir, with high respect and esteem, your most obedient servant,

"THOMAS L. KANE."

President Fillmore was satisfied with the answer given by Col. Kane and nothing more was heard of the charges printed in the Buffalo Courier.

II

The Fourth of July, 1851, Independence day, was appropriately celebrated this year. The Saints gathered near Black Rock on the shore of Great Salt Lake. President Young in describing the event in his history relates:

"A company of about 130 carriages started from the Bowery at nine a.m. and proceeded to the lake where they enjoyed themselves in picnic style, bathing, scaling the mountains, and various other exercises. In the evening the company were entertained by addresses from myself, President Heber C. Kimball, and Elders O. Spencer, J. M. Grant, Willard Snow, James Ferguson and John Kay, and by toasts and instrumental and vocal music."

By August 17th, 1851, all of the territorial appointees of President Fillmore, from the eastern states, had arrived at Salt Lake City. "The officials were kindly received by the Saints," says Bancroft, "and had they been men of ability and discretion, content to discharge their duty without interfering with the social and religious peculiarities of the people, all would have been well; but such was not their character or policy. Judge Brocchus was a vain and ambitious man, full of self-importance, fond of intrigue, corrupt, revengeful, hypocritical."—History of Utah, p. 456.

A few weeks after the arrival of Judge Brocchus in the valley, he sent a note to President Young, requesting the privilege of meeting with the Saints in the Bowery, and of addressing them on a subject of his own choosing. President Young afforded Brocchus this opportunity on the 8th of September at a session of the semi-annual conference. Brocchus spoke for nearly two hours and took the Saints to task for their religious beliefs and many acts of their past history. Richard Ballantyne who was there, in reporting the conference to John Taylor in England, said:

"During the conference, Judge Brocchus, one of the United States associate judges of the supreme court, made a speech to the people, and it was full of insults. He talked throughout as if he was addressing a people ignorant of religion, of justice, of history, of politics, of common sense and virtue—chastised the Presidency and others for their religious sentiments relating to departed spirits, etc., and manifested a self conceit and pomposity of deportment throughout, that was alike full of insult and disgust, to this enlightened and virtuous community."

Judge Brocchus had President Young sitting behind him on the stand and when the judge resumed his seat the President arose. He had endured too much persecution and injustice in his past life to listen to drivel such as this. It filled his soul with indignation. In his reply he was utterly fearless. "I arose and spoke substantially as follows," he relates in reporting this meeting in his history:

"Judge Brocchus is either profoundly ignorant or wilfully wicked, one of the two. There are several gentlemen on this platform who would be glad to prove the statements referred to in relation to him, and much more, if I would let them have the stand. His speech is designed to have political bearing. If I permit discussion to arise here, there may be either pulling of hair or cutting of throats. It is well known to every man in this community, and has become a matter of history throughout the enlightened world, that the government of the United States looked on the scenes of robbing, driving and murdering of this people and said nothing about the matter but by silence gave sanction to the lawless proceedings. Hundreds of women and children have been laid in the tomb prematurely in consequence thereof, and their blood cries to the Father for vengeance against those who have caused or consented to their death. George Washington was not dandled in the cradle of ease, but schooled to a life of hardship in exploring and surveying the mountains and defending the frontier settlers, even in his early youth, from the tomahawk and the scalping knife. It was God that dictated him and enabled him to assert and maintain the independence of the country. It is the same God that leads this people. I love the government and Constitution of the United States, but I do not love the damned rascals who administer the government. I am indignant at such corrupt fellows as Judge Brocchus coming here to lecture us on morality and virtue. I could buy a thousand of such men and put them into a bandbox. Ladies and gentlemen, here we learn principle and good manners. It is an insult to this congregation to throw out such insinuations. I say it is an insult, and I will say no more."

Judge Brocchus thus learned in this meeting that in President Brigham Young he had a man to deal with, a man who would not stand for any evil inference from "such corrupt fellows as Judge Brocchus" or anyone else. Brocchus was utterly whipped and disgraced and in a few weeks he packed up his bag, and went back to the states, influencing Judge Brandenbury and Secretary Harris to accompany him.

Four days after the conference, President Young wrote the following splendid and interesting letter to Elder Eli Kelsey in London. This letter shows that he was not at all disturbed by his controversy with the federal officials. His mind was occupied with the preaching of the Gospel and the establishment of the Kingdom.

"Great Salt Lake City,

"September 12th, 1851.

"Elder Eli B. Kelsey:

"Dear Brother: Your favor of the 23rd of April is received, and it is truly gratifying to hear such good news. It is good news to hear the glad tidings of the Gospel. It is good news to hear of others receiving and obeying its requirements, and good news to receive assurances of being faithful in the hour of trial from those who have partaken of the good word of life unto salvation. It fills my soul with joy and rejoicing to hear of the rapid extension of the Gospel of peace among the nations of the earth; it shows that the servants of God are not asleep and that God Himself is yet working, "bringing to pass ever His strange act," in touching the honest in heart with the fire of his Spirit and causing them to flee from the wrath of the Almighty, which is even now being poured out upon the nations.

"I have read the account of your celebration; that must have been a great day for the Saints in London and will, I doubt not, have a good effect. London was the hardest place in England to get the work planted, but now bids fair to outstrip all other places. This is as myself and my brethren anticipated it would be, for in the Metropolis, you know, they think all truth is known and look for it to emanate therefrom, and so it should, and so it does emanate from the Great Metropolis to those who with an eye of faith can see beyond the things that perish. In the valleys of the mountains we live in peace. Our settlements are extending to the north and south, to the east and west, with that rapidity commensurate with the wants of the Saints and the tide of emigration. There is room for all; therefore let them come home, is the word, that 'Zion may be comforted, that her waste places may be built up, and her wilderness made like Eden and her desert like the garden of the Lord; joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody.'

"So shall the Kingdom of our God be established, built up and extended in the earth. So shall temples be built unto the name of our Lord and the true knowledge of God imparted unto His faithful Saints, the priesthood honored, also the anointings and endowments from the Lord and all the people made to rejoice in the Holy One of Israel. Praying that the blessings of my Father in Heaven may rest upon you and preserve you in health and strength from all evil influences which surround and attend upon you, that you may faithfully fulfill your mission and then return to Zion with crowns of joy and rejoicing upon your head and bringing your sheaves with you, I remain sincerely and truly yours in the Gospel of Peace and Salvation.

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

On the 21st of October, President Young, with a number, of his brethren, left on an expedition to the south to locate a convenient place to establish a capital of the territory. There were in the party, "fifteen men and three boys, with carriages, baggage wagons, horses and mules; a party well armed and considered sufficiently strong in case any small band of Indians should be hostile." The second day they were at Provo, the fourth, at Payson. Two days later, on the Sevier river crossing, "a small party of San-pitch Indians gathered round us while we were fixing a crossing place. They told our interpreter that they were hungry, whereupon President Young gave them a liberal meal of bread and meat, but even this did not clear the lowering look from their countenances." On October 27th, the brethren arrived on the banks of Chalk Creek (now Fillmore in Millard county) where President Young decided they should halt. Here "the site for the seat of government was located, about one mile above the ford, and four or five miles below the mouth of the canyon." The camp historian relates that "at the suggestion of President Young, this site is called Fillmore City, and commands an extensive view of the rich valley."

Having completed their task the brethren began their return journey on the 30th, and after an uneventful trip they arrived home in Salt Lake City on November 7th. President Young having contracted a severe cold, immediately took to his bed, and was hardly out of his house during the entire month of November.

During December the storms of winter closed in on the valley. The brethren worked diligently to complete the adobe Tabernacle on the Temple Block, but were unable to roof it in before the end of the year, consequently the Christmas celebration this year was held in the carpenter shop adjoining and the special guests of the evening were the workmen and their wives. On this occasion, President Young spoke to them:

"Five years ago we were menaced on every side by the cruel persecutions of our inveterate enemies; hundreds of families who had been forced from their homes, and compelled to leave behind them their all, were wandering as exiles in a state of abject destitution; but by the favor of heaven, we have been enabled to surmount all these difficulties and can assemble here today, in the chamber of these mountains, where there is none to make us afraid, far from our persecutors, far from the turmoil and confusion of the old world. Brethren and sisters, has not the Lord poured out his blessings upon you to surpass all former times? Your barns and your presses are filled with fine wheat, and other products in these valleys; your tables groan under the abundance of the blessings of the Almighty. Is there room for one complaint or murmur by this people. No! You are full with the blessings of God; you can sit down and eat and drink until you are satisfied. There are hundreds of thousands in the old world who can say, they never did have enough to satisfy the cravings of nature. There are thousands at this time who would crawl upon their hands and knees, or travel on foot over the mighty ocean, were there a highway cast up, carrying their little children upon their backs, to obtain the blessings that we this day enjoy. That day of peace and plenty which the Saints have looked for from the commencement of this Church, has in a great measure come to pass.

"This is a party for the public hands, those who are laboring for the public good. I am a public hand, and myself and all I possess belong to the Lord. All I possess is tithing, from the cap upon my head, to the soles of the pumps upon my feet. When my bishop came to value my property, he wanted to know what he should take my tithing in. I told him to take anything I had, for I did not set my heart upon any one thing; my horses, cows, hogs, or any other thing he might take; my mind was not set upon any of them. My heart is set upon the work of my God; upon the public good of his great Kingdom: If there be any public hands who feel contrary to this they had better leave and seek to build up themselves. Let them try if they can accomplish any more in that way, than by dedicating themselves to the Lord, in the building up of his work. Those who wish to try this will meet with a signal disappointment."

Regarding the building of a Temple which President Young proposed to begin in the near future, he continued:

"Brethren, we are the Lord's, and all we possess, and I have determined by the help of the Lord and this people to build him a house. You may ask, will he dwell in it? He may do just as he pleases; it is not my prerogative to dictate to the Lord. But we will build him a house, that if he pleases to pay us a visit, he may have a place to dwell in, or if he should send any of his servants, we may have suitable accommodations for them. I have built myself a house and most of you have done the same, and now shall we not build the Lord a house? (The public hands answered "aye.") I will not interrupt your enjoyments by saying more, though on such an interesting occasion as this, much more might be said. Brethren and sisters, I feel to bless you in the name of the Lord. Amen."
