Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

"THE New Year, the first of January, 1852," said the seventh general epistle of the First Presidency, "was ushered in as a day of humiliation, praise and thanksgiving, by proclamation of Governor Young; and thus far the year has never been equalled by the Saints in their willingness to pay their tithing, and to do as they are counselled; and joy of heart, through a greater flow of the good spirit unto them, has been made manifest in a manner not to be mistaken, that when the children of the Kingdom do their duty, God is ready to fulfill his promises unto them, and pour them out blessings until there is no room to receive."

Thus the outlook for the year 1852 appeared better than any that had gone before. It was apparent now that the Saints could succeed and prosper in their new found home. The country was being built up; the Kingdom was forging ahead. The prophecies were being fulfilled. Zion was being established "in the tops of the mountains."

On January 5th in the Council house Governor Young delivered his message to the members of the territorial legislature. I shall quote only two or three paragraphs:

"When I reflect upon the kind dealing of the God of Israel towards the people which you represent, I am led to the certain conviction that He has held us all in the arms of mercy, and contributed more for our benefit, than we at present can appreciate or fully understand. Acting under this conviction, it well becomes us, first of all, to implore His divine protection and assistance, to sustain, guide, and direct us in the discharge of those duties which devolve upon us."

This regarding slavery which was a dominant issue at the time:

"It is unnecessary perhaps for me to indicate the true policy for Utah in regard to slavery. Restrictions of law and government make all servants; but human flesh to be dealt in as property, is not consistent or compatible with the true principles of government. My own feelings are, that no property can or should be recognized as existing in slaves, either Indian or African."

Following is the closing paragraph:

"Let us be wise stewards over the blessings we enjoy, over the trusts reposed in us; with peace and union dwelling in our midst; may exaltation and perfection crown all our efforts, enabling us to perpetuate unto those who shall come after us, the blessings of a free, sovereign and independent government."

The work on the Tabernacle occupied considerable of President Young's time during the months of January, February and March of this year. On January 24th The Deseret News was able to announce that "the Tabernacle is enclosed except the doors and windows."

On January 31st, the first mail of the year came through from the east, and with it the news of the "runaway judges," and the stories they were circulating throughout the country. Brigham was greatly interested, but not much concerned. I shall reproduce here two letters which he wrote the same day the mail was received, one to Dr. John M. Bernhisel at Washington, and the other to Apostle Ezra T. Benson who was on business for the Church in the east.

Salt Lake City,

January 31st, 1852.

"To the Hon. John M. Bernhisel.

"Dear Brother: The mail just arrived has brought the news of the first explosion. (Referring to the reports given out in Washington by the runaway judges.)

"It has created no excitement, although the same favor returns sundry drafts protested and other annoyances, all of which only tend to strengthen our every devotion to the cause of truth, manifesting to us that truly there is no communion in spirit between the sons of Belial and the children of light.

"The legislature is still in session, but will probably adjourn before long, having passed several laws of a general nature and authorized a code commission. This will be by far the best mode to obtain a perfect code and is the practice usually adopted in other states and territories. All is quiet in these far distant vales, peace reigning supreme in all the land.

"The weather has been mild thus far during the winter, resembling the first winter that our people were located in this region. Times are rather dull in relation to money matters; lumber is now obtained at two and a half dollars per hundred feet of good quality for cash; shingles, five dollars per thousand. Beef and wheat have also come down to corresponding rates, although beef has not so much of a downward tendency, owing to the merchants paying goods for cattle.

"The library is now open, bestowing its advantages upon many of the citizens as well as the officers of the territory and members of the legislative assembly. There are a number of books wanted of which we send you a list. In relation to money matters, we are not much disappointed, for we seldom find a man worth much money who is willing to pay his tithing.

"You are hereby authorized to draw upon the office in Liverpool for any funds in the office. We write Brother F. D. Richards in relation to it this mail; we shall need all the assistance that you can render us, having incurred considerable indebtedness for the promotion of the public works and expect to draw upon you. Therefore, be pleased to keep us advised of your resources to answer our drafts.

"You have before this been put in possession of all the facts in relation to our quondam friends who deserted their posts without just cause or provocation. In relation to being removed from office, it gives me no concern. It is a matter that I do not trouble myself about, and if they should, I am abundantly able to pay over an account for any amount that has ever been entrusted in my hands by the government. They never entrusted any to me except the appropriation for the public building and that has to be applied by me in connection with the legislative assembly. The money has been applied in the purchase of part of the Council House, although this building cost much more than that amount; yet, we expect to purchase it back when sufficient public buildings are erected in Fillmore City on the Nuguin, the beautiful Indian name of Chalk Creek in Pahvan Valley, which we have named Millard County. The superintendent of Public Works is making arrangements for the erection of one wing of the State House at that point the ensuing season.

"He informs me that the bills are principally out, and that it will probably cost them fully the amount of the appropriation, if not more. The cost of the Council House in this city was fully forty-five thousand dollars. This is in part owing to the high prices which we have to pay for every item which we have to buy and the high price of labor. The articles of paint, when prepared for use, costs very nearly for the cheapest preparation an average of one dollar per pound. This is owing to the high price of oil, for which article we pay eight dollars per gallon; but things are gradually growing cheaper, and a better building can be built for the same amount the ensuing season than at any previous time.

"There is now a very salutary reformation going on in these valleys in relation to home manufacture. The people seem to understand at last that it is their only resource. The influence which the "News" is exerting with this people upon this subject is truly great, and it is to be hoped will be followed by the happiest results. I refer you to that for further particulars, as my time will not permit any longer indulgence at this time. Be of good courage, Doctor, for all is right; do not permit anything that may occur to discourage you in the least. Go ahead, never doubting, although the sun and all else may appear dark around you, yet the dark curtain will be rent asunder, disclosing the brighter rays for its temporary absence.

"The copy of a letter sent to Mr. Elisha Whittlesey, first comptroller of the treasury, is herewith forwarded to you, and also to Brothers J. M. Grant, O. Hyde and E. T. Benson, that you may be in possession of the facts concerning us. The account of expenses, we think, should be paid whatever that amount may be, a copy of which is also forwarded.

"Praying continually in your behalf, I remain as ever,

"Your brother in Christ,

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

The same day there follows this letter to Ezra T. Benson:

"Great Salt Lake City,

January 31st, 1852.

"Dear Brother Benson: By the "NEWS" EXTRA and Father Hyde's letter you will obtain the principal items of interest from this far off region, where we have only just heard of the reception of the Gentile officers, as they report themselves in the United States. We are differently situated a little from what we were, when a man could go in one night to Carthage or Warsaw and the next day have the myrmidons of Satan upon our heels. Herein truly, "distance lends enchantment to the view." We are going on about as usual; a general time of health prevails and quiet and peace reigns supreme in all the land. Long may it continue, say I, until the Saints of the Most High and the hosts of Israel shall fill every corner and nook thereof, and become very numerous, until they shall be able to marshal their thousands and tens of thousands for the redemption of Zion, when the glory of the Lord will go before them as a pillar of fire by night and a cloud by day. Urge on the emigration with all your might. Tell the people not to be afraid of the plains but to encounter them with any kind of conveyance that they can procure, with their handcarts, their wheelbarrows, and come on foot, pack an animal, if they have one, and no other way to come. I send you a copy of my answer to Mr. Whittlesey, first comptroller of the Treasury, lest either copies sent may miscarry. Your family are all well, and Brother Benson, the Lord is on our side; therefore be of good heart, and rejoice in the Lord of Hosts, for He is our God and His arm is mighty to save, even to the uttermost. We shall feel gratified again to meet you when you shall have accomplished your mission, as also Brothers O. Hyde and J. M. Grant.

"May the peace of God rest upon you and all his Saints, is the prayer of your brother in the Gospel of Christ.

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

There are two items in these letters that especially interest me, and that clearly reveal two of the noble traits of Brigham Young's character. The first, in the letter to Dr. Bernhisel. "Be of good cheer Doctor, for all is right; do not permit anything that may occur to discourage you in the least." Who could give advice greater than that? The Doctor in Washington, representing the maligned and neglected Mormon people in the far west, struggling alone against the mountains of calumny and abuse on all sides, what could he accomplish? It was probable that he would become discouraged and disheartened; hence Brigham's firm and timely reminder to him, which reflected his own great character, "do not permit anything that may occur to discourage you in the least."

In the letter to Ezra T. Benson, note this: "Brother Benson, the Lord is on our side, therefore be of good heart, and rejoice in the Lord of Hosts, for He is our God, and His arm is mighty to save even to the uttermost." Thus with the consciousness that "the Lord is on our side" Brigham went forward from day to day and became a pillar of strength to all about him. He knew that right would prevail and that in the last analysis evil and injustice would come to naught, wherever they were practiced. "Rejoice in the Lord of Hosts, for He is our God, and His arm is mighty to save."

With the closing of the session of the Territorial Legislature early in March, 1852, there was a social afternoon and evening held in the Council House by the members on the fourth inst. President Young was there and was asked to address the gathering. Note the sweet and hopeful spirit of his talk that enabled him to encourage all about him:

"With joy and delight I look upon you, brethren and sisters. I feel to render all praise, thanks and adoration to our Father and God, that my heart is capable of rendering; and with all the affections, together with all the talent bestowed upon me, I feel to serve, praise, adore and acknowledge the Lord our God.

"This party was gotten up by members of the Legislature, to rest their minds, to convene in a social capacity, and enjoy the society of each other with their families and to give renewed activity and energy, which will invigorate and strengthen them in the discharge of the arduous duties devolving upon them.

"I feel to say that every heart of the company present this afternoon and evening feels to sing praises to the Lord, and shout Hallelujah to His holy name. I am in the best place I ever was living in my life, and with the best society. I never saw a community that enjoyed the tranquility and peace that is enjoyed by this people in these valleys of the mountains.

"When I look at myself before the Lord, and see what He has called me to, and what He has called my brethren and sisters to; how He has bestowed blessings upon us, and heaped them up until there is not room to receive them; and I should then want to go to the gold mines, and return again here to speculate upon the Saints, and should be guilty of complaining all the time; it seems if I were to do this that the Lord would damn me."

And then this paragraph in closing:

"I love this people so well that I know they love me; they have confidence in me because I have confidence in them. You may scan the history of the whole Church, and look over the whole surface of the matter, and did you ever see this people, when they had the same confidence they have in each other at this day? No, never. And it is on the increase; and this is what will make us a powerful community. But if we lack confidence in each other and become jealous of each other, our peace will be destroyed. If we cultivate the principles of unshaken confidence in each other, our joy will be full."

II

President Brigham Young was gratified when he called the annual conference together on April 6th, 1852, for the Saints were meeting, no longer in the old Bowery, open to the weather, but in their new Tabernacle, a comfortable building, capable of seating 2,500 people.

"When the doors were thrown open at nine a.m.," relates Thomas Bullock, clerk of the conference, "the people rushed in as if the flood gates of a mighty reservoir had given way, and in a few minutes all the seats were occupied, so great was the desire of the Saints to hear the teachings of the servants of the Lord."

At the opening session President Young expressed himself as follows:

"We have not had much privilege hitherto of meeting together in the valley. Four years ago, when the brethren came into this valley, Brother George A. Smith delivered his first lecture upon the cannon, for there were no houses wherein the people could assemble. Since then they have been greatly blessed, yet they have had little opportunity of holding meetings. The first large place we had to meet in was the Bowery. We felt comfortable in it, and I felt as thankful for it as I ever did for anything in my life; but as quick as the falling weather came, it drove the Saints away, and rendered it necessary to discontinue the meetings in that place, and to hold them in the different wards, so that it became impossible to get all the people together. Now we have a convenient room, the best hall I ever saw in my life, wherein the people could be convened on one floor. I trust we shall renew our strength, meet here to pray and to praise the Lord, and partake of the sacrament, until our feelings are perfectly pure; for we are where we can sit and enjoy the society of each other as long as we please, and there is none to make us afraid."

President Willard Richards was called upon to deliver the dedicatory prayer. It is certainly a beautiful prayer; but I can find space here to quote only that part which pertains to our honored hero, Brother Brigham. Note the love that Willard Richards bore for him:

"Bless thy servant Brigham, with health and strength, of body and of mind, with long life, and peaceful days; may he be endowed with thy Spirit, and the revelations of eternity continually, and may thine angels visit and sustain him, and ministering spirits from thy presence attend him, in all his ways. Guard him, O Lord, from the malicious designs of wicked men; turn aside every shaft that is aimed for his injury; fit and prepare him with every necessary qualification to lead and guide thy people; may his strength and ability be according to his duties, and the burden he is required to bear; may the rich blessings of heaven and earth be poured out upon him, and upon his household; may they, individually and collectively, enjoy the communion of God, and His Saints, and have bestowed upon them every desirable gift that shall promote their peace, comfort, health, and happiness. Bless his habitation, and all therein, his flocks and his herds, the ground that he cultivates, his fields, his gardens, and his vineyards; bless him in basket and in store, and in all that pertains unto him."

Perhaps no man was ever loved more by his people than was Brigham Young. Thus they sustained him again this day as their Prophet and their President, and they were willing and eager to listen to, and obey, his words of counsel and advice. "Find in any country," says the Scotch writer, Carlyle, "the ablest man that exists there; raise him to the supreme place, and loyally reverence him; you have a perfect government for that country; no ballot-box, parliamentary eloquence, voting, constitution building, or other machinery whatsoever can improve it a whit. It is in the man; the truest-hearted, justest, the noblest man; what he tells us to do must be precisely the wisest, fittest, that we could anywhere or anyhow, learn."

A few excerpts here from President Young's sermon during this April conference of 1852 will no doubt be of interest to the reader. On the opening day he said:

"It is a great privilege which we enjoy this morning of assembling ourselves together in this comfortable edifice, which has been erected in the short space of about four months, in the most inclement season of the year. We have now a commodious place in which we can worship the Lord, without the fear of being driven from our seats by wet and cold, or of standing exposed to the weather. I now say to my brethren, that I feel to dedicate myself and all I possess to the Lord, and constantly feel that all I have is on the altar of sacrifice to the cause of my God."

And again:

"There may perhaps be some few here this morning who feel they ought to be plowing, fencing, building or attending to some minor affair, and cannot possibly spend time to remain at the Conference. If you will harken to the counsel of your humble servant you will say to the fields, the flocks, and the herds, to the gold and the silver, to the goods and chattels, to the tenements and possessions, and to all the world—stand aside, get away from my thoughts, for I am going up to worship the Lord.

"This people have passed through scenes of deep sorrow and affliction, but they are now in comfortable circumstances. They have been miserably poor, but they are now, I may say, in comparative wealth. We have been sick, now we are well. We have been tormented, now we are comforted. We have been afflicted by our enemies, but we are now far from them."

And in closing there is this:

"This kingdom will continue to increase and grow, to spread and prosper, more and more. Every time its enemies undertake to overthrow it, it will become more extensive and powerful; instead of decreasing, it will continue to increase, it will spread the more, become more wonderful and conspicuous to the nations, until it fills the whole earth."

On the 22nd of April, President Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and several of the Apostles, together with a small group of the brethren, left Salt Lake City, "for the purpose of visiting the southern settlements, exploring the country, ascertaining the situation of the country, making roads, building bridges, preaching the Gospel, and doing and performing all other acts and things needed to be done, as they may be led by the good spirit." On the 28th they arrived at the Manti settlement in San Pete County. William Clayton in writing back to the News from this place said: "There are several beautiful settlements on the road to this point, among which perhaps Springville may rank first, and Nephi second. At both of these places the spirit of energy and industry is almost without a parallel. All the houses look clean and neat, fences in good order, and everything shows the Saints live there. The city of Nephi was commenced in September last. There are now 20 good houses, a splendid corral for cattle and a good quantity of land for cultivation."

Three weeks later, on May 21st, the company was back in Salt Lake City, and on that day President Young records in his history:

"I returned with the exploring company on the 21st, having visited many Indian tribes and preached in all the settlements in the southern part of the territory. The energy and industry displayed by the settlers generally were commendable. At Coal Creek (Cedar City) they had erected dwelling houses and corrals and had just organized into an Iron Manufacturing Company, for the purpose of carrying on that business."

Eight days after his return from the south, President Young wrote this extremely interesting letter detailing his southern trip, to his faithful friend in Philadelphia, Colonel Thomas L. Kane. I shall only reproduce part of it:

"I am just returned from an excursion to the southern part of the territory, during which I took occasion to visit the principal settlements in that direction, as also many bands and tribes of Indians. The settlements are in a flourishing condition and bid fair soon to furnish themselves with all the necessaries and many of the luxuries of life. An excellent influence seems to be exerted with the native tribes, many of whom have been induced to abandon their indolence and acquire a more liberal supply of food for themselves, by using the necessary exertion; some have sown wheat, planted corn, also beans and potatoes, while others are employed by the citizens and receive remuneration for their daily labor. A continuance in this course, uniformly carried out, cannot but produce the happiest results, in effecting a salutary change, not only in their temporal, but moral conditions. We found many fine valleys, susceptible of sustaining a large and dense population. So far as my observation extends, the natural wealth of this country consists of its rich pasturage; although its natural resources as yet are scantily developed. There are many hundreds and thousands of acres of good land which cannot be made available owing to a scarcity of water for irrigation; never theless ourselves and our friends can find a place for many years to come amid these wild mountain regions, where surrounds the health inspiring atmosphere, and the clear cool mountain rivulet winds its way from lofty and rugged eminences, presenting a scenery bold, grand and beautiful, to some sequestered vale, where downtrodden liberty shall feel exalting aspirations, and contentment find repose."

"(Signed) "BRIGHAM YOUNG."

One of the things that has tremendously interested me in compiling this history is, that under every existing circumstance and condition, where calm, cool judgment, and wise action was required, President Young seemed to know exactly what to say and do. He was blessed with the supreme gift of wisdom—without which it is said, all other gifts are useless. Note the wise and splendid counsel given at this time in an "Epistle" to the little colony of Saints at Fillmore, regarding their treatment of the Indians. It was written on the 30th of May, 1852, some days after his return:

"It has been and is our uniform advice and counsel, to all of the distant settlements, to secure themselves and their families from the dangers incident to settling in all new countries, which are inhabited by savage tribes, whose ignorance induces vice, and whose indolence induces crime. They are very weak, both in mental and physical resources and not to be compared with our advanced stage of civilization and enlightenment.

"The merest trifle is sufficient to ignite their most terrible and uncontrollable passions, because they do not possess sufficient judgment and expansion of mind to circumscribe and make allowance for the follies and weaknesses of others. Brutal barbarity, love of plunder, blood-thirstiness and the most filthy, degraded and low estate are their general characteristics. As such they should be guarded against and no advantage given them to injure or destroy the brethren or their property.

"To you, brethren, we say: Secure your fort, so that you can close it at night, or any other time, with good and substantial gates, and as soon as you are able to build a good and sufficient stone fort, high enough to accommodate rooms upon the inside, whose flat roofs shall not come within four or five feet of the top with bastions at diagonal corners which will command the outside of the walls all around the fort, also the water. The site you now occupy is a good one for such a fort and your present improvement might be made available until the accomplishment of the other.

"Guard and herd your stock, and do not give the Indians any opportunity to kill or drive off any animal without some one seeing him do it; keep your arms and ammunition in the most perfect order, ready for instantaneous use, and when you go into the canyon or field to labor, let some of the company have some weapons of defense with them; let the herdsmen also carry arms and ammunition in the most perfect order ready for instantaneous use and that you be not met upon unequal terms; the savage is never without his weapons. You will find it necessary to build a large corral in which to stack your grain and hay; let this not be so near your fort as to endanger the same by fire. This much to inspire you to watchfulness and the defense of yourselves and property; against whom? Who is the enemy that thus threatens to injure and destroy, and against whom it behooves us to be so guarded and watchful?

"Brethren, our warfare is against the powers of darkness. The enemy of all righteousness lurks in every place where he can gain admittance, inspires every tabernacle that will subject itself to his control to destroy the Saints; to annoy and injure them by every machination that he can devise, in order to prevail and triumph over the power of the Holy and Eternal Priesthood of Almighty God. This is his aim and design, and he uses every means that lies within his control and power to accomplish this object. The forlorn descendant of Abraham who wanders in ignorance, degradation and darkness cannot "test the spirits," he knows not "what manner of man he is," and his tabernacle in this low condition has become a receptacle for every unclean spirit; an easy prey to the despoiler of the fair heritage of our God. But brethren, he is our brother, he is of Israel, through the loins of Joseph and Manasseh. Here opens up a field of usefulness and opportunity to do good; for, although the just indignation of the Almighty has been poured out upon the transgressor, and his posterity for many generations, yet to them pertain the promises and blessings of the chosen seed.

"We expect you to feed and clothe them so far as lies in your power; never turn them away hungry from your door; teach them the art of husbandry; bear with them in all patience and long suffering, and never consider their lives as an equivalent for petty stealing; remember that it is a part of their existence, practiced by them from generation to generation, and success in which paved the way to renown and influence amongst them. Induce them from those ideas and notions by your superior wisdom and genial influence and intercourse with them, and they, seeing your good works and the benefits arising from the peaceful avocations of civilized society will, peradventure, lay aside their idle and predatory habits and gradually return from the long night of darkness and thraldom, which has so long held them in chains and bondage. Finally, brethren, be just and quiet, firm and mild, patient and benevolent, generous and watchful in all your intercourse with them; learn their language so that you can explain matters to them, and make them understand you. Employ them and pay them the full and just reward for their labor, and treat them in all respects as you would like to be treated, had it been your fate instead of theirs to have come upon this stage of action under the penalties incurred by the transgression of their fathers. And remember that the time draweth nigh, and is even at the door, when their captivity shall be turned, and the Lord will visit upon their oppressors and their persecutors even all and more than all that they have imposed upon them."
