Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER NINETEEN

ON Sunday, June 13th, 1852, President Young addressed the Saints in the Tabernacle. Dramatically pointing to Elder Eleazer Miller, who sat in the audience, he said:

"There sits the man who baptized me and who first presented the Book of Mormon to my notice. It filled my system with light, and my soul with joy. The world, with all its wisdom and power, with all the glory and guilded show of its kings and potentates, sinks into perfect insignificance, compared with the simple unadorned testimony of a servant of God."

Regarding the preaching of the Gospel:

"I would rather hear men tell their experience, and testify that Joseph is a Prophet of the Lord, the Book of Mormon, the Bible, and other revelations of God are true; that they know it by the gift and power of God, have conversed with angels, have had the power of the Holy Ghost upon them, giving them visions and revelations, than hear any other kind of preaching."

This beautiful expression in closing:

"All I design to live for is to see the inhabitants of the earth acknowledge God, bow down to Him and confess His supremacy, and His righteous covenant. To Him let every knee bow, and every tongue confess, and let all creation say Amen to His wise providences. Let all persons declare their allegiance to God, and then live to it, saying 'As for me and my house we will serve the Lord.' As for me, and all I have, it is the Lord's, and shall be dedicated to him all my days."

In writing this history of President Young I have found continually that there is much more material to be left out about him than I can possibly put in. A complete record of this man's sayings, sermons and letters would fill many volumes. I can only pause here and there to show a side light of his marvelous personality, his splendid grasp of the Gospel principles, and the examples of his perfect faith. Here and there something comes to light, at times unexpectedly, which fairly breathes with the fervor of the Gospel spirit. In the files of the historian's office, I came upon this letter, written in the summer of 1852, (dated July 12th, to be exact) and addressed to a party unknown to me, George C. Bank, of Fremont, Ohio. Brother Bank had written to President Young, asking about "the best means for a poor man to emigrate." Note the strength, the beauty, the faith and understanding of this reply:

"The way for the Saints to do is to pray fervently, with faith believing, using the utmost exertions, to accomplish the work which is devolved upon them, whether it be to emigrate, to cultivate the earth, or to preach the Gospel. Dear Brother, it is a warfare that we are engaged in, to seek to roll back the curtain of darkness and gloom which has so long overspread the firmament, enveloping in its murky atmosphere the whole face of the earth, and establish the light of heaven, the work of our God, and the building up of His Kingdom upon the earth. Hundreds and thousands of Saints have felt the impulse of the regenerating influence, and sought by every exertion, yea, even with life itself, to be found in the active service of the work in the last days, even the dispensation of the fulness of times.

"That friends should leave you, is nothing more than you should expect; that you would be despised and abused, no more than the true servant of God expects. Jesus Christ, the Captain of our salvation, was made perfect through suffering. Why, then, if we expect to attain an exaltation, should we shrink from persecution here? Believe me, it is by faith, integrity and perseverance that we obtain a foot-hold upon the earth, and in direct opposition to the powers of darkness, bigotry, superstition, priestcraft, etc. It therefore becomes all Saints everywhere to exert themselves to the extent of their abilities in the service of their God. How many hundreds and thousands wend their way to the gold regions of California at the sacrifice of everything? Absolutely everything is sacrificed at the shrine of their golden worship. They go in handcarts, in wheelbarrows, on foot, as hirelings and assistants, etc., in every way that human ingenuity can devise. Can this be possible and yet the Saints of the Most High God not equal to offer as much at the shrine of the eternal worlds, where, if he shall endure to the end, he will receive an inheritance which will not fail?

"Let your faith be strengthened, and may the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, of Joseph and Hyrum, even that God who never forsakes His servants, bless and preserve you, and all that you have, and open up the way before you, is the prayer of your brother in the new and everlasting covenant, in the name of Jesus of Nazareth. Amen."

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

What would not a man do for the writer of such a letter. No wonder that Matthew Carruthers wrote back to his friends in England from the little colony of Cedar City about this time:

"The counsel of Brigham Young, the present governor of the territory, is followed to the very letter, and men's determination to obey his mandates, is stronger than the love of life, or worldly enjoyments, or the fear of death itself. This struck me more than any other thing after I came to the valleys."

The 24th of July, Pioneer day, was appropriately celebrated again this year. President Young spoke to a large group of Saints in the Tabernacle. I shall reproduce two or three paragraphs:

"Five years ago this day the Pioneers approached this valley, with their implements of husbandry, etc., which were represented by them in the procession today. We came for the purpose of finding a place to set our feet, where we could dwell in peace. That place we have found. If the Saints cannot enjoy that peace which is so dear to them here, I would say that I am ignorant of the spot on the earth where they can. Where could a place have been found, where we might enjoy freedom of thought, freedom of speech, and freedom of worship? If not in these mountains, I am ignorant of the place.

"When we first approached this valley there was not a man upon the face of the earth who ever had beheld these valleys of the mountains, or knew anything of the Great Basin, who knew that corn or any other kind of grain could be raised here; can you find the man who had any knowledge of the Great Basin, as it is called, that believed there could be an ear of corn ripened in it? There is not that man on the earth, when you have excepted the people called the Latter-day Saints. We came here and planted our garden seeds of various kinds, five years ago this day; they grew, but they did not ripen, though the buckwheat would have ripened, perhaps, had it been properly taken care of; some other grains would also have come to maturity so as to have assisted a small colony to live here; they, however, lived; how? Shall I say by faith? Yes, partially so; for had they not had faith, they certainly never would have come to this place; it is the faith of the Latter-day Saints that brought them here.

"I say to this community, be humble; be faithful to your God, true to His Church, benevolent to the strangers that may pass through our territory, and kind to all people, serving the Lord with all your might, trusting in Him; but never fear the frowns of an enemy, or be moved by the flatteries of friends or of enemies, from the path of right. Serve your God; believe in Him; and never be ashamed of Him; and sustain your character before Him, for very soon we will meet in a larger congregation than this, and have a celebration far superior; we will celebrate our perfect and absolute deliverance from the power of the Devil—we only celebrate now our deliverance from the good brick houses we have left; from our farms, and lands, and from the graves of our fathers; we celebrate our perfect deliverance from these. . . .

"Our lives have been spared, and we are yet upon this planet, and by and by we will celebrate a perfect deliverance from all the powers of earth; and we will keep our eyes set upon the mark and go forward to victory. . . .

"I say to the aged, to the middle-aged, and to the young, all be true to your God, true to your brethren, and kind to all, serving God with all your heart; and may He bless you for Jesus' sake; Amen."

On Saturday, August 28th, 1852, there convened in the Tabernacle on the Temple Block an important special session of Conference. The three members of the First Presidency and seven of the Twelve were present, together with many of the leading brethren. The Tabernacle was filled to overflowing. At the opening session President Young spoke in part as follows:

"I suppose the brethren understand the object of this special conference; it is for the purpose of transacting business pertaining to foreign missions, and of giving the brethren an opportunity to cross the plains before the cold weather.

"I wish to say to the brethren, I am thankful and I rejoice in the Lord my Savior for His choice blessings which we enjoy. It was observed by Brother Benson, that Brother Brigham has but one fear concerning this people; it is true.

"I do not fear all the devils in hell nor all the mobs that could be raised, but if I have any fear, it is upon this ground, that the people in their blessings should forget the Lord their God.

"The reports we have heard from our brethren are favorable, cheering and rejoicing to every heart. Those who are coming from the islands of the sea, and from the old countries, where the Elders have been sent; those from Pottawatomie and the States are coming home; for the present this is the place of gathering; here the standard is reared for the Latter-day Saints from all the nations, that they spread out from this place, and fill up other places, until all the continent of America, which is the land of Zion, shall be peopled with Saints of the Most High."

At the afternoon meeting the names of one hundred and seven missionaries were read out to the congregation. They were selected to go to the following countries: the United States, Canada, British Guiana, West Indies, England, Wales, Ireland, France, Germany, Denmark, Norway, Hindoostan, China, Siam, South Africa, Australia, and the Sandwich Islands.

During this afternoon session Brigham spoke again, fervently requesting the Elders to "start from here with clean hands and pure hearts, and be pure from the crown of your heads to the soles of your feet; then live so every hour. Go in that manner, and in that manner labor, and return again as clean as a piece of pure white paper." Making a personal reference to himself he said, "I never have professed to be Brother Joseph, but Brother Brigham, trying to do good to this people. I am no better, nor any more important, than another man who is trying to do good; if I am, I don't know it. If I improve upon what the Lord has given me, and continue to improve, I shall become like those who have gone before me. I shall be exalted in the Celestial Kingdom, and be filled to overflowing with all the power I can wield, and all the keys of knowledge I can manage will be committed unto me."

II

One of the strongest characteristics of President Brigham Young was his marvelous self-reliance. While he worshiped the God of Heaven, and continually looked to Him for divine guidance, he also relied upon his own strength and ability to carry him through the difficult and arduous situations of life. This admirable characteristic of depending upon himself he had built up over a period of many years. As a youth of fourteen he lost his beloved mother in death. He adored her character and companionship. She was his support and mainstay. With her passing Brigham was "farmed out" among the neighbors, and from that time on he made his way alone. But he quickly learned the lessons of life, perseverance, industry, thrift and frugality. Above all he learned to depend upon himself.

His experiences in the Church brought home to him this lesson to a marked degree. In the first ten years of his membership he was driven out of his own home three times by armed mobs, and forced to flee for his life. These bitter trials taught him a lesson, which he never forgot—that only upon himself and his Heavenly Father could he place his dependence for his temporal and spiritual welfare. He could look nowhere else for succor or support. Each succeeding year confirmed this lesson; gradually he grew self-sufficient, strong, like a granite mountain.

Occasionally we catch glimpses of this great self-reliance. Such an occasion is afforded in the following letter written in September, 1852, to Dr. Bernhisel, in Washington. The doctor had again written Brother Brigham detailing his discouragement, reporting the slanderous sayings of the "runaway" judges, and the many false and vicious attacks on the Church that were being made by editors and members of Congress. Brigham was able to reply in a vein that left no doubt as to where he stood. His mind was made up; nothing his enemies or the enemies of the work of God, could do or say, could injure him in the least. He would carry on, regardless of them all. I have copied the letter in part as follows:

Dear Brother Bernhisel:

You may think that we are determined to drive from us all our friends, subvert the best laid plans for our political advancement as a territory and cause you a tremendous deal of trouble, anxiety and care, but you must remember, doctor, that we are not dependent upon this generation for our position, only so far as they accelerated it by their oppression. We fled from their persecution. We grew by being let alone; and through the blessings of a merciful Providence sustained ourselves, even to this day, without any of their assistance or available goodwill. If, as you say, we have many good friends who would do us good, we have not as yet been able to discover in these mountains and peaceful vales the effects of their fond endeavors. We have only asked for simple justice, but have not as yet been able to distinguish even by our most enlarged, piercing and extended vision, her semblance, her form, to say nothing of her glittering presence, emanating from the present Congress, but on the contrary receive by every fluttering gale the most unquestionable indications of deadly hate and malice. The press appears to be teeming with the most vile and malicious falsehoods, and away they go with lightning speed, the length and breadth of the nation and even to foreign countries, scarcely contradicted and certainly nothing diminishing as they go. Well, what do we care for it. Just nothing at all, as I before observed; we are not dependent upon this generation for our position, neither are we for our sentiments, feelings or religion. We have long since learned to regard not the opinions of the world, nor the malignant abuse of our enemies. Let them howl and spend their fury. The Lord is our God and where He is, they cannot come. He is our defense and will sustain His cause against all opposition, and, reflect, Doctor, will hush every murmur. Therefore, let not your heart be troubled, although you should hear the deep intonations indicating an approaching tempest, although you may see the dread array and observe the preparation for the dreadful conflict, remember that God has spoken, and His word shall not return unto Him void, but all shall be fulfilled. Policy is a favorite theme with some, but I have no policy adverse to the rapid spread of the principles of truth, fraught as they are with the salvation of men. I cut loose many years ago from all world aspirations, or expectations of favor, from this generation. Appropriations, I almost pray that they may withhold them, and I would do so fervently with all my heart, if they would only let us alone and leave us to govern ourselves without any of their interference; but this cannot be so, they cannot let us alone, it is not so decreed, but is otherwise. We are, therefore, required to exercise our wisdom, our judgment and best faculties to compete with whatever comes along, but while we do this, never permit our own private notions of policy to in any wise retard or obstruct the progress of the great work of truth or any principle from going forth, when it is certain that it should be upon its mission."

And this paragraph in closing:

"You may think that I feel bitter, but I do not; it is all first rate, and I never felt better, had better health, or enjoyed better than at present. All is right. But I am writing too long and will therefore close by wishing you a very good night, and may heaven's peace rest upon you, and may you be blessed with all the blessings pertaining unto the faithful Saints, in the name of Jesus, Amen.

"I remain your friend and brother in the bonds of the Gospel of Truth.

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

The principal theme of the October conference in 1852 was the building of a temple in Salt Lake City, on the Temple Block. Through the sermons of President Young and the brethren, great enthusiasm for the project was developed. On the third day of the conference, President Heber C. Kimball presented a motion "that we build a temple of the best materials that can be obtained in North America, and that the Presidency dictate where the stone and other materials shall be obtained." It was debated for some time as to whether stone from Sanpete, red sand stone found in the mountains east of Salt Lake City, adobes or the native granite should be used in the building.

The conference was followed on October 13th, by the issuance of the "Eighth General Epistle of the Presidency," a lengthy document setting forth the progress of the Church since the previous epistle in April. A few paragraphs from this message will reveal the spirit with which President Young and the brethren worked:

"Beloved Brethren: Every returning season presents new scenes and subjects for our contemplation; and mercies and blessings, renewed and multiplied, to call forth songs of praise and gratitude and thanksgiving to our Heavenly Father, who is causing the light of the Gospel of his dear Son to shine farther and farther, and with greater effulgence, from day to day, until even now the four quarters of the earth, and the islands of the sea, are beginning to be heard by a multitude of the nations; and Israel is coming home in crowds, like doves to their windows."

"The Saints in the valley are feeling well, doing well, rejoicing in God, diligent in business, prospering abundantly in every lawful undertaking and growing more faithful in keeping the commandments of God, paying their tithing, and building up the kingdom every year. The stone wall around the Temple block was commenced August 3rd, and if the fall and winter weather shall prove as favorable as the last, will probably be completed before spring, ready for the brick or adobes which are to surmount it. Cash is scarce, though more plenty than it was, and will continue to improve as domestic manufactures improve. We dig no gold or silver but depend on our friends to dig and bring to us, while we are digging after richer treasures."

"Come up to the building of the house of the Lord, O ye Saints, from the four corners of the earth; for as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, so would the Lord Jesus gather you, in these last days; and now is the time for you to come, while the nations of the earth are at peace, and plenty covers the land. You know not how soon your way may be hedged by the sword, or stayed by the hand of famine; for the Savior said, while here on earth, that there should be wars and famine, even bloodshed upon the face of the whole earth; but the nations will not believe it until it comes upon them."

"Listen to the voice of your teachers; listen to the counsel of the elders of Israel whom we send unto you; for inasmuch as this is verily the work of God, in which we are engaged, you will find their words a light unto your feet, a lamp to your path and the Holy Spirit will dwell with those who live by their precepts; and we trust we shall not have to say to you, as did an ancient Apostle to the Saints, "Ye have many masters, but few fathers." O ye Elders of Israel, be ye fathers to the household of faith. Ye shepherds of Israel, feed the flock of God, and seek his pleasures, and not your own, in all things; and teach the Saints to be subject to the powers that be, wherever they are."

Two weeks after the Epistle was issued President Young penned a splendid letter to Samuel W. Richards, who was presiding over the British mission. It is dated October 29th, 1852. I can find space to quote it only in part, but it is filled with faith inspiring admonition; such a letter as only he could write:

"We believe, as the time draws near, the Lord will hasten His work, and nations will soon be gathered into the fold of Christ. The work urges, and is becoming very much enlarged, and extended, and requires a commensurate accumulation of men and means, and expansion of mind and energy, ability and perseverance. The Lord our God is our strength, and under this accumulation and weight of care, and business, has hitherto given in grace and strength according to our day and generation, has sustained us in every time of need and preserved and delivered us from the hands of our enemies. Blessed forever be His holy name; great and wondrous be His power. Let all the nations give heed to His servants, for they are preparing the way for His coming; yea, when He shall come in power and great glory, to take unto himself a kingdom, prepared and made ready in the due time of the Lord; for this is the Lord's work; woe be unto him who putteth forth his hand, his influence, his energies, or any of his powers to oppose it.

"My heart is truly rejoiced in the spread of the Gospel in the British Isles, and the hold which it has obtained in the adjacent countries of Europe. The seed is sown; the word has gone forth, and will not return void, but will be accomplished while thus the Lord is working in the earth by the power of His might; it behooves us, even all His Saints, to go to with all our might, mind and strength, to do what we can for the advancement of His cause, for the delivery of the honest in heart from the oppressor's rod, and to let the captive go free, that Israel may be gathered from among the nations, whither they have been scattered, Zion redeemed and the Kingdom of our Lord established and built up, never again to be thrown down. So shall we fill the measure of our creation, and fill up our days in usefulness; and having wrought righteousness upon the earth, have joy in the work we have performed and be prepared to receive our exaltation among the blood-washed throng, the sanctified ones, and the sons of God, even to become kings and priests unto His holy name forever.

"Brother Samuel, may this be our happy lot; and let our prayers and supplications, in unison, ascend to our Father in Heaven, to grant unto us of His good Spirit, that it may richly abide within and upon us, that we may be thoroughly furnished with wisdom to discharge and perform every duty that is or may be devolved upon us.

"Praying God my Heavenly Father continually in your behalf, and the behalf of all faithful Saints, I remain your brother in the Gospel of Christ.

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

During November cold weather came on, and with it frequent snow storms. Early in the month Brigham became ill with influenza, and on the 11th, Thomas Bullock reports, 'Today President Young has a high fever." He remained in bed for some days, but on the 24th felt well enough to go to his office. However, as is frequently the case with this complaint, he got out too soon. He had to return to his room and it was not until the 17th of December before he had recuperated sufficiently to resume his work.

The snow fell in abundance during December. On the 24th it was reported to be five feet deep in the mountains and one to one and a half feet on the level in the valley.

Christmas day dawned cold and clear. About ten o'clock in the morning the Nauvoo brass band assembled in front of President Young's house and played several stirring and familiar tunes. The Christmas spirit was prevalent throughout the city. Peace and prosperity reigned amongst the Saints.
