Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER TWENTY

JANUARY 1st, 1853, was a happy day for President Brigham Young, despite the fact that the sky was overcast and rain fell in the afternoon. Before he left his house in the morning, eleven of the Quorum of Twelve (Orson Pratt alone being absent in the east) called at his door to extend to him New Year's greetings. Brigham was indeed gratified to have the love of his brethren manifested in this regard. The members of the Quorum of Twelve were perhaps closer to his heart than any of the brethren. It was his quorum. He had traveled along with most of them since the first apostles were called in February, 1835. Almost eighteen years had elapsed since that time and they had all passed through many and varied experiences—the kind of experiences that draw men close together. Now they were here at his door to do him honor.

"President Young blessed the Quorum of the Twelve," wrote the brother who reported this event to The News, "and said they always had his blessing. And the Twelve Apostles felt and realized that the blessings of the Presidency of the Church and Kingdom of God were of far more worth and benefit to them than any earthly gift, or the treasures of the earth; their hearts were full of joy and gladness, which was unspeakable, at the blessings of once more having the privilege of returning from the four corners of the earth, and beholding each others' faces, and sitting in council together, and meeting with the President and his council, and receiving blessings at their hands."

During the afternoon of this same day, President Young attended the dedication ceremonies at Social Hall. The festivities, which consisted of songs, recitations and speeches, began about two p.m. and continued until six p.m. when "a dinner for all present" was served. Afterwards there was dancing and music, more songs and speeches, until a late hour at night. Thus opened the pleasant little Social Hall which afforded many hours of amusement and recreation for President Young and his friends during all the succeeding years of his life.

On Sunday, January 16th, President Young preached a splendid sermon in the Tabernacle, his subject being "Salvation." His reasoning is as sound and practical for us as it was to his hearers that day.

"How difficult it is," he said, "to teach the natural man who comprehends nothing more than that which he sees with the natural eye. How hard it is for him to believe. . . Talk to him about angels, heavens, God, immortality and eternal life, and it is like sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal to his ears; it has no music to him; there is nothing in it that charms his senses, soothes his feelings, attracts his attention, or engages his affections in the least; to him, all is vanity.

"To say that the human family is not seeking salvation is contrary to my experience and that of every other person with whom I have any acquaintance. They are all for salvation, some in one way, some in another; but all in darkness and confusion.

"If the Lord does not speak from heaven and touch the eyes of their understanding by his Spirit, who can instruct or guide them to good? Who can give them words of eternal life? It is not in the power of man to do it; but when the Lord gives his Spirit to a person, or to a people, they can then hear, believe, and be instructed. An elder of Israel may preach the principles of the gospel, from first to last, as they were taught to him, to a congregation ignorant of them; but if he does not do it, under the influence of the Spirit of the Lord, he cannot enlighten that congregation."

And in closing his sermon he made this personal reference:

"I feel happy, as I always told you. Brother Kimball has known me 30 years, 21 of which I have been in this Church; others have known me 20 years, and there are some here who knew me in England. I had Zion with me then, and I brought it with me to America again, and I now appeal to every man and woman, if I have not had Zion with me from first entering into the Church to the present time."

The chief topic with the brethren in Salt Lake valley for some months past, had been concerning the building of a Temple. It had largely occupied their time, thought and attention. Now the day had arrived to break ground for that sacred edifice. "About ten a.m., Monday, February 14th, 1853," relates a reporter in The Deseret News, "men, women and children began to assemble on the Temple Block. It was as clear and lovely a day as the sun ever shone on in Great Salt Lake City, with from one to three inches of snow on the ground in some places, and others quite bare; with some six inches of frost in the earth, though the thaw was mild through the day." Standing "in a small buggy," President Young called the congregation to order and addressed them:

"The Lord wished us to gather to this place. He wished us to cultivate the earth, and make these valleys like the garden of Eden, and make all the improvements in our power, and build a Temple as soon as circumstances would permit.

"Seven years ago tomorrow, about 11 o'clock, I crossed the Mississippi river with my brethren, from this place, not knowing at that time whither we were going, but firmly believing that the Lord had in reserve for us a good place in the mountains, and that he would lead us directly to it. It is but seven years since we left Nauvoo, and we are now ready to build another Temple."

After finishing his address, and after "a consecrating prayer," by Heber C. Kimball, President Young took a spade, lifted it full of earth and "after holding it about one minute before he could get room to lay it down, so dense was the crowd, President Young declared the ground broken for the Temple, blessed the people in the name of the Lord and dismissed the assembly."

It had been a great day for the Saints, but a greater was soon to come, for on April 6th following, amidst the most solemn ceremonies, the cornerstones of the Temple were laid. Days of preparation had been devoted to this event, and the heavens again smiled on the assembled multitude. The Deseret News relates that "April 6th, 1853, could not have dawned a more lovely day, or have been more satisfactory to Saints or angels. The distant valleys sent forth their inhabitants, this valley swarmed forth its thousands, and a more glorious sight has not been seen for generations than at Great Salt Lake City, this day."

At 10 o'clock in the forenoon, President Young called the multitude to order in the Tabernacle. After a few introductory remarks by himself a procession was formed at the "vestry door" to march to the southeast corner of the Temple. Following was the order:

Arriving at the southeast corner, "Presidents Young, Kimball and Richards, with Patriarch John Smith, proceeded to lay the southeast corner stone, and ascended the top thereof," while the choir sang a beautiful hymn composed for the occasion, the first verse of which was as follows:

"Deep in this holy ground

These corner stones are laid;

Rejoicing thousands round,

Oh God, implore thine aid,

That Zion now may prospered be,

And rear a Temple unto thee."

Then in the midst of this great and solemn assembly President Young spoke in part as follows:

"This morning we have assembled on one of the most solemn, interesting, joyful and glorious occasions that ever has transpired, or will transpire among the children of men, while the earth continues in its present organization and is occupied for its present purposes. And I congratulate my brethren and sisters that it is our unspeakable privilege to stand here this day, and minister before the Lord, on an occasion which has caused the tongues and pens of prophets to speak and write for many scores of centuries which are past.

"The Church, through our beloved Prophet Joseph, was commanded to build a Temple to the Most High in Kirtland, Ohio, and this was the next House of the Lord we hear of on the earth, since the days of Solomon's Temple. Joseph not only received revelation and commandment to build a Temple, but he received a pattern also, as did Moses for the Tabernacle, and Solomon for his Temple; for without a pattern he could not know what was wanting, having never seen one, and not having experienced its use. . . . . .

"Let me give you the definition in brief. Your endowment is to receive all those ordinances in the House of the Lord, which are necessary for you, after you have departed this life, to enable you to walk back to the presence of the Father, passing the angels who stand as sentinels, being enabled to give them the key words, the signs and tokens, pertaining to the Holy Priesthood, and gain your eternal exaltation in spite of earth and hell.

"At Nauvoo, Joseph dedicated another Temple, the third on record. He knew what was wanting, for he had previously given most of the prominent individuals then before him their endowment. He needed no revelation, then, of a thing he had long experienced, any more than those now do, who have experienced the same things. It is only where experience fails, that revelation is needed.

"Before the Nauvoo Temple was completed, Joseph was murdered—murdered at sunlight, under the protection of the most noble government that then existed, and that now exists, on our earth. Has his blood been atoned for? No! And why? A martyr's blood to true religion was never atoned for on our earth. No man, or nation of men, without the priesthood, has power to make atonement for such sins. The souls of all such, since the days of Jesus, are "under the altar," and are crying to God day and night, for vengeance. And shall they cry in vain? God forbid! He has promised he will hear them in his own due time, and recompense a righteous reward.

"But what of the Temple in Nauvoo? By the aid of sword in one hand, and trowel and hammer in the other, with fire arms at hand, and a strong band of police, and the blessings of heaven, the Saints, through hunger and thirst, and weariness, and watchings, and prayings, so far completed the Temple, despite the devices of the mob, that many received a small portion of their endowment, but we know of no one who received it in its fulness. And then to save the lives of all the Saints from cruel murder, we removed westward, and being led by the all-searching eye of the Great Jehovah, we arrived at this place.

"Of our journey hither, we need say nothing, only, God led us. Of the sufferings of those who were compelled to, and did leave Nauvoo in the winter of 1846, we need say nothing. Those who experienced it know it, and those who did not, to tell them of it would be like exhibiting a beautiful painting to a blind man.

"We will not stop to tell you of the sufferings of widows and orphans on the Omaha lands, while their husbands and fathers were traversing the burning plains of the south, to fight the battles of a country which had banished them from civilization, for they secured the land on which we dwell, from our nation's foes; exposed the gold of California, and turned the world upside down. All these things are before you—you know them, and we need not repeat them.

"While these things were transpiring with the Saints in the wilderness, the Temple at Nauvoo passed into the hands of the enemy, who polluted it to that extent the Lord not only ceased to occupy it, but he loathed to have it called by his name, and permitted the wrath of its possessors to purify it by fire, as a token of what will speedily fall on them and their habitations unless they repent.

"But, what are we here for, this day? To celebrate the birthday of our religion! To lay the foundation of a Temple to the Most High God, so that when his Son, our Elder Brother, shall again appear, he may have a place where he can lay his head, and not only spend a night or a day, but a place of peace, where he may stay till he can say, I am satisfied. . . . . . .

"We dedicate this, the southeast corner stone of this Temple, to the Most High God. May it remain in peace till it has done its work, and until he who has inspired our hearts to fulfil the prophecies of his holy prophets, that the House of the Lord should be reared in the 'tops of the mountains,' shall be satisfied, and say, it is enough."

II

President Brigham Young was weighted down with responsibilities, troubles and cares, and yet his anxieties were to be increased during the summer and fall of 1853 by serious difficulties with the Indians. During the six years that the Saints had been in the valleys, peace between themselves and the natives had been maintained only by the most consummate and careful management on the part of President Young, and the carrying out of his orders by the settlers. Now, however, as the number of white inhabitants increased, it was only natural that clashes should occur between themselves and the red men, who were being more and more restricted in their freedom and encroached upon in a country which they had claimed for centuries as their own.

Although President Young pursued the most peaceful policy towards them, regarding them as "our Lamanitish brethren," and although he did everything within his power to aid and instruct them in the ways of the white men, yet he was not able to entirely overcome a smouldering resentment which they harbored amongst themselves, and which broke out at the slightest provocation. Particularly treacherous were Indian Chiefs Walker and his brother Arapeen, who, with their bands of warriors, roamed the southern part of the territory, between Utah Lake and the rim of the Great Basin.

Early in April, 1853, President Young relates, "an express was sent from Iron county that Indian Walker has manifested hostile feelings; for it seems that he had drawn out his men on a small portion of our brethren and commanded them to return home, when they were in pursuit of supposed thieves. These Indians would not suffer them to proceed any farther. This circumstance, small as it might appear to some, caused suspicion in my mind that all was not right with the Indian chief."

Shortly after the above described event, on April 20th, President Young and a party of his brethren, "in five carriages," left Salt Lake City for a visit to the southern settlements. It was Brigham's intention to visit the Saints, encourage them in their labors, instruct them in the principles of the Gospel, and also to contact and ascertain the welfare of the Indian tribes. The second night of the journey found the brethren at the settlement of Provo. Here an incident occurred that further aroused Brigham's suspicion, and which he related on his return home as follows:

"After tarrying at the city of Provo a day and a night, I was accosted in a very abrupt manner by a stranger, a person that I knew nothing of, and had never seen before. I have learned since that he is an American from the state of New York, and has been living in New Mexico some years. This person came to my carriage, while I was standing upon the steps of it, arranging my luggage, preparatory to proceeding onward, and said in a rough authoritative tone, "Is Governor Young in this carriage?" "No, sir," I said, "but he is on the steps of it. What is wanted?" I turned round to see who addressed me, and saw this stranger, dressed in buck-skin, pretty well smoked. He said. "I have a little privacy with you." Stepping aside, far enough not to be heard by any other person, I said, "Say on, sir." "But I want to see you in private," he replied. I said, "I have no privacy with strangers; if you have any communication to make to me, you can do it by letter." He walked, and left me. That was all that passed between us. As soon as he intimated that he wanted a private conference with me, I scanned the man, and saw that his pockets were filled with deadly weapons, and of his intentions I had my own thoughts."

"I went about my business, but in the meantime sent a man to reconnoiter him, to whom he made some haughty expression about Governor Young. Said he, "Governor Young need not feel so damned important. I associate with governors when I am at home, and have money enough to buy Governor Young." He further said, "I have four hundred Mexicans waiting my orders, and can have as many more if I wish, besides, the Indians here are all at my command."

"I soon learned to my satisfaction, that he had come into the territory to buy Indian children, and sell them again for slaves. Therefore I issued a proclamation which you have no doubt read in the pages of the News, gave orders to the lieutenant general, and he has done what he has."

Continuing his narrative, President Young relates:

"We proceeded on our journey, and found that this man had been trading with the Indians. He said, "He asked no odds of the authorities of this territory, but calculated to buy all the Indian children he could." He was told it was against the law. He replied, "Catching is before hanging."

"When I arrived at San Pete, I learned that one hundred and fifty Yampa Utes on the west Fork of the Sevier river, had come over to Walker's camp. I did not believe that this Mexican trader had four hundred Mexicans lying on the head waters of the Sevier, for I did not think that men would patiently wait in the snow and frost for a man of his appearance. Instead of Mexicans, they turned out to be those Yampa Utes."

"I sent out a reconnoitering party consisting of thirty men, to learn their intentions, if possible; also the whereabouts of D. B. Huntington, who had gone previously, but I have not heard from them, nor him, since they left us at Salt Creek, about a week ago last Tuesday morning. Amasa Lyman and Charles C. Rich proceeded on their journey, and omitted calling at San Pete. I went to San Pete to learn the situation and proceedings of the Indians. Arapeen, it appeared, from some cause, had been dissatisfied, and had left. Before he left, he gave them to understand that he desired peace, and wanted to live in peace. However, I was prepared for whites, reds or blacks, by night and by day, and aways intend to be."

After a short visit with Father Morley and the Saints at Manti, Brigham and the brethren began their return journey to Salt Lake. Nothing of interest transpired during the following few days except this little human interest story of an occurrence at Spanish Fork, as related by Brother Thomas Bullock, who was with the party.

"April 30th. Arrived at Spanish Fork about four-thirty p.m. The water of the Spanish Fork river had overflowed the banks, and the gophers had undermined the roads leading to the bridge. The horses mired down as soon as they entered. The horses were taken from the carriages and led through the mud and then the carriages were pulled through by the brethren with the assistance of ropes. George A. Smith and two of the troopers were the only ones who got through dryshod; all the rest of the brethren got a soaking, even President Young."

On May 2nd the brethren were back in Salt Lake City, and on Sunday, the 8th, the President spoke to the Saints in the Tabernacle, detailing at some length his experiences while on his trip south, (quotations from which have been given above), and offering them some practical advice which he could so capably do.

"Every settlement," he said, "that has been made in these valleys of the mountains has received strict charges from me, to build, in the first place, a fort, and live in it until they were sufficiently strong to live in a town; to keep their guns and ammunition well prepared for any emergency; and never cease to keep up a night watch, if any apprehensions of the Indians being hostile are entertained. We have suffered nothing from them, compared with what we have suffered from white men who are disposed to steal; and I would rather take my chance today for good treatment among Indians, than I would among white men of this character."

"I have no recollection of the Indians killing any of this community, except one man, which happened about three years ago this spring, who had started for California on foot and alone, against counsel. The redskins found him and slew him. I have never heard of their even disturbing a family; and I do not intend that they ever shall, if watching, and praying, and being ready for them will prevent it."

"I have always acknowledged myself a coward, and hope I always may be, to make me cautious enough to preserve myself and my brethren from falling ignobly by a band of Indians. I am satisfied that the men who follow Walker, who is the king of the Indians in these mountains, do it out of fear, and not because they have real regard for their leader. If he becomes hostile, and wishes to commit depredations upon the persons or property of this people, he shall be wiped out of existence, and every man that will follow him. This is my calculation, and I wish you to be ready for it."

"My advice is to be on the watch all the time. Do not lie down and go to sleep and say all is well, lest in an hour when you think not, sudden destruction overtake you."

Indian Chief Walker and his brother continued their depredations, foolishly figuring that they could "wipe out all the whites." On July 18th, on Peteetneet creek, Arapeen fired at Alexander Keele, who was doing guard duty, killing him instantly. On the night of the 19th, William Jolly was wounded while on guard duty at Springville. On the 24th at Summit creek, "Clark Roberts was shot in the shoulder and John Berry in the wrist, by Indians secreted in the vacated houses." Matters came to such a pass that President Young took up the challenge, and on the 19th of August issued the following proclamation, as Governor of Utah:

"Whereas the Utah Indians of this territory have been for some time, and still are, in a state of open and declared war with the white settlers, committing injuries upon them at every opportunity, killing them, driving off their stock, and burning their mills and dwellings, and

"Whereas, numerous responsible affidavits are lodged in the office of the United States district court for Utah Territory, setting forth that certain white inhabitants of this territory, in defiance of all law, justice and humanity, have trafficked and do still traffic with the said hostile Indians, selling them powder, lead and guns, and threaten to continue to do so, and

"Whereas, such conduct tends directly to augment burdens which are already onerous: Therefore, to promote the public safety and preserve the property and lives of the people from hostile Indians,

"I, Brigham Young, Governor and Ex-officio Superintendent of Indian Affairs of the said Territory of Utah, do hereby order and direct as follows, to-wit:

"1st. Let all the forces be in readiness to march to any point at a moment's notice; and when not in service, remain in their various locations using all diligence to completely secure sufficient hay, and all crops, and keeping strict guard upon stock, and all exposed property, and prosecuting the completion of their defenses with all possible speed.

"2nd. Let every person be prepared to defend himself, and to aid others by personal service, or with supplies, whenever required."

"3rd. Every person, whether resident or non-resident, is hereby strictly forbidden to give, trade or in any way voluntarily put in possession of any Utah Indian, any powder, lead, gun, sword, knife or any weapon or munition of war whatever; or to give, or in any manner render to any Utah Indian, any aid, shelter, food or comfort, either directly or indirectly, unless by permission or license from the Superintendent of Indian Affairs, the Indian agent or sub-agent; and every license to trade with the Indians, in this territory, is hereby revoked; and every person to whom opportunity offers is required to notify passing emigrants, and non-residents of this proclamation, so far as trading with, or aiding Indians is concerned, and forthwith report to the nearest civil or military officer, every case of departure from the most rigid compliance with this prohibition and revocation.

"4th. As small and large parties of Indians are constantly prowling about, watching for unguarded points, let all who go to canyons, or any retired places, go armed, and in sufficient numbers to be safe; and all are required to be constantly on the alert; and all officers must preserve order, and carry out the orders and regulations which have been given since the commencement of Indian hostilities, and may hereafter be given, and enforce the same when necessary.

"5th. Heavy expenses have already been incurred by the inhabitants of this territory, in defending themselves against hostile Indians, and much property has been lost and destroyed, and such will continue to be the case until hostilities cease.

"Therefore, officers of every grade, when on duty, are required to keep an accurate account of all services performed, and expenses incurred under their commands on account of hostile Indians, or other evil disposed persons, whether residents or non-residents, and promptly forward the same to the office of the Governor and Superintendent of Indian Affairs.

"In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand, and caused the Seal of said Territory to be affixed, at Great Salt Lake City, this nineteenth day of August, in the year of our Lord, one thousand eight hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the United States of America, the seventy-eighth. By the Governor,

"BRIGHAM YOUNG.

"WILLARD RICHARDS, Secretary Pro Tem."
