Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

AMONG his many great accomplishments, President Young was an unusual orator, a natural speaker, a gifted expounder of the principles of the Gospel which he loved so well. Beginning at first to speak as a young man, he found great difficulty in explaining the thoughts, hopes, feelings and aspirations which had found lodgment in his heart. His schooling had been extremely limited, only "eleven days" in some back-woods school, therefore, what came to him in an educational way he had to acquire for himself, as best he could. But gradually, through his constant missionary experience, an easy flow of language came to him; and when he arrived at middle age he had a command of English and a gift of expression second to none in the Church. In fact, as a public expounder of the Gospel, I place him first among all his brethren. Perhaps I am prejudiced in this regard; perhaps my admiration overcomes my judgment, but it seems to me the gist of oratory consists of this, that the speaker shall have something to say, some message that burns in his heart, and gives him no rest, day or night, until, as Carlyle says, "he gets it uttered."

President Brigham Young, in his sermons, always had something to say. It was L. F. Moench who told me that when Brother Brigham arose in the pulpit to speak, a hush fell over the audience and every ear was trained to catch his words. He had a message to deliver, and the people were eager to hear it. Coupled with this was his sincerity, his earnest appealing way, so that men would say to each other, "this man speaks the truth." There was not an ounce of hypocrisy in his make-up, and that student of history misses Brigham Young entirely who claims that he was not sincere in all that he said and did. It was a matter of life and death with him, these great Gospel principles, revealed from God to the boy Prophet. Brigham stood there, ready to front eternity with them.

During this year of 1853, he spoke many times in the old Tabernacle, almost every Sunday, when he was at home. He took up all manner of subjects, treating them all in his easy, interesting way, surveying them with intelligence, exposing their weakness, extolling their strength, putting truth forward and painting its beauty, pointing out the pit-falls and the awful results of evil. I shall attempt here in this short chapter to bring out a few of the things which crossed his mind during the summer and fall of 1853, and which he so splendidly laid before the people in his public discourses.

Among the subjects which are very rife at the present time are those of Capital and Labor. They are being discussed on every street corner. It may be interesting to know how President Young handled these subjects, eighty-three years ago. Here are a few excerpts from his sermon of June 5th, 1853:

"Money is not real capital; it bears the title only. True capital is labor, and is confined to the laboring classes. They only possess it. It is the bone, sinew, nerve and muscle of man that subdue the earth, make it yield its strength, and administer to his varied wants. This power tears down mountains, and fills up valleys, builds cities and temples and paves the streets. In short, what is there that yields shelter and comfort to civilized man that is not produced by the strength of his arm, making the elements bend to his will."

Many people have asked me what I thought President Young would do were he alive today; how would he cope with the present problems of unemployment and idle capital? I can answer by saying that my belief is that he would solve the problems of today as easily as he did those of his own time. He would not allow capital to be hoarded in the banks while labor remained idle. Listen to this from the same sermon as the above:

"When we first came into the Valley, the question was asked me, if men would ever be allowed to come into this Church, and remain in it, and hoard up their property. I say, No! That is a short answer and a pointed one. The man who lays up his gold and silver, who caches it away in a bank, or in his iron safe, or buries it up in the earth, and comes here and professes to be a Saint, would tie up the hands of every individual in this kingdom, and make them his servants, if he could. It is an unrighteous, unhallowed, unholy, covetous principle. It is from the devil and from beneath."

Now that is strong doctrine, but President Brigham Young faced a situation that had to be met and handled, and he was never the man to dodge an issue. He despised the hoarding of money, the "burying of it up in the ground" while people were out of employment and going hungry for the want of something to do. The function of money was to be spent, so that labor might be carried on. And if a man came into this Church and did not use his means to build up Zion, to beautify her waste places, to make productive her farms and fields, he had a mean, covetous spirit, and should not be fellowshiped.

Continuing he said:

"If a man comes in the midst of this people with money, let him use it in making improvements, in building and beautifying his inheritance in Zion, and increasing his capital by thus putting out his money to usury (interest). Let him go and make a great farm, and stock it well, and fortify it around with a good efficient fence. What for? Why for the purpose of spending his money. Then let him cut it up into fields, adorn it with trees and build a fine house upon it. What for? Why for the purpose of spending his money. What will he do when his money is gone? The money thus spent, with a wise and prudent hand, is in a situation to accumulate, and increase a hundred fold."

Well, that is the doctrine of the use of money, taught by President Brigham Young, eighty-three years ago, to the pioneers in this valley.

On Sunday the 14th of August, 1853, President Young again addressed the Saints in the Tabernacle and continued along the same strain as quoted in the above: What are true riches and how should they be used?

"Why do the children of men set their hearts upon earthly things? They are to be used, but not to the abusing of yourselves. They are to be used to make us comfortable. Suppose all the good things of this world should be given to us, the gold and the silver, the cattle and the horses and all the flocks of a thousand hills; it would be for the express purpose of building mansions and temples, of feeding the poor that cannot feed themselves, of succoring the tried and the tempted, of sending elders to preach the Gospel from nation to nation, from island to island, and of gathering Israel from the four quarters of the globe.

"But that moment that men seek to build up themselves, in preference to the Kingdom of God, and seek to hoard up riches, while the widow and the fatherless, the sick and afflicted around them are in want, it proves that their hearts are weaned from God, and their riches will perish in their fingers and they with them.

"What then are true riches and how are they to be obtained?

"True riches are life, happiness and salvation, to secure for ourselves a part in the first resurrection, where we are out of the reach of death, and him that hath power over it; there we are exalted to thrones and have power to organize the elements. Yes, they that overcome, shall be crowned with crowns of eternal glory."

During the October conference, the President spoke at some length on the opening day. His endeavor was to discuss frankly with those who had emigrated from abroad, the ideal Zion which they had pictured in their minds before leaving home, and the practical Zion which they found on their arrival, or on their journey hither.

"Let me refer your mind to the time that the Gospel was first introduced to you, and the light and glory of it opened up to your understandings; when eternity and eternal things reflected upon your benighted minds, and your conceptions were aroused to see things as they were, as they are, and as they shall be."

"What were your feelings and reflections under such circumstances, when you first heard of the Latter-day work, of the Gospel in its fulness, when you first learned that the Lord had a Prophet, and Apostles, who held the words of life for the people? What was there you would not have sacrificed in a moment for the privilege of assembly with the Saints?"

"If any of you had a vision of Zion, it was shown to you in its beauty and glory, after Satan was bound. If you reflected upon the gathering of the Saints, it was the Spirit of gathering that enlightened you; and when your minds were opened in vision to behold the glory and excellence of the Gospel you did not see a vision of driving cattle across the plains, and where you would be mired in this or that mud hole; you did not see the stampedes among the cattle, and those of a worse character among the people."

No, perhaps that was not taken into consideration at all, otherwise many would have turned back.

"But you saw the beauty and glory of Zion, that you might be encouraged, and prepared to meet the afflictions, sorrows and disappointments of this mortal life, and overcome them, and be made ready to enjoy the glory of the Lord as it was revealed to you."

To those who had lost the vision of "the glory of Zion" and become discouraged upon their arrival here:

"My advice to you is, go and be baptized for the remission of your sins, and start afresh, that temptation may not overcome you again; pause and reflect, that you be not overcome by the evil one unawares."

In his last sermon of this year, on December 5th, he gives a glowing account of the work of God, and concludes with these words.

"Our religion embraces every truth pertaining to mortal life—there is nothing outside the pale of it. It matters not what the subject be, if it tends to improve the mind, exalt the feelings, and enlarge the capacity. The truth that is in all arts and sciences forms a part of our religion. Faith is no more a part of it than any other true principle of philosophy. Were I to give you a lecture today upon farming, would I be speaking upon a matter that transcends the bounds of our religion? Agriculture is a part of it as well as any other truth. Were I to lecture on business principles of any kind, our religion embraces them, and what it does not circumscribe, it would be well for us to dispense with, once and for ever."
