Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

ON Saturday, March 11th, 1854, "about nine o'clock in the morning," Willard Richards, second counselor to President Brigham Young, died at his home in Salt Lake City. He was only forty-nine years of age; in the prime of his life, but he left an enviable record. He had risen from a lowly station in the Church to an honored position in the First Presidency; for nearly eight years he had been Brigham's counselor.

Willard's death was a sad blow to the President. By blood they were cousins, their mothers having been strong, capable women of the Howe family. It was Brigham who had brought the Gospel to Willard in Massachusetts in the year 1835; indeed he had baptized him. And what a help Willard had been to him; doing all the clerical work, writing the letters and epistles, editing and printing The Deseret News and recording the Church history. To get some idea as to the quality of this man, let it be remembered that it was Willard Richards, together with John Taylor, who went into Carthage jail with the Prophet and Patriarch (although they were not under arrest and were not required to be there) and remained with them while the murderous mob took the lives of the two martyrs. That was an act of unsurpassed devotion and bravery.

About three weeks after Willard's death, at the annual general conference in April, 1854, President Young said of him:

"Brother Willard Richards I have known from before he became a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He lived at my house for many years—boarded with me. From our first acquaintance to his death, in the Gospel and out of it, as far as I knew him, in his integrity and friendship, he was as true and unwavering in his course as the sun is to the earth, or as the earth is revolving upon its axis. There was not a shade of deviation upon his mind, or wavering in his actions, in his feelings, or in his faith, from the principles of righteousness. He was true to his God, to his religion, and to his brethren, and in administering blessings to all, to whom he had power to administer. He was careful not to injure any person, and lived and died a Latter-day Saint. He is gone to his rest, and is prepared to receive his body again in the resurrection, and then he will be prepared to take his seat in the Celestial Kingdom of our God. All that can be said of brother Willard's life can be summed up in these few remarks."

Jedediah M. Grant, a young and active man, under forty years of age, was called to Willard Richard's place as second counselor to President Young. The new First Presidency issued an epistle to the Saints on April 10th, which was largely dictated by the President, and dealt with timely and interesting problems. I shall present a few excerpts:

"Since our last general epistle, we have received intelligence of the general success and spread of the Gospel of Christ, with few exceptions, wherever it has been preached; which is cheering to our souls, and causes our hearts to rejoice in the goodness of God towards our fellow men, by inclining the honest in heart among the nations of the earth unto the truth as it is in Christ Jesus.

"Prosperity has generally characterized all our efforts, both at home and abroad; and the work is making rapid progress throughout the earth. The Lord has opened the way before the elders in foreign countries, and upon the islands of the sea, in the most remarkable manner. No mission has been appointed, but the elders appointed to go have been able to reach their destination with little or no delay; and in all, except Prussia and the West Indian Islands, have been permitted to remain and promulgate the Gospel in its fulness.

"Although the Indians are quiet, and have been for several months, yet we have no assurance that they will remain so; it therefore becomes necessary for your temporal salvation and the quiet of the territory, that you should be prepared for any emergency that may arise. On no occasion trust yourselves to go into canyons or by places where an Indian can lurk unseen by you, without first exploring and ascertaining that all is safe. Go in companies sufficiently strong to intimidate the foe, and you will be less liable to be attacked. So with all your preparations, be prepared, ready and fully capable of defending yourselves at a moment's notice.

"And we now say that every solitary instance of Indian hostility and depredation has been committed through neglect, disobedience of orders, carelessness, or disregarding the counsel which has been given from time to time. Brethren, when will you be wise and follow the precepts of wisdom? Must you first be destroyed and wasted away, like unto the Nephites, or will you harken unto counsel in time to save yourselves and your families, your flocks and your herds from destruction?

"Bishops, we have a word of counsel to you. You are the fathers of the poor, the stewards in Israel. Lend your efficient aid in collecting together the tithing and consecration of the Saints; and see that all is preserved and taken care of, and faithfully deposited in the storehouse of the Lord, and not diverted from its legitimate use."

"True charity to a poor family or person consists in placing them in a situation in which they can support themselves. In this country there is no person possessing an ordinary degree of health and strength but can earn support for himself and family.

"We are gathered here, not to scatter around and go off to the mines, or any other place, but to build up the Kingdom of God. And those who gather for any other purpose, we wish them no harm, but cannot consider to hold them in fellowship. We have no fellowship for those who embrace this work for aught else than the love of the truth and the testimony of Jesus; who are not willing to endure all, sacrifice all and everything for the sake of the Gospel of Christ.

"Then haste, ye elders, to the work which lies before you; and let the Saints go to with their might to prepare for the great day of power and devastation which will assuredly come upon the whole earth, for the day when the Son of Man shall appear, the Ancient of Days shall sit in judgment, and each and every one shall be required to render a faithful and true account of his stewardship.

"Humble yourselves, O ye Saints of the Most High, for the day draweth nigh! Let your division, discord, envying, and wickedness cease from among you; and dwell together in peace and unity. Give your hearts to God, and your might, mind and strength to the accomplishment of his purposes in the last days. Let nothing swerve you from your path of duty. Awake to the importance of your calling, and the work which is for you to accomplish. Shake off the lethargy which enwraps you as a mantle and let your works and faith appear like the noon-day sun in brightness and glory to all around."

On the 4th of May, 1854, President Young and a large group of his brethren, began a trip to visit the southern settlements, to contact the Indians, particularly the wily chief Walker, whom they hoped to dissuade from his warlike attitude, and to tend to such other matters as pertained to both Church and State, which were then under President Young's direction. The company consisted of eighty-two men, fourteen women, and five children. They traveled in thirty-four carriages, and had ninety-five animals. In the group were a number of young men bound for the Pacific Islands, to serve as missionaries there.

I have surveyed the names of all these travelers, as listed by that worthy scribe, Thomas Bullock, who kept a day to day journal of this trip. Among the group is the name of a boy who interests me more than any of the others, President Young alone being excepted. On his departure from Salt Lake City, there had been no mother's fond kiss for this boy; no father's parting blessing; his parents had both departed from this world. He was only fifteen years of age, but with character sufficient then to set out bravely on this mission to the Pacific Islands and successfully carry it through. By and by, this boy grew up to manhood and he became, in my estimation, the greatest preacher of righteousness to his generation—Joseph F. Smith.

This particular journey south, with President Young and party, as far as Fort Harmony, and the return to Salt Lake City, which consumed slightly under a month's time, is filled with interest.

I shall attempt to give an account here somewhat in detail. The first night's stop was made at Union, south of Salt Lake City, where Brother Brigham "slept in his carriage, in the yard." May 5th, "a boisterous south wind prevailed, and the morning was cold," but the brethren continued on to American Fork, "with considerable dust flying all the way." On the 6th, "we resumed our journey, traveling over a muddy road to Pleasant Grove Fort," where the company halted for noon. Brother Bullock records of this place, "This is decidedly the cleanest, neatest and prettiest fort we have yet visited."

Journeying out again in the afternoon they arrived at the Provo river, which "was running very rapidly and came into some of the wagon beds, but we got through without any serious accidents." President Young spent the night at Harvey Redfield's. The following morning Daniel H. Wells sent a message forward to the brethren in Juab county, that the President would like to meet Chief Walker and his brother, Grosepene, who were just then camped in lower Juab valley at Chicken Creek. Bullock writes, "President Young called for four beef cattle to be furnished by Provo and sent to Walker in the morning." The President sensed that the way to Walker's heart would be through his stomach. It would not do any particular good to try and make peace with a hungry Indian.

On Monday, May 8th, "about nine o'clock a.m., the President gave orders to gather up the teams and at ten-fifteen we started for Springville. The road was very muddy." Provo and Springville people will understand this, as the brethren tried to cross that bog south of Provo, in those early days, rather than go around the foothills as at present. Bishop Johnson entertained the President on his arrival, and at two p.m. a meeting was held in the fort at which Brother Brigham spoke. The entire group remained over night at Springville. The next morning, "having gathered up our horses, we started at ten a.m., taking the road to the mouth of Spanish Fork canyon, where President Young rode up to see if water could be taken out on the bench." Yes, Brother Brigham was looking out for that too. He was keen and alert to every move which could be made with advantage to the Saints. About four p.m., the caravan came to a halt at the little settlement on Peteetneet Creek (Payson). Launching out again in the morning they "arrived at Summit Creek (Santaquin) at eleven a. m. where we watered our teams." They then journeyed over the hill into Juab valley "where the roads were good and grass plenty." "About five p.m., we arrived at Nephi. President Young preached to the people on the necessity of building a fort, and gave orders that a woman was not to come to the place until a fort was built."

Leaving Nephi on the morning of Thursday, May 11th, "between eight and nine a. m., we took a diagonal line to the west side of the valley, where at twelve-fifteen we reached Walkers wickiups, and formed a corral near a willow patch." Here was the fellow President Young wanted to see, Chief Walker, skulking in his tent. After lunch the President and all members of the Twelve present, together with Dimick Huntington, the interpreter, called on him, but Walker would not come out. "He said he was sick and had lost his spirit and would not talk." "At four p.m. President Young sent some flour and wheat down to Walker." Brother Brigham found he had to bait this fellow like one would a bear. But still Walker would not come out, so the brethren decided to let him rest until morning.

"After a pleasant night," says Bullock, President Young went again to Walker's tent and was told that his little daughter was sick. "President Young went in and laid hands upon her." "Walker struck his wife with his fist, and said if the child died, a woman or somebody else would have to die with her." Directly after this the President went into council with the chief and Walker agreed to give up the animals he and his men had stolen. "He gave them up, receiving guns and blankets, cloth, etc., as gifts."

II

Old Indian Chief Walker decided to be good after his talk with President Brigham Young. He gave up his depredations on the whites and did his best to keep his peace agreement with the President. Within less than a year he died—January 29th, 1855, to be exact—and went to his "happy hunting ground" where he could disturb the Saints no more. Among his last words, relates Peter Gottfredson in his history of the Indian warfare in Utah, Walker advised his tribe to live in peace with the settlers and not to molest them.

Leaving Walker's camp about eleven a.m. of May 12th, President Young and his caravan crossed Chicken Creek, went up a hill, and then across a rolling country now known as "washboard flat" to the crossing of the Sevier river, where "we came to a halt about three p.m." "The water was too deep by several inches for the wagons and therefore the President ordered a raft made to carry us over the river." About nine p.m. the last wagon was ferried across and camp was made for the night.

Starting out at seven o'clock in the morning, "Presidents Young and Kimball walked ahead for several miles." Round valley was reached at eleven o'clock. Then the Round valley hill was climbed and at eleven-forty a.m. "we commenced descending into Pahvant valley." "At four-forty p.m. we came in sight of Fillmore and entered its gates at five-fifteen. This place is picketed in, has adobe walls with bastians and embrazures and many loop holes for defense. A heavy hailstorm visited the camp in the evening."

The entire day of Sunday, May 14th, was spent by President Young and party at Fillmore. "A meeting was held in the school house, commencing at ten o'clock a.m. Parley P. Pratt and President Young preached about the Indians."

Journeying forth in the morning towards Meadow and Corn Creek, the brethren noted that "myriads of black flies resembling gun powder covered the road." Arriving at Corn Creek, "Joshua Arthur's team mired and was unable to stir. We got ropes and lariats and pulled the wagon out backwards." Cove Creek was reached at six p.m. President Young went up the side of a hill with Dimick Huntington to view the country.

Breaking camp early in the morning the brethren pushed on steadily throughout the day, and reached Beaver Creek at three-thirty p.m. "Wilford Woodruff went fishing and caught a trout which he gave to President Young!" The next morning the journey was resumed at seven-fifteen, and after continuing throughout the day "over very rough roads" they arrived at Parowan at six p.m. "The presidency and camp distributed themselves amongst the citizens. A public meeting was held in the log tabernacle in the evening."

After visiting with the Saints at Parowan during the forenoon, the brethren continued on to Cedar Fort, which they reached at two p.m. Thomas Bullock records of this place: "The Fort is half a mile square and nearly finished. The water has a milky appearance and the soil a reddish brown clay. In the afternoon a meeting was held in the school house at which Joseph Young and President Young spoke."

The next morning "we continued on over a pretty good road, crossing Kanarra creek. Then on a downward grade to Fort Harmony where we arrived at three p.m." This place was the objective of President Young's journey, and here he was to turn back. After designating the location of a fort he returned to Cedar the following day.

I have gone into detail somewhat regarding this trip for the express purpose of informing the reader of the manner in which travel was carried on in those pioneer days. President Young consumed two weeks time in reaching Fort Harmony in the spring of 1854. The same journey can be made comfortably now in six or eight hours in an automobile, over oiled roads.

Among the group of young missionaries under Parley P. Pratt who were on their way to the Pacific Isles, and whom I have referred to before, was a nephew of President Young, a youth of sixteen, John R. Young. He has left us an interesting account of this trip. He relates that at Cedar Fort the missionaries said goodbye to the other members of the camp, and when he shook hands with "Uncle Brigham" the President said to him: "Johnny, I will give you a little advice. Be humble. Live near the Lord. Keep yourself pure from sin. Do not tell the people that you are unlearned; it will only weaken their faith. Avoid public discussions. I have noticed that they engender feelings of bitterness and seldom do good. Never tell all that you know at once; keep back something to talk about next time. Be careful and say nothing but what you can prove."

I shall not attempt to go into an account of the return trip of the brethren to Salt Lake City, only to say that they all arrived safely on the afternoon of May 30th. The same day President Young records in his history: "I returned from visiting the settlements south with Elder Heber C. Kimball and others in good health and spirits. Elder George A. Smith accompanied us from Provo. The trip was highly opportune, as our red neighbors were thawing out of their winter retreats, had come into the valleys and were undecided as to what course they would pursue, their summer haunts being within easy proximity to our settlements. As superintendent of Indian affairs I was enabled to hold talks with the great majority of the Indians concerned in the difficulties of the past year, among whom were Walker, Grosspene and Washear. All the talks were favorable to good peace, and the Indians were much pleased and gratified with the presents of beef cattle, blankets, shirts, tobacco, etc."

Settling down in his office the day after his return home, President Young made an effort to catch up with some of the voluminous correspondence which had accumulated while he was on his trip south. Under date of May 31st he relates in his history:

"I wrote lengthily to Delegate John M. Bernhisel in relation to the expenditure of the $20,000 appropriated by Congress for public buildings in Utah and concluded with the following items:

"I have just returned from a trip through our southern settlements, having gone as far as Harmony, about 290 miles from this city. Walker, Grosspene and Washear joined my company at Chicken Creek and traveled with me; the two latter are here now.

"As a general thing, the inhabitants in the different settlements felt and were doing well, and all the Indians I met with were very friendly and expressed an intention to continue so, not only towards us but each other.

"The crops looked very well, especially the wheat, and notwithstanding we have had much stormy weather, it has been unusually favorable to their rapid and luxuriant growth, and much more plowing and seeding has been done than heretofore, which I am in hopes will afford us sufficient surplus to begin storing for future use.

"I enjoyed my trip very much and feel my health improved by it, and the inhabitants and Indians were pleased to have me visit with them. On my return I found that our public works had progressed with commendable diligence under the direction of my second counselor Jedediah M. Grant, who tarried here to oversee our general business matters.

"The foundation of the wall around the Temple block is nearly completed, which when done will enable us to speedily finish the wall with the exception of the gates and iron railing.

"We continue to enjoy general good health, though death takes some even in these secluded and healthy valleys. On the 23rd inst. Patriarch John Smith left his aged and feeble body to rest for a season, and his spirit has gone where the works of a long and faithful stewardship will follow and honor him.

"All is peace and prosperity in Utah, for which we feel to rejoice and give thanks always, not trusting in the arm of flesh nor taking honor to ourselves."
