Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

ALL is peace and prosperity in Utah." So wrote President Young to Dr. John M. Bernhisel on May 31st, 1854; and so it was, and so it continued to be throughout the entire year. The brethren were everywhere busy, improving their farms, building homes, erecting bridges, constructing roads. Zion was verily being built up, and the desert was being made to blossom as a rose. In foreign lands the Elders were promulgating the Gospel with great diligence and success, and thousands of honest souls were turning their faces towards "the gathering place," in the valleys of Utah. With united effort of heart and hand on the part of the Saints, the Kingdom was making tremendous strides towards its ultimate destiny.

July 4th, Independence day, was appropriately celebrated again this year. During the early forenoon there was a martial parade throughout the city, and at 10 a.m. a large concourse of people assembled in the Tabernacle. George A. Smith and Orson Hyde delivered patriotic addresses, followed by "a few remarks" from President Young.

He began by declaring his allegiance to the nation. He believed the Saints were living under the best government in the world; that it was divinely instituted.

"The general Constitution of our country is good, and a wholesome government could be framed upon it; for it was dictated by the invisible operations of the Almighty. He moved upon Columbus to launch forth upon the trackless deep to discover the American continent. He moved upon the signers of the Declaration of Independence, and he moved upon Washington to fight and conquer, in the same way that he has moved upon ancient and modern prophets, each being inspired to accomplish the particular work he was called to perform, in the times, seasons and dispensations of the Almighty."

But the trouble with the government is that it has not always been administered wisely; ofttimes low and corrupt officials have been in power:

"For instance, the government of the United States was willing to take my money for lands in Missouri, which were in the market, but the people in that sovereign, that free and independent state, rose up and mobbed me—drove me from my possessions, and confiscated my property to themselves."

What then should be done with these corrupt officials? There is only one remedy. They should be driven from their high places.

"Let the people, the whole American people, rise up and say they will have these abuses regulated, and no longer suffer political demagogues to gamble away their money, but turn them out of office, to attend to their own affairs. Let the people make a whip, if not of good tough rawhide, of small cords at least and walk into the Temple of this nation, and cleanse it thoroughly out, and put in men who will legislate for their good, instead of gambling away their money and trifling with the sacred interests of the nation, which have been entrusted to their keeping."

And what a nation, and what a government we could have had, if the officials had sought God and followed righteousness instead of seeking their own aggrandizement.

"If the framers of the Constitution, and the inhabitants of the United States, had walked humbly before the God who defended them, and fought their battles when Washington was on the stage of action, the nation would now have been free from a multitude of evils. The country would not now have been overrun with murderers and thieves, and our cities filled with houses of ill-fame; and men could have walked the streets of cities, or traveled on conveyances through the country, without being insulted, plundered and perhaps murdered; and an honest, sober and enterprising and righteous people would now have been found from one end of the United States to the other."

What then is the destiny of this great nation and what part will the Latter-day Saints play in it?

"Will the Constitution be destroyed? No! It will be held inviolate by this people; and as Joseph Smith said, 'the time will come when the destiny of this nation will hang upon a single thread, and at that critical juncture, this people will step forth and save it from threatened destruction."

Such were the political views of President Young, as expressed on this fourth day of July, 1854, before a crowded house of Saints in the old Tabernacle.

Three weeks after the above event came Pioneer day, July 24th, and with it the most elaborate celebration ever attempted by the Saints. A mammoth parade, with 63 divisions, formed at the Tabernacle at half past eight in the morning, and marched through "a portion of the city." Halting at the residence of President Young, "where the President and suite were received under a pioneer salute of seven guns, a mammoth flag was unfurled, and the procession proceeded to the Tabernacle." Here there were prayers, songs and addresses.

The first speaker was Leo Hawkins (unknown to me) who gave an address "in behalf of the young men." Turning to brother Brigham, he said, in part:

"We thank you, under God, for leading us from a land of turmoil and confusion, to these lovely valleys, where we can enjoy, under the fostering care of a liberal government, the rich blessings of peace. For while on the 4th of July we express our patriotic feelings, and revere the men who burst the shackles of tyranny, and introduced a new dynasty into the political world, we cannot but esteem more highly, the day on which you led the Saints into this valley, and virtually formed a new era in our history, changing our position from that of a municipal city authority to the provisional government of Deseret; removing us from the power of an oppressive state, and giving us the power of self legislation.

"Born among mobs and cradled on the billows of persecution, we have learned to appreciate the banquet of peace that we enjoy, in the valleys of Ephraim. Our cities arise in beauty and grandeur; our villages multiply; our fields teem with plenty; our flocks and herds abound; all nature seems to smile on us; in fact the wilderness and the solitary places have been made glad, and the desert has blossomed as a rose. The Lord has been merciful unto His people, and we would bless His Holy name.

"Brother Brigham, we thank you for your attention, for this audience and privilege, and pray that you may live to see many happy returns of your entrance into this valley."

President Young arose and addressed the assembly. He was appreciative of the compliments which had been given him, but he knew he had reached his present position by God's sustaining hand.

"The youth around me, in their addresses this day have eulogized the life and ability of Brother Brigham. I want you not only to do as I have done, but a great deal better. I am trying to encourage you to do good and not evil, that the Lord Almighty may take care of you, sustain you, and give you power and influence, which he will do if you serve Him with an undivided heart.

"Look and see the past course of Brother Brigham; he is not any different today from what he ever was. Knowing the Lord wishes him to do a certain work, he is willing to do it. This has always been his character.

"I will now offer a few words of encouragement, and I wish you to listen to them attentively. If you wish to be great in the Kingdom of God, you must be good. It has been told you often, and I reiterate it today, that no man or woman in this Kingdom, that the Lord Almighty has again established upon the earth, can become great without being good—without being true to their integrity, faithful to their trust, full of charity and good works. If they do not order their lives to do all the good they can, they will be stripped of their anticipations of greatness.

"Again, you must make sacrifice, if such you may call it, of every feeling you possess on earth, as a man, as a woman, as a father, as a mother, as a husband, as a wife, as a member of a family or community, for the sake of the Kingdom of God on earth—that you assuredly must do. Now remember, that no earthly object may stand between you and your calling and duty."

The Summer and Fall of 1854 went along pleasantly enough in Salt Lake City. The brethren pursued their various tasks, brother Brigham's time being mostly occupied with the public works.

Writing to Franklin D. Richards in England, under date of August 2nd, he relates a few of the passing events.

"General good health continues to be enjoyed by all our settlements, and all business matters and Indian relations remain prosperous and amicable.

"From last advices all the Elders on their way from these valleys to fill various foreign missions, were abundantly blessed and prospered in their travels, and would probably soon reach their several fields of labor. Rumor reports some sickness and several deaths among the brethren now crossing the plains, but no specific information of their condition and movements has yet reached us, and from all we can learn, they are getting along usually well, but some will be rather late in arriving. Elders E. T. Benson and Ira Eldredge are on the way back to meet the train in the immediate care of Elders Orson Pratt and H. S. Eldredge, from neither of whom have we received any letters, per last mail, nor since they started upon the plains. The adobe work on the Temple block wall will soon be completed, and much of the coping stone is cut and ready for laying, and many workmen are busily engaged in laying immense blocks of stone in the massive foundation for the Temple.

"The prospects are still good for an abundant general harvest, though hail and the grasshoppers have done more or less damage to the crops and gardens. This is all right; and the kind and wise hand dealing of the Lord will cause the people to be more thankful for and careful of what remains."

II

On Thursday, the 31st of August, 1854, there might have been seen emerging from the mouth of Emigration Canyon, a long line of United States soldiers, "numbering about 175, with 150 employees or quartermasters men, 100 wagons, and 1,000 head of horses and mules." In command was a gallant young Lieutenant Colonel, Edward J. Steptoe, to whom it was rumored, President Pierce had offered the Governorship of Utah, as President Young's four-year period as Governor was about to expire. Steptoe and his men marched down to the edge of the city and camped. They said little about their purpose in being in Salt Lake valley, except to announce that they were en route to California. Shortly after the arrival of the soldiers came two more of President Pierce's appointees, John F. Kinney of Iowa, who was to to Chief Justice of the Territory and W. W. Drummond of Illinois, Associate Justice.

Colonel Steptoe and his men made themselves agreeable to the citizens of Salt Lake City, and it was not long until the Colonel announced that they would remain in the valley throughout the winter and go on to California in the Spring. It has since been surmised that he was surveying conditions, and attempting to decide whether or not he should accept President Pierce's appointment. At any rate Steptoe soon came to the conclusion that he would be entirely out of place as Governor of Utah, and that the position rightfully belonged to Brigham Young. In this conclusion, it seems to me, he was a very wise man, indeed.

President Young, in his message to the legislature, on December 11th, spoke of the soldiers as follows:

"A corps of U. S. troops, under the command of Colonel Steptoe, on their way to California, are also sojourning with us during the winter. From the courteous and gentlemanly bearing of the officers, and the control which they appear to exercise over their men, I feel gratified in the belief, that if their services were wanting in protecting the settlements from Indian aggression, or otherwise, they would be cheerfully extended."

Towards the latter part of December, Colonel Steptoe gave up the idea entirely of being Governor and he and his fellow officers drew up a petition to President Pierce, asking that Brigham Young again be appointed to that office. This petition they, together with the leading officials of the Territory, and several of the non-Mormon merchants, signed, and on the 31st of December forwarded to Washington. It is an interesting document, and as it pertains entirely to President Young, I desire to reproduce it in full. It reveals the estimation in which he was held by those not of his faith:

"Whereas Governor Brigham Young possesses the entire confidence of the people of this Territory, without distinction of party or sect; and from personal acquaintance, and social intercourse, we find him to be a firm supporter of the Constitution and laws of the United States, and a tried pillar of Republican institutions; and having repeatedly listened to his remarks, in private as well as in public assemblies, do know he is the warm friend and able supporter of Constitutional Liberty, the rumors published in the States to the contrary notwithstanding; and having canvassed to our satisfaction his doings as Governor, and Superintendent of Indian Affairs, and also the disposition of the appropriation for public buildings for the Territory; We do most cordially and cheerfully represent that the same has been expended to the best interest of the Nation; and

"Whereas his re-appointment would better subserve the Territorial interest, than the appointment of any other man and would meet with the gratitude of the entire inhabitants of the Territory, and his removal would cause the deepest feelings of sorrow and regret; and it being our unqualified opinion, based upon the personal acquaintance which we have found with Governor Young, and from our observation of the results of his influence and administration in this Territory, that he possesses in an eminent degree every qualification necessary for the discharge of his official duties, and unquestioned integrity and ability; That he is decidedly the most suitable person that can be selected for that office,

"We therefore, take great pleasure in recommending him to your favorable consideration, and do earnestly request his reappointment as Governor and Superintendent of Indian Affairs for this Territory.

"Great Salt Lake City, Utah Territory.

"December 30th, 1854."

As the Winter season was on, it would take this petition nearly three months to get to Washington; indeed I am at a loss to know how the mail got through at all in that inclement season of the year. At any rate someone plunged into the snow going east with it, and Brigham continued to be Governor, as he awaited word from President Pierce.

Meantime, at Washington, Delegate Bernhisel not knowing what was going on at home, supposed that all was settled as far as the appointment of Colonel Steptoe was concerned, and so advised Franklin D. Richards in England in a letter dated January 4th, 1855.

"Dear Brother:

"I deeply regret to inform you that the President finally declined to re-appoint Governor Young to the office which he now holds. Lieut. Colonel Steptoe is the appointee.

"The President seems quite friendly and stated at a recent interview that he had received letters from Colonel Steptoe and Chief Justice Kinney, speaking in high terms of the Governor and the people of Utah, and added that if he did not appoint Governor Young he would appoint no one but a man of the highest character, believing that it would be better for our people that such a one should be appointed, for he would do us justice, and speak well of us, which would do much towards removing the prejudice against us, but I still urged the reappointment of Governor Young.

"The President has no idea of interfering with the domestic relations of our Territory. His Excellency spoke in the most exalted terms of Colonel Steptoe, saying that he was a gentleman and a scholar, and the most amiable and just man he ever knew.

"The Colonel sustains a high character here and numbers among his friends the Hon. Secretary of War. Since Governor Young's reappointment could not be secured, which is a source of profound regret to us all, I know of no one whom I suppose would be more acceptable than Colonel Steptoe, but his friends here believe that he will not accept.

"Truly and respectfully yours,

"JOHN M. BERNHISEL."

With his brethren at home Brigham revealed that fine balance of mind which marked him as a great man. He was not perturbed about whether he or Colonel Steptoe would be appointed Governor, for was it not all in the hands of God? He would over-rule all circumstances and events for the welfare of his Church and Kingdom, and Brigham would bow to His great and wise will. In a sermon on February 18th, 1855, while Steptoe was still in the city, President Young went freely into the whole subject. I shall quote a few paragraphs:

"The newspapers are teeming with statements that I said, 'President Pierce and all hell could not remove me from office.' I will tell you what I did say, and what I now say: the Lord reigns and rules in the armies of the Heavens, and does his pleasure among the inhabitants of the earth. He sets up a kingdom here and pulls down another there, at his pleasure. He walks in the midst of the people, and they know it not. He makes kings, presidents and governors at his pleasure; hence I conclude that I shall be Governor of the Utah Territory, just as long as he wants me to be; and for that time, neither the President of the United States, nor any other power, can prevent it. Then, brethren and sisters, be not worried about my being dismissed from office; for when the President appoints another man to be Governor of Utah Territory, you may acknowledge that the Lord has done it, for we should acknowledge his hand in all things."

Yes, this would be a poor world if it were ruled by the intrigue and deception of man; but it is not so; the world is ruled by the God of Heaven.

"All people are in the hands of the Almighty, and he governs and controls them, though they cannot perceive, neither do they acknowledge his handiwork. He exalts the president to be the head of the nation, and places kings upon their thrones. There is not a man that escapes his cognizance, and he brings forth his purposes in the latter days.

"I can tell you something more, brethren and sisters, and friends, and the United States and all the world: the Lord Almighty will not suffer his priesthood to be again driven from the earth, even should he permit the wicked to kill and destroy his people. The government of the United States and all the world may go to war with us, but God will preserve a portion of the meek and humble of this people to bear off the Kingdom to the inhabitants of the earth, and will defend his priesthood, for it is the last time, the last gathering time, and He will not suffer the priesthood to be again driven from the earth."

One can feel the mighty faith which prevailed in the heart of Brother Brigham. There was no doubt in his mind about the great latter-day work in which he was engaged. It was ordained of God and would prevail. But still he had one foreboding fear regarding this people:

"I have but one fear concerning this people in the valleys of the mountains. I have but one trembling sensation in the nerves of my spirit, and that is, lest we do not live the religion we profess.

"If we transgress the laws God has given us, and trample His mercies, blessings and ordinances under our feet, and treat them with indifference, which I have thought that so many occasionally do, not fully realizing the obligations that they are under to their God, I have feared that in consequence they would be overcome, and that the Lord would let them be scattered and smitten."

Is there any fear for the Saints if they do live their religion? No, none at all.

"Only let them live their religion, and I have no more fear with regard to their being driven, and with regard to their enemies having power over them, than I have with regard to these mountains being blown over upon this city."

As for myself and my duty:

"I am willing to fight or to go; to run or to stay! Or to do anything else that the Lord Almighty requires of me for His Kingdom's sake, and then to lay down my life for His cause.

"My religion is first and foremost with me, and I will send it to all the earth, to President Pierce, whether he retains me as Governor of Utah territory or not, and whether I should be president of the United States, or king of Great Britain, or monarch of all the world, my religion, and my God, are first and foremost with me. My kingship, my presidentship, and all, shall bow to that eternal priesthood which God has bestowed upon me."

In the latter part of April, 1855, Colonel Steptoe marched away towards California with his troops, and a few weeks later word came from the Capitol at Washington that President Pierce had appointed Brigham Young to his second term as Governor of Utah.

Forty-one years after this event, in 1896, Colonel Steptoe, an aged man now, sat on the veranda of the Hotel Del Coronado, in San Diego, and talked with a newspaper reporter of days long since gone by. Among other things he said:

"Brigham Young was certainly an extraordinary man. Holding as I did a government position which frequently took me from my home in the States across the plains as far as Salt Lake City, and kept me there months at a time, I had many opportunities of forming a correct judgment of this man, who, by pure force of will and indomitable pluck, led his people across trackless deserts, and mountain ranges, through a region of country infested by Indians, and finally located them where now stands the beautiful city which bears the name of the great inland sea. Then it was a spot most unpromising, surrounded by rugged mountains, between which nestled valleys seemingly as unproductive as the alkali wastes through which his forlorn and footsore contingent of men, women and children, had passed."
