Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

IN The Deseret News under date of November 7th, 1855, there is an interesting bit of correspondence from President Brigham Young's own hand. It is a humorous and clever account of a journey he took with his counselors, Heber C. Kimball, Jedediah M. Grant, and a few close friends northward towards the Box Elder settlement, where Lorenzo Snow was presiding over a small but growing colony, soon to be called Brigham City, after the President's own given name.

How he came to write this account and why, I have been unable to learn, but it reveals Brother Brigham in a natural, free and easy element, just as he was as a fellow traveler and friend, in the association of his brethren whom he loved, and who loved him.

I have been told by many who knew President Young, (my own father was one of them) that he was a most friendly and sociable man, one of the best companions, and that he enjoyed life, and could see a humorous situation as quickly as anyone else.

But to return to the sketch: I shall reproduce it practically in its entirety, and I hope the reader will be able to catch a glimpse of Brother Brigham, there as he was, on the 15th of October, 1855, as he journeyed forth in his carriage to visit John Kay's home in Davis county.

Editor News:

"With a view of rusticating for a short time and attending to some business, I left this city on Monday, the 15th ultimo, at 35 minutes past twelve noon, precisely, in company with Hon. J. M. Grant, Lieut. Gen. D. H. Wells, Br's. Frederick Kesler and James Wilkin, and Br. Samuel Ensign, who was going to Box Elder to work on a mill, now in progress, belonging to myself and Hon. Lorenzo Snow.

"We should have started a little sooner, say some twenty-five minutes, had we not have waited for Hon. J. M. Grant to finish his dinner, though for this detention he agreed to hold the horses while the rest of us should also eat our dinners (later on.)

"I was moreover entertained, while so waiting, by one Tippetts, who was very strenuously opposed to paying his wall tax (this refers to a tax for the wall around the city) and who seemed to think that I must have had a hand in taxing him, and could abate it at pleasure; he even threatened to leave the Territory if he had it to pay. If my legal opinion had been solicited I should have unquestionably have ventured to give it, and that would have been for him to do just as he pleased about leaving; however, as he was from Box Elder, and I intended to pay that place a visit, I remarked that he might meet me at that point with the local authorities and we would see about it, although I could not perceive that, in reality, I had anything to do with the case. I told him that the officers were acting under a law of the Territory, and that I presumed that they were only doing their duty, and if he should threaten to shoot me, as I had understood he had them, I would make wolf bait of him.

"However, we got started at last, and were soon joined by Hon. Heber C. Kimball and son David; the company then had two carriages and one wagon. The wagon contained some feed for horses, also luggage, such as blankets, provisions, etc., a chest of tools for Saml. Ensign, etc., etc., and in which Mr. Wm. Naylor officiated as teamster.

"We were all prepared with fire arms, the Hon. J. M. Grant having a minie rifle, loaded for a bear by the owner, Mr. Thomas Ellerbeck, one of my clerks. We proceeded, in a northerly direction, up the street leading past the old Bath House, which street we found decidedly one sided for the want of throwing up dirt on the west as well as the east side.

"We were informed, however, by his Honor the Mayor, that it was intended to be done so, and that it had been thrown up on one side at a time for the convenience of traveling while they were working it, which I considered a very judicious arrangement.

"Passed the Bath House without calling, but discovered that it had been converted into a Tannery by A. H. Raleigh and Golden, whose sign appears on the outside of the building. They also give warm and cold baths, as will be perceived by another sign, but I should presume not entertainment, the sign post being cut down.

"There are a few good and substantial buildings on this street, some of which have been built the present season. We noticed an addition put up by our enterprising and worthy friend Ira Ames, tanner and currier, which I presume he intends to use for a leather store, as the room he now occupies for that purpose, it being in the back part of the house, I should think was very inconvenient both to himself and customers.

"Apropos, we find that we have got a little behind our story. But to record: we passed through the city gate, on the north side of the city, and traveled on, without incident worthy of note, over rather a rough road, caused by the rocks sticking up a little too high, until we arrived at the new turnpike made this season across the swamp, just beyond the warm springs, by one of our worthy and enterprising citizens, Mr. David Wilkin, under the direction of the Honorable Mayor and City Council.

"We noticed, as we passed along, that the pump logs leading from the warm springs to the bath house were very much out of repair, as illustrated by the frequent jets of water seen spouting up several feet into the air, and seemingly, running to waste.

"The turnpike is a decided improvement, and speaks well for the enterprise of the city. Much money has heretofore been applied, in various ways, to make this a good road, but heretofore without success; the plan now hit upon, besides straightening the road, seems permanent. It is ditched on both sides, with a deep, wide ditch, the dimensions of which I did not take the trouble to determine, but they are sufficient to drain off all the water, thereby leaving the space occupied by the road perfectly dry.

"I should think that the road between the ditches is three rods and six inches wide, and the earth from the ditches being thrown upon it of course raises it considerably higher than the original surface of the ground. I noticed that the ditch upon the upper side of the road was much the largest, which seems quite necessary, as the springs of water, constantly and frequently gushing out of the earth, are principally between the road and the mountain. Thus had a good, dry, and permanent road been made across that quagmire which has so long baffled the united exertions of Heywood, Rockwood, Moore and others, and been such a source of discomfort to the public generally.

"We soon came to the model farm of Hon. J. M. Grant and Col. J. C. Little, who have built a model house entirely with cobblestones, except the chimney which I understand is made of adobes."

"It was designed to water this farm from those ditches before spoken of, which furnished considerable quantities of water, but upon trial it was found too salt. These gentlemen made a ditch across the road which, though dry at present, is still unbridged, and is, we suppose, an infraction of the law in such case, made and provided; we, therefore, leave this case to the consideration of the Attorney general of Utah Territory, whose duty it is, as some have urged, to see that the law should be complied with, and its penalties duly enforced against every infraction thereof.

"I do not know how such offenses can be compounded, but if they are to be paid by the jolt, I should recommend my friends, Grant and Little, to lose no time in abolishing the ditch, at least as a very unprofitable appendage to the model farm.

"I'd like to have forgotten to tell you that this farm is a part of a joint enclosure, made this season by the people of the northwestern part of the city for a pasture, and is principally enclosed by a Spanish or mud wall just 4 feet 9 inches high, with a ditch on each side, from which the earth was taken to make it.

"The earth is generally mixed with water and pounded, and it makes a very good fence when it is well done. The model house had no occupant when we passed, but we soon met a man by the name of Jordan, formerly a Baptist deacon in England, with team, wagon, and family, who, Mayor Grant informed us, was expected to inhabit it, and who is, moreover, an excellent cooper.

"I presume that he is now comfortably situated therein as, upon our return, 'the smoke which so gracefully curled' from the model chimney indicated the cheerful hearthstone, around which the domestic circle are wont to gather.

"We passed on to the Hot Spring, which gushes from the rock at its usual rate, although the surrounding pond has been lowered about two feet by another improvement made through the energy of our worthy mayor and city council. This improvement was made by digging a straight ditch which safely carried the water into the lake, and is deep enough to lower the pond around the spring, as above mentioned.

"We safely crossed the bridge and proceeded on our journey over a road, which is rather rough, owing in some places to the rock's protruding itself and in others to the earth being gouged into deep holes, filled with dust, on account of the severe drouth.

"There has been a long string of mud fence, or Spanish wall, as it is called, made on the east side of the Church pasture, though it is not done exactly right; they have aimed to mix straw with the mud, but the straw is too long and not sufficiently mixed; it seems to lay straight between each layer, and I think does more harm than good, for it has a tendency to gather and hold the moisture, during the wet season, which may rot the straw and leave spaces for the water to make inroads; whereas, if it was cut short and thoroughly mixed, and both pounded hard and dried well during the hot weather, it would be a great advantage.

"I am sanguine that straw, when properly applied, will be of great advantage to such walls, and also to the adobie. The Egyptians used it in sun dried bricks or adobies, which have endured until this day, although over three thousand years old; they are also found in the mounds and ancient fortifications, in many places in America, made in the same manner with eminent success.

"But, not to be too tedious, I will return to our trip. We passed through the Session's Settlement, or North Kanyon ward, on the middle road, about midway between the county and state roads.

"We saw various improvements in progress, among which we noticed the Hon. J. M. Grant's new farm house, with yards, corrals, and line fences made of the Spanish wall. We also noticed many large piles of straw, which indicated to us that at least some wheat had been raised.

"Here is a considerable body of very rich land on which are raised the very large crops which we often hear of, and the celebrated Muir farm from which such astonishing productions have been yearly reported is located in this region. Much of this land is farmed without irrigation.

"By taking this road we avoided much of the dust, as it is not traveled quite so much as the county road between it and the mountains on the east. The State road lies one mile farther west, and is designed to cross the barrens, but the lake has been so high, for the last two or three years, that it could not be traveled.

"On our return we undertook to come down, or rather up, this route, but we discovered that, although the water in the lake was quite low, still we had to keep round the barrens instead of crossing them, and found ourselves, after many wanderings and windings about, landed back in the same street which we had traveled going up or rather, down. Excuse me for getting ahead of my story, but as I designed making a quick passage home, I thought I would mention these things as I proceeded out, which you know will save the trouble of passing over the same ground twice.

"Farther along we turned a square corner to the right and passed up towards Centerville, which, be it known, is, with the principal situations bordering along on the bench, continually in sight. While traveling easterly upon this road we passed the adobie yard, Gen. Rich's beautiful farms and those of many others, and, turning to the left in about a mile's travel, we soon passed Centerville, leaving it about half a mile on our right. It appears at this distance to be quite an enterprising place, having many good buildings, among which Bishop Smith's stood conspicuous, it being finished on the outside with stucco work lined and marbled.

"After traveling a short distance we again took to the right, and then again to the left, and since this order-loving people have all their lines crossing at right angles, the roads must, perforce, follow on around all their farms. The last turn, however, landed us above them all, and then we wended our way among rocks which, by having traveled the lower road, we had hitherto escaped.

"I had contemplated stopping at Mr. Judson Stoddard's for dinner, and have since learned that his hospitable family had pumpkin sauce and chicken fixings in great abundance and in complete readiness, in anticipation that we would do so, but the route which we traveled not passing directly by his house, and wishing to make Bishop Kay's, if possible, that night, I concluded that we would not go out of our way to partake at his hospitable board. We exceedingly regretted the necessity which hurried us onward without calling, the more so, as we were all, with the exception of the Hon. J. M. Grant, without dinner, and still more so since our return, than at the time, upon learning of their preparation.

"However, disappointments will happen and misfortune unbidden come, as in this case; the dinner was ready for us, we were hungry, the Hon. J. M. Grant was engaged to hold the horses, but all failed and we were left to prosecute our journey with empty stomachs.

"Farmington is a large town, though one of small pretensions, located on North Cottonwood Creek, and about seventeen miles from Great Salt Lake City in a northerly direction. We passed the gates of the city wall, which were open, indeed, I believe, unhung. There is a large Court House erected this season at this place, and now in process of finishing. The city wall is nowhere finished, though it is being built in various places. There is a large amount of good improvements in this place, mostly private residences. The Bishop here as well as at Centerville seems to be setting an example in building, for he also is completing a good dwelling.

"The water in the North Kanyon ward is quite scarce, hardly sufficient to cover the pebbly bottom, but the wheel of the grist mill was fluttering as we passed, and the water sect, which waters the city, was almost full to the overflowing of its tidy banks.

"From this point we passed, taking the road by Hector C. Haight's across the bottoms, where we found several ponds and pools of water, in one of which my near horse took a notion to lay down but, through the energy and dexterity of my hired man, James Wilkin, who drove my team, he was fortunately prevented from accomplishing his design and we passed safely through, almost without a spatter. Arriving at Mr. Haight's we called a halt for a few minutes, to inquire about the road across the Barrens, and were told that we could cross them in safety. This point is twenty miles from the city and has a beautiful creek, now dry, bordered with a very handsome grove of Willow and Cottonwood timber. I did not count the trees but should think that there were more than two hundred. The house is a comfortable resting place for the weary and hungry travelers, and the barn is exactly opposite the house, across the street, where it appeared as though animals also might find refreshment and repose. We speak knowingly in regard to this matter, having heretofore shared the hospitality of the kindhearted landlord, who is now absent on a mission to England, and his most excellent lady. But this availed us nothing upon this occasion, as we were bound for Bishop Kay's, still about three miles distant.

"The sun was about setting as we left this pleasant retreat, and we passed along a tolerably smooth, though dusty road, until we arrived at the Bishop's about dark. We were kindly received and entertained by the Bishop and his family, who spared no pains to make us comfortable and happy.

"At this place we were joined by Seth M. Blair, Esq., and Jesse W. Fox, Surveyor General for Utah Territory; this was a portion of our party who were to accompany us on our trip, but had been detained in the city until about sunset, after which time they had driven through and overtaken myself and company at precisely four minutes before eleven p.m., the distance being about twenty-five miles from the city.

"As to sleeping, after having partaken of a hearty supper, the particulars of which we propose giving you on another occasion, we retired in the following order: Hon. H. C. Kimball and Hon. J. M. Grant took the carriage, which was provided with a bed and suitable clothing; Lt. Gen. D. H. Wells and Mr. Kesler took a quilt that I had ridden on in my carriage and a buffalo robe and went out to the straw pile, where they made their lodging. My driver, Mr. J. Wilkin, Mr. Naylor and David Kimball also made their beds in the straw. This arrangement left the sitting room of our worthy host and a very nice and comfortable bed all to myself, and which I enjoyed exceedingly after the fatigue of travel and incidents of the day. Esq. Blair and Surveyor General Fox slept in their carriage, and all parties reported, in the morning, that they had slept well and soundly during the night, except Mr. Kesler, who got nervous by looking at the Great Bear performing his diurnal task around the polar star."

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

II

Early in December, 1855, President Brigham Young, his counselors, and a large number of brethren, began their journey southward towards Fillmore, to hold in the new Statehouse there a session of the Territorial Legislature. It was the winter season, cold and inclement, but after four or five days they arrived, and took up their labors. The session was to last forty days, consequently Brother Brigham remained in Fillmore until the middle of January, 1856, fulfilling whatever obligations were his in the capacity of Governor. Writing from there to Franklin D. Richards under date of December 24th, the day before Christmas, he relates the accomplishments of the Legislature up to that date.

"We at present hail from this place, being here during the session of the legislature, which convened at this point on the 10th inst., and will hold forty days. We send you the message (referring to his own message as Governor) and the laws providing for holding a convention and taking the census, with a view of obtaining our admission into the Union as a State. There has, as yet, but little else passed the Legislature Assembly of much importance. The Deseret News, which will go out in this mail, will give you all the items."

Two items of importance in this Fillmore session of the Legislature, were the creation of Cache and Box Elder counties, which were soon to provide farms and homes for thousands of settlers.

Concluding their labors at Fillmore "at five o'clock in the morning" of January 18th, 1856, the brethren began their return journey through the snow "from two to three feet deep in places" towards Salt Lake City, where they arrived on the afternoon of January 21st, "almost exhausted." Events were soon to shape themselves so that this was the only session of the legislature ever held in Fillmore, and the Territorial Capital was soon to be removed to Salt Lake valley.

On his arrival home Brigham found that the food shortage among the Saints was extremely acute. Owing to the drouth of 1855 and the grasshopper plague, there was grave danger that many would soon be without food entirely. Coupled with this, the winter was extremely severe; deep snow and continued cold. Writing in his history under date of February 9th, 1856, he records:

"The weather is cold and frosty; continual reports of cattle dying. Numbers of people have nothing else but potatoes and salt to eat. The snow is two feet deep in Davis and Weber counties."

In a letter to his son William, who was laboring as a missionary in England, dated February 29th, President Heber C. Kimball went more into detail regarding conditions:

"I have been under the necessity of rationing my family and also yours, to two-thirds of a pound of bread-stuff per day each. As the last week is up we shall commence on half a pound each—at the same time they all begin to look better and fatter, and more ruddy, like the English. This I am under the necessity of doing. Brother Brigham told me today that he had put his family on half a pound each, for there is scarcely any grain in the country, and there are thousands that have none at all scarcely. We do this for the purpose of feeding hundreds that have none.

"My mill has not brought me in, for the last seven months, over one bushel of toll per day, in consequence of the dry weather, and the water being frozen up—which would not pay my miller. When this drouth came on, I had about seven hundred bushels of wheat, and it is now reduced to about one hundred and twenty-five bushels, and I have only about twenty-five bushels of corn, which will not provide for my own family until harvest. Heber has been to the mill today, and has brought down some un-bolted flour, and we shall be under the necessity of eating the bran along with the flour, and shall think ourselves doing well with half a pound a day at that. Martin Wood stated to him (Heber) that he ground thirty bushels yesterday, but last night was a very cold night, which will check the water again, as the weather has not modified a great deal. Although the sun shines pleasantly through the day, the nights are still quite cold. You must remember that I did not raise one spoonful of wheat last year, and I have not received any from any other source than the mill. Brother James planted some late corn from which we obtained about forty bushels, and rather poor at that. We have some meat, and, perhaps, about seventy bushels of potatoes, also a few beets and carrots; so you can judge whether or not we can get through until harvest without digging roots. Still, we are altogether better off than the most of the people in the valleys; there are several wards in this city who have not over two weeks provisions on hand."

Brother Kimball goes on further with a graphic account of the condition of the livestock:

"Now as to my own stock—cattle, horses, and sheep. My sheep are on Antelope Island, I put them there last fall, and Peter Hanson is with them, living in the Garr house, and Joseph Toronto is with Brother Brigham's, five miles beyond, where Brother Weaver lived. Brother Joseph Toronto came over last week. Peter Hanson wrote a line to me, stating that there had but two of the sheep died. Some portions of the Island are covered with snow, nearly three feet deep. The sheep range on the tops of the mountains where the wind has blown off the snow, and they do first-rate. My cattle, sixty head of them, were put in Cache Valley with the Church cattle, and those of other individuals, numbering about two thousand five hundred head, with some forty or fifty horses, some six or eight of which were mine. When the snow fell in that valley about ten inches deep, the fatter portion of the cattle broke and came over into Box Elder and Weber valleys, and scattered hither and thither. It is supposed that one-half of those two thousand five hundred head are dead. Whether mine are all dead I know not. My John horse fled out of that valley down on the Weber and died. Old Jim, Elk, and Kit and Kurley remained in Cache Valley, and they were with about forty head of other horses when last seen, but they have not been heard of for a considerable time, and whether living or dead we know not. The snow is about waist deep in that valley. Week before last, Heber and some other boys started to go there, but when they got to the divide between that valley and Box Elder, the snow was about twelve feet deep, and they were obliged to return. Heber found the Lize mare and your two mules on the Weber, and brought them home. They were so poor that they almost staggered."

Well, that is a general picture of conditions which Brother Brigham found and faced on his arrival home from Fillmore in January, 1856. People out of food, cattle dying, and unrelenting winter bearing down on all the little settlements, scattered through the valleys. What could he say? What could he do? He was the leader. He had led the people out here. They now looked to him. First, by wise and stringent measures of economy, he figured carefully that the Saints could and would get through until the next harvest. There would be suffering, but no general or major catastrophe. By the blessings of God they would survive. Next, he determined that he for one, as the leader, would not give up or show the white feather anywhere. This was still "the right place."

The first Sabbath after his return, January 27th, he spoke to the Saints in the Tabernacle, and launched into his subject with characteristic energy and vigor.

"I might say something with regard to the hard times.

"I do not apprehend the least danger of starving, for until we eat up the last mule, from the tip of the ear to the end of the fly whipper, I am not afraid of starving to death."

That would give the Saints a laugh and they would already feel better. He continued to encourage them.

"There are many people who cannot now get employment, but spring is going to open upon us soon, and we are not going to suffer any more than what is for our good."

Perhaps this food shortage was a blessing in disguise to the Saints.

"I am thankful for the hand of the Lord which is visible; I am as thankful for this Providence of his as for any I have ever received."

For would not the Saints now learn a valuable lesson. They had been wasteful with their substance in times of plenty. Perhaps the Lord was displeased with them because they had not stored up out of their abundance for future use.

"My soul has been grieved to bleeding, to see the waste, and the prodigal feeling of this people in the use of their bountiful blessings. Many have walked them under foot. They wanted gold and silver, instead of wheat and corn and the best vegetables that ever grew upon the earth."

"No, it is not my fault that many of you are suffering; nor is it because the Lord is not mindful of his people. It is because you have neglected yourselves."

"We never ought to be without three to five years' provisions on hand. I hope you will learn wisdom in the future, and lay up wheat to feed the brethren when they come here from distant countries. If you will learn wisdom now, I will promise you in the name of Israel's God, that the earth will yield its abundance as it has heretofore."

Continuing along the same line in a sermon on March 16th, he again reminds the Saints that they must be frugal, and that they must learn the greatest of all lessons that "it is the Lord who rules and reigns."

"I tell you honestly that I do not know when I have been more thankful, in all my life, than I have to see the pinching hand of want compel every man and woman to pray God our Father to give us this day our daily bread.

"It makes me happy, inasmuch as the people will not otherwise understand that the Lord does feed them. In years of plenty their understandings seem closed to this fact, they do not appear to realize that the Lord made the earth fruitful, and caused it to yield its fruit bountifully.

"And while our flocks and herds were increasing upon the mountains and plains, the eyes of the people seemed closed to the operations of the invisible hand of Providence, and they were prone to say, "It is our own handy-work, it is our labor that has performed this."

"It seems to be so interwoven with our nature, while we are blessed and surrounded with all the comforts of the earth, to forget that the Lord furnishes these things to us. Then I say that I rejoice when I see that the Lord brings us into circumstances calculated to make us aware that if we are fed it is he that feeds us, that if we are clothed it is he that clothes us.

"I am glad to see you brought into a state where you may begin to think and realize from whence your blessings flow. For the Lord rules and reigns."

It was the wise and careful management of Brother Brigham, and the encouragement of himself and the other leaders that brought the Saints through this desperate crisis, until the bounteous harvest of 1856 came on.
