Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

THE two principal events of the summer of 1856, in which President Brigham Young participated, were the celebrations of the 4th and the 24th of July. On account of the failure of crops in 1855, and the near famine conditions which prevailed during the winter and spring of 1856, the Saints had been laboring under a tension which had brought them almost to a state of despair—but this condition had happily been relieved by the generous harvest which came on in June and July. Now they were in a mood to celebrate, and extend their gratitude to God for his bounteous blessings. Accordingly, an elaborate program was planned for July 4th. "At sunrise," relates The Deseret News, "the stillness of the morning was broken by firing a national salute of thirteen guns from the arsenal, which was the signal for ringing of bells and hoisting of flags.

"The mammoth United States flag was hoisted upon the Temple Block, under the direction of A. N. Hill, Esq.; and flags were displayed from the cupola of Governor Young's residence; at Livingston, Kinkead and Co.'s, Hooper and Williams', Gilbert and Gerrish's, and the Church stores, Townsend's and Wilkins' hotels, and Whitehouse's shop together with a great variety of banners and mottos at the different stores and private residences.

"The cannon were in charge of Captain Cowan, and the ringing of the several bells was under the direction of Hon. Nathan Davis.

"The bands, under the direction of Major William Pitt, played at the residences of Governor Young, Hon. H. C. Kimball, and Lieut.-General D. H. Wells; after which the Nauvoo Brass Band, mounted, and Ballo's and Martial Bands, in omnibuses, passed through the principal streets discoursing beautiful and harmonious strains of music, indicating to the citizens that the anniversary of American Independence was to be celebrated with joy and thanksgiving."

About nine o'clock in the morning a mammoth parade was formed which marched through the principal streets of the city and then to the Bowery on the Temple Block. "His Excellency (Governor Young) rode in a barouche (open carriage) drawn by a pair of milk white horses, driven by Mr. F. Little." On arrival at the Bowery, after prayer by Wilford Woodruff, Governor Young delivered the oration of the day. I shall give the reader a few excerpts from it:

"To what casual circumstance can be attributed the assemblage of this vast concourse for the purpose of celebrating the anniversary of so memorable a day, upon this isolated spot, where, but nine years past, solitude reigned unbroken, save by the music of the elements, the cries of wild beasts and the untutored sounds of the still more savage red men? What cause has awakened to life and civilized improvement these desert plains—these barren wastes?"

"We live here through the blessings of the Almighty, and by his providences we have nourished and sustained ourselves; we are willing to continue so to do. We came here to be free from oppression and mobocracy, and we do not wish such characters to follow us, or to tarry in our midst. But we say to all lovers of freedom, virtue, and good order, in every land, you are welcome, for you will respect our rights, our laws and the legitimate obligations of our republican government.

"We are occupying a region well known as being peculiarly undesirable, and one hitherto unsettled by the whites, since the days of Christopher Columbus. We are almost a thousand miles from the nearest seaport. We are hemmed in by lofty mountains on nearly every side, while numerous isolated ranges and barren, arid plains so crowd our surface, that but a small portion is at all suited to the purposes of settlement. In even those narrow localities, ditches and canals have to be made by much labor, in order to irrigate a soil whereon rain seldom falls from early in spring until late in autumn. And when all has been done, that as yet could be, towards supplying the thirsty crops, the husbandman is oft compelled to witness the products of his toil droop and die ere maturity, through the failure of the few small streams so laboriously brought under control. Grasshoppers and other insects swarm in myriads to devour what may have escaped the drought, and the severe storms of winter complete the destruction of animals struggling to subsist upon herbage which has been so effectually cut off. But amid all these disadvantages, unendurable by any other people, we are still striving to extend the area of freedom, and to gladden the most uninviting domain of a great nation, with the blessings and privileges of her free institutions.

"If this people should leave these sequestered vales, they would soon revert to their former waste condition; silence would again assert her supremacy. The country suits us merely because no other well-informed people can covet its possession. If they do, it is because they grudge us an existence upon any part of God's footstool. There is nothing here, except what is produced by the most arduous toil, and that often unrequited, to tempt the avarice or cupidity of any reasonable creature. It is useless, therefore, for official cliques, who never have identified their interests with the welfare of this Territory, and who never intend to, to seek to dictate, govern and control us.

"In view of these facts, we fondly anticipate soon seeing the day when, in accordance with the spirit and intent of our republican government, we shall be blest with the full enjoyment of our rights and have the privilege of electing officers of our own choice, and be freed from the imposition of those known to be unsolicited and unsought upon our part and who feel no interest in our prosperity, but would much rather see us languish and come to naught."

Brigham felt very strongly on the proposition of the Saints having a state government, rather than a territorial government, and he worked unceasingly for this objective throughout all the remaining years of his life, but it was to be exactly forty years from the time about which I am writing until Congress granted statehood in 1896. Meantime, the inhabitants of Utah suffered along under the territorial appointees of the various presidents of the United States, and men were sent here to govern and administer the laws who neither understood nor had any sympathy with the people. Within a year this condition brought about a breach which developed into open warfare.

The 24th of July, Pioneer Day, 1856, was to be a happy day for President Brigham Young. He determined to take a select company of Saints into the mountains where they could be free and celebrate as they desired. Perhaps he wanted to get away from the listening ears and spying eyes of the non-Mormons, who were eager and anxious to misinterpret and report in the east everything he said and did. Therefore, he issued, on July 18th, to a group of friends, numbering between three and four hundred, the following invitation:

PIC-NIC PARTY AT THE HEAD-WATERS OF BIG COTTONWOOD

"President Brigham Young respectfully invites...............and family to attend a Pic-Nic Party at the Lake in Big Cottonwood Kanyon, on

THURSDAY, 24TH OF JULY

"You will be required to start from the City very early on Wednesday morning, as no one will be permitted after two o'clock, p.m., of the 23rd to pass the first mill, about four miles up the kanyon.

"All persons are forbidden to make or kindle fires at any place in the kanyon, except on the camp ground.

"G. S. L. City, July 18th, 1856."

The delightful spot, now known as "Brighton" on the head-waters of Big Cottonwood" is one of the most picturesque summer resorts adjacent to Salt Lake City. Nestled in the tops of the mountains, fanned by cool breezes from Silver Lake and the rocky snow-clad canyons, covered with the native pine and cottonwood trees, it affords protection, quietude and beauty unequaled.

At the time about which I am writing, three saw mills were located in the canyon and by severe exertions the brethren had completed a road to the source of Cottonwood Creek.

All day long on the 23rd, carriages and wagons and men and boys on horseback, wended their way upwards through this rocky defile to the spot which had been selected for the celebration.

"The camp ground," relates George D. Watt, "was located on a fairy-like spot, overlooking the surrounding meadows and lake. The Bowery, President Young's marquee, and President Kimball's tent, occupied an open space amid the small copses of pine, while the numerous carriages were conveniently grouped around. A massive granite rock, fifty-four feet in circumference, by four feet high, stood at the entrance to this lovely spot; from the center of this rock, and apparently without earth to sustain them, grew three pine trees, which were fringed round at the top of the rock with a thick cluster of young pines, about two feet high. A large flag was suspended from these trees bearing the motto, "Clear the Way," with the all-seeing eye in an oval in the upper margin, above two clasped hands, under which, inscribed upon a scroll, were the words, "Blessings follow Sacrifices;" a representation of the uper crossing of the North Fork of the Platte, with the Pioneer company upon both banks; and crossing upon rafts, occupies the center. "The Pioneers of 1847 at the upper crossing of the Platte, in pursuit of the Valleys of the Mountains," fills the lower margin.

"At the head of the bowery is a large pine, one hundred feet high, to the top of which Brother John bagley, assisted by Patriarch John Smith, son of Hyrum Smith, who was martyred for his religion in Carthage jail, fastened the flag of the United States.

"Nature seems to have exerted hereself to out-vie art, in forming this enchantingly beautiful place. The trees grew in pyramidal groups with thick foliage, each group fringed with small pines some two feet high, back of which gradually rose other trees, gently leading the sight to the lofty tops of the center. Every heart that could feel, every mind that could appreciate the skilful blending of the sublime and picturesque and realize the deep silent peace that all nature seemed bathed in, could not entertain an angry thought, a jealous feeling, an unvirtuous desire and hardly a willingness to ever again mingle with the ungodly world."

The morning of the 24th dawned "beautiful and clear." At seven o'clock the entire company centered before President Young's tent for prayer. During the forenoon there were music, games, mountain climbing, fishing in the lake; the Saints indulging in forms of amusement to suit themselves. At two p.m. President Young called the company about him and addressed them as follows:

"I wish to tell you that I am satisfied with every individual that has come up this canyon, and I am perfectly satisfied with our day's exercises. We have been as happy, I presume, as we are capable of being; I have enjoyed myself extremely well, I will now ask my brethren and sisters whether they are all satisfied, if you are follow my example. (He raised his right hand, and all raised theirs.) If there are any who are not satisfied, they can make it known after they leave this place.

"I have enjoyed this day, because of the liberty each of us has enjoyed. We have celebrated the 4th and the 24th of July ever since we first came into the valleys in the mountains, but I have never had the privilege, before this day of freely acting myself. Hitherto I have been placed, by the people, where I must sit, and been told to walk just so, eyes right, eyes left, eyes front, now forward, right, left, right, left, etc. Today I have been at liberty, looking round and seeing the people enjoy themselves, without any stringent rules and regulations, and I may say that we have had perfect freedom. I told you to do anything or everything you wished to, if you would not do wrong, and enjoy yourselves in the way that would make you the most happy.

"I would like to have had the whole Church here, but when I select a party, on any occasion, I never know where to stop, short of getting the last Saint on earth enrolled in it. I have no distinction in my feelings, for I feel that we are all one family, and all brethren and sisters. The whole Church could not come here, we could only invite a few, and as we have observed strict decorum since we came out, I wish it to be observed until we leave the canyon, and from that time henceforth, that when we leave here we may have the pleasing reflection that no accident has occurred to mar our enjoyment.

"We wish every man, woman, and child to observe the strictest law of equity in the rest of our enjoyments this evening. When morning comes we will fire a salute to wake you up, when we wish the brethren and sisters to arise, eat their breakfasts, and take up the line of march, and if you see any persons in the mud, pick them up and carry them with you. We wish the company, so soon as breakfast is over, to put out their fires and vacate this ground, for I intend to tarry with the lumber company, until the rest are gone, and see that the fires are all well put out, when we shall take up our line of march and follow you.

"Many times I have a feeling to bring this people under a covenant, but a doubt as to the propriety of doing so operates as a check upon that feeling. While the toasts were being read, some of the brethren wished me to make some remarks, and it was strongly in my mind to ask, will you live your religion from this time, henceforth, and forever? and to bring the people under a covenant. But they are already under one, and my feelings are, I would rather they would not make covenants, than to make them and break them. Live your religion; live honestly before your God, deal justly with your own conscience and with one another, and do right from henceforth, and you shall be blessed.

"I could say a great deal on this occasion—the anniversary of our emancipation from the yoke of bondage, but I should say that which I do not wish to say, were I to give free vent to my thoughts. I shall wait with patience, in anticipation of the day when the people of God will triumph over the wiles and powers of Satan, and assume their place among the nations of the earth. But let me tell you that this will never be, until this people are a holy people. They have got to be sanctified; and when I can see the armies of Israel sanctified, no matter whether they are many or few, when that time comes they will go forth and maintain their rights. "Conquering and to conquer," until Satan is bound. But we will wait with patience; all we have to do is to live our religion and wait, for the time will come as quickly as we are prepared for it.

"I will now propose, that we do not dissolve this meeting, if that is the feeling of those present, but adjourn until the 23rd of July, 1857, to meet on this ground by 4 o'clock, p. m., preparatory to celebrating the 24th; that virtually gives the people present an invitation, aside from those I shall invite hereafter. The brethren and sisters who are now here and those whom I shall invite, I shall be happy to see here another season; but I give no liberty to any person to invite others to come here without my permission. I have no question but that all have friends whom they would like to bring with them, but order and decorum must be maintained in this, as in all matters pertaining to the kingdom of God."

II

In the fall and early winter of 1856 occurred what is known in our Church history as "the Reformation." It was the expression of an ardent desire on the part of the leading brethren, that the Saints should renew their covenants and live more nearly in accordance with the commandments of the Lord. President Young had given vent to his feelings in this regard when he stated at the 24th of July celebration at "Brighton" that "while the toasts were being read, some of the brethren wished me to make some remarks, and it was strongly in my mind to ask, will you live your religion from this time henceforth and forever, and to bring this people under a covenant?"

President Jedediah M. Grant, President Young's second counselor, took up this cause (perhaps gathering the thought from the President) with all the vigor and fire of his young manhood, and it was not long before he was enthusing entire wards and stakes to the extent that they were coming forward and asking for re-baptism; renewing their covenants and rededicating their lives to the cause of God.

In writing from Salt Lake City to Orson Pratt at Liverpool under date of September 30th, 1856, Wilford Woodruff takes cognizance of the great work going on.

"The Presidency of the Church have commenced a great reformation among this people in the valleys of the mountains. I have never heard as strong sermons delivered to the people as have been preached unto them of late. The Presidency are weighing the people in the balance, and are calling upon them to repent and be baptized for the remission of their sins.

"President Grant has gone into the northern counties and is preaching and baptizing whole wards, and building up churches. I presume the same course will be pursued in the wards of this city. The people begin to feel more than ever that they are dealing with the spirit and power of God, and the holy priesthood. Yes, the Latter-day Saints begin to feel that they are dealing with a spirit that can reach the hearts, know the thoughts and intents thereof, and try the souls of men. The people are called to sanctify themselves before the Lord that we may be prepared for the work of our God."

It was during this particular time of the so-called "Reformation," the latter half of the year 1856, that President Brigham Young preached some of the most remarkable sermons of his career. On Sunday, August 17th, in the Bowery at the rear of the old Tabernacle, he took up the beautiful subject "Implicit confidence in God." I regret that I cannot print all of this sermon, but its length forbids, and I shall quote only excerpts from it:

"How slow many of us are to believe the things of God, Oh how slow. How many men and women can I find here who place implicit confidence in their God? Perhaps you might wish an explanation with regard to the term I here make use of.

"To explain how much confidence we should have in God, were I using a term to suit myself, I should say 'implicit confidence.' I have faith in my God, and that faith corresponds with the works I produce. I have no confidence in faith without works. Shall I explain this?

"A portion of our community have so much confidence in God, even men and women in this city, that if you put in their possession five bushels of wheat, they will dispose of it and trust in God for their food for a year to come. To me this is inconsistent; I know nothing about the consistency of such a confidence in God. But to me it is consistent for the poor man, or woman, that has been gleaning wheat, and has saved five or ten bushels, to lay it up for a time of need; though I understand that some of them are trying to sell it. Poor men and women who have had to beg for the last six months, and who have had nothing but what they obtained through charity, but who have now obtained a few bushels of wheat, are ready to sell it for something of no intrinsic worth, trusting in God to provide for them. This is inconsistent to me.

"Again, in regard to food, implicit faith and confidence in God is for you and I to do everything we can to sustain and preserve ourselves; and the community that works together heart and hand, to accomplish this, their efforts will be like the efforts of one man. The past year was a hard one for us with regard to provisions, but I never had one faltering feeling in reference to this community's suffering, provided all had understood their religion and lived it; some few understand their religion and live it; others make a profession, without understanding their religion, and do not live it; consequently there has been a lack of union of efforts to sustain ourselves, which has made it very hard for the few.

"Suppose that we had done our best and had not raised one bushel of grain this year. I have confidence enough in my God to believe that we could stay here, and not starve to death. If all our cattle had died through the severity of the past winter, if the insects had cut off all our crops, if we still proved faithful to our God and to our religion, I have confidence to believe that the Lord would send manna and flocks of quails to us. But he will not do this, if we murmur and are neglectful and disunited.

"This is my confidence in my God. I am no more concerned about his people's sufferings unto death, than I am concerned about the sun's falling out of its orbit, and ceasing to shine on this earth again. I know that we should have that confidence in God; this has been my experience, I have been led into this confidence by the miraculous providences of God. My implicit confidence in God causes me to husband every iota of property he gives me; I will take the best care of my farm, I will prepare my ground as well as I can, and put in the best seed I have got, and trust in God for the result, for it is the Lord that gives the increase."

After the interesting and instructive treatment of the above subject President Young again speaks the true feelings of his heart as he proclaims his love for the Saints.

"This people is the best people upon the face of the earth, that we have any knowledge of."

He loves them and he is disposed to do everything in his power to aid and assist them; however he will not praise them to their detriment.

"I hope and trust in the Lord my God that I shall never be left to praise this people, to speak well of them, for the purpose of cheering and comforting them by the art of flattery; to lead them on by smooth speeches day after day, week after week, month after month, and year after year, and let them roll sin as a sweet morsel under their tongues, and be guilty of transgressing the laws of God. I hope I shall never be left to flatter this people, or any people on the earth, in their iniquity, but far rather chasten them for their wickedness and praise them for their goodness."

But if the Saints are righteous they do not need praise from me.

"The Lord praises you and comforts you if you live as you are directed; if you live with your life hid with Christ in God, you do receive, from the fountain head, life, joy, peace, truth, and every good and wholesome principle that the Lord bestows upon this people, and your hearts exult in it, and your joy is made full.

"The consolations of the Holy Spirit of our Gospel comfort the hearts of men and women, old and young, in every condition of this mortal life. The humble, the meek, and faithful are all the time consoled and comforted by the Spirit of the Gospel that we preach; consequently, their comfort, happiness, joy, and peace must be received from the fountain head. As Jesus says, 'In the world ye shall have tribulation, but in me ye have peace,' so we say to ourselves, so we say to the Saints: in the Lord ye have joy and comfort, and the light of truth which shines upon your path.

"The Holy Ghost reveals unto you things past, present, and to come; it makes your minds quick and vivid to understand the handiwork of the Lord. Your joy is made full in beholding the footsteps of our Father going forth among the inhabitants of the earth; this is invisible to the world but it is made visible to the Saints, and they behold the Lord in his providences, bringing forth the work of the last days."

In closing this sermon President Young paid his respects to those who were weak in the faith and were going away to California and elsewhere after the things of this world.

"It is reported that many are going away; I say, gentlemen and ladies, you who wish to go to California, or to the states, go and welcome; I had rather you would go than stay. I wish every one would go who prefers doing so, and if they will go like gentlemen, they go with my best feelings; but if they go like rascals and knaves, they cannot have them. I have never requested but two things of those who leave, namely, to pay their debts and not steal; that is all that I have required of them. Go about your business, for I would rather you would go than stay.

"I wish the people to understand that they have no interest apart from the Lord our God. The moment you have a divided interest, that moment you sever yourselves from eternal principles.

"The moment a person decides to leave this people, he is cut off from every object that is durable for time and eternity, and I have told you the reason why. Everything that is opposed to God and his Son, Jesus Christ, to the Celestial Kingdom and to celestial laws, those celestial laws and beings will hold warfare with, until every particle of the opposite is turned back to its native element, though it should take millions and millions of ages to accomplish it. Christ will never cease the warfare until he destroys death and him that hath power over it.

"I say again, you that wish to go, go in peace, and we like to have you go; and those that like to come here we like to have them come and be Saints, and if they would, they would stay; but if not, I like to have them leave, no matter whether they belong to the Church or not.

"My soul feels hallelujah, it exults in God, that he has planted this people in a place that is not desired by the wicked; for if the wicked come here they do not wish to stay, no matter how well they are treated, and I thank the Lord for it; and I want hard times so that every person that does not wish to stay, for the sake of his religion, will leave. This is a good place to make Saints, and it is a good place for Saints to live; it is the place that the Lord has appointed, and we shall stay here, until he tells us to go somewhere else.

"All I ask of the Saints is to live their religion, serve their God, and recollect that their interest should be in him, and nowhere else; that the inferior must be controlled by the superior, and our efforts and affections all be concentrated in one, namely, in building up the Kingdom of God to the destruction of wickedness; and may God help us to do it, I ask in the name of Jesus Christ: Amen."

Such was the manner in which President Brigham Young addressed the Saints, during the "Reformation" in the summer and fall of 1856. One can feel the power of his spirit, the depth of his sincerity, the strength of his great personality. His words are thrilling and faith inspiring to us now, after a lapse of nearly eighty years.

III

The record of the year 1856 would not be complete without a story of the hand-cart companies. Of itself, this is one of the most fascinating recitals in our Church history, and I should like to go into great detail regarding it, but as I am concerned primarily with President Brigham Young, I shall have to confine myself to the part he played in this interesting and dramatic episode.

From the beginning of the settlement of the Saints in Utah, a tremendous effort had been made by President Young, his counselors and the Twelve, to aid and assist the poor members of the Church, particularly in the European branches, to emigrate to Zion. To this end, in 1849, the Perpetual Emigration Fund company had been organized, with Brigham at its head. Contributions had been solicited from the Saints everywhere, and all the means acquired had been used, faithfully and carefully, for the purpose of gathering the poor.

Among those who had assisted the P. E. Fund Company, writes James Ferguson, in the Millennial Star of February 16th, 1856, "were no wealthy capitalists. The poor husbandman, giving his only cow, that had furnished his little ones their only luxury; the widow, presenting the rifle, or pet farm horse, a relic she had cherished in memory of him who had fallen in defense of his comrades, or had sunk exhausted, and lay buried in the dry waves of the desert; the wife of the absent missionary, bringing in the jewels she had preserved as tokens of her early love—these were the capitalists, these the first stockholders in that holy institution, which already has redeemed thousands from pauperism and despair, and given them a home and an independence on a free soil."

I have no record of the number of persons assisted to Zion by this fund, but as Ferguson says, they numbered into the thousands. It had done a great work up to the fall and severe winter of 1855, but at that time over half of the Church cattle starved or were frozen; the wagons and equipment were almost worn out; the funds were depleted.

But the great man at the head of the Church was not to be discouraged or defeated. It had been one of his major desires, that of gathering the poor Saints to the valleys. Therefore, his mind set to work on how to continue the immigration, in spite of all difficulties. Writing to Franklin D. Richards at Liverpool, under date of September 30th, 1855, he said:

"I have been thinking how we would operate another year. We cannot afford to purchase wagons and teams as in times past. I am consequently thrown back upon my old plan to make hand-carts, and let the emigration foot it, and draw upon them (the carts) the necessary supplies, having a cow or two for every ten. They can come just as quick, if not quicker, and much cheaper—can start earlier, and escape the prevailing sickness which annually lays so many of our brethren in the dust. A great majority of them walk now, even with the teams which are provided, and have a great deal more care and perplexity than if they came without them. They will only need ninety days rations, from the time of their leaving the Missouri river, and as the settlements extend up the Platte, not that much. The carts can be made without a particle of iron, with wheels hooped, made strong and light, and one, or if the family be large, two of them will bring all they will need upon the plains.

"If it is once tried, you will find that it will become the favorite method of crossing the plains. I want to see it fairly tried and tested, at all events, and I think we might as well begin another year as any time, and save this enormous expense of purchasing wagons and teams—indeed, we will be obliged to pursue this course, or suspend operations, for aught that I can see at present."

Thus beginning the work and carrying out the counsel of President Young, Franklin D. Richards published in the Millennial Star of January 3rd, 1856, the following notice:

"With a particular view of promoting the comfort of our brethren going out to Utah by the newly adopted method of hand-carts the ensuing season, we deem it advisable to release Elder Edmund Ellsworth from his present field of labor, that he may benefit the approaching emigration by the considerable experience which he has had in journeying across the plains."

Preparations were soon underway for the season's emigration, and upwards of thirteen hundred European Saints signed up to travel across the plains by the hand-cart method. They sailed from Liverpool to Boston and New York. From New York they went by railroad to Iowa City, Iowa, which was to be the outfitting point. Here the hand-carts were manufactured and provided—and the adventurous journey begun. The first three companies came through in safety. The fourth and fifth companies, under command of James G. Willie, and Edward Martin, on account of starting too late, encountered snow storms and freezing weather in the mountains, and met with severe disaster.

At the opening of the fall conference on October 5th, 1856, President Young took up with great vigor the subject of "bringing in our brethren and sisters from the plains."

"I will now give this people the subject and the text for the elders who may speak today and during the Conference. It is this: On the fifth day of October, 1856, many of our brethren and sisters are on the plains with hand-carts, and probably many are now seven hundred miles from this place, and they must be brought here; we must send assistance to them. The text will be—to get them here! I want the brethren who may speak to understand that their text is the people on the plains, and the subject matter for this community is to send for them and bring them in before the winter sets in.

"That is my religion, that is the dictation of the Holy Ghost that I possess; it is to save this people. We must bring them in from the plains, and when we get them here, we will try to keep the same spirit that we have had, and teach them the way of life and salvation; tell them how they can be saved, and how they can save their friends. This is the salvation that I am seeking for, to save our brethren that would be apt to perish, or suffer extremely, if we do not send them assistance.

"I shall call upon the bishops this day—I shall not wait until tomorrow, nor until next day—for sixty good mule teams, and twelve or fifteen wagons. I do not want to send oxen. I want good horses and mules. They are in this territory, and we must have them; also twelve tons of flour and forty good teamsters, besides those that drive the teams. This is dividing my text into heads; first, forty good young men who know how to drive teams, to take charge of the teams that are now managed by men, women and children, who know nothing about driving them; second, sixty, or sixty-five good span of mules, or horses, with harness, whipple-trees, neckyokes, stretchers, load chains, etc.; and thirdly, twenty-four thousand pounds of flour, which we have on hand.

"I will tell you all that your faith, religion and profession of religion, will never save one soul of you in the celestial kingdom of our Lord, unless you carry out just such principles as I am now teaching you. Go and bring in those people now on the plains, and attend strictly to those things which we call temporal, or temporal duties, otherwise your faith will be in vain; the preaching you have heard will be in vain to you, unless you attend to the things we tell you. Any man or woman can reason this out in their own minds, without trouble. The Gospel has been already preached to those brethren and sisters now on the plains; they have believed and obeyed it, and are willing to do anything for salvation; they are doing all they can do, and the Lord has done all that is required of Him to do, and has given us power to bring them in from the plains, and teach them the further things of the Kingdom of God, and prepare them to enter into the celestial kingdom of their Father. First and foremost is to secure our own salvation, and do right pertaining to ourselves, and then extend the hand of right to save others."

In response to President Young's appeal, before two days had elapsed, fifty-one teamsters had volunteered, fifty-four teams were made ready, and the following goods were brought forward to aid the needy emigrants as listed in President Young's history: "twenty-six thousand six hundred sixty-eight pounds of flour, thirty-one and a quarter bushels of onions, twelve pounds of dried meat, five bushels of oats, one hundred six quilts and blankets, fifty-three coats, eight cloaks, fifty-one pairs of pants, fifty vests, one hundred thirty-four pairs of boots and shoes, twenty-nine shawls, fifty-one dresses, seventy-two shirts, sixty-seven hoods, one hundred seventy-four pairs of stockings, seventy-two pairs of socks, nine pairs of mittens, fourteen sacks, one buffalo robe, two overshirts, two chemises, four neckties, thirteen hats and caps, three boys suits, eight pairs drawers, fifteen jackets, twelve bonnets, seven shirts, four handkerchiefs, one rug, three yards lindsey, two aprons, one pair gloves." Thus did the Saints in the valleys give of their own meagre stores to aid the suffering emigrants.

In spite of the stress and difficulties encountered by these hand-cart companies of 1856, President Young did not lose faith in the enterprise. Writing to George A. Smith, at Washington, D. C., under date of October 31st, 1856, he states:

"This year's operations have eminently proved the feasibility and success of the hand-cart enterprise, when the business is rightly managed and the companies leave the frontiers in anything like proper season. Those companies that left Iowa City in the forepart of July arrived in good time and were in excellent condition and spirits. But those who left the Missouri river in September are still back and Brother Willie's company has suffered some from cold and storms, as might have been naturally foreseen, and a few of the aged and infirm have died. How far back Brother Martin's company may be, I am as yet uninformed, though it is presumable that they are not far in the rear of Brother Willie's. A large number of men and teams have gone to help in the companies, having started out from time to time, for several weeks past, and very many during this week. As the weather is tolerably mild and pleasant, and assistance forwarded so liberally, it is to be hoped that the balance of this season's immigration will arrive before severely inclement weather sets in. At least the rear companies will learn the imprudence of leaving the frontiers at so late a date."

President Young did not cease his anxiety and efforts until the two belated hand-cart companies were found. Many did not survive the hardships and rigors of the journey, but the great majority were taken from the snow covered canyons and brought safely into the city. While this rescue work was going on, the President spoke in the old Tabernacle on Sunday, November 2nd, as follows:

"Do you want to know the reason why I speak of our being so comfortably situated this morning in so comfortable a meeting house? We can return home and sit down and warm our feet before the fire, and can eat our bread and butter; but my mind is yonder in the snow, where those immigrating Saints are, and my mind has been with them ever since I have had the report of their start from Winter Quarters on the 3rd of September, I cannot talk about anything, I cannot go out or come in, but what in every minute or two minutes my mind reverts to them, and the questions—where are my brethren and sisters who are on the plains, and what of their children?—force themselves upon me and annoy my feelings all the time. And were I to answer my own feelings, I should do so by undertaking to do what the conference voted I should not do, that is, I should be with them now in the snow, even though it should be up to the knees, up to the waist or up to the neck. My mind is there, and my faith is there; I have a great many reflections about them."

And again in the same sermon:

"A good many teams have already gone out to meet the Saints who are struggling to gain this place. I can hardly keep from talking about them all the time, for when I am preaching they are uppermost in my mind. The brethren were liberal last Sunday in turning out to meet them with teams, still, if any more feel desirous of going to their assistance, I will give them the privilege, and advise them to take feed, not only for their own animals, but also for those of the brethren who have gone out, for they will very likely be short. But I should be more particularly thankful if the minds of this community could be so impressed and stirred up, so wakened up, that when those poor brethren and sisters who are now on the plains, do arrive, they may be able to say of a truth and in very deed, "God be thanked, we have got to Zion."

By November 30th, all members of the hand-cart companies had been brought safely into the valley. President Young determined that such an occurrence should not happen again, even if stringent measures had to be taken.

"There is not a person, who knows anything about the counsel of the First Presidency concerning the immigration, but what knows that we have recommended it to start in season," he said, speaking in the old Tabernacle. "True, we have not expressly, and with a penalty, forbidden the emigration to start late, but hereafter I am going to lay an injunction and place a penalty, to be suffered by any elder or elders who will start the immigration across the plains after a given time; and the penalty shall be, that they shall be severed from the Church, for I will not have such late starts again."

IV

While the remaining members of Edward Martin's hand-cart company were being brought to the city in wagons, through the deep snows of Echo canyon, on Saturday, November 22nd, 1856, there was born to President Jedediah M. Grant, and his wife, Rachel Ivins Grant, in a house which stood on the present site of the Z. C. M. I. store, a son, whom the parents named Heber Jeddy. Today, in vigorous health, though in his eightieth year, Heber J. Grant is the honored President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

One week after the birth of his baby boy, there was tragedy in the home of President Jedediah M. Grant. He had contracted a severe cold, which rapidly developed into pneumonia, and on Monday, Dec. 1st, his spirit departed out of this world.

In the death of Jedediah, President Young, for the second time since the settlement of the Saints in the valleys, lost a counselor. Jedediah was a favorite of President Young; strong, capable, vigorous—only a few months past 40 when he died—he was able to shoulder a great deal of the responsibility which devolved upon the President. He was an ardent speaker and orator, fearless and enthusiastic to a degree unequaled by any of his brethren. His work in the recent "Reformation," which he had conducted almost with the fervency of a crusade, had brought out all his potential powers, and apparently there was a great future for him in the Church—but it was not to be so.

President Young spoke feelingly of Jedediah at the funeral, which was held on Dec. 4th, in the old Tabernacle.

"It would take me a long time to reveal to you what is in my heart, but I expected to have had time to bestow a portion thereof on this congregation. I will say to those here assembled, and especially to those more immediately connected with Brother Grant in the capacity of a family, you have no cause for mourning, neither have we. True, we were very fond of the company and society of Brother Grant; Brother Jedediah was a man we all loved, and we would have liked to have had him stay with us longer; we would have been pleased in enjoying his society here. But this our place of abode is only temporary; we are on a journey; we have only to winter and summer, as it were. Brother Grant has got through here and has gone to his spiritual place of abode for a season. Not that he has reached his journey's end, nor will he, until he has again received this body that now lies before me. Every material part and portion pertaining to this body, to the temporal organization that constitutes the man, will clothe his spirit again, before he is prepared to receive the place that is prepared for him; yet he has gone to his spiritual home for a season.

"I am aware of the feelings of families and friends on such occasions. Many times I can govern and control my feelings; at other times I cannot. When I can control my own feelings, I can collect my thoughts and express my ideas as clearly as my language will permit.

"Some people would have to live to be a hundred years of age in order to be as ripe in the things of God as was Brother Grant, whose body now lies lifeless before us; to be ripe as was the spirit which lately inhabited this deserted earthly tabernacle.

"There are but few that can ripen for the glory, the immortality that is prepared for the faithful; for receiving all that was purchased for them by the Son of God; but very few can receive what Brother Grant has received in his lifetime. He has been in the Church upwards of twenty-four years, and was a man that would live, comparatively speaking, a hundred years in that time. The store house that was prepared in him to receive the truth, was capable of receiving as much in twenty-five years as most men can in one hundred.

"Brother Grant was a great help to me; he stood by me, and was willing to come and go, and to do whatever was requested of him, in order to take the burden from me.

"Brother Grant's spirit is in the presence of God; and he is with Joseph, when he is not required to be somewhere else. He is at work for the benefit of Zion, for that is all the business that Joseph and the elders of this Church have on hand.

"When the spirit is unlocked from the tabernacle, it is as free, pure, holy and independent as the sun is of this earth. Jedediah can now do more for us than he could by longer staying here.

"I have not answered my feelings, and cannot, owing to the lateness of the hour. It wanted but five minutes of twelve when I began to speak, and it is now time to bring the services to a close. I hope you will remember what I have said, for it is true; and if you do not, I hope it will be told you until you do. God bless you, Amen."

On December 10th, one week after the burial of President J. M. Grant, President Young and his counselor, Heber C. Kimball, issued, "The 14th General Epistle to the Latter-day Saints in the Valleys of the Mountains, and scattered abroad throughout the earth." In reading this Epistle through carefully it is my impression that it was dictated in its entirety by President Young. I shall quote a few paragraphs of it, setting forth his splendid practical advice and wisdom.

"Avoiding the track, which grinds the face of the poor to elevate the rich, let us bestow our charity, not so much to feed the hungry and clothe the naked, as to cause them to feed and clothe themselves, and lead the people to practice virtue, to walk in the paths of honesty and truth, not so much by the fear of punishment, prisons and penalties, as by implanting in their bosoms, an abiding and ever increasing love, for those pure principles which induce to honor, prosperity, salvation and exaltation in this life, and which will clothe them with the riches of eternity in the life to come.

"The Saints of the Most High God should sustain themselves by their industry, economy, and sobriety; their health by their virtue, prudence, cleanliness, faith and observance of the holy ordinances; and their morals by the love they bear to their God and their holy religion. They should be united that they may be powerful and enjoy the blessings of peace and quietness, at home and abroad.

"Fathers, teach your children to practice industry; teach your sons to practice agriculture, or some useful mechanical trade.

"Mothers in Israel, you also are called upon to bring up your daughters to pursue some useful avocation for a sustenance, that when they shall become the wives of the elders of Israel, who are frequently called upon missions, or to devote their time and attention to the things of the Kingdom, they may be able to sustain themselves and their offspring. Teach them to sew, spin and weave; to cultivate vegetables as well as flowers; to make soap as well as cakes and preserves; to spin, color and weave and knit, as well as embroidery; to milk, make butter and cheese, and work in the kitchen, as well as in the parlor. Thus will you and your daughters show yourselves approved, and prove helpmeets in very deed, not only in the domestic relations, but in building up the Kingdom also.

"When we look upon the advancing hosts of Israel, and consider their rapid improvement in faith, knowledge, good works, influence, power and constantly accumulating numbers, we feel to thank the Lord for his goodness, even him who hath brought forth salvation, and caused light to spring up upon the earth. We feel grateful that we have been permitted to live in this day and generation, in which the great Jehovah has seen proper to re-establish His authority upon the earth, and reconfer the holy and eternal priesthood upon the children of men."

The Territorial Legislature was to meet again this year, and as President Young was not in the best of health, and did not feel like undertaking the journey to Fillmore, it was suggested that a few of the members go to Fillmore, meet and adjourn to convene at the Social Hall in Salt Lake City. This was accordingly done, and on the 18th of December the Governor's Message was read to the joint session, "and five hundred copies were ordered printed."

The Governor began by deprecating the fact that Congress still refused to grant Statehood, although the last census had shown that there were seventy-seven thousand people in the Territory, and that a considerable number had come in during the past two summers. He conceived that it was on account of the great prejudice against, and mis-understanding of the Mormon people. Until that was removed, the government would not allow them to elect their presiding officers, but at any rate, it was all in the hands of the Lord, and he would overrule all things for the good of the people.

Addressing the legislators regarding the work before them, he said:

"For the advancement and progress of our territory, we should enact such laws as are necessary for the benefit, the development of her resources and most conducive to her interests, regardless of what other states or territories may have seen proper to adopt. The dissimilarity of existing circumstances might make theirs a bad example or precedent for us to follow, though beneficial to them. To cull from the experience and history of the past, for the benefit of the future, seems wisdom, and so it is, so far as applicable to our condition; when it is not, it betrays a lack of fore-thought and concentration which disqualifies and renders inconsistent those who shelter beneath the shades of precedent.

"Owing to the absence and supposed death of Secretary Almon W. Babbitt (reported from the plains and later proved true) and there being no probability of an appointee of the general government arriving here before another year, I supplied the place by the appointment to that office of William H. Hooper, Esq., as secretary pro tem.

"The peace of the Territory has remained uninterrupted during the year, except by a few Indians who commenced hostilities in Utah county in the early part of March, which, though soon suppressed, caused the death of seven persons, mostly herdsmen, and the loss of a large amount of stock.

"In conclusion, permit me to add that, while we congratulate ourselves upon the peace, union and prosperity which so eminently attends our efforts, we continually invoke Him who rules in the affairs of men, for wisdom to enable us to perform the duties devolved upon us, with ability before Him, and fidelity to our constituents."

The year 1856 drew to a close. In a measure it had been a strenuous year for the President. During the first six months the Saints were on rations, and many had felt the pangs of hunger. Then there was the hand-cart episode, with all its attendant anxieties, and the death of the much loved and useful man, Jedediah M. Grant. The strain seemed to be telling on President Young and he was confined to his home during most of the month of December. However, there was one event which was outstanding, and which tended to gladden the heart of Brother Brigham and those about him. The Deseret News of Wednesday, December 31st, relates the following:

"President Brigham Young gave an entertainment in his new residence, the Lion House, on Christmas evening, to a large number of missionaries lately returned from foreign missions and a few of the brethren, with their wives. Soon after the company assembled the President expressed his gratitude at being able to comfortably entertain so goodly a party, most cordially greeted all with a fatherly welcome and invited them to enjoy themselves with singing and conversation, or with praying and preaching, as might seem to them good, and remarked, as he often does, that in inviting guests to a party, the only limitation to number, in his feelings, was the extent of room for their accommodation, hence had he suitable room, he would never wish to stop until he had invited every Latter-day Saint in the world. The time passed with usual harmony and real enjoyment, enlivened with songs by Elders Dunbar, McAllister and others, the happy reunionary conversation of the brethren and sisters, who had been for some time separated, a short and appropriate speech by Elder J. Ferguson, and an excellent supper most admirably served."
