Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

ON the afternoon of Sunday, January 24th, 1857, Daniel H. Wells was set apart as second counselor to President Brigham Young, to fill the vacancy caused by the death of Jedediah M. Grant. The choice was an excellent one. Brother Wells brought to the First Presidency strength, dignity, the wealth of years of experience, a thorough knowledge of the Gospel, and a loyalty to the Church and to President Young that was unquestioned.

It amazes me with that aptitude the President could select these co-workers, who stood about him like pillars of strength. But that was one of the secrets of his genius and leadership; by surrounding himself with men of character, loyalty, strength and ability, he made himself doubly strong.

Squire Wells, as he was familiarly called, had been a resident of Nauvoo before the Saints settled there in 1839. He at once became a great admirer and friend of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and after the Prophet's death, he cast his lot with the Saints, abandoned his possessions, and took up the line of march to Salt Lake valley. Now, in his forty-fourth year, he had achieved the high position of a member of the First Presidency. A gentleman, a scholar, an executive, a military man, mild in manner, yet absolutely fearless, he left a great name, and an extensive posterity to do him honor.

During the month of January, 1857, President Young's health was such that he was unable to go farther from his home than to attend a few sessions of the legislature at the Social Hall. However, he frequently worked at his office and attended to such matters of correspondence as were necessary. In the files of the Historian's office I have found a letter which he wrote, during this month, to Elder Orson Pratt, who was presiding in England. It is such a newsy, splendid letter, and gives such an intimate account of conditions which came under President Young's observation that I desire to reproduce it here in part. It is dated at the President's Office, Salt Lake City, the last day of the month, January 31st, 1857.

"Brother Orson Pratt: Another mail reminds me of my duty to you, and the interests of the Kingdom of our God in Europe. You are always remembered by us in our fervent and faithful prayers, and I believe that inasmuch as you have given heed to our former counsels, and sought the Lord for a larger portion of His Spirit, ere this, you have a portion of the hallowed fire which has aroused and warmed thousands of the gathered Saints.

"The Reformation," as it has been called, has begun,—"not a change in our religion, nor of the principles revealed from the heavens through Joseph,—but a change in the practices and an arousing of the people from habits of lethargy; and its salutary influences are already perceptible. We have appointed two or more "home missionaries" to each ward in this city, and drawn up a list of questions to be asked the Latter-day Saints. Those missionaries go from house to house, and examine every individual therein separately; and, as a consequence, we have had this people examining themselves minutely; much honest confession and restitution have been made. The catechism has been as a mirror to the Saints, reflecting themselves in truth.

"Your family enjoy good health. This winter has been cold and protracted, yet the health of the Saints is good, and peace abounds, and union is on the increase.

"I presume you have heard of some of the movements at Washington in reference to us. Brother Heywood is dismissed from his Marshalship, and much of the paper issued by him is yet unpaid. Judge Drummond incurred heavy expenses by his foolish courts here, especially at Fillmore, then signed certificates of expenses, or in other words, orders for payment on the United States, when at the same time he wrote to Washington direct, ordering the departments there most emphatically not to pay them.

"Peter Dobson, a Gentile here, agent for M. Hockaday, is appointed Marshal, and it is expected by some that a new Postmaster, two new Judges, Prosecuting Attorney, and, perhaps, a Governor, will be appointed before Franklin Pierce leaves the White House.

"My own health is fairly good, and I doubt not, will improve as the season becomes milder, so that I can stir out a little more.

"Brother Orson: As I besought you before, so do I now. Seek earnestly, constantly, and in mighty faith, to have much of the Spirit of the Lord, and stir up the Saints in England to awake and reform.

"The Saints here are awakening from a drowsy stupor and lethargy to live their religion, and do right. The different quorums begin to trim up and are active for good, and I expect a more faithful discharge of all duties, by all of the priesthood, and all that are called Saints. All the meetings are now numerously attended.

"We have appointed Daniel H. Wells to the Presidency, in the place of J. M. Grant, deceased. Brother Heber C. Kimball enjoys very good health this winter. Brother Heber presided over the Council, and Brother Hosea Stout over the House. The Legislature held its session here, after meeting at Fillmore and adjourned to this place. We had a time of peace and good order in the Social Hall here—of order and dispatch, such as exist in no other political assembly on the earth.

"The coping of the Temple wall is finished, and we have plastered two sides of the said wall the same as my houses.

"The stone cutters are busy preparing stone for commencing our labors again on the foundation of the Temple; and the people are busy digging the canal to Cottonwood, that we may have rock conveyed by this means.

"This winter has been unusually severe. We have had eight feet of snow fall since the first of November last, which would yield, when melted, a depth of seventeen inches over all the surface here; and we at present live in clouds of hoar-frost even during the day. This, according to former observation, indicates an abundant season.

"Judge Phelps, with the aid of his son Henry, keeps a record of the weather, wind, atmosphere, and stars. They have erected the embryo of an observatory. There has been an average of two feet of snow on the ground over this valley for some weeks; excellent sleighing, but bad for cattle. We have removed our stock from the island, and sent most of it south, some to Grantsville.

"I purpose going north in the spring, to our northern settlements, etc., and shall take a company with me. We also purpose sending you additional aid soon, among whom are two of my nephews, Joseph W. and Brigham H. Young. I trust they will carry with them some portion of that sacred fire which now warns many bosoms here.

"Brother Heber C. Kimball has spoken much truth lately, and in much plainness. The most of the people are now better prepared to receive stronger food, and to learn more truth. Brother Wells has also spoken freely to the people since his appointment.

"The bread and cup we have withheld from the Saints for some months, to afford them space and time for repentance, restitution and preparation for a renewal of their covenants.

"Brother Joseph Young, Sr., was taken down after Brother J. M. Grant's death, and has been nigh unto the world of spirits, but it has pleased our Father in Heaven again to restore him; and though weak in body, he enjoys much of the Holy Spirit, the Comforter. I feel again to say to you, Brother Pratt, labor with all your might, rightly dividing your words of truth with much wisdom, in all meekness and patience, and may the Spirit of the Lord and of your calling aid you. Keep yourself pure and holy, that your tabernacle may always be a proper habitation for the Holy Ghost, whose power, I pray the Lord, may be made manifest in and through you.

"We have had no dancing—no theatrical representations, this season; and the peace and contentment among the Saints is greater than you have ever witnessed; they appear more willing to do as they are told—to abide counsel.

"No news from the inward eastern mail yet. The weather began to moderate on the evening of the 27th; rain has fallen more or less since, and the deep snow begins to sink, and our mountain pines again are seen.

"Brother Orson Hyde has arrived from Carson Valley, and has taken hold in the Reformation, with good spirits.

"Some property has been destroyed here this winter by persons unknown to us; with the intent, probably to plunder and rob. This was annoying to me, but I think we shall discover the perpetrators.

"The facts connected with this year's immigration are peculiarly worthy of note:

"First, all the Saints of the last companies came in on a principle of equality such as has not existed since the Saints began to migrate; they all had to be helped in. The independent companies, and the hand-cart Saints, of all grades and circumstances, arrived here, having with them only the clothes they wore; these have cost us less trouble since their arrival, and done more good for themselves also than any company that has preceded them apparently under more favorable circumstances.

"Second, all the clothing and other property which they paid for, and for the freight and hauling of it, that belonging to the hand-cart companies, was left at Florence and that of the independent companies at Devil's Gate; and the means thus expended are now beyond reach of their present necessities. Again their property left at Florence and at Devil's Gate will, in all probability, be spoiled, or the most of it, before it can be brought on here. Therefore, I would suggest:

"First, that all who can will come by hand-carts, and,

"Second, that they bring nothing with them but what they wear, or may wear of necessity on the road and can carry on their hand-carts. Thus you will perceive the money usually spent in England for extra clothing and unnecessary "fiddle-faddles"—for extra freight on the same, and for hauling this across the plains, can all be saved; and most assuredly may be more profitably used on the arrival of the Saints here. Who will believe it? Who will act accordingly? Can we persuade men to do right, and to leave the Missouri river by the first of July.

"None of our remarks in this letter are to be construed so as to interfere with our remarks on the extent of emigration, contained in our letter to you of the 7th of December last.

"The mail to the east will be carried out this time by William A. Hickman and others, and will be carried, subject to our directions, by various brethren, and to it we purpose adding an express and carrying company, for freight, passengers, etc.

"May the wisdom and knowledge of God and his Spirit inspire you!" "BRIGHAM YOUNG."

The day after writing this interesting letter fell on Sunday, Feb. 1st, and President Young went to the Tabernacle services for the first time in two months. Addressing the Saints he said as follows:

"This is the first time that I have walked so far as to come to this Tabernacle since the burial of Jedediah M. Grant. My bodily afflictions would not permit me to walk much, and they also still hinder my efforts in speaking or exercising. I have been troubled this winter, as are many in this high altitude, with a rising of the blood to the head; that is what is troubling me this morning, in so much that I hardly felt able to get here."

The effects of high blood pressure on Brother Brigham were, for many years, depressing and enervating, but he always did all that his bodily strength would allow him to do. Though weak in health, the spirit of the Gospel was there within him, burning like a living fire. Continuing on in this sermon he said:

"I have a great desire to teach people the way of life and salvation; I have been occupied in that labor for many years. It has been my chief business, to instruct the inhabitants of the earth how they can procure unto themselves eternal life. The more I become acquainted with the principles pertaining unto salvation, and the more strictly I adhere to them, the more importance I attach to them."

As he proceeded with his sermon, the beauty of the Gospel plan unfolded itself before him.

"The Lord has done everything He can do, in justice and in truth. In His mercy and in His long suffering and kindness, there is nothing He has neglected, in order to put into the possession of this people power to secure unto themselves eternal day, eternal peace instead of eternal misery. Eternal glory, happiness, beauty, power, exaltation, excellency and every good thing are prepared for the elders that now sit before me to enter into the presence of the Father and the Son, where they could be exalted, sit with the Gods, be crowned with immortality and eternal lives; become the fathers not only of many nations, but of an endless posterity; be the framers not only of a kingdom, but of an endless chain of kingdoms."

And in closing, there is this:

"I am happy for the privilege of speaking to you today and I trust that I shall see you here many times. I pray for you continually, and I know that you pray for me, for I have the witness that there is not an honest heart in this Kingdom, but what is praying for me continually. You are before me always, and my whole desire is for your welfare, and for the welfare of the Kingdom of God on the earth. May God bless you. Amen."

II

On Monday, April 6, 1857, in the old Tabernacle, on the opening day of Conference, President Young preached an interesting sermon. It had to do with the every-day practical affairs of life, and in this subject he was entirely at home.

"Brother Heber has made a remark," he said, "which I will take for a text. "It is whispered about that some of the brethren laboring on the public works are living on dry bread." I want to preach a short discourse upon this subject, and I will endeavor to do so to the understanding of those present. I acknowledge that some persons live very poorly, and are very destitute; but there is not one family out of a thousand in this territory of those who live poorly, but what that destitute mode of living is brought upon them by themselves, through their own management or the want of economy."

How did he know this? Because:

"I have been a poor boy and a poor man, and my parents were poor. I was poor during my childhood, and grew up to manhood, poor and destitute; and I am acquainted with the various styles of living, and with the different customs, habits and practices of the people."

Yes, the school of experience had been his since childhood; but it had been good for him, and he had learned and solved many of the problems of life.

"There is no necessity of any person living on bread and water. We have not a man at work for us but what has had means to put into his hands sufficient to support from five to twenty persons, and many of them could lay up from five hundred to a thousand dollars a year, if they would use proper economy. I comfortably supported a family when I was poor, and that, too, in a country where it was more difficult to do so than it is here—where it often was almost impossible to hire to do a day's work—where a man would have to run, and perhaps beg, and plead, to be employed to do a day's work; and when the labor was performed, it was frequently worth twice the amount to get the pay, which would generally be only three or four bits; though sometimes ordinary mechanics would receive five or six bits, and good mechanics one dollar or one dollar and a quarter a day.

"I have labored for fifteen dollars a month to support a family, and that, too, in a place that was as hard again for a person to live in as it is in this city. You could not have the free use of so much as a quarter of an acre of ground thrown out to the public for a cow to graze upon. You could not get a stick of wood, although in a well wooded country, without paying for it. You could not get a pint of milk, or even buttermilk, without paying for it.

"I have worked for nearly all the various grades of wages, and supported a family since I was quite young. I know how to live, and I have taught my brethren here how to live, and I know how many of them do live. But you may take a hard-working man, one earning good wages, and though he carries an abundance into his house, his wife may sit there and toss it out again.

"You will find that much depends upon the economy of women, in regard to the living of the poorer classes of the people—the laboring classes. For instance, let a man buy ten pounds of fresh meat and carry it home, and in the morning the wife will cook up, perhaps, four or five pounds of that meat, for the breakfast of the man, the wife, and the little child. To begin with, it is often cooked very badly, not properly seasoned, smoked up, part of it burnt, and the rest raw, so that they cannot eat much of it; and there is a great platter full left that cannot be eaten, and the uncooked portion has probably been neglected until it is spoiled, and thus nearly the whole is wasted."

Brother Brigham had obtained his information at first hand regarding these conditions.

"Sisters, if you do not believe this, many of you go home and remember what you cooked this morning, and see the platters full, and the plates full, and the little messes standing here and there. By and by it is not fit to eat, and is finally thrown out of the door. Is this true? It is. The reason I say so is because I see it with my own eyes. You may wish to know where I see it. Among some of my neighbors where I visit, among some of my own family, and in many places where I go. And when I go into a house, I can soon know whether the woman is an economical housekeeper or not; and if I stay a few days, I can tell whether a husband can get rich or not. If she is determined on her own course, and will waste and spoil the food entrusted to her, that man will always be poor."

Well, that was a pointed sermon to the sisters, but he was not through yet.

"Some women will set emptyings (yeast) in the morning, and let them stand until they sour, and mix up the flour with them, and sweeten it with saleratus (baking soda) and then knead it ready for baking; and then if Sister Somebody comes in they will sit down and begin to talk over old times, and the first they know is, the bread is sour: 'Dear me, I forgot all about that bread,' and into the oven she puts it, and builds up a large fire, and again sits down to visit with her neighbor, and before she thinks of the loaf, there is a crust burnt on it from a quarter to a half inch in thickness. So much of the bread is spoiled; there goes one quarter of the flour; it is wasted and the bread is sour and disagreeable to eat; and the husband comes home and looks sour, and is sour, as well as the bread. He finds fault and that makes the wife grieve, and there are feelings and unhappiness and unsatisfaction in the family.

"The husband may be a good man and the wife a good woman, and try to please her husband, and to do as much as the old lady did who said, 'It was impossible for her to please her husband in baking bread; for if it was half dough he did not like it; and if it was half burned up he scolded her about it."

Now, there are also a few lessons of economy that the men can learn.

"A man may be good and industrious, may be an excellent mechanic, and in many things a diligent man, as is the case with a number with whom I am acquainted; yet you go into his house and ask, 'Have you a pig in your pen?' 'No, I have nothing to fed a pig with; I cannot keep one.' Sit down to his table and he has not a mouthful of meat from week's end to week's end, unless he buys a little. 'Have you a cow?' 'No, I have nothing to feed a cow with; I cannot hire a pasture; and were I to hire one driven to grass as far as the herd boys go, she would not give milk enough to pay the herd bill.' I have been in worse places than this and kept a cow."

"I have taught the brethren how to live on five, three, or even less than two dollars a day for the support of a small family; and when men complain they live here on bread alone, they do not know how to provide for themselves. Years pass away, one after another, and I see more and more that there are but very few men and women that are even capable of taking care of themselves temporally.

"A great many men do not know that they can keep a pig, but there is not a family in this city, where there are two, three, four or five persons, but what can save enough from their table, from the waste made by the children, and what must be swept into the fire and out of doors, to make pork sufficient to last them through the year, at least all they should eat. When you know enough to put a pig in your pen, do so; and when you have an opportunity to buy a bushel of corn, oats or bran, get your bins ready and lay it away.

"We pay our mechanics from two and a half to five dollars a day, and there is no necessity for many of them using more than fifty cents or one dollar a day throughout the year. 'Why do you not buy a cow?' 'I have nothing to feed her with.' Yes, you have. In the course of the season you will find a time that you can buy a little straw, and stack it up and take good care of it. Buy now and then a bushel of bran, or oats, or corn and lay it by. When you have done your day's work, take your ax, cut up the straw, throw a little meal on it, give it to the cow, and sit down and milk her yourself, unless your wife is a good hand to milk and can attend to it better and more conveniently than you can; in that case let her do the milking; but do not set six or eight-year-old children to stripping the cows.

"Most, if not all, have already been furnished with cows. What did you do with the calves? 'We sold them for a trifle.' Why did you not raise them? Do you not know that they would very soon be valuable? No, but you waste your calves, neglect buying pigs and live without milk, and many of the easily procured comforts of life. Is there any necessity for this? No, there is not, if people will try and use a little economy.

"Go round this city now, and probably you will not see one garden out of twenty, even where men have lived here four or five years, that has a fruit tree growing on it. Have they set out anything? Yes, some cottonwoods; but they would not set out a peach tree if you would give it to them. In many lots there is not a fruit tree, or a currant bush, or anything to produce to make a little family comfortable.

"If I lived as I used to I would have my cow and she would not stray off, for I would always have a little handful of food to give her when she came up at night. I would feed her a little in the morning, and at night she would come for more. I would keep my pig in the pen, and have a few fowls to lay eggs. I would raise my own pork, and in the spring I would not have to run to the public works and say, 'I have not anything to eat.'

"It is a shame that men and women do not pay more attention to the principles of economy in living. They want to have money to go to the market and buy everything ready made. They want to have somebody feed them. I have though many times, that some persons would not be satisfied unless we baked plum puddings, and roasted beef for them while they were lounging in big easy chairs.

"I worked hard when I first gathered with the Saints. I had to walk two miles to my labor, and the sun seldom if ever, shone on my work before I had my tools in my hands and was busily engaged; and I rarely laid down my tools so long as I could see to use them. In the morning I would get up and feed my cow and milk her, and do the other out-door chores while my wife would be preparing the breakfast. My pig was in the pen, and I would gather a little here and a little there and a day would not pass without its having sufficient food.

"Let me have the privilege of dictating every chore about my house and I would soon put everything right. I do not have that privilege, for I have so many, and so much around me, that I have to depend upon others. I have asked myself, shall I go and attend to my own business, or let it go? And I have replied, I will not neglect my public duties if my property all goes to destruction—if we do not have a drop of milk from this time henceforth and forever.

"Some men do not know what to do with their means. You may take the poorest mechanic here, and one who has nothing but bread to eat, and you may see him paying half a dollar or a dollar for a meal of victuals at the Globe (restaurant). You may see the barber shops crowded with our poor mechanics, who pay from three to five dollars a quarter for being shaved. I bought a razor, when I began to shave, that cost thirty-seven cents and a half, and I used it for fifteen years. Some black their boots, so that they will not last more than two or three months. I keep my boots well oiled, wear them two or three years, and then give them away to the poor.

"Nearly all who grumble about their poor scanty fare would be rich if they would do as I do. Take care of your articles of food, of your clothing, of your boots and hats and you will have plenty; and let the women take care of what is taken into the house. If you do not go to now and prepare for the day of trouble, you will be sorry and lament and mourn.

"I want to tell you the feelings of several in this community: 'I do not want to build a good house, because I shall have to move away bye and bye; our enemies will come and possess it. I do not want to lay up corn because our enemies will come and take it from me.' Now I tell you this:

"If this people will do as they are told, will live their religion, and deal justly with each other, we will make you one promise in the name of Israel's God, that you will never be driven from these mountains."

In this plain, practical manner, showing his wisdom and genius of leadership, did President Brigham Young address the Saints, at the April conference in 1857.

III

President Brigham Young had now been in the valley nearly ten years, and during this time his fartherest trip south had been to Fort Harmony in Washington county, and his fartherest trip north to the Malad valley. This year he determined to take a company of men and go north into the Oregon country, visiting the brethren who had made a settlement at Fort Limhi on the Salmon river. Accordingly he selected a group of one hundred forty-two persons and on the afternoon of April 24, "in fifty-six wagons and carriages," they departed for the north. The trip out occupied two weeks, and the distance covered was, according to the President's report, three hundred eighty-one and one-half miles. After remaining at the Fort for several days and encouraging the settlers there, the President and his party began their return journey, and arrived home on the afternoon of May 26th, having been away one month and two days, and having covered a distance of seven hundred sixty-three miles.

It was a time of relaxation and enjoyment for the President. On making his report the Sunday after his return home, in the Tabernacle, he said:

"I have accomplished what I designed to accomplish, and I believe the brethren will join with me, at least on one point, namely, that we started from here to rest the mind and weary the body; and so far as the body is concerned, I believe all parties will agree with me in saying that we have done that most effectually. I see one man that went for his health—Brother East. I expect that it will prove a benefit to him. Others also went for their health. It is a hard medicine to take, but the result will be beneficial.

"I rested my mind. From the time I left this city until my return, I do not think that this valley, this Tabernacle, my own house, or any of my family scarcely ever came before me to reflect upon.

"My mind was so taken from the cares that surround me here, that it was perfectly relaxed into an easy state of rest, and I had no anxiety, not in the least, about one care that had formerly been upon me."

As for the brethren who had traveled with him, he paid them a glowing compliment.

"On our journey, I can truly say, we had perfect peace. In my travels with the Saints, up to this day, I can truly say that I never had the pleasure of journeying with so peaceful and orderly a company as the one with which I traveled to Salmon river. They were schooled and instructed and knew how to contribute to the comfort of each other, and performed every duty in peace, without noise, without strife, without contention. Every man was at his post, performing the duties assigned him, and that too in the faith of the Gospel, with a perfect resignation to the requirements upon him. I believe that I have never seen men together, to anywhere near the same number, who were so united, as the company I traveled with this spring.

"Only one accident occurred worthy of mention, and that happened on the evening after we drove out of Fort Lemhi. While chopping some fire wood, Brother Franklin Wooley had the misfortune to cut his foot, but the wound is already so far healed that he is walking about.

"We did not lose an animal, though we left two at the Fort. Brother Wooley's was the only accident that occurred in our camp; and I do not think that I heard one cross word from man or woman during the journey, unless it was from myself. I think if anybody was out of humor or cross, or irritated it must have been myself, for I did not see anybody else so, and I endeavored to keep my own temper as cool as possible."

As for the country he passed through:

"I could give you a detailed account of our journey, and a description of the country through which we have passed, but perhaps it is unnecessary today, though I will say that I had not received from all the northern travelers with whom I had conversed, hardly one correct idea of that region of country. I had asked several who had been there to describe Salmon River valley, and the intermediate country, the quality of the soil, the nature of the climate, the positions of the mountains, etc., but I must say, that when I came to travel through the country, I might readily suppose that I had never conversed about it with a man who had been there.

"I have frequently asked with regard to the location of Fort Hall, and the replies have been, 'It is built near Snake river!' 'Is there anything of a valley?' 'Yes, something.' 'Is there any timber there?' 'I think there is pretty plenty of timber on the river, such as cottonwood, quaking asp and willows.' 'Is it anything of a country for settling?' 'I should think likely it might be.' That is about all I have ever been able to learn of the country, previous to my late journey."

Then a description of the country which will interest present residents of Snake River valley. It is President Young's description of it nearly eighty years ago.

"When we began to approach Fort Hall, we learned that we could see over it and all around it to a great distance; and if our eyes had been good enough, we might have seen the little Fort some thirty miles before we reached it.

"From the Rocky Mountains, at the source of Snake river, this plain extends one hundred fifty to two hundred miles in a westerly and southwesterly direction; and from the mountain south of Snake river, to those north, is a distance of some ninety miles. I never had this idea before, nor could I get it from any man I had conversed with. It is a vast desert plain, and we called it Shanghai plain. I think it is as desert a country as ever was brought together to aid in holding the earth from parting asunder."

Regarding the condition of the soil and the part of land fit for cultivation in that section, this was his observation.

"Upon the banks of Snake river, when it does not overflow, there is a lengthy, narrow strip of good soil, varying from a quarter of a mile to ten rods wide, and in some places not more than six inches. It is a sterile, barren, desert country, filled with belts of rock and sand. As we passed over some portions of Shanghai Plain, the brethren undertook to remove the stones, so that we might drive our wagons with a little more ease to ourselves, and less danger to our vehicles. I begged them not to take all the rock out of the road, for if they did there would be nothing to travel on."

President Young's comment on Malad valley was that it looked rather barren on the way out, but on the return trip, after what they had seen of Shanghai Plain, Malad valley looked a paradise.

"Malad valley, north of Bear River, has been considered a pretty desolate, cold, hard, sterile valley; it was so looked upon by us as we passed through it on our way north. At the same time, we considered it a tolerably good grazing country, and thought that people could possibly live there. But after we had traveled over the Basin rim into Bannock valley, descending a mountain, beside which the one we call the Big Mountain, is a mole hill, down through the little Bannock valley, and on to Shanghai Plain, and traveled northeasterly and northwesterly, almost in a semi-circle to Spring Creek, then up Spring Creek to Salmon River, and wended our way down that stream, through swamps and willows, and climbed over points of bluffs to keep from being mired, and paid our brethren a visit and returned again to Malad valley, it looked to us like one of the most beautiful valleys that any person ever beheld; while before this experience we thought that nobody could live there; and I expect that, if we had gone a few hundred miles north, it would have looked still better to us."

Continuing, he said:

"The farther one goes north, the less good characteristics are connected with the valleys, except in the articles of fish, water, and in some instances, timber; and when people are obliged to live in the north country, that will be high time for them to go there."

Thus did Brother Brigham give his description of his brief visit to Fort Limhi on the Salmon river, undertaken in the spring of 1857. He did not live to see the beautiful Snake river valley developed through the genius and daring of modern engineering. In fact it was not until 1882 that Thomas E. Ricks was called to lead a colony of Saints there. Now it is a vast prosperous empire—compare it with President Young's view eighty years ago.

Concluding his interesting descriptive account of his "northern journey," he bespoke this beautiful desire and hope for himself:

"I feel that I have renewed my strength, renewed my vigor of body and mind; and I believe that I am as ready to act in any capacity now as I ever have been in my life, and a little more so; for I hope as I grow old to grow wise.

"As I advance in years, I hope to advance in the true knowledge of God and godliness. I hope to increase in the power of the Almighty, and in influence to establish peace and righteousness upon the earth, and to bring all the sons and daughters of Adam and Eve, even all who will hearken to the principles of righteousness, to a true sense of the knowledge of God and godliness, of themselves, and the relation they sustain to heaven and heavenly beings. I hope to increase and advance, as I do in days and years, in the wisdom and the knowledge of God, and in the power of God; and I pray that this may be the case, not only with myself, but with all the Saints, that we may grow in grace and in the knowledge of the truth, and be made perfect before Him."

And in closing this:

"Blessed are the Latter-day Saints, if they love God and keep his commandments. And let the world revile them, and do what they will, we are blessed, because we have words of eternal life, and know how to perform, and are actually performing the works, to secure to ourselves an eternal salvation, and an existence in the presence of our Father and God, while they will be wasted away and destroyed from the earth, and from every kingdom where there is peace and righteousness.

"We are blessed, and we may never expect our happiness and heaven, until we gain a perfect victory over the devil, hell and the grave; and that we cannot do in this mortality; but we can conquer to a certain degree, and gain admission into the favor of our Father and God, and receive His promise to be received into His celestial kingdom, when we shall have a perfect victory over everything that is evil. I will give way for others. May God bless you. Amen."
