Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

JULY 24th, 1857, was a beautiful day, and according to arrangements made the previous year, President Brigham Young, his counselors, and a large group of Saints, had gathered at Silver Lake, at the headwaters of Big Cottonwood creek (Brighton) to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the arrival of the pioneers in Salt Lake valley. All day long on the 23rd a continuous line of wagons, carriages, people on horse back and mule back had wended their way up the canyon, until by nightfall, there were, by actual count, two thousand five hundred eighty-seven persons, four hundred sixty-four wagons and carriages, one thousand and twenty-eight horses and three hundred thirty-two oxen and cows on the camp ground. Captain Ballo's band, the Nauvoo Brass band, the Springville Brass band, the Ogden City Brass band, and the Great Salt Lake City and Ogden City Martial bands were on hand to gladden the festivities. Also there was a military display: the 1st company of Light Artillery, under command of Adjt. General James Ferguson, a detachment of four platoons of Life Guards, and one platoon of Lancers under command of Col. R. T. Burton, and one company of light infantry, under command of Captain John W. Young.

"At sunset of the 23rd," writes George D. Watt, "the notes from a bugle summoned the Saints from an eminence near the center of the camp ground, when President Brigham Young made a few remarks, recounting the mercies of God to his people in delivering them from the power of their enemies, in making the desert places blossom like the rose, and the sterile places yield luscious fruits and golden grain, in loading the leaves of the trees and shrubbery with dew, and in increasing our flocks and herds in a marvelous manner.

"After President Young had concluded his remarks, President Heber C. Kimball offered a prayer of thanksgiving unto God for his goodness to his people, prayed for Israel and Israel's enemies, and dedicated and consecrated unto God, the ground, the waters, the timber, the rocks and all the elements pertaining to the stream upon whose head waters we were assembled to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the entrance of the pioneers into these valleys.

"Three spacious boweries, with plank floors, had been provided by the Big Cottonwood Lumber company, and a large number passed the evening in the joyous dance."

The following day:

"July 24th, each one began to enjoy the privileges of the occasion as best suited their several tastes and feelings, in accordance with the order of the day, giving liberty to all to do as they pleased, occupying their time and opportunities in a manner the most conducive to the greatest amount of happiness and comfort.

"The different bands played at intervals throughout the day, and greatly added to the zest of the varied sources of enjoyment.

"At the morning assembly, the choir sang "On the Mountain Tops Appearing." Prayer by Elder George A. Smith. President Kimball gave a few instructions for the government of the company in their exercises during the day, and President Wells said that on account of the large number of people, President Young wished them to attend to prayers at their several tents.

"The stars and stripes were unfurled on two of the highest peaks in sight of the camp, and on the tops of two of the tallest trees.

"At twenty minutes past nine a. m. three rounds were fired from a brass howitzer, for the First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and our rights and independence. At fifteen minutes past ten a. m., three rounds were fired for the "Hope of Israel!" Captain John W. Young's company of Light Infantry were paraded, and elicited admiration from all beholders. This company numbers fifty boys, ranging from ten to twelve years of age, and was furnished with tasteful uniforms, by Governor Young and truly they are the "Hope of Israel."

"About noon, Bishop A. O. Smoot, Elders Judson Stoddard, O. P. Rockwell and Judge E. Smith rode into camp, the two former from the states in twenty days."

Reader, I shall pause here for a moment to pay particular attention to these two tired travelers, A. O. Smoot and Judson Stoddard, who had driven from Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, to Salt Lake valley, in a light wagon, with swift horses and mules, (a distance of approximately 1,000 miles) in 20 days. In the hour of gay festivities at Silver Lake, they brought a most important and momentous message to President Brigham Young, namely this—that a United States army, numbering 2,500 men had been ordered to Utah—that a new governor of the Territory had been appointed—Alfred Cumming, ex-Indian agent on the upper Missouri. Although rumors had been afloat concerning these events, this was the first definite information that the President had received.

Abraham Owen Smoot, a strong, splendid, intelligent man—now in his forty-third year—mayor of Salt Lake City, and already engaged in numerous successful commercial enterprises, (a man loyal to death to President Young and the Church) had gone east early in June, with the east-bound mail and the B. Y. Express. "Between Fort Laramie and Fort Kearney," says Bancroft, (History of Utah, page 503) "he encountered the advanced guard of the army of Utah, and, as he relates, was informed by the commanding officer that the troops "were reconnoitering the country in search of hostile Indians." When about a hundred miles west of Independence, freight teams were met, destined, as the drivers said, for some western post, but for what particular post they did not know. On reaching Kansas City, Smoot repaired with one, Nicholas Groesbeck to the office of William H. Russell, and there ascertained that the freight trains were intended for Salt Lake City, that Cumming had been appointed governor, and that orders had been given that no more mails should for the present be delivered to the Mormons." Mayor Smoot thereupon drove directly to Salt Lake valley, averaging fifty miles a day. Now in the quietness of President Young's tent at Brighton, he delivered his message to the President and his immediate counselors and associates. It was quickly determined that no such startling information should be conveyed to the happy throng celebrating their Pioneer day. "The afternoon's merriment went on," says Roberts, "as if no messengers from the east had arived." "At sunset," relates George Watt in The Deseret News, "the camp assembled for prayers, when President Wells made a few remarks in relation to the latest tidings from the States, upon the order of leaving the ground in the morning, and concluded with prayer, after which, dancing and general hilarity continued to a late hour."

I can picture Brother Brigham, riding down the canyon next morning; not saying much to those around him, sitting in silence mostly, those firm lips of his closed—and as he emerges from the mouth of the canyon, and sees the beautiful valley (which he had first penetrated ten years before) forming a resolution in his mind that no army should ever invade this peaceful habitation, which he had founded, while there was life left in his body to prevent it.

July 26th fell on Sunday, and the President went to the Tabernacle to address the Saints. They were eager to hear him, and ready to follow him in any decision. I regret that I cannot print all of his sermon on this occasion, but following are a few excerpts from it:

"If this were not the Kingdom of God upon the earth, do you suppose that the world would be arrayed against us? No! There is not a sound, well informed mind in the world but what would decide at once that there is no cause of enmity against this people, and that all hostility arises from the fact that we have the eternal priesthood and the influence thereof. The Kingdom of Heaven is here, and we are in it, and they are angry at us solely for that.

"It is a little more than twenty-seven years since I commenced reading the Book of Mormon and defending the cause which we are engaged in. My mind was open to conviction and I knew that the Christian world had not the religion that Jesus and his apostles taught. I knew that there was not a Bible Christian upon the earth within my knowledge. A few years previous to that time Joseph had obtained the plates and began translating the Book of Mormon, and from the time he found the plates in the hill Cumorah, there has been just that tirade of abuse, lying, slandering, defaming the name and character of the Prophet and his associates, that there is at this day. It is no hotter a time now than it was then; there is no more persecution now than there was then.

"God has commenced to set up his kingdom on the earth, and all hell and its devils are moving against it. Hell is yawning and sending forth its devils, and their imps—what for? To destroy the Kingdom of God upon the earth—BUT THEY CANNOT DO IT.

"I am not going to interpret dreams, for I don't profess to be such a prophet as were Joseph Smith and Daniel, but I am a Yankee guesser, and I guess that James Buchanan has ordered this expedition to appease the wrath of the angry hounds that are howling round him.

"But woe, woe to that man who comes here to unlawfully interfere with my affairs. Woe, woe to those men who come here to unlawfully meddle with me and this people.

"If they kill me it is all right; but they will not until the time comes, and I think that I shall die a natural death; at least I expect to.

"Would it not make any man or community angry to endure and reflect upon the abuse our enemies have heaped upon us, and are still striving to pour out upon God's people?

"Let me be president of the United States awhile, and I would say to the senators, representatives, and other officers of the government, Gentlemen, you must act the part of men and statesmen, or I will reprove you. What are they angry at me for? Because I will reprove men for their iniquity and because I have such influence here—the very thing they are after. They think they are going to obtain it with money (and force) but they cannot do it.

"There is no influence, truth or righteousness in the world, only what flows from God our Father in the Heavens. We have that power, that influence; we also have such love and submission that we submit ourselves to our Father and God, as a child does to a kind parent. God bless you brothers and sisters. Amen."

II

On August 9th, 1857, a little more than two weeks after President Young first heard of the coming of the army, he again took the stand in the old Tabernacle to address the Saints. What were his reactions by this time? What were the feelings in his heart and what conclusions had he reached? I have tried to analyze his letters and his sermons. There is resentment and some bitterness—but absolutely not anywhere a shade of fear. For what harm could the United States, or indeed the whole world, do to the Kingdom of God? None at all, unless He who ruled in the heavens were willing! True, there were causes for the present conflict.

"One grand cause of the enmity entertained towards us by officials sent here by the general government has simply been, that I take the liberty of telling men when they do wrong, and wherein they do wrong—both those who are in the Church and those who are out of it; and my brethren take the same liberty."

The Saints had no quarrel with the government. All they asked was to be let alone.

"We have no difficulties with our government; we never have had any difficulties with any government under which we have lived. But there has been a difficulty, and what is it? The Mormons have got something of course that the rest have not, "and we will kill them out of the way; we will not have them."

The army was being sent here by President James Buchanan. But was he acting on his own account, or for others?

"I shall take the liberty of talking as I please about the President of the United States, and I expect that I know his character better than he knows it himself. I will tell you in a few words a little about it. James Buchanan, who is now sitting in the chair of state, and presiding over this great republic, is naturally a passive, docile, benevolent, and good man—that is his natural disposition, I will venture. Arouse him, and he has been a man who could make flaming speeches. He is now bound up; they have the fetters upon his feet; he is handcuffed; his elbows are pinioned; he is bound on every side; and they make him do as they please. . .

"I wish that old Hickory Jackson was now our president.

"If we had a man in the chair who really was a man, and capable of magnifying his office, he would call upon his servants, and order them to kick those mean, miserable sneaks out of the presidential mansion, off from its grounds, and into the strets. But the President hearkens to the clamour around him; and, as did Pontius Pilate, in the case of Jesus Christ, has washed his hands, saying, "I am clear of the blood of those Latter-day Saints. Gentlemen, you have dictated, and I will order a soldiery and officials to Utah."

We have repeatedly told the truth, and preached the truth about ourselves, but the people nor the government will believe us.

"With regard to the present contention and strife, and to our position and situation, there are a few things to be considered, and much labor to be performed. Let the Saints live their religion; let them have faith in God, do all the good they can to the household of faith, and to everybody else, and trust in God for the result; for the world will not believe one truth about us. I tell you that the government of the United States, and other governments that are acquainted with us, will not believe a single truth about us.

"What are we to do, under these circumstances? Live our religion. Are you going to contend against the United States? No. But when they come here to take our lives solely for our religion; be ye also ready. . . . .

"Do I expect to stand still, sit still or lie still, and tamely let them take away my life? I have told you a great many times what I have to say about that. I do not profess to be so good a man as Joseph Smith was. I do not walk under their protection, nor into their prisons as he did. And though officers should pledge me their protection as Governor Ford pledged protection to Joseph, I would not trust them any sooner than I would a wolf with my dinner. Neither do I trust any wicked judge, nor in any evil person.

"I trust in my God, and in honest men and women, who have the power of the Almighty upon them.

"What will we do? Keep the wicked off as long as we can, preach righteousness to them and teach them the way of salvation.

"We have the keys of the priesthood and the ways of eternal life, and understand them, and what manner of persons ought we to be? We ought to live our religion, believe in our God, love and serve Him, be faithful to Him, to one another, to all our covenants, and keep the devils from killing us as long as we can, and that is just as long as we have a mind to."

On Saturday, August 15th, 1857, the first definite move was made to counteract the approach of the troops. Col. Robert T. Burton and James W. Cummings, with a company of seventy-five picked men, left for the east, for the purpose of protecting the oncoming immigration and ascertaining the location, strength and equipment of the approaching army. They were also under orders to note the strategic points along the route which might be taken advantage of in opposing the army, but they were carefully instructed not to interfere with life or property belonging to anyone.

"According to Burton's own narrative," says B. H. Roberts in his Comprehensive History of the Church (Vol. 4, page 247), "he reached Fort Bridger on the 21st of August; and five days later met at Pacific Springs, the first Mormon immigrant companies; and the next day several large supply trains for the government, entirely unprotected by any escort.

"Leaving his wagons and half of his men on the Sweetwater, Colonel Burton proceeded eastward to Devil's gate, which he reached on the 30th of August, meeting frequently the westward moving immigrant companies. In this locality he cached considerable quantities of provisions for future use. On the 8th of September, he sent an express in advance to the Platte, which four days later returned with information of the approaching United States forces. From this time Burton's command began its slow return westward, meanwhile keeping close observation of the army's movements, including its scouting operations. When Colonel Alexander's division of the Expedition, comprising the 5th and 10th United States infantry regiments, with Phelps and Reno's battery, camped at Devil's Gate, on the 22nd of September, Colonel Burton, with three companions, camped within half a mile of him; and from thence until the troops arrived at Ham's Fork, an indirect western tributary of Green River, Colonel Burton's command kept in the immediate neighborhood of the army, reporting by frequent express riders its every movement, either to Governor Young or General Wells."

Meanwhile, what of President Brigham Young at home? I can discover no difference whatever in the spirit of his sermons during these weeks and months, from those of preceding months and years. In his feelings he did not manifest any fear or particular concern; there is the same calm, unperturbed spirit of the Gospel which had animated him for twenty-five years. Following are quotations from his remarks made in the Tabernacle on Sunday, August 30th, while Col. Burton was out on the plains:

"I can truly say that I am happy for the privilege of meeting with the Saints. When I am alone, and look by the vision of the Spirit upon this people, my heart says within me, God bless the people, God bless the people; and I bless you in the name of the Lord Jesus. I feel to bless the people continually, from day to day. Their interest is my interest; their welfare is my welfare; their hope is mine. We are of one faith; and to see the people drawing near unto the Lord and becoming more of one heart and one mind is the most cheering thought and reflection that can pass upon my mind; there is nothing else that compares with it. As for the riches of the world, or the good things of the world, as for gold and silver, houses and lands, they are nothing in comparison to the purity of the faith of the people. . . .

"I thank my Father in Heaven, yes, my soul says, Glory, hallelujah, praise the name of Israel's God, for the blesisngs I enjoy at the present time. . . . .

"I have no fears in regard to the Kingdom of God upon the earth; but I have fears lest this people be not prepared to receive glory, immortality and eternal lives, when those principles are presented to them—this is all the fear that I have, that we will not walk up to our privileges and be prepared for them. . . . . . .

"So live day by day that your lives will be like an even spun thread. Let there be no lying, no backbiting, no evil; but let the whole life of every man and woman tend to good. Then, when they have their failings, they will forgive each other and will find the words of the Savior to be true, that his Spirit will be in them as a well of living water, springing up to everlasting life."

Continuing this sermon, President Young referred to the coming of the army.

"They have been trying to break up this people and destroy their organization ever since we became a church and every time they try, their opposition forces us into greater note; they increase our numbers and strengthen us in faith and in the knowledge and power of God.

"Cannot this Kingdom be overthrown? No. They might as well try to obliterate the sun.

"God is at the helm. This is the mighty ship Zion. You stick to the ship and honor it, and see that you are in favor with the ship Zion and you need not worry about anything else.

"Sow your grain early this fall. Many wish to know whether I think we shall reap. I do not care whether we do or not, but I intend to sow early this fall so that it will ripen next season. How bad we should feel if we did not sow and all should be peace and safety next season.

"The Lord has suffered the wicked to drive us about, that we might accomplish his designs the sooner.

"This army that is reported to be coming to this place know no more about you and me than you know about the interior of China; they go because they are sent.

"Brethren and sisters, do not be angry with them, for they are in the hands of God. Instead of feeling a spirit to punish them, or anything like wrath, you live your religion; and you will see the day when you will pray God to turn away from your eyes the sight of their afflictions."

The above are the words, my readers, of the man whom the United States army was coming to Utah to remove from his office as Governor of the Territory—the best qualified man then living in the world to govern this people—the best man then living to build up this inter-mountain empire—had the President of the United States understood him, and had he not been influenced by the lies and falsehoods of the small, disreputable men who circled around him.

III

It is an old and apparently a true saying that troubles never come singly, for in those dark days of the fall of 1857, particularly during the month of September, while President Brigham Young's mind was wrestling with perhaps the greatest problem that ever confronted him, that of coping with an armed force of the United States government, a messenger, James Haslam, rode into Salt Lake City, post haste from Cedar City, with word to President Young, that a group of Arkansas emigrants had been surrounded by Indians at the Mountain Meadows, about forty miles southwest of Cedar. What was the President's order? Should the emigrants be allowed to pass?

Hurriedly writing a letter to Isaac Haight, who was presiding at Cedar City, he said:

"In regard to the emigration passing through our settlements, we must not interfere with them, until they are first notified to keep away. You must not meddle with them. The Indians we expect will do as they please, but you should try to preserve good feelings with them. There are no other trains going south that I know of. If those who are there will leave, let them go in peace."

Haslam rested only four hours in Salt Lake City, after his strenuous ride from Cedar, and then took off again on his return trip of two hundred sixty-seven miles on horseback, which he completed in three days. As President Young handed him the letter to Haight, he said:

"Go with all speed, spare no horse flesh. The emigrants must not be meddled with, if it takes all Iron county to prevent it. They must go free and unmolested."

It was while Haslam was riding with this message, on the eleventh of September, that the horrible Mountain Meadows affair took place. Its history is well known, and I shall not attempt to relate any of it here, but I do deny any implication that President Brigham Young was ever concerned in it, except to order that the emigrants were to be allowed to go free and unmolested. Repeated attempts have been made by critics of "Mormonism," for the past seventy years to connect President Young with the perpetration of this atrocious crime, but they have all proved unavailing.

It was on the eighth of September that the first member of the army of the United States arrived in Salt Lake valley, Captain Stewart Van Vliet, assistant quarter-master on General Harney's staff. He came as an advance agent for the army, to purchase food and supplies, and to locate a suitable site for their camp. The evening of his arrival President Young and a few of the leading brethren called on him, and a meeting was arranged for the following day to be held in Social Hall.

Here a letter was read from General Harney, addressed to "President Brigham Young, of the society of 'Mormons'," setting forth the purpose of the Captain's visit, after which a free discussion, principally between President Young and Captain Van Vliet took place. President Young informed the Captain that the Saints could supply the meat, the food stuff, the hay and lumber necessary for the army, but that they would not do so.

Three days later, on Sept. 12th, in an extended interview between the President and Captain Van Vliet, Brother Brigham had this to say:

"We do not want to fight the United States, but if they drive us to it we shall do the best that we can; and I will tell you, as the Lord lives, we shall come off conquerers, for we trust in Him.

"God has set up His kingdom on the earth and it will never fall. We shall do all we can to avert a collision, but if they drive us to it God will overthrow them. If they would let us alone and say to the mobs, 'Now you may go and kill the "Mormons" if you can, but we will have nothing to do with it,' that would be all we would ask of them; but for the government to array the army against us, is too despicable and damnable a thing for any honorable nation to do; and God will hold them in derision who do it.

"The United States are sending their armies here to simply hold us still until a mob can come and butcher us, as has been done before.

"We are supporters of the Constitution of the United States, and we love that Constitution, and respect the laws of the United States; but it is by the corrupt administration of those laws that we are made to suffer. If the law had been vindicated in Missouri, it would have sent Governor Boggs to the gallows, along with those who murdered Joseph and Hyrum, and those other friends who accomplished our expulsion from the state.

"Most of the government officers who have been sent here have taken no interest in us, but, on the contrary, have tried many times to destroy us."

To the above Captain Van Vliet replied:

"This is the case with most men sent to the territories. They receive their offices as a political reward, or, as a stepping-stone to the senatorship; but they have no interest in common with the people.

"This people has been lied about the worst of any people I ever saw.

"The greatest hold that the government now has upon you is in the accusation that you have burned the United States records."

Governor Young: "I deny that any books of the United States have been burned. All I ask of any man is, that he tell the truth about us, pay his debts and not steal, and then he will be welcome to come and go as he likes.

"If the government has arrived at that state that it will try to kill this people, because of their religion, no honorable man should be afraid of it.

"We would like to ward off this blow if we can, but the United States seems determined to drive us into a fight. They will kill us if they can. A mob killed Joseph and Hyrum in jail, notwithstanding the faith of the state was pledged to protect them. I have broken no law, and under the present state of affairs, I will not suffer myself to be taken by any United States officer, to be killed as they killed Joseph."

Captain Van Vliet: "I do not think it is the intention of the government to arrest you, but to install a new governor in the Territory."

Governor Young: "I believe you tell the truth—that you believe this—but you do not know their intentions as well as I do. When you get away from here you will think of a great many things that you have seen and heard; for instance, people have accused us of colleaguing with the Indians against the government; they were much afraid that Joseph Smith would go among the Indians, and they wanted to keep him away from them, but now they have driven us into their midst. I want you to note the signs of the times; you will see that God will chastise this nation for trying to destroy both the Indians and the Mormons.

"If the government persists in sending an army to destroy us, in the name of the Lord we shall conquer them. If they dare to force the issue, I shall not hold the Indians by the wrist any longer; they shall go ahead and do as they please. If the issue comes, you may tell the government to stop all emigration across this continent, for the Indians will kill all who attempt it; and if an army succeeds in penetrating this valley, tell the government to see that it has forage and provisions in store, for they will find here only a charred and barren waste."

Captain Van Vliet: "If our government pushes this matter to the extent of making war upon you, I will withdraw from the army, for I will not have a hand in shedding the blood of American citizens."

Governor Young: "We shall trust in God. Congress has promptly sent investigating committees to Kansas and other places, as occasion has required, but upon the merest rumor it has sent 2,500 armed soldiers to destroy the people of Utah, without investigating the subject at all."

Captain Van Vliet: "The government may yet send an investigating committee to Utah, and consider it good policy, before they get through."

Governor Young: "I believe God has sent you here, and that good will come out of it. I was glad when I heard you were coming."

Captain Van Vliet: "I am anxious to get back to Washington as soon as I can. I have heard officially that General Harney has been recalled to Kansas to officiate as governor. I shall stop the train (army) on Hams Fork, on my own responsibility."

Governor Young: "If we can keep the peace for this winter I do think there will something turn up that may save the shedding of blood."

On Sunday morning, September 14th, President Young invited Captain Van Vliet to accompany him to the Tabernacle services. Introducing him to the congregation he said:

"The officer in command of the United States army, on its way to Utah, detailed one of his staff, Captain Van Vliet, who is now on the stand, to come here and learn whether he could procure the necessary supplies for the army. Many of you are already aware of this, and some of you have been previously acquainted with the captain. Captain Van Vliet visited us in Winter Quarters, and, if I remember correctly, he was then officiating as assistant quartermaster. He is again in our midst in the capacity of assistant quartermaster. From the day of his visit to Winter Quarters, many of this people have become personally acquainted with him. He has invariably treated them kindly, as he would a Baptist, a Methodist, or any other person, for that is his character. He has always been found to be free and frank, and to be a man that wishes to do right, and no doubt he would deal out justice to all if he had the power. Many of you have labored for him, and found him to be a man; and I understand that he has much influence in the army, through his kind treatment to the soldiers."

Then launching out into an explanation of his attitude toward the oncoming army, Brother Brigham spoke fearlessly:

"I have been in this Kingdom a good while—twenty-five years and upwards, and I have been driven from place to place; my brethren have been driven, my sisters have been driven; we have been scattered and peeled, and every time without any provocation upon our part, only that we were united, obedient to the laws of the land, and striving to worship God. Mobs repeatedly gathered against this people, but they never had any power to prevail until governors issued their orders and called out a force under the letter of the law, to hold the Mormons still while infernal scamps cut their throats. I have had all that before me through the night past, and it makes me too angry to preach. Also to see that we are in a government, whose administrators are always trying to injure us, while we are constantly at the defiance of all hell to prove any just grounds for their hostility against us; and yet they are organizing their forces to come here, and protect infernal scamps, who are anxious to come and kill whom they please, destroy whom they please, and finally exterminate us.

"This people are free; they are not in bondage to any government on God's footstool. We have transgressed no law, and we have no occasion to do so, neither do we intend to; but as for any nation's coming to destroy this people, GOD ALMIGHTY BEING MY HELPER, THEY CANNOT COME HERE."

President Young thus gave Captain Van Vliet to understand that the Saints would oppose the coming of the army, with physical force, if necessary. He thought, however, that an armed conflict could be avoided if the army were stopped in the vicinity of Fort Bridger for the winter, and a commission were appointed by the President to investigate the causes of the invasion—which to this date had not been made clear to the Saints, or anybody else. Captain Van Vliet agreed to depart for the east the following day, and to try and halt the army, while he hurried to Washington with the request to the President, that a peace commission be appointed. The day after his departure, September 15th, Governor Young issued the following proclamation, placing the territory under martial law:

"Citizens of Utah: We are invaded by a hostile force, who are evidently assailing us to accomplish our overthrow and destruction.

"For the last twenty-five years we have trusted official government, from constables and justices to judges, governors and presidents, only to be scorned, held in derision, insulted and betrayed. Our houses have been plundered and then burned, our fields laid waste, our principal men butchered while under the pledged faith of the government for their safety, and our families driven from their homes to find that shelter in the barren wilderness, and that protection among hostile savages which were denied them in the boasted abodes of Christianity and civilization.

"The Constitution of our common country, guarantees to us all that we do now, or have ever claimed.

"If the constitutional rights which pertain to us as American citizens, were extended to Utah according to the spirit and meaning thereof, and fairly and impartially administered, it is all that we could ask—all that we ever asked.

"Our opponents have availed themselves of prejudices existing against us because of our religious faith, to send out a formidable host to accomplish our destruction. We have no privilege, no opportunity of defending ourselves from the false, foul and unjust aspersions against us, before the nation.

"The government has not condescended to cause an investigating committee or other persons to be sent to enquire into and ascertain the truth, as is customary in such cases.

"We know those expressions to be false, but that avails us nothing. We are condemned unheard, and forced to an issue with an armed mercenary mob, which has been sent against us at the instigation of anonymous letter writers, ashamed to father the base, slanderous falsehoods which they have given to the public; of corrupt officials who have brought false accusations against us to screen themselves in their own infamy; of hireling priests and howling editors, who prostitute the truth for filthy lucre's sake.

"The issue which has been thus forced upon us compels us to resort to the first great law of self-preservation, and stand in our own defense, a right guaranteed to us by the genius of the institutions of our country, and upon which the government is based.

"Our duty to ourselves, to our families, requires us not tamely to be driven and slain without an attempt to preserve ourselves. Our duty to our country, our holy religion, our God, to freedom and liberty, requires that we should not quietly stand still and see those fetters being forged which are calculated to enslave, and bring us in subjection to an unlawful military despotism, such as can only emanate, in a country of constitutional law, from usurpation, tyranny and oppression.

"Therefore, I,Brigham Young, Governor and superintendent of Indian affairs for the Territory of Utah, in the name of the people of the United States in the Territory of Utah:

"First—Forbid all armed forces of every description from coming into this Territory, under any pretense whatever.

"Second—Order all the forces in said Territory to hold themselves in readiness to march at a moment's notice to repel any and all such invasion.

"Third—Martial law is hereby declared to exist in this Territory, from and after the publication of this proclamation, and no person shall be allowed to pass or repass into or through or from the Territory, without a permit from the proper officers.

"Given under my hand and seal at Great Salt Lake City, Territory of Utah, this 15th day of September, A. D. 1857, and of the Independence of the United States of America the 82nd.

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."
