Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT

THAT President Brigham Young meant business when he determined to resist the United States army is very evident when one looks into the history. Writing to W. I. Appleby, who had succeeded John Taylor as president of the Eastern mission, President Young said under date of September 12th, while Captain Van Vliet was still in the city:

"I wish you and all the returning brethren to provide yourselves with good rifles and pistols and bring with you all the powder and lead which you are able to purchase and freight through."

Captain Van Vliet was also aware that in dealing with Brigham he was in touch with a man whom it would not be safe to provoke too far, as the on-coming army was likely to do. Making his report at Hams Fork, to Captain Pleasanton, assistant to the Adjt. General at Fort Leavenworth, under date of Sept. 16th, two days after leaving Salt Lake City, he said:

"I reached Salt Lake City without molestation, and immediately upon my arrival I informed Governor Brigham Young that I desired an interview, which he appointed for the next day. On the evening of the day of my arrival, Governor Young, with many of the leading men of the city, called upon me at my quarters. The Governor received me most cordially, and treated me during my stay, which continued some six days, with the greatest hospitality and kindness. In this interview the Governor made known to me his views with regard to the approach of the United States troops, in plain and unmistakable language.

"He stated that the Mormons had been persecuted, murdered and robbed in Missouri and Illinois, both by the mob and state authorities, and that now the United States was about to adopt the same course, and that, therefore, he and the people of Utah had determined to resist all persecution at the commencement, and that the troops now on the march for Utah, should not enter the Great Salt Lake valley. As he uttered these words, all those present concurred most heartily in what he said. The next day, as agreed upon, I called upon the Governor, and delivered in person the letters with which I had been entrusted. In that interview, and in several subsequent ones, the same determination, to resist to the death the entrance of the troops into the valley was expressed by Governor Young and those about him."

Accompanying Captain Van Vliet on his journey east was Dr. John M. Bernhisel, Utah's lone representative in Congress, and it seems to have been tacitly agreed between them, that if the army could be kept on Green river, or in that vicinity, during the winter, they would both do all in their power, when they got to Washington, to induce President Buchanan to appoint a commission to investigate conditions in Utah, and see if open hostilities could not be avoided, and the so-called differences between the Saints and the government brought to a peaceful conclusion. This plan was precisely the one which President Young had hinted at in his conversation with Captain Van Vliet, and in the end, through the help of Thomas L. Kane at Philadelphia, Brigham's great friend, it was the plan which was carried through.

Meantime, what of the Saints in the valleys? And what of President Young? On Sunday, September 20th, while Captain Van Vliet and Dr. Bernhisel were hurrying east, and while hundreds of the brethren under command of General D. H. Wells, were gathering in Echo Canyon, to resist the approaching army, President Young took the stand in the old Tabernacle.

Strange to say, he scarcely mentioned the army, but proceeded to give the people some good sound advice and doctrine.

"No matter what the outward appearance is, if I can know of a truth that the hearts of the people are fully set to do the will of their Father in Heaven, though they may falter and do a great many things through the weaknesses of human nature, yet, they will be saved.

"If there is an outward appearance of mistakes or evils, we ought to have the Spirit of the Lord to look at the designs of the actors, and know whether they act from impure or sinister motives. If their motives are pure—no matter whether their outward appearance is particularly precise, their acts will be discerned by the Spirit of the Lord, and will be appreciated for what they were intended. If people act from pure motives, though their outward movements may not always be so pleasant as our traditions would prefer, yet God will make those acts result in the best good to the people.

"I wish the people to know that they have to come to the position that, in their feelings and affections, the Kingdom of God must be all in all to us. If we are not in that position, you will find that we will be scourged and afflicted until we are. With us it must be the Kingdom of God all the time; it must be that or nothing. The time has come in which that must be the common feeling with the Saints.

"As to the world's being in fellowship with us, it never was and it never can be. We cut off the gentiles just before we left Nauvoo; and they have cut us from their fellowship. The thread is cut that has hitherto connected up; and now we have to act for ourselves, and build up the Kingdom of God on the earth, which we will do by the help of the Lord. For He has decreed that His Kingdom shall take the ascendency over all other kingdoms under heaven.

"As to being afflicted, never fear that; only fear that you are not living as well as you might, and then there is no danger.

"Be faithful, and God will not only fight for us, but he will lead us on to victory."

On September 29th, President Young sent a very interesting note to "The Officer commanding the forces now invading Utah Territory." The note was accompanied with a message from General Wells, stating that he was on hand to "carry out the instructions of Governor Young."

"Governor's Office, Utah Territory,

Great Salt Lake City,

September 29th, 1857.

"Sir—By reference to the act of Congress passed Sept. 9th, 1850, organizing the Territory of Utah, published in the laws of Utah, herewith forwarded, pp. 146-7, you will find the following:

"Sec. 2. And be it further enacted, that the executive power and authority in and over said Territory of Utah shall be vested in a governor, who shall hold his office for four years, and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed by the President of the United States. The Governor shall reside within said territory, shall be commander-in-chief of the militia thereof, etc., etc.

"I am still the governor and superintendent of Indian affairs for this territory, no successor having been appointed and qualified, as provided by law; nor have I been removed by the President of the United States.

"By virtue of the authority thus vested in me, I have issued, and forwarded you a copy of my proclamation forbidding the entrance of armed forces into this territory. This you have disregarded. I now further direct that you retire forthwith from the territory, by the same route you entered. Should you deem this impracticable, and prefer to remain until spring in the vicinity of your present encampment, Black's Fork or Green River, you can do so in peace and unmolested, on condition that you deposit your arms and ammunition with Lewis Robison, quarter-master general of the territory, and leave in the spring, as soon as the condition of the roads will permit you to march; and should you fall short of provisions, they can be furnished you, upon making the proper application therefor. General Wells will forward this, and receive any communication you may have to make.

"Very Respectfully,

"BRIGHAM YOUNG,

"Governor and Superintendent of Indian Affairs, Utah Territory."

Colonel Alexander replied that he would submit Governor Young's letter to his superior officers; that he was in the west by the orders of the President of the United States and that his future movements would depend "upon orders issued by competent authority." Of course he did not recognize the authority of Governor Young. Therefore, the brethren who were in the field under General D. H. Wells, decided to take the offensive. Fort Bridger, which the Church had purchased as a stopping place for the weary emigrants who were crossing the plains and which had a property value of $2,000, was burned to the ground. Three days later the torch was applied to Fort Supply, which had mills and buildings to the value of $50,000. Also grass fires were started along the route and several successful raids were made in running off stock belonging to the army. In issuing his orders to begin the offensive General Wells had said: "Use every exertion to stampede their animals and set fire to their trains. Burn the whole country before them and on their flanks. Keep them from sleeping by night surprises; blockade the road by felling trees or destroying the river fords where you can. Watch for opportunities to set fire to the grass before them that can be burned. Keep your men concealed as much as possible, and guard against surprises." And he added, "take no life."

Matters were brought to a crisis when on the nights of the 4th and 5th of October, Major Lot Smith, with a small command of men, burned 74 of the government's supply wagons, and thereafter ran off nearly 1,000 head of cattle. This was, indeed, a serious blow to the army, for if their provisions were cut off they could not stand a rigorous winter in the mountains. A council of officers soon followed. It was decided that the army should not attempt under present conditions to go into Salt Lake valley, but should make a winter camp at Fort Bridger, and depend upon further supplies from the east. Thus President Young won the first objective in the conflict between the Saints and the government. He had said to Captain Van Vliet: "If we can keep the peace this winter I think there will be something turn up that may save the shedding of blood."

Meantime, in Salt Lake City, through the frequent arrival of messengers, President Young was kept well posted as to what was going on. In his history, under date of Sept. 30th, he records his reflections as follows:

"We have about 800 men in the mountains. It is a solemn time. The armies of the Gentiles are making war upon us because of our religion, and we have to defend ourselves against a nation of twenty-five millions of people, and the war has just commenced. We have to trust in God for the result. We shall do what we can, and leave the work in his hands."

II

On Sunday, October 4th, President Young addressed the Saints in the old Tabernacle.

"As but few can be in our offices to learn the news that is brought in, I will say that on the 2nd, Friday last, a messenger arrived with intelligence that the soldiers were going up Ham's Fork. Previous to that I had sent by Lieutenant General Wells a copy of the Proclamation acclaiming martial law and ordering the troops not to come here. They treated it as I presumed they would. They say that they are sent by the President, are subject to superior officers, and intend to abide their instructions; and I expect that they will, until some other power checks their progress. The brethren (in the mountains on guard against the army) are well, and the spirit of peace and contentment rests upon them. They are doing their duties; living to and serving their God.

"I do not know that anybody's heart burns, except it is to get a little nearer to our enemies and for the troops to undertake to come in here. Well, we are in the hands of the Lord our God, and he will overrule things just as he pleases.

"The main object I had in coming to meeting this morning is to let you know that my health is better. Last Sabbath I did not think it prudent to come out; but I am at my post, and God is at the helm.

"Let us walk in the precepts of our Savior—those that he has marked out for us, and God will bless us; and I bless you, my brethren and sisters, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. I mean to save my brethren and sisters, God being my helper. God bless you. Amen."

On Tuesday, the 6th of October, 1857, the semi-annual conference convened as usual in the old Tabernacle, with President Young presiding. He spoke on both the 6th and 7th in his usual intelligent and splendid manner, adroitly directing the course that the Saints were to pursue, fearlessly proclaiming his determination that the army should not enter the valley, and bearing a strong testimony to the truthfulness of the Gospel. I shall quote copiously from these sermons, as they give a clear picture of what was going on, and they reveal the depth of feeling and the ardor that Brother Brigham had for the Kingdom of God. As he arose to open the meeting on the forenoon of the 6th he said:

"Quite a goodly number have assembled to our conference to transact business in a Church capacity. We shall first present and attend to the business, and then to such instructions, teachings, exhortations, etc., as may come before the conference."

Referring in the outset to the preparations to meet the approaching army, there is this:

"I believe the brethren are pretty much in readiness, and have all got their guns ready for shooting. We will first attend to the business, so that if it is necessary to repair to the canyons we can do so."

And continuing:

"I do not know how long we shall hold this conference, and therefore, no one needs to ask me. There is a time for all things; and I never saw a better time than now to secure potatoes and other crops, and thus do our preaching in the season thereof and digging potatoes in the season thereof. And I could almost wish that our conference would be dismissed this morning, and that all hands go and secure the potatoes, squash, corn, etc.

"We have heretofore spent a great deal of time in conferences unmolested, and we shall again have a great deal of time to spend in this capacity undisturbed. We must have what is good for us, that which puts up in mind and brings to us principles that are free. Should we live in peace year after year how long would it be before we were glued to the world? Our affections would be so fastened to the things of the world that it would be hard for us to spend a little time in conference; it would be hard to go on missions, it would be contrary to our feelings to attend to anything but our own individual concerns to make ourselves rich.

"It seems to be necessary for the Lord to bring this people into circumstances to show them that the things of this world are mere nothingness in their present state—are but a shadow. They are today and tomorrow they are not. This shows to us that all things pertaining to this world are subject to change, and such changes as we cannot control."

But the living of righteous, honest lives is within our control, and to this we must adhere:

"It is a truth—it is God's truth—it is eternal truth, if the people did but know it, that it is much better to be honest, to live here uprightly, and forsake and shun evil, than it is to be dishonest. It is the easiest path in the world to be honest, to be upright before God, and when people learn this they will practice it. If they could only believe this, it does appear to me that they will forsake evil practice, every evil thought and banish them from their minds and try to practice virtue and truth and to live in that way that they will overcome every evil disposition, and live so that they can control their reflections, and that their reflections will tend to virtue, truth and holiness; for this is our privilege, until we become pure in our hearts, and find that the principles of righteousness dwell within us. Then, as it was said by the Savior to his disciples, He will be in us a fountain of living water, springing up into everlasting life."

As President Young concluded this sermon, he presented to the congregation the names of the authorities, and put forth his own name as "Prophet, Seer and Revelator." After which he made this comment:

"I will say that I never dictated the latter part of that sentence. I make this remark, because those words in that connection always made me feel as though I am called more than I am deserving of. I am Brigham Young, an apostle of Joseph Smith, and also of Jesus Christ. If I have been profitable to this people I am glad of it. The brethren call me so and if it be so, I am glad."

The following day, in the afternoon and closing session of the conference, he launched out again into a Gospel sermon:

"I rise to bear my testimony with the rest of the brethren who have spoken. Several who have lately returned from foreign missions have addressed you during this conference. As has been observed here we are all missionaries; and when our mission will be ended I am not able to say. I expect that in all probability our bodies will have to rest for a time. By and by, when they fall back to their mother earth, they will have a rest. But as for the mission being at an end for the faithful person, I do not know anything about it closing merely because the body has been laid in the grave. In this Church I have always felt myself to be a missionary, and I always desire to be ready and willing to bear my testimony to the truth. This has been about the amount of my preaching for the last twenty-six years. As for sermonizing, I have but seldom attempted it, but I have borne my testimony of the truth to the people.

"I had only traveled a short time to testify to the people, before I learned this one fact, that you might prove doctrine from the Bible until doomsday, and it would merely convince a people, but would not convert them. You might read the Bible from Genesis to Revelation, and prove every iota that you advance, and that alone would have no converting influence upon the people. Nothing short of a testimony by the power of the Holy Ghost would bring light and knowledge to them—bring them in their hearts to repentance.

"Nothing short of that would ever do. You have frequently heard me say that I would rather hear an elder, either here or in the world, speak only five words accompanied by the power of God, and they would do more good than to hear long sermons without the Spirit. That is true and we know it. My testimony is that this is the Kingdom of God upon the earth."

After explaining that the Spirit of God is the same in all ages, he continues:

"There is no clash in the principles revealed in the Bible, the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants; and there would be no clash between any of the doctrines taught by Joseph the Prophet and by the brethren now, if all would live in a way to be governed by the Spirit of the Lord. All do not live so as to have the Spirit of the Lord with them all the time, and the result is that some get out of the way.

"The Lord will rule; and if we continue steadfast to the Kingdom of God, it will save us; but if we do not, we shall be left off, and the old ship Zion will sail right ahead, and safely carry her passengers to port. If the people could understand, they would be able to discern that we must gain that spiritual victory I have already spoken about, before we can have the privilege of proclaiming the building up of the people of God in the mountains.

"We have a nation here in the mountains that will be a kingdom by and by, and be governed by pure laws and principles. What do you call yourselves? some may ask. Here are the people who constitute the Kingdom of God. It may be some time before that kingdom is fully developed, but the time will come when the Kingdom of God will reign free and independent."

And now referring to the army which was bottled up for the winter at Fort Bridger, he reiterated his determination that they should not come into Salt Lake valley:

"If our enemies intend to come here by way of Emigration canyon, we shall be ready to meet them; and if they intend to come around by the Malad, we shall be ready to meet them; and if they undertake to come by Fort Hall, we shall also be ready to meet them.

"The time has arrived when we have either to be trodden under foot and die, or to defend ourselves and our rights; and which will it be? Every man and woman feel their hearts fail when they think of submitting to the oppression and unlawful abominations practiced by our enemies and sought by them to be introduced into our society, and we will not submit to such wicked and unlawful treatment.

"I tell you, and I tell our enemies, that we are here, and we intend to stay here.

"If we will stand up as men and women of God, the yoke shall never be placed upon our necks again; and all hell cannot overthrow us, even with the United States to help them. It is not pleasant to the natural feelings to be obliged to talk in this manner about fellow citizens with whom we have been reared; but when they act like the devil, it is impossible for us to bow to their unjust and illegal mandates without becoming as corrupt as they are. It is an honor to resist the wicked; and my name will be had in honor, and so will Joseph Smith's, and so will your names, for not bowing to their iniquitous doings."

Again, on Sunday morning, the 18th of October, he expressed the same determination to resist the army:

"If they come here, I will tell you what will be done. As soon as they start to come into our settlements, let sleep depart from their eyes and slumber from their eyelids until they sleep in death, for they have been warned and forewarned that we will not tamely submit to being destroyed. Men shall be secreted here and there and shall waste away our enemies.

"Another year and I am going to prepare for the worst, and I want you to prepare to cache our grain and lay waste to this territory; for I am determined, if driven to that extremity, that our enemies shall find nothing but heaps of ashes and ruins. We will be so prepared that in a few days all will be consumed. I shall request the bishops to see that the people in their wards are provided with two or three years provisions.

"Who has sought for war? Have we? No! We have preached the Gospel to Saints and strangers, when strangers would come and tarry long enough to hear it. We do not want to stand here and talk about war. There is nothing so repugnant to my feelings as to injure or destroy. But what is upon us. Nothing, only another manifestation of the opposition of the devil to the Kingdom of God.

"But with us it is the Kingdom of God, or nothing; and we will maintain it, or die in trying—though we shall not die in trying. It is comforting to many to be assured that we shall not die in trying, but we shall live in trying. We shall maintain the Kingdom of God, living."

III

The deep snows of winter effectually put an end to any hopes the army might have entertained regarding entering Salt Lake valley. By December 1st only a small guard was left in Echo canyon, under command of Captain John R. Winder, and all the brethren who had been on duty returned to their farms and homes. It was Captain Winder's task to climb to an eminence at the head of Echo canyon and take observations as to whether any of the army were attempting to move forward. But all remained quiet at Fort Bridger, and Colonel Johnston and his men "holed in" until the advent of spring.

The condition of the army was more or less precarious. They were camped at an elevation of between six and seven thousand feet, where the cold of winter was intense. Due to the burning of seventy-four wagons laden with food supplies, by Lot Smith and his scouts, there was a distinct shortage brought about, which forced Colonel Johnston to put his men on rations as soon as they encamped. As early as the middle of November, the army was entirely without salt. President Young was not one to see the poor soldiers suffer, and consequently, almost at the risk of their lives, he requested Henry Woodward and Jesse J. Earl to carry through 800 pounds of this necessary ingredient. With the men President Young sent a letter to Col. Johnston, in which he stated that the salt was to be a gift to the army, but "should you prefer making any compensation therefor, I have to request that you inform me, under sealed envelope, of weight received and the amount and kind of compensation returned." And, furthermore, "should any in your command be suspicious that the salt now forwarded, contains any deleterious ingredients other than those combined in its natural disposition on the shores of Great Salt Lake, Mr. Woodward, or Mr. Earl, in charge of its transportation and delivery, or doubtless Mr. Livingston, Mr. Gerrish, Mr. Perry (gentile merchants with the expedition) or any other person in your camp that is acquainted with us, will freely partake of it to dispel any groundless suspicion, or your doctors may be able to test it to your satisfaction."

On the arrival of the brethren at Fort Bridger with the salt, after traveling through a furious snow storm, Col. Johnston refused to accept the gift, stating that he would "accept no favors from traitors and rebels," and that "any communication which they might in the future hold with the army must be under the flag of truce." It is related that the salt eventually found its way into the army through the Indians, who sold it to the soldiers as high as $2.50 per pound.

When the news of the "salt incident" reached Washington, Senator Sam Houston of Texas did not justify Col. Johnston in his conduct. Speaking before the Senate, he said, "An act of civility was tendered by Brigham Young, and you might, if you please construe it, under the circumstances, rather as an act of submission on his part. He sent salt to the troops, understanding that it was scarce there, and was selling at seven dollars a pint. As an act of humanity, thinking that at least it could not be regarded as discourteous, he sent a supply of salt requisite for the relief of the encampment, intimating to the commander that he could pay for it, if he would not accept of it as a present. What was the message the military officer sent back? I believe the substance of it was that he would have no intercourse with a rebel, and when they met they would fight. They will fight; and if they fight he will get miserably whipped. That was a time to make peace with Brigham Young, because there is something potent in salt. With the Turk, who has similar habits and religion of the Mormons, it is the sacrament of perpetual friendship. Why may not the Mormons have incorporated that into their creed? But, instead of that he sent him a taunt and defiance. Why could he not have said: 'I will accept it as a present, or I will recompense you for it according to its value? I would rather see Brigham Young; and if he choose to come to my encampment, I pledge him the honor of an officer that he shall go away unscathed if we come to no understanding; but, if he wishes to acknowledge the authority of the United States, I am ready to receive that acknowledgment; and if the government of the United States bids me, I will withdraw my troops." If he (Col. Johnston) had sent that message, it would have been worthy of a magnanimous, generous soldier's mind and heart. As it was, he sent a message I would not have sent, and I do not think it is calculated to conciliate Brigham Young. He is too proud a man, I take it; a man of too much sense to have sent such a message as that, after an act of civility was tendered." Such was the speech of Senator Sam Houston in defense of President Young.

Meantime, in Salt Lake City, there was a general feeling of relief and satisfaction that the army had been kept in the mountains. Life went on in the usual order with the Saints. A splendid harvest had been gathered, on which, it was estimated, the people could subsist for two years—if the worst came to the worst. But, the opinion held by most of the people, and especially by President Young, was that a peaceable solution of the present difficulties with the government would be reached.

Brother Brigham always maintained a spirit of optimism, although he had often told the people that the proper attitude for every difficulty in life is, "Be ye ready." And he was ready, for he felt that it was his sacred duty to guard, even with his life, every interest of the Kingdom of God. And he often repeated the saying that, "when the Saints have done all they can, the Lord will do the rest." Therefore he felt that all would come out right.

During November and December he spoke almost every Sunday in the old Tabernacle. Sometimes he would add only a few words to the sermons that had been given; at others he would launch out into a lengthy discourse, with words and sentences which rang as clear as a bell. He did not prepare his sermons, but spoke whatever thoughts came to his mind, trusting always "to the guidance of the Spirit." He was always the master; and when he ceased speaking, the Saints were satisfied.

I shall quote a few paragraphs from his sermon of November 15th, 1857:

"I am happy for the privilege of standing before the Saints. It is a great pleasure to me to associate with those whose feelings are concentrated in the establishment of peace and righteousness upon the earth.

"Since I have been in this Church and Kingdom, I have endeavored to learn and treasure up wisdom and good understanding, and then not to forget them. I have endeavored to gather to myself every principle that would promote righteousness in me, and those who would hearken to my counsel."

What is the source of true happiness? Brother Brigham answers as follows:

"There is no man or woman on the earth who can enjoy solid satisfaction, unalloyed peace and comfort, but in the holy spirit of our religion—in the Gospel of Salvation; that is the only source of true happiness."

As for himself, he was living his religion, and he felt this joy:

"I am happy; I am full of joy, comfort and peace; all within me is light, for I desire nothing but to do the will of my Father in Heaven. I delight not in unrighteousness, but in righteousness and truth. I seek to promote the good and happiness of myself and those with whom I am associated.

"You never saw a true Saint in the world that had sorrow, neither can you find one. If persons are destitute of the fountain of living water, or the principles of eternal life, then they are sorrowful. If the words of life dwell within us, and we have the hope of eternal life and glory, and let that spark within us kindle to a flame, to the consuming of the last and least remains of selfishness, we never can walk in darkness, and are strangers to darkness and fear."

"As for the army now in the mountains. How many times have I said here, within the last three months, I pray that God would lead us and our enemies, that there would be no blood shed.

"One of the brethren prayed in camp that the snow might fall forty feet deep on our enemies. I am satisfied if it falls only four or five feet deep.

"Colonel Alexander—probably one of the best men in the army now near Bridger ruins, told one of our messengers, when replying to a piece of advice I had given him to resign his commission rather than be found operating against an innocent people, that he was compelled to remain in the army; for if he resigned, he knew not how to manage to sustain his family. He said, "I have no other means of support. I cannot throw up my commission, for then I would have no means to support my wife and children." As an American, shame and confusion would overwhelm me, were I to even think of trying to sustain my family by siding with tyranny and oppression."

And in closing his sermon there is this splendid spiritual advice:

"Pray that this people may be preserved—that the Kingdom of God may roll on—that our Elders on the Islands of the Pacific, in the United States and in foreign lands may be so blessed as to come safely home. Pray for the honest in heart, and that the ungodly may be so filled with fear and trembling that they may leave us, that we may live here as Saints and build up the Kingdom of our God, and prepare for the return of this people to the center stake of Zion, where we can lay the foundations for a new Jerusalem.

"All eternity is before you, and everything you can ask for will be given you in due time; for the heavens and the earth are the Lord's, and the fulness thereof.

"Live your religion. How much you are exhorted—how much have we pleaded with you to live your religion—to live in the light of God's countenance—to live with the Holy Spirit so reigning in you as never to be led astray, that you may know how to promote the Kingdom of God on the earth. Let selfishness be out of sight, and ask the Lord to preserve you in the truth, and do with you as He pleases, and dispose of you to His glory."

The year 1857 drew to a close. And what a year it had been for Brother Brigham. The coming of the army, two thousand five hundred armed soldiers now encamped on the borders of the Territory, coming to accomplish what purpose? Perhaps his death, and the destruction of the Saints. Then the terrible Mountain Meadows affair; and now the preparations for the evacuation of the settlements, should the army attempt to enter the valley in the Spring. But Brother Brigham held his composure remarkably well. He kept strictly to his task; that of building up the Kingdom.

"I would rather have a hundred righteous men," he said, speaking in the old Tabernacle, two days after Christmas, "with whom to face all hell and the world at its back, than to have all this great community, unless they serve the Lord.

"We have the privilege, while the majority of the inhabitants of the world are deprived of it, of learning the ways of God. He is in the acts, and directs and guides all the affairs of this world, and we have the privilege of understanding His ways in so doing. We have the privilege of learning the principles that pertain to God and godliness, we have the privilege of learning the weakness, ignorance, blindness, and all the evils that sin has brought upon the children of men—of so understanding correct principles that we can discern the things that are of God, and the things that are not of Him, and of learning the great wisdom displayed by the Almighty in causing intelligent beings to dwell in a sinful world."
