Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE

JANUARY 1st, 1858, dawned cold and clear in Salt Lake City. "About noon," says the Deseret News, "the brass band serenaded President Young at the Lion House." There was a jovial attitude among the inhabitants, and many social entertainments were being indulged in. Dancing parties were held frequently in the wards and President Young stated a few Sundays previously in the Tabernacle that the people had never seemed so anxious to dance. The theatre, too, was attracting more attention than ever before. An item in the Deseret News under date of Jan. 20th, states as follows:

"The Social Hall is crowded each Wednesday and Saturday evening, and the general style of the playing is that which is so highly pleasing to those who appreciate the graceful, appropriate and natural personification of the several characters represented."

Among the plays being given were "Paul Pry," "Slasher and Crasher," "All Is Not Gold That Glitters," "Still Water Runs Deep," etc.

I mention the above items to show that there was no feeling of fear among the inhabitants of Salt Lake City, in fact, on the contrary there was a feeling of relief, which gave vent to itself in the desire for amusements.

On Sunday, Jan. 17th, President Young took the stand in the old Tabernacle and gave the Saints a splendid sermon on the necessity "of this people being self-sustaining." The supplies from the East had been cut off. The stores could get no more goods until the Army would let them through. What could be done now? Brother Brigham had a ready answer:

"Brother Taylor has inquired how we are to be clothed another year? We have either to obtain new clothes, or wear these we have now. Some one may say, 'My clothes will not last another year.' Perhaps they will, if you will take good care of them.

"When we first came here the people were told, and many saw and believed it as much then as they can now, that the Lord in his providence led the people into these mountains, to separate them from the Gentile world, in order that He might establish His kingdom, His laws and commence His Zion in the mountains, where His people could have but little connection with the world. They were taught that when they first came here; and now the prospect is very fair for separating us from the rest of the world, and most of the people can see it.

"They were taught then as much as they are taught now, that it was necessary to go to and provide for ourselves. Do any of the brethren who came here ten years ago last July remember that you were instructed that every facility that we could need was here in the elements?—that the gold, the silver, and the iron were in these mountains—that the wool, the flax, the cotton, and everything necessary to sustain man were in the elements around us. Yes, in as great abundance as in any part of the earth; everything to make life desirable is here."

That is real leadership, I think. To convince a people, even though they were thirteen hundred miles from a railroad, and with all connections blocked by an army, that they could still get along, and survive and prosper; that they could still be self-sustaining when cut away from all other inhabitants of the world.

Continuing:

"Can you sustain yourselves? Yes. We have women who know how to manufacture flax into thread and the finest cloth in this house. Why do you not make linen? Because we can turn a calf on the range, and after a while sell it for twenty or thirty dollars and buy store goods. That course is temporal ruination to this people. It is a far greater injury than benefit for us to purchase imported goods. Shut down the gate and make your own hats, bonnets, and every other article of wearing apparel. We have the furs and every necessary facility for making every article we need. We can also make our dye stuffs, as soon as we can get a greater variety of seed. For ten years we have advised the brethren to bring indigo seed; and I have not obtained any, only a little that Brother William Willis brought from the East Indies. I have also wished them to bring madder seed, for you can raise it where you can raise corn. Do we know enough to raise indigo and cotton? Yes, when the gate is shut down.

"Can we feed and clothe ourselves? Yes, we can, as well as any people on the earth. We have a goodly share of the genius, talent, and ability of the world; it is combined in the elders of this Church and their families. And if the Gentiles wish to see a few tricks, we have Mormons that can perform them."

While Brother Brigham was continually busy preaching the Gospel, teaching self-reliance, and doing his utmost to build up the Kingdom, he was also directing operations to meet the army, should they attempt to advance in the spring. General Wells and Col. Burton and other officers of the Legion were traveling up and down the valleys taking enlistments, until by February 20th they could announce that a defense army of one thousand men, mounted and armed, was ready. And then there is this interesting item in the Journal History under date of February 9th: "President Young, Heber C. Kimball and Daniel H. Wells spent a part of the day in the Endowment House, giving endowments to the brethren who were going to the mountains."

Thursday, February 25th, there arrived, by the southern route from California, Brigham's great friend, Col. Thomas L. Kane, from Philadelphia. Of this remarkable man I cannot say too much in praise. Ever since the summer of 1846, when, as a young soldier, he had been nursed back to life through the kindly care of Mary Ann Angell Young, on the banks of the Missouri, at Council Bluffs, while the Saints rested there on their way from Nauvoo, he had exercised all his strength and ability, to do everything within his power, to uphold and sustain President Young and the Church. He had labored at Washington with the various administrations that Utah might be admitted into the union as a state. He had worked for appropriations for their public buildings. He had defended their reputation, refuted slander, and had extolled their virtues. During all the lifetime of President Young, I class Thomas L. Kane as his greatest friend, among the non-Mormons in the east. And now, hearing that the army had been ordered to Utah, to install a new governor, and fearing a clash with the Saints and possible bloodshed, he had, in weak health, left his home in Pennsylvania, and after going to Washington and conferring with President Buchanan, he pursued his way by boat to Panama, where he crosed over the Isthmus, then by boat up the California coast to San Pedro. At San Bernardino he joined a few Saints on their way to Salt Lake City, Elder Amasa Lyman being among the number, and now here he was, safely arrived, and ready to offer his services to President Young as a messenger of peace. The coming of this man was an answer to all of President Young's prayers. How many times had he stated during the past six months, "I pray that God will lead us and our enemies that there will be no blood shed."

Col. Kane went immediately into conference with President Young, his counselors, and a number of the leading brethren. Addressing them as follows: "President Young and gentlemen:—I come as an ambassador from the chief executive of our nation and am prepared and duly authorized to lay before you, most fully and definitely the feelings and views of the citizens of our common country, and of the executive towards you, relative to the present position of this Territory, and relative to the army of the United States now upon your borders. After giving you the most satisfactory evidence in relation to matters concerning you, now pending, I shall then call your attention, and wish to enlist your sympathies, in behalf of the poor soldiers who are now suffering in the cold and snow of the mountains. I shall request you to render them aid and comfort, and to assist them to come here, and to bid them a hearty welcome into your hospitable valley."

Following this there was a private interview with President Young, the purport of which is not known. Then the conference was resumed. I shall furnish the report as it was written down that day: "You have borne your part manfully," said Col. Kane, addressing the President and referring to the coming of the army: "I was pleased to see how patiently your people took it. You all look very well. You have built up quite an empire here in a short time."

"How was the President's message received?" asked President Young, referring to the message in which President Buchanan had denounced the Mormons and given his reasons for sending the army.

"The message was received as usual. In his appointments he has been cruelly impartial. So far he has made an excellent president. He has an able cabinet. They are more united and work together better than some of our former cabinets have done."

"I suppose," said President Young, "they are united in putting down Utah."

"I think not," replied Colonel Kane, and continuing, "I wish you knew how much I feel at home here. I hope I shall have the privilege of breaking bread with these, my friends."

"I want to take good care of you," replied Brother Brigham. "I want to tell you one thing, and that is, the men you see here do not look old. The reason is they are doing right, and are in the service of God. You can endure more now than you could ten years ago. If you had done as some men have done, you would have been in your grave before now."

"I fear that I can endure more than I could ten years ago," answered the Colonel. "The present life doesn't pay, and I feel like going away as soon as it is the will of God to take me."

"I know, to take this life as it is, and as men make it," said Brigham, "it does not appear worth living, but I can tell you, that when you see things as they are, you will find that life is worth preserving, and blessings will follow our living in this life, if we do right. If God should say, I will let you live in this world without any pain or sorrow, we might feel that life was worth living. But this is not in his economy. We have to partake of sorrow, affliction and death; and if we pass through this affliction patiently, and do right, we shall have a greater reward in the world to come. I have been robbed several times of my all in this life, and my property has gone into the hands of my enemies, but as to property, I care no more about it than about the dirt in the streets, only to use it as God wishes. But I think a great deal of a friend—a true friend. An honest man is truly the noblest work of God. It is not in the power of the United States to destroy this people, for they are in the hands of God. If we do right, he will preserve us.

"The Lord does many things which we would count as small things,' Brother Kimball said in Nauvoo, 'If we have to leave our houses we will go to the mountains, and in a few years we will have a better city than we have here.' This is fulfilled. He also said, 'We shall have gold, and coin twenty dollar gold pieces.' We came here, founded a city, coined the first twenty dollar gold pieces in the United States. Seeing the brethren poorly clad, soon after we came here, he said, "It will not be three years before we can buy clothing cheaper in Salt Lake valley than in the states.' Before the time was out, the gold diggers brought loads of clothing, and sold them in our city at a wanton price.

"Friend Thomas," concluded President Young, "the Lord sent you here, and he will not let you die—so you cannot die till your work is done. I want to have your name live to all eternity. You have done a great work, and you will do a greater work still."

II

Colonel Kane remained in Salt Lake City from February 25th to March 8th, when he departed for the camp of the soldiers at Fort Bridger. During this time it seems that he must have discussed with President Young quite fully the terms of peace between the Saints and the government, but at no place in the old histories or records do I find the facts set out. There is one reference in President's Young's history under date of August 15th, 1858, some months after the time about which I am now writing, that bears upon the point in question. It seems that on this day several of the brethren were conversing in the President's office about the stirring events which had just passed, when President Young said as follows:

"When Colonel Kane came to visit us, he tried to point out a policy for me to pursue. But I told him I should not turn to the right nor the left, ONLY AS GOD DICTATED. I should do nothing but what was right. When he found that I would not be informed, only as the Spirit of the Lord led me, he felt discouraged, and said he would not go to the army. But finally he said, if I would dictate he would execute. I told him that as he had been inspired to come here, he would go to the army and do as the Spirit of the Lord led him, and all would be right. He did so—and all was right. He thought it very strange that we were not afraid of the army. I told him we were not afraid of all the world; if they made war upon us, the Lord would deliver us out of their hands, if we did right. God controls in all these matters."

It was in this spirit that Colonel Kane went to the army. The first part of the journey was undertaken with an escort of the brethren; but the last twelve miles the Colonel traveled on horseback, alone, arriving on the evening of the 12th, "completely exhausted by fatigue and cold." The following morning he presented himself at the tent of Governor Cumming, "was received as his guest, and remained in conference with him throughout the day."

After remaining three weeks at the soldiers' camp, during which time he had numerous conferences with Col. Johnston and Governor Cumming, he so far persuaded the Governor to his views, that the Governor agreed to accompany him to Salt Lake City, and Colonel Kane assured him that the Saints and President Young would accept him in his official capacity. On the 5th of April the two set out on their journey. At the head of Echo canyon they were met by a guard of the brethren, who conveyed them safely through to the city. It is related in the Journal History, that "At the mouth of Weber canyon, the Farmington guards, mounted and in uniform met him. On reaching the court house in Farmington, the band played the Star Spangled Banner. Sunday evening he stopped at Judson Stodard's at Farmington. Monday morning he was visited by the Farmington band in carriages; they played Hail Columbia, Yankee Doodle, the Star Spangled Banner and other popular airs. Cumming made a speech, remarking that he was astonished at such attachment for national airs."

What sight met the eyes of Governor Cumming as he approached the capital city? "The road was thronged with people," writes B. H. Roberts, "moving southward, their wagons loaded with provisions and household effects, while loose cattle, horses, sheep, even pigs were driven in droves before them. They were leaving their homes at the call of their Prophet upon another hegira—this time not only into a wilderness, but into a desert. But they were moving confidently, even cheerfully, leaving men in charge of their deserted homes with orders to lay them waste by applying the torch to everything that would burn, and the ax to every shrub and tree that had been planted, in order to leave the settled valleys of Utah, a blackened, treeless waste, giving them back to desolation—a protest against the injustice of forcing upon an American community officers whom they had no voice in selecting; and from their viewpoint dragooned upon them by a military power." It must have occurred to Governor Cumming that if this condition continued, he would soon be governor of a Territory without inhabitants.

For some time President Young had been evolving in his mind the great move southward, in which he proposed to abandon the Territory, and destroy all improvements that he and his faithful followers had wrested from the desert, should the soldiers come in upon them. As early as January 6th he wrote President W. I. Appleby, in the Eastern Mission:

"We have an abundant supply of grain and cattle, and if necessity compel us to flee to the mountains, bread and beef will appease our hunger. Every preparation is being made to preserve ourselves in case the administration does not relent. We feel, however, perfectly assured, if this contest in opinion should come to be a passage at arms, that James Buchanan and his co-adjutors will want to let out the job of our extermination before they are half through with it. We can but lose our improvements, and, twere better to lose the little that we have of this world's goods, than our liberty in this life, and our hope of salvation in the world to come. Rather than see my wives and daughters ravished and polluted, and the seeds of corruption sown in the hearts of my sons by a brutal soldiery, I would leave my home in ashes, my gardens and orchards a waste, and subsist upon roots and herbs, a wanderer through these mountains for the remainder of my natural life."

Reader, the statements in the above letter reveal the character of the man who led the Latter-day Saints to these valleys, the man who founded this commonwealth. Whatever was noble, right or just he would insist upon; whatever was evil, degrading, ignoble, he would resist, or become "a wanderer through these mountains for the remainder of my natural life." Such character is the foundation upon which this Church exists today—a foundation laid in part by this great man.

About the middle of March, during the time that Col. Kane was visiting at the soldiers' camp (March 18th, to be exact) there was held in the Historian's office at Salt Lake City, a meeting of the First Presidency, the Twelve, and thirty of the leading military officers of the Territory. It was determined here that armed conflict would be no longer the best course for the Saints to pursue. The recorder of the minutes of the meeting states that "President Young's plan was to go into the desert, and not war with the people of the United States, but let them destroy themselves." The following Sunday, the President spoke in the old Tabernacle "and presented the policy which he intended to pursue, which was to remove the grain and the women and children from the city, and then, if need be, burn it and lay the country waste." It was not long before five hundred families were under way, and it was these people, no doubt, that Governor Cumming encountered when on his journey from Farmington to Salt Lake City. On April 1st, President Young joined the caravan, and moved south into Utah county. At Lake City, where he stopped the first night, he spoke before a public gathering and "compared himself to a man who had a family of fifty blind persons to lead over rough, bad roads, bridged, but planks out of the bridges, and had to cross on the string pieces."

It was at this critical juncture, when, without determining the exact location where the Saints would again seek an abiding place, that Brigham received word from Col. Kane that he was coming to the city with the new Governor, and asking the President and the people to receive him as their presiding officer. This was indeed a new turn of affairs, but President Young regarded it in the light of his instructions to Col. Kane when he went to the army, "Go and do as the Spirit of the Lord leads you, and all will be right." Therefore he and the brethren returned and made preparations to accept and welcome the new governor, which they did on the day after his arrival, April 13th, at the home of W. C. Staines in Salt Lake City.

George A. Smith has left us an excellent pen picture of this Governor Cumming. On first sight, he states, he "thought Cumming was a toper, but examining him closely with glasses, he concluded he was a moderate drinker and a hearty eater, his probable weight being about two hundred and forty pounds. He was well dressed, in black, had a ruddy face and grey hair. His head was small around the top."

It would be interesting to know what Brother Brigham's impressions were of this corpulent, good natured Georgian, as he shook hands with him and looked into his eyes. Brigham was so quick to correctly size up a man's capabilities and weakneses. But this information is not available.

At the first meeting of Cumming and President Young the conversation was guarded, but in no-wise unpleasant. The President invited the new governor to take a ride with him around the city, and view the homes and improvements, to which Cumming replied that he would be glad to do so in a day or two when he was rested. Thereupon Brother Brigham could not pass up the opportunity of remarking that had the governor come into the valley "last fall" he could have been made more comfortable, to which Cumming made a quick retort that he had "a crow to pick with Governor Young in relation to that."

The following day, April 15th, there was a long serious conversation between the governor and the ex-governor, Colonel Kane being the only other party present. President Young complained that the soldiers had consistently attempted to incite the Indians against the Saints. "For some time," he said, "the people of Utah have lived in peace with the natives but now they come to their homes and draw their bows upon the women and say that the 'Mormons' are squaws and will not fight; but that the soldiers will fight and kill all the 'Mormons.'" President Young also related to George A. Smith after this interview that the governor "came pretty near commanding me to forbid the people leaving their homes." But the interview was terminated with a friendly feeling between the two men. In fact it seems that President Young was entirely for peace if peace could be obtained, for under date of April 16th he addressed a letter to Governor Cumming again making a tender of supplies to the army should they be in need.

"Salt Lake City,

April 16th, 1858.

"His Excellency,

Governor A. Cumming.

"Sir: Learning that you propose sending an express to Colonel Johnston's camp, I avail myself of the opportunity of proffering, through your excellency, to Colonel Johnston and the army under his command, inasmuch as they are supposed to be measurably destitute, such supplies of provisions as we have, and they may need, prior to the arrival of such supplies from the east.

"Trusting that you will appreciate the sincerity of the motives prompting this courtesy, I have the honor to be,

"Very respectfully, "BRIGHAM YOUNG."

This offer was conveyed to Colonel Johnston, but no reply was received from the frigid colonel. Governor Cumming, however, took a more friendly course with the Saints and reported favorably concerning his reception in Salt Lake City to Colonel Johnston. In a communication on April 15th he said:

"I have been everywhere recognized as the Governor of Utah, and so far from having encountered insults and indignities, I am gratified in being able to state to you that in passing through the settlements, I have been universally greeted with such respectful attentions as are due to the representative of the executive authority of the United States in the Territory."

One of the falsehoods of Judge Drummond and one of the causes of President Buchanan's sending the army to Utah, namely, the report that the supreme court records had been burned by order of Governor Young, was soon to be rectified by the friendly Governor Cumming. In his report to Secretary of State Cass, at Washington, under date of May 2nd, he relates:

"Since my arrival I have been employed in examining the records of the supreme and district courts which I am now prepared to report upon as being perfect and unimpaired. This will doubtless be acceptable information to those who have entertained an impression to the contrary. I have also examined the legislative records and other books belonging to the office of the secretary of state which are in perfect preservation."

III

On Sunday, April 25th, two weeks after his arrival in the valley, Governor Cumming was invited to attend the services in the old Tabernacle, and was there introduced to the audience by President Young as his successor in the governorship.

Cumming spoke at some length and endeavored to minimize the coming of the army. And withal he was conciliatory and friendly in his attitude towards the Saints. He stated that "he had been appointed by the President of the United States, with the consent of the Senate, to be the Governor of this Territory. It was true that there was a large body of armed men on the frontier, but they were sent not to destroy the Mormons, but to protect them from the lawless savage." (Of course everybody present knew that was not true). Continuing, he stated "that he was sent to enforce the law, and said he would in all future moves consult with the gentlemen who had enjoyed our confidence. He and the officers had nothing to do with our social and religious views; we had the right to serve God in any way we pleased. He did not expect his would be a path of roses, but expected opposition by some misguided men. Requested the brethren if they saw him go a little astray, not to treat him harshly, but to counsel with him as a friend."

To all of which President Young responded also in a conciliatory manner. According to the secretary who recorded the minutes, Brother Brigham "spoke of the present move of the Saints, and said God would over-rule it for good, and it would redound to His honor and glory. He referred to the treatment we have received in Missouri and Illinois while the officers asserted that they were maintaining the supremacy of the law. Exhorted the brethren to be patient and let the Lord work. Said he did not think we were prepared to meet the blow (of the army) and therefore he thought the Lord would avert it for a time. Urged the Saints to purify themselves. Spoke of the course now being pursued by the administration towards us. Said Governor Cumming could do us good by reporting favorably. Told those who wanted to go away, to go in peace."

From all the above it is apparent that President Young was willing and ready to accept Cumming as his successor in the governorship, and make the best of him. But he was in nowise yet willing or ready to have the army thrust in upon the Saints of Salt Lake valley. In his judgment there was not a reason for it; on the contrary it would bring evil, crime, and perhaps open warfare and bloodshed. But he had decided that the Saints "were not prepared to meet the blow" and therefore his alternative was to lay the territory waste and go into the desert.

With this end in view, since early in April, when he had ordered the evacuation of all the northern settlements, a steady stream of people were journeying south and making headquarters at Provo, and around Utah lake. On "the block east of the meeting house" at Provo, Brigham began the erection of some lumber "shanties" for his own family, and by the 30th of April, the Lion House and the Bee Hive House were empty, and his family and "belongings" were moved to these temporary quarters. Thus for the sixth time in his life, Brother Brigham had had to leave his own home "for armed mobs."

Governor Cumming rather excitedly followed the Saints into Utah county and begged them to return. "He inquired of President Young if there was not some way to stop the people moving. President Young replied that if the troops were withdrawn from the territory the people would stop moving; but that ninety-nine out of every one hundred of this people would rather live out their lives in the mountains than endure the oppression that the federal government was now heaping upon them."

It was at this juncture that Col. Kane received word that his father had died in Philadelphia during his absence, and "as he considered that his mission had been filled, he desired to hurry east." Yes, his mission had been filled; through his efforts the way to peace had been opened. Before leaving the city Col. Kane assured President Young that he approved of the course he and the Saints had taken, saying, "You have taken the right course, and I want you to keep it; I would not have had you take any other course for anything."

On May 13th, Col. Kane set out for the east, accompanied by Governor Cumming, who was going to the camp of the soldiers to get his family. President Young had furnished the colonel an efficient body guard, headed by Maj. Howard Egan, to accompany him across the plains. To Maj. Egan he gave a letter which was directed to all the elders he might encounter on the plains who were returning from their missions.

This letter is so characteristic of Brother Brigham that I desire to reproduce it here in full:

"G. S. L. City,

May 8th, 1856.

"To the brethren supposed to be on the road to this city from their missions:

"Dear Brethren: We improve the present opportunity of writing by the escort sent with Colonel Kane to communicate with you. We have to say that, so far as we are acquainted, your families are all well, and we trust that you will be able to elude the grasp of our enemies who lie in your path, and come to us in peace and safety.

"We advise you to take the 'Sublette cut-off' to Bear River, and then travel up that river until you come to the trail leading to the head of Echo, unless you get information of the movement of the U.S. army subsequent to this date; in which case you will have to act according to the existing circumstances; but dodge them, if possible, and take every precaution not to fall into their hands.

"As you approach Green River you must watch out for Indians as well as mountaineers, and especially the latter. The Indians from the north have been committing depredations and are at present on Bear River and will probably be straggling along towards Bear Lake; the Green River Indians, and all the Indians, more or less, are also excited and liable to be influenced to deeds of blood and plunder. The mountaineers, however, are more to be feared than the Indians; concerning them you will get more information from Brother Howard, but you must never for a moment relax your watchfulness over yourselves and animals.

"We intend to provide you, if possible, with passports from Governor Cumming, who at present is with us and really seems disposed to take hold of the thread of justice and is endeavoring to set us right before the government and the people generally. He has officially contradicted the burning of the records, library, etc. If, unfortunately, you should fall into the hands of the army, you may find them of use to you. Our faith is that you will come safely through; that the Lord will guide you aright. Be of good cheer and be humble and prayerful, and watch as well as pray. Be vigilant, and, as you approach the vicinity of the troops, keep your scouts well in advance, that you do not go blindly into the enemy's camp, or fall into the hands of their scouting or patrolling parties.

"The news you will learn by the bearers of this letter. Suffice it to say that all is well with us. The Lord is at the helm of the old ship 'Zion,' and she sails well.

"May God bless and preserve you, and bring you all safely and speedily into our midst, is the daily prayer of your brother in the Gospel of Christ,

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

"Be of good cheer; all is well with us." With a hostile and menacing army on the border of the Territory; with their homes vacated, and themselves forced to seek temporary quarters in 'shanties' on the vacant blocks of Provo, Brother Brigham could write a letter like that! His heart and his hand reached out to every member of the flock of God. And with that calm consciousness that the Good Ship Zion yet sails well, and that "the Lord is at the helm," he inspired confidence in all.

Meantime, in the east, many things had been happening, which were all quite unknown to Brother Brigham. Newspapers were beginning to ask what had become of the army sent to Utah; indeed why had it been sent there at all? As early as November 12th, 1857, a correspondent had written in the New York Herald:

"Justice to the gallant men who have been ordered on this needlessly desperate service, requires that the plain unvarnished facts should go out to the country; so that, in the event of a disgraceful catastrophe, (which from all appearances does not seem probable) the public may know with whom to settle the account."

And again there is this on December 23rd, 1857, from the New York Times:

"It would puzzle ordinary men, we suspect, to explain why a hostile army was sent against Utah at the outset. There were undoubted disorders in the affairs of the territory; but it has never yet been shown that they were such as could only be remedied by fire and sword. . . The whole Utah business has been mismanaged in the most extraordinary manner from the beginning; and if it does not end in open and bloody rebellion, it is not likely to be saved from that issue by any special wisdom on the part of the general government."

Horace Greeley took up the question of the Utah army in the New York Tribune of January 14, 1858:

"The government at Washington, by its shameful mismanagement of this whole expedition, has placed Colonel Johnston and his whole army in a dangerous position. What does that government intend to do by way of getting them out?"

Thus bitter criticism began to be levied at President James Buchanan, and the administration, which he was soon forced to take cognizance of. Early in February he had several long conversations with Dr. Bernhisel, the Utah representative, in which the latter proposed that the army should be withdrawn from Utah, and that a commission should be sent to the territory to arange for a peaceful settlement of the difficulties. President Buchanan was not converted to the withdrawal of the army, but he did respond to the suggestion of a peace commission (which, by the way President Young had contended for from the very beginning) and on the sixth of April he appointed Senator L. W. Powell of Kentucky, and Major Ben McCulloch of Texas, as commissioners, to proceed to Utah, and bring about a peaceful settlement of hostilities. With them he sent a "Proclamation of Pardon" which was to the effect that all Latter-day Saints who "would submit themselves to the authority of the federal government" should have "a free and full pardon."

It is amusing to me to record that these peace commissioners set out for Utah from Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, on the 25th of April, 1858, "in five ambulances drawn by four mules each." It was figured that these ambulances would serve as sleeping quarters, and would do away with the necessity of tents. In one month and four days the peace commissioners, the ambulances, a sergeant, five dragoons, a wagon master, five teamsters and a guide," bag and baggage, arrived at the camp of the soldiers at Fort Bridger.
