Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER THIRTY

PRESIDENT BRIGHAM YOUNG was at Provo when he received word about the arrival of the Peace Commissioners. It reached him there on June 1st (his 57th birthday) through Nelson Empey, who had obtained the information from parties who had been at the camp of the soldiers. The information was meagre, but Brigham was no doubt pleased that the President had decided to make some efforts towards peace.

On Sunday, June 6th, George D. Grant rode into Provo, bearing with him a copy of President Buchanan's "Proclamation to the People of Utah." Brother Brigham and the brethren must have read this "proclamation" with great interest, for it contains forty-two separate charges against them, "all of which," said George A. Smith, "are false." I have read this document with great interest, and for the benefit of the reader, and in order that he may see what President Young had to face in this chastisement by the President of the United States, I desire to reproduce part of it as follows: After reciting the charges, President Buchanan continues:

"Fellow citizens of Utah, this is rebellion against the government to which you owe allegiance. It is levying war against the United States and involves you in the guilt of treason. Persistence in it will bring you to condign punishment, to ruin and to shame; for it is mere madness to suppose that, with your limited resource, you can successfully resist the force of this great and powerful nation.

"If you have calculated upon the forbearance of the United States—if you have permitted yourselves to suppose that this government will fail to put forth its strength and bring you to submission—you have fallen into a grave mistake. You have settled upon territory which lies geographically in the heart of the union. The land you live upon was purchased by the United States and paid for out of the treasury. The proprietary right and title to it is in them, and not in you. Utah is bounded on every side by states and territories whose people are true to the union. It is absurd to believe that they can, or will, permit you to erect in their very midst, a government of your own, not only independent of the authority which they all acknowledge, but hostile to them and their interests.

"Do not deceive yourselves, nor try to mislead others by propagating the idea that this is a crusade against your religion. The Constitution and laws of this country can take no notice of your creed, whether it be true or false. That is a question between your God and yourselves, in which I disclaim all right to interfere. If you obey the laws, keep the peace and respect the just rights of others, you will be perfectly secure, and may live on in your present faith, or change it for another, at your pleasure. Every intelligent man among you knows very well that this government has never directly or indirectly, sought to molest you in your worship, to control you in your ecclesiastical affairs, or even to influence you in your religious opinions.

"This rebellion is not merely a violation of your legal duty; it is without reason, without excuse. You never made a complaint that was not listened to with patience. You never exhibited a real grievance that was not redressed as promptly as could be. The laws and regulations enacted for your government by Congress have been equal and just, and their enforcement was manifestly necessary for your own welfare and happiness. You have never asked their repeal. They are similar in every respect to the laws which have been passed for other territories of the union which everywhere else (with one partial exception) have been cheerfully obeyed.

"No people ever lived who were freer from unnecessary legal restraints than you. Human wisdom never devised a political system which bestowed more blessings or imposed lighter burdens than the government of the United States in its operation of the Territories.

"And being anxious to save the effusion of blood, and to avoid the indiscriminate punishment of a whole people, for crimes of which it is not probable that all are equally guilty, I offer now a full and free pardon to all who will submit themselves to the authority of the Federal Government. If you refuse to accept it, let the consequences fall upon your own heads. But I conjure you to pause deliberately and reflect well, before you reject this tender of peace and good will.

"Now, therefore, I, James Buchanan, President of the United States, have thought proper to issue this, my proclamation, enjoining upon all public officers in the Territory of Utah, to be diligent and faithful, to the full extent of their power, in the execution of their laws; commanding all citizens of the United States in said Territory, to aid and assist the officers in the performance of their duties; offering to the inhabitants of Utah, who shall submit to the laws, a free pardon for the seditions and treason heretofore by them committed; warning those who shall persist, after notice of this proclamation in the present rebellion against the United States, that they must expect no further lenity, but look to be rigorously dealt with according to their deserts; and declaring that the military forces now in Utah, and hereafter to be sent there, will not be withdrawn until the inhabitants of that Territory shall manifest a proper sense of duty which they owe to the Government.

"In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed to these presents. Done at the city of Washington, the sixth day of April, one thousand eight hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the United States, the eighty-second."

"JAMES BUCHANAN."

There are high sounding phrases in this document. It teems with loyalty to the government, loyalty to the Constitution, warnings against rebellion, etc., and yet, within four years time, this very man, James Buchanan, was himself accused of being disloyal, a southern sympathizer, in this country's greatest rebellion.

Col. Johnston, too, out there with the troops, scorning Brother Brigham and his brethren as "rebels," was soon to be shot to death at the battle of Shiloh, fighting against the Union which the Latter-day Saints remained true and loyal to. And poor old Governor Cumming, the last glimpse we get of him before he sinks into oblivion, is when he is released from a Northern Prison camp, where he had been incarcerated during the Civil war. How time alters events and conditions. But I am running far ahead of my story.

On Thursday, June 10th, President Young, his counselors, and members of the Twelve who were with him, left Provo and proceeded to Salt Lake City for the purpose of meeting with the peace commissioners. Going into the Globe Bakery, or restaurant, for supper, their own homes being vacant, they encountered Powell and McCulloch, and were introduced to them by Governor Cumming. A meeting was set for the following morning, at 9 a. m., in the Council House.

The old Council House, the first public building in Utah, stood at the corner of Main and South Temple streets, on the site of the present Deseret News building. Fearing the invasion of the army, President Young had had all the windows of the building removed and "cached" and boards nailed over the openings. Now it was necessary to remove the boards and again install the windows. The meeting convened at 9 a. m. as arranged. President Young requested the peace commissioners, Powell and McCulloch, together with Governor Cumming, to occupy the stand, while he and his brethren were seated on the floor facing them.

President Young opened the meeting by introducing the Commissioners to the assembly. He was followed by Commissioner Powell who stated that "the purpose of their mission was to use their best exertions in effecting an amicable adjustment of the unfortunate difficulties existing between the general government and Utah."

"What do you want of us?" inquired President Young.

"We only want you," answered Commissioner Powell, "to let the government send in the troops, and that you submit to the laws. Let the army come in, go through and locate lands, protect the inhabitants."

Erastus Snow and Gilbert Clements then reviewed the President's proclamation, and were sharp in their criticism of Buchanan, whereupon President Young remarked, referring to the commissioners, that "these gentlemen were friends of President Buchanan, and believe him to be sincere, and he did not wish them (the brethren) to do or say anything that would not present him in as favorable a light as possible."

President Young then said to Powell, remembering his former experiences in Missouri and Illinois, "We want some security for our safety." To which Powell replied, "We have no more security for you than what is contained in the proclamation."

It is related that in the evening President Young had a private interview with Powell and then McCulloch, and then with both together. What went on in these conversations, we do not know.

The second day of the conference opened with two lengthy, splendid talks by John Taylor and George A. Smith. Both set out the position of the Saints clearly, that the charges made by President Buchanan were false, that the Saints had always been loyal to the government and the Constitution, the latter document they believed to be inspired.

All of the speakers accepted President Buchanan's pardon and amnesty, though they stated they did not know what crimes they were guilty of. In closing, President Young voiced his opinion forcibly and clearly.

"I have listened very attentively to the commissioners," he said, "and will say, as far as I am concerned, I thank President Buchanan for forgiving me, but I really cannot tell what I have done. I know one thing, and that is that the people called Mormons are a loyal and law abiding people, and have ever been. Neither President Buchanan nor anyone else can contradict that statement. It is true that Lot Smith burned some wagons containing government supplies for the army. This was an overt act, and if it is for this that we are to be pardoned, I accept the pardon. The burning of a few U. S. wagons is but a small item, yet for this, combined with false reports, the whole Mormon people are to be destroyed.

"What has the United States government permitted mobs to do to us? Gentlemen, you cannot answer that question. I can, however, and so can thousands of my brethren. We have been whipped and plundered, our houses burned, our fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters and children butchered and murdered by the scores. We have been driven from our homes time and time again; but have troops ever been sent to stay or punish those mobs for their crimes? No! Have we ever received a dollar for the property we have been compelled to leave behind? Not a dollar! Let the government treat us as we deserve; this is all we ask of them. We have always been loyal and expect so to continue; but, hands off! Do not send your armed mobs into our midst. If you do we will fight you as the Lord lives. Do not threaten us with what the the United States can do, for we ask no odds of them or their troops. We have the God of Israel—the God of battles—on our side; and let me tell you gentlemen, we fear not your armies. . . ."

"Now let me say to you peace commissioners, we are willing those troops should come into our country, but not to stay in our city. They may pass through if it needs be, but must not quarter less than forty miles from us. If you bring your troops here to disturb this people, you have got a bigger job than you or President Buchanan have any idea of. Before the troops reach here this city will be in ashes, every tree and shrub will be cut to the ground, and every blade of grass that will burn shall be burned. Our wives and children will go to the canyons and take shelter in the mountains; while their husbands and sons will fight you, and as God lives, we will hunt you by night and by day until your armies are wasted away. No mob can live in the homes we have built in the mountains. That's the program, gentlemen, whether you like it or not. If you want war you can have it; but if you wish peace, peace it is; we shall be glad of it."

The Commissioners declared for peace; it was decided that the army should be allowed to enter the valley, but that they should not form a permanent camp within forty miles from the city.

II

The day after the close of the Peace Conference, President Young and the brethren who had accompanied him returned to their temporary homes in Provo to await developments.

President Young had determined that the Saints should not return to their farms and homes until it had been demonstrated what the army would do. He took nothing for granted. When Col. Johnston proved that he would not molest the Saints, then and then only would Brigham relax his vigilance.

He had not long to wait, for on the morning of June 26th, the soldiers began to emerge from the mouth of Emigration canyon. "As early as eight o'clock," writes a correspondent, "on the morning of the 26th ult., the army began to move through the city.

"Entering from Emigration canyon at the east, the troops passed north to South Temple street, marched by Brigham's house with banners flying and drums beating, thence past Temple Block Square to the bridge across Jordan. A band of sappers and miners were in the van to strengthen the bridge before the army could pass. The order of march has already been given. The 'Mormons' were greatly surprised at the vast number of wagons. There was a body of troops and an immense line of wagons which were driven through the city at full trot. The day was intensely hot, man and beast sweating copiously.

"Dense clouds of dust were raised by the advance of the wagons, the men perspiring with labor and the heat, and enveloped by the dust, their faces covered by the sweat, were recoated with dust till they looked black as the earth upon which they trod. The 'Mormons' greatly admired the military bands, particularly the excellent one pertaining to the tenth infantry. Not a man left the ranks in passing through the city, not a stick or stone belonging to Zion was touched; the army passed through it as hastily as possible and then shook the dust off their feet by leaping into the Jordan for a bath, which every man of them needed. It was night before the last of the army and its appurtenances got through the city. All encamped beyond Jordan."

President Joseph F. Smith once told me that he was in the Bee Hive House on this day when the army marched through. The rooms were filled with straw and he had orders from President Young to fire the building should any members of the army attempt to occupy it. In fact, men were stationed everywhere throughout the city, for the purpose of laying it completely waste, if Col. Johnston tried to effect his quarters here. It was with a sigh of relief, therefore, that the brethren watched them march across the Jordan and make their first night's camp. Col. Johnston was as good as his word.

It may be interesting to note here that the army which marched through the city this day comprised three thousand men, six hundred wagons, and an estimate of six thousand cattle, horses and mules.

As soon as the army had marched through a messenger was dispatched to Provo to inform President Young that no harm had been done to the city; that the troops were beyond the Jordan.

The following day was Sunday, and Brother Brigham addressed a large group of Saints assembled in the Bowery at Provo. There is no manifestation of fear or concern in any part of his sermon. He is the same firm, determined man; the same wise counselor; the same great spiritual leader directing the Church and the Saints of God. He does not mention the army in the beginning of this address, but launches at once into a doctrinal subject.

"The people called 'Mormons' by the world have a peculiarity about them that is understood by very few. In a great degree it is not comprehended, even by the Church, and yet they acknowledge it. The nature of that peculiarity is simply this: The Gospel of salvation, the priesthood of the Son of God, is so ordered and organized, in the very nature of it, being a portion of that law of heaven by which the worlds are organized, that it is calculated to enlighten the children of men, and give them power to save themselves. It is of the same nature as the further principles of eternal existence, by which the worlds are and were, and by which they will endure; and these principles are pure in their nature, from the fact that they are of God, who is pure; BUT, WITHOUT THE REVELATION OF THE SPIRIT OF GOD, NO MAN CAN UNDERSTAND THEM. That is the peculiarity there is about this mysterious work.

"To me it is evident that many who understand the truth do not govern themselves by it; consequently no matter how true and beautiful truth is, you have to take the passions of the people, and mould them to the law of God, and nothing less will accomplish that union and salvation which we are striving for.

"Do you think the people will obey the truth because it is true, unless they love it. No, they will not. Truth is obeyed when it is loved. Strict obedience to the truth will alone enable people to dwell in the presence of the Almighty.

"I strive to live to do good on this earth, and I have all the time asked my Father in heaven, in the name of Jesus, to let me depart when I cease to do good. I want to live to oppose wicked men and devils, until the last one of them is righteously disposed of, though at times it is pretty hard work to get faith enough to desire to live to stem such floods of ignorance and sin."

And now, regarding the army:

"What is the present situation of affairs? For us the clouds seem to be breaking. Probably many of you have already learned that General Johnston passed through Salt Lake City with his command under the strictest discipline. Not a house, fence or sidewalk has been infringed upon by any of his command. Of course, the camp followers are not under his control, but so far as his command is concerned, while passing through the city, he has carried out his promises to the letter.

"So soon as General Johnston finds a place to locate his command—when we get news what he is going to do with his troops—we will go home. Women, do not induce your husbands to go home just yet, but wait until the proper time. . . . If any of the sisters say they have not a house to live in, they can go a short distance from their wagon, and get bushes to make a comfortable shade."

Three days later, about 6 p. m. of June 30th, Brother Brigham, his counselors, and several members of the Twelve, departed from Provo for their homes in the city, where "they arrived at 3 a. m. on the morning of July 1st. A note in The Deseret News reporting the event, states further: "All who now wish to return to their homes are at liberty to do so."

In a few days the roads were blocked with hundreds of wagons wending their way northward from their temporary exile, and in a few weeks Salt Lake City and the villages which had been abandoned, again resumed their customary ways of life. The "Utah War" was over.

Brother Brigham, now back in the Bee Hive House, made up his mind to two policies: First, that it would be the better part of wisdom for the Saints to remain silent for the immediate future and that no public meetings of any kind should be held. He did not know what remarks might be made that would cause trouble to break out between the army and the Saints. Second, he very definitely determined that he would protect himself against unjust arrest, against assassins, against anyone bent on doing him bodily harm.

He knew that now he would be the target for abuse and slander, and that possibly attempts would be made to carry him off to the camp of the soldiers. Remembering the Prophet Joseph's experience at Carthage, he made up his mind that he would not allow himself to be taken under similar circumstances, where he would be left at the mercy of the rabble. The day of his return home I find this item in the Journal History: "President Young had all his gates closed, locked and bolted, and had a guard at his door at the east entrance, where people were admitted."

For about three weeks I can find no record that the President at any time left his house. He did labor diligently at his office, however, and answered many letters, and held many council meetings with his brethren. There is one letter, written during this month of July, which reveals the familiar and human side of Brother Brigham in interesting detail. One of his early friends from western New York had written for some facts pertaining to his life, and he replied at this time as follows:

"Great Salt Lake City,

July 23rd, 1858.

"To————————:

"I received your letter dated Canandaigua, May 5th, 1858. I will give you a short sketch of my history. I was born at Whittingham, Windham County, Vermont, June 1st, 1801. My father and family removed to Smyrna, Chenango County, New York, when I was about eighteen months old. We lived in the place until 1813.

"Shortly after the commencement of the late war with Great Britain my father and family removed to the town of Genoa, Cayuga County, New York, in which county I lived until 1829, when I moved to Mendon, Monroe County, and in 1830 removed from thence to No. 9, Canandaigua, into a small house owned by Jonathan Mack, situated on the west side of the road opposite to where Mr. Mack then lived. I helped to finish his new house, so that he moved into it before I left the place. I left Canandaigua in 1832 and returned to Mendon. April 14th, the same year I was baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I did not live in any other house during my residence in Canandaigua than the one before mentioned. I never saw Sena Coff to my knowledge. I never held meetings in partnership with any person, nor ever preached or pretended to while I lived in the town of Canandaigua, nor ever spoke in meeting, except once in a prayer meeting in the house I lived in, when probably I occupied from two to five minutes. There is a possibility of my having spoken in prayer meeting at other times, but I have no recollection of it. . . .

"After I had joined the Church I became somewhat accustomed to public speaking. Once in passing through No. 9, I stopped and preached at the school house north of Mr. Mack's. I have thus far marked out my path with some particularity. Since then, the events of my life are before the world. I will, however, state, that after my return to Mendon, I removed to Kirtland, Ohio; from thence to Far West, Missouri; from thence to Nauvoo, Illinois; and from thence to the mountains.

"There are five brothers of us in the following order: John, Joseph, Phineas H., myself and Lorenzo D. The two former never lived at No. 9. Phineas H. and Lorenzo did live there, but removed long before I came. The five of us, with my two living sisters (I have three dead) are here; and although some of them are past three score and ten years of age, yet, by living in a judicious manner, through the blessings of the Lord, we have good health and are surrounded by an abundance of the comforts of life.

"Through the faith and prayers of the Saints, and the visible dealing of the Almighty, we are blessed with peace, and again delivered from the grasp of our enemies who have sought all the day long to trample in the dust, and extinguish that sacred light which God through his revelations to Joseph the Prophet, has implanted in our breasts.

"My heart yearns towards my friends of bygone years; and blessed indeed will be the day when they receive the light of the New and Everlasting Covenant; when I can join hands with them and feel that my God is their God, and that where I worship, there also will they offer up devotion to the throne of grace.

"The war is ended. The troops have partly withdrawn, and we have returned to our comfortable homes. Our trees are loaded with fruit. We have the best country in the world for vegetables. Our crops are most abundant. Wheat is our staple grain. At many times we have harvested three crops from one sowing, by what we call voluntary wheat springing up the second and third season. Although I have been in this valley only eleven years, I have had peaches seven years, and this year will have an abundance of apples for family use. We've apricots, almond trees, plums, cherries, and the finest grapes I have seen; they grow in bunches, weighing from eight ounces to two pounds. I have a fine family of boys and girls, a part of whom are married. I have fifteen living, and two dead, grandchildren.

"Present my warmest regards to your father and his family. I really desire you to let me know where they are living, and how they are situated.

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

III

In August President Young broke his self-imposed detention long enough to make a short pleasure trip into Big Cottonwood canyon.

In The Deseret News, under date of August 26th, 1858, I find the following:

"Pic Nic Excursion: Agreeable to invitation by President Brigham Young, the First Presidency, his excellency, Governor Cumming, and several other leading citizens, with ladies and children, rendezvoused at a romantic, shady location a short distance above Mill D in Big Cottonwood Kanyon, and around a commodious bowery built by the B. C. Lumber company for the accommodation of those who might wish to participate in the dance. Captain W. H. Hooper accompanied the Governor to the rendezvous and in returning, while Mrs. Cumming, upon her spirited pony and escorted by General Ferguson, enjoyed a wider and more picturesque view of the constantly shifting scenery than could those who occupied luxurious seats in carriages. Music, dancing and song enlivened the social gathering, in the enjoyment of which none seemed to surpass the Governor and his lady. The party returned on the 28th, delighted and refreshed by the pleasant drive, the pure kanyon breezes and the two nights and a day encampment amid leafy bowers by ice-cold streams."

During this summer the residence of George A. Smith, which served also as the Historian's Office, was built immediately opposite the Lion House. As soon as the structure was completed, the "upper room" was frequently used by President Young, his counselors and the Twelve, as a prayer room. With a hostile army at their door they sought the Lord frequently and fervently in prayer. To whom else could they appeal? They looked to the God of Heaven to guide and direct his Church and his people.

Although General Johnston did not call on President Young during his entire stay in the territory, and, in fact, seldom left his camp in Cedar Valley, I note that others of the army officers were more friendly, and sought to promote good will. On the 6th of August Colonel Alexander called at the Bee Hive House and had a pleasant half-hour's chat with the President. Brother Brigham remarked to his brethren afterwards, that if he had had "a half-hour's interview with Colonel Alexander last fall, the army might as well have come in last fall as this spring."

To Alexander Wilson, United States attorney for Utah, who was returning to the states on account of the illness of his wife, and who called on President Young on August 22nd, the President went into some detail about the demoralizing influence of the army upon the people of Utah, and remarked as follows: "When you get back to the states, no doubt you will be asked many questions about me. I wish you would tell them that I am here watching the progress of civilization."

The summer months turned to fall and still Brother Brigham thought it best that no public gatherings should be held. The tension was still strong between the Saints and the army—especially between the Saints and the disreputable judges who had accompanied the army to the Territory. The brethren who felt the proselyting spirit were at times somewhat discouraged. It was with sadness that Wilford Woodruff recorded in his journal under date of September 1st, 1858:

"There is silence in Zion. No warning voice is heard in the streets, nor in the Tabernacle of the Lord; everyone is left to go his own way, and many are turning away from the Lord and in the hour of temptation and darkness, it is our duty to live our religion."

On October 6th the ban was lifted, and the regular semi-annual conference convened in the Tabernacle. There were two days of spirited discourses before crowded assemblies. Unfortunately, Brother Brigham fell ill about the first of October, and was unable to attend any of the sessions, in fact, it was some weeks before he took up again his official duties. On November 12th the clerk in his office makes note of the fact that he is again at work, "and in good spirits."

In searching through the Journal of Discourses I find that there is not another recorded sermon of Brother Brigham's until May 22, 1859. At that time, on Sunday, he appeared in the Tabernacle and launched into a vigorous discourse.

"I wish to inform you that I am here," he said, "and doing what many years ago I resolved to do—the best that I can. . . .

"I will say, for your consolation, that as soon as the time arrives, when this people have been proven sufficiently to satisfy justice, mercy will interpose, peace be fully restored, and the valleys of the mountains resound with the joyful voices of the Saints. Until then I am perfectly willing that the people do without preaching. . . .

"I am accused by our enemies and by the enemies of the Lord Jesus Christ, of possessing great influence over the people of this territory; and I would to God that I had sufficient influence to make every man and woman work righteousness and cease iniquity, and so live that angels and the Spirit of the God of peace would dwell with them day by day. But that influence I have not. I have an influence, but I have only what the Lord has given me. . . .

"No man will gain influence in this kingdom, save what he gains by the influence and power of the Holy One that has called him to truth, holiness and virtue. That is all the influence I have, and I pray God that I may never have any different influence. . . .

"We are here and we shall live and grow, and no power can hinder it. I shall stick to the kingdom, God being my helper, and shall not let go until this earth is revolutionized and all nations bow to the Savior, and I be his priest and servant.

"May God bless you, brethren and sisters, that you may have power to guide yourselves, by the aid of the Spirit, into all righteousness, independent of any power of man on earth. I do not want any power over my brethren, only to lead them in the way of truth, and to run parallel with them in the ways of truth and righteousness."

Early in April, 1859, President Young became suspicious that the army was about to make some attempt upon his life. General Wells went to Governor Cumming and complained that certain gentlemen in uniform "had been examining the points above President Young's house, apparently looking out positions for placing artillery." President Young joined in the interview and "requested the Governor, provided the army came here, to protect his buildings and family, for," he said, "I shall not be there, but if there is a shot fired into my house, I'll prove not to be very far away," . . . Continuing:

"We kept the army out until you and the peace commissioners induced us to consent for them to come in. We could have cut them in pieces if we had chosen, and all that they could have sent; but we desired peace above all things else; but if we cannot have peace, we can at least preserve ourselves in these mountains until we waste away those that oppress us. . . .

"I am perfectly willing to go before any court of justice or any other civil tribunal and have every act of my life scanned, and all the men in the world be examined as witnesses, as to whether I have committed any crime or sanctioned any criminal act, but I will not be nosed about by the military, and I will not go into their camp alive."

Governor Cumming informed the brethren that if any attempt was made by the army to advance on Salt Lake City, or to molest President Young, he would like to know about it. . . .

General Wells replied: "I will do so, and make you acquainted with our movements immediately."

President Young then told the Governor that it was in his power, with instructions he had, to hold the army still; but "as for advice, with all due respect to your excellency, I do not wish any. I do not calculate to take the advice of any man that lives, in relation to my affairs. I shall follow the counsel of my Heavenly Father, and I have faith to follow it, and risk the consequences. I told Colonel Kane, when he undertook to counsel us, what I should do last spring, that he did not know me, that I should take no man's counsel upon the face of the earth, but would follow the counsel of God. You may think strange of it, but you will see that I am right."

General Wells had five thousand men he could place under arms, and evidently knowing this, General Johnston adroitly refused to be drawn into a conflict. So nothing came of the proposed attempt to arrest or injure the President.

On Sunday, July 10th, 1859, a noted visitor arrived in Salt Lake City, Horace Greeley, famed editor of the New York Tribune. He was making a leisure trip across the country for his own benefit and instruction, an account of which he subsequently compiled in a book entitled, "Overland Journey From New York to San Francisco." Having defended the Mormons somewhat in his editorials, during their recent trouble with the government, he was naturally curious for a first-hand look at them, consequently his stop-over in Salt Lake City. The third day after his arrival he called on President Young and had "a two hours interview," covering a great variety of subjects. The following Sunday he attended both sessions of the services in the Tabernacle, and listened to sermons by Orson Pratt and John Taylor. The sermons, he thought, were "adapted to tastes or needs, different from his own. The prayers were "pertinent and full of unction"; the music rather better than is to be heard, "in an average worshipping assemblage in the states."

He objected to the sermons as not being prepared, but delivered in an extemporaneous manner. "When a preacher is to address a congregation of one to three thousand persons, like that which assembles twice each Sabbath in the Salt Lake City Tabernacle, I insist that a due regard for the economy of time requires that he should prepare himself, by study and reflection, if not by writing, to speak directly to the point." (Overland Journey, p. 220).

But the most interesting comments in Greeley's book to me are those which pertain to President Young.

"As President Young is the first minister of the Mormon Church, and bore the principal part in the conversation, I have reported his answers alone to my questions and observations. The others appeared uniformly to defer to his views, and to acquiesce fully in his responses and explanations. He spoke readily, not always with grammatical accuracy, but with no appearance of hesitation or reserve, and with no apparent desire to conceal anything; nor did he repel any of my questions as impertinent. He was very plainly dressed in thin, summer clothing, and with no air of sanctimony or fanaticism. In appearance he is a portly, frank, good-natured, rather thickset man of fifty-five (this should have been fifty-eight) seeming to enjoy life, and to be in no particular hurry to get to heaven. His associates are plain men, evidently born and reared to a life of labor, and looking as little like crafty hypocrites or swindlers as any body of men I ever met. The absence of cant or snuffle from their manner was marked and general; yet I think I may fairly say that their Mormonism has not impoverished them, that they were generally poor men when they embraced it, and are now in very comfortable circumstances." (Overland Journey, p. 216).

With all due respect to Horace Greeley, the great editor, it is my candid opinion that he had no insight whatever into Mormonism, and that he could not even guess what President Young was trying to accomplish. He could only see the outside skin of it, as represented in this rough frontier element; the heart and soul of the work, the spirit which animated the brethren, were all obscured from him.
