Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

ON Thursday, the 6th of October, 1859, the semi-annual General Conference convened in the old Tabernacle with President Young presiding. Meetings were held for four days and were largely attended. The Saints were anxious to hear their leaders, partake of the Spirit, renew acquaintances, and mingle with relatives and friends.

The opening session was designated as a Fast meeting.

"We have assembled this morning in the capacity of conference," announced Brother Brigham, "and as it is also our fast day, we will conduct the forenoon services as we generally do in our fast day meetings, when the Saints meet to express their feelings and to strengthen each other in the faith of the holy Gospel. We will, so far as the time will permit, give all the Saints who may wish the privilege to freely express their views and reflections to this congregation; and I hope we shall be enabled to appreciate the privilege we enjoy. I am aware that the Saints like to speak often to one another, if the candle of the Lord is lit up within them, and it is their delight to walk in the light thereof, and diffuse that light to others, that they may also enjoy its blessings.

"The earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof, and he deals with the children of men according to their agency—according to their knowledge and power, to let each and every one have an opportunity of proving themselves worthy to be crowned with crowns of glory, immortality and eternal lives; and if they forfeit them, they must abide the consequences. But if they live the principles of the holy religion that Jesus Christ has produced on the earth, they will be prepared to dwell eternally in His presence. . . .

"Seek for that which will endure. Set your hearts upon those things that will abide, not only today, but tomorrow, this year and throughout your lifetime, but also to the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. . . .

"All eternity is before us. Let us deal with ourselves like men and women of God. Let us deal with one another like intelligent beings. Our religion drinks up all the intelligence and wisdom that has ever been exhibited among men."

The testimonies that were given by the Saints on this occasion went deep into the heart of Brother Brigham. He referred to them in his sermon on the following day. "In our testimony meeting yesterday, I could not refrain from weeping for joy. What a peaceful, joyous, happy, heavenly spirit rested upon the congregation. . . .

"Our faith must be concentrated upon one great work—the building up of the Kingdom of God upon the earth, and our works must aim to the accomplishment of that great purpose. . . .

"Brethren and sisters, I feel as calm and serene as the autumn sun of our mountain home. All is right. I have minded my own business and I intend to do so. I have seldom seen enough affliction to prevent my dropping to sleep in a minute after I had lain down to rest and my business for the day was done, and sleeping as soundly as a healthy child in the lap of its mother. God is at the helm. He guides the ship, and will bring us safely into port. All we have to care about is to take care of ourselves and see that we do right. Let us man the ship manfully, everyone standing faithfully and firmly to his post, and she will outride every storm and safely bear us to the harbor of celestial bliss."

During this same month, on the 23rd of October, an important meeting was held in the Historian's Office." The purpose of the meeting was to select an Apostle in the place of Parley P. Pratt, who had fallen by the hand of an assassin in Arkansas on the 13th of May, 1857. Also there was a vacancy in the quorum of the First Presidents of Seventies caused by the excommunication of Benjamin L. Clapp. At this meeting there were present the First Presidency, all members of the Twelve who were in Salt Lake City, and members of the First Council of Seventies. After some discussion it was moved that President Young make the nominations of the two men who were to succeed to these important callings. Brother Brigham replied that if the brethren felt that it were best for him to make the nominations he would do so, and followed with this: "I nominate George Q. Cannon to be a member of the Twelve and Jacob Gates as a member of the First Council of Seventies."

The selection of these two men was indeed a happy one. George Q. Cannon, although just past his thirty-second year, was already recognized as one of the most brilliant missionaries and ablest defenders of the faith. As a youth his parents had joined the Church in England, through the efforts of their brother-in-law, John Taylor, in the year 1840. In 1842 the family began the long journey towards Nauvoo. While on the sailing vessel the mother died and was buried in the ocean. Four years later, during a visit to St. Louis, the father fell ill and passed away, leaving six orphan children, the eldest, George Q., being seventeen. From that time on he made his way alone, helping his brothers and sisters, first to Winter Quarters, and then to Salt Lake valley. At the age of twenty-three he was selected to undertake a mission to Hawaii, where he labored for four years with great brilliance, assisting in raising up a mission of four thousand members. Returning to California he undertook to translate the Book of Mormon into the Hawaiian language, and to publish a paper of some considerable importance called "The Western Standard." He was engaged in this work when President Young called him home with the news of the approach of Johnston's army. Arriving in Salt Lake City he was requested by Brother Brigham to remove the press, the type and the printing materials of The Deseret News to Fillmore for safety, and to publish the paper there during the occupation of the army in Cedar Valley. While engaged in this work he was called to preside over the Churches "in the East" and without hesitation began his journey towards New York City, leaving his family "on one day's notice," to be gone on this important mission for two years. It was while in the east that he received word of his calling to the Council of the Twelve. All the remaining years of his life were spent in the active service of the Church. He grew in knowledge, in ability, in strength of character; in his varied travels he absorbed the culture of the world, which he used for the purpose of promulgating his religion; in his loyalty to the cause, in his contribution to the Church, he stood second to none, except the great President who had selected him.

The year 1859 moved forward; the Autumn season changed to Winter. The fear of the army had now lessened to the extent that President Young determined that social activities should begin again, and in consequence, the Social Hall, which had been closed for nearly three years, was repaired and renovated, "for parties of social amusement and recreation." The evening of Feb. 7, 1860, was set for the most brilliant function of the year. "Among those present were Presidents Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, D. H. Wells; Elders O. Hyde, O. Pratt, J. Taylor, E. T. Benson, E. Snow, and F. D. Richards; Bishop Edward Hunter; President D. Spencer, and other prominent members of our community," records The Deseret News. "His excellency, Gov. Cumming, Surveyor General Stambaugh, with several members of his staff, the Hon. J. M. Bernhisel, and other distinguished citizens, were also there, together with other principal officers of the Territory and of this country and city, all of whom, not feeling themselves particularly restrained by the dignity of their official stations, whether ecclesiastical or civil, seemed to enter heartily into the spirit and to enjoy the festivities of the occasion without reserve.

"The ladies who were in attendance, out-numbering the 'lords,' contributed not a little, by their intellectuality, beauty and grace, to make the festivities of the evening agreeable and entertaining.

"To particularize or to eulogize those who superintended or were employed in carrying out the arrangements, is foreign to our natural inclinations; so we will simply say that all things were in excellent order and good style; each performed his part admirably and successfully, and there was nothing wanting to render the festivities complete.

"The occasion and the company called up many reminiscences of the past; and to see President Young, and his immediate associates going forth once more in the gay and festive dance, afforded us a pleasure we have desired for some time to see and realize; and such, if we are not mistaken, were the feelings that pervaded the bosoms of all who were present. The bright hope of the future, if dormant in the heart of any who are looking for 'the good time coming', could not but be awakened by a scene like that."

Early in March, 1860, President Young was surprised to learn that General Johnston had taken his departure from the camp of the soldiers in Cedar Valley, and that Philip St. George Cooke had succeeded him in command. Col. Cooke will be remembered as the efficient officer who led the Mormon Battalion through to California. The silent and morose Gen. Johnston traveled by the southern route to California, thence across the Isthmus of Panama, thence north to Washington by boat. "For some cause," relates The Deseret News, "he never visited Great Salt Lake City after he passed through it with his army, consequently never had an opportunity of seeing the 'lion.'" (referring to President Young.)

On April 25th, 1860, in the upper room of the Historian's Office, President Young addressed a large group of missionaries who were about to depart for the states and foreign countries. This address is so filled with good practical advice and wisdom that I desire to reproduce part of it here.

"I believe that you already understand," he said, "all that is necessary for your safe guidance through the peril and temptations that await the elders and Saints of the last days. None of you can be said to have heard the Gospel last Sabath, being baptized on Monday last, ordained on Tuesday, and on Wednesday sent forth to preach, as were many of the first elders. On the contrary, I think you have been pretty well schooled.

"But the inquiry arises in my mind, do the elders realize the importance of their missions? Do they realize that in their ministrations, they carry with them the keys of life and death, not pertaining to this life alone, but to this in connection with all the life there is? It is necessary that you should fully realize this in your calling as elders of the Church of Jesus Christ. . . .

"If an elder, in preaching the Gospel, does not feel that he has the power to preach life and salvation, and to legally administer the ordinances, and that too by the power of God, he will not fill his mission to his own credit, nor to the good of the people, and the advancement and honor of the Kingdom of God. . . .

"From all I can read, from all I can gather from the revelations of God to man, and from the revelations of the Spirit to me, no man can successfully preach the Gospel, and be acknowledged and blessed by the heavens, unless he preaches by the power of God through direct revelation. . . .

"Debate and argument has not that saving effect that has testifying to the truth as the Lord reveals it to the elder by the Spirit. . . .

"In your traveling you will have to trust in the Lord. I do not know whether you have means sufficient to enable you to go directly to your fields of labor. Probably some of you have and some have not. Strive to be full of the Holy Ghost, and the necessary means will come to you, often in a way you cannot comprehend, and you will be expedited in your journeyings, and perform your missions. And furthermore, if you do not drop one thread in the garments of your characters, from the time you leave here, I am not in the least doubtful in my mind, I have not a shade of hesitation in my feelings in promising that each of you will accomplish a mission that will please our Father in heaven, and every good person on the earth and in heaven, and live to return to this place. Have faith to live and do just as you should do; and do not imagine that you can go to the right or the left, or do this, that, or the other wrong thing with impunity, thinking it is well enough in the end. Do that alone which you know to be right, and which you ought to do. . . .

"Do not contend or argue much, but pass along peaceably and preach the first principles of the Gospel—faith in God and in His Son Jesus Christ, and teach the people to repent of their sins, and be baptized for the remission of them, and they shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost."

II

President Brigham Young, accompanied by a large group of his brethren, "in thirty carriages," began on Monday the 4th of June, 1860, his first trip to visit the settlements of the Saints in Cache valley.

For a number of years, since the news of the coming of Johnston's Army, in 1857, he had refrained from making excursions to the outlying settlements of the Saints, his whole time and attention having been occupied with the defenses which he proposed to make, and did make, against the soldiers.

But now the menace of the army had passed. By orders, issued in the Spring of 1860 from the War Department at Washington, the military forces in Utah were reduced to three companies of dragoons, three companies of artillery, and four companies of infantry. The remainder of the troops were ordered away to Wyoming, Arizona and New Mexico. Therefore President Young again felt free to go ahead with the work of "building up the Kingdom;" to take up anew the peaceful and delightful labors which had been so rudely interrupted by the coming of the army.

When President Young had last viewed Cache Valley, from the dividing ridge, where Bear River winds its way through a rocky defile, it was known as Willow Valley, and had been selected as a winter feeding ground for the Church cattle. Following that time, a small group of Saints, under the leadership of Peter Maughan, had penetrated Box Elder canyon, in 1856, and founded a settlement which they named Wellsville, after General Daniel H. Wells. In 1858, during the exodus of the Saints from the northern settlements, which had been ordered by President Young, Wellsville had been abandoned; but a few of the settlers returned in the fall and began their efforts again.

In 1859, a steady stream of emigrants poured into the valley, and the locations of Logan, Smithfield, Richmond and Franklin were designated. It was therefore with pleasure that Brother Brigham anticipated viewing these settlements, all of which were new to him.

The correspondent of The Deseret News who accompanied the brethren on this trip has left us a delightful account of it. Beginning with their leaving Salt Lake City, on the morning of June 4th he states:

"In passing through the settlements of Davis county, we could not but admire the marked hand of Providence in the distribution of His bounties—the grass springing up fresh and green on the mountain sides, on our right, and away towards the west, the wheat and oats and rye and barley, gave tokens of an early and prolific harvest. The sun had not yet risen when we passed through the northern limits of Farmington. All was peace. Not a sound was heard save the tinkling of cow bells, and the innocent frolics of the little bands of horses that played upon the benches and over the hills around us. As the sun showed himself in grandeur over the high peaks of the everlasting hills, all nature seemed to breathe forth a thanksgiving for the welcome mild rains of heaven.

"We crossed the Weber, high, foaming and dashing in its proud independence, and formed our camp by the dwelling of our kind friend, General West. The hospitality of the citizens of Ogden was unbounded. All seemed to study to emulate one another in acts of kindness, and combined to give the whole camp a hearty welcome. Ogden is not behind the chiefest of the cities of Utah in substantial and durable improvements. Tanneries, sugar machines, flouring and saw mills, and all the appendages necessary to provoke prosperity and advancement are to be found here in all profusion. Improvements of every kind multiply year by year, making it a real pleasure to visit or travel through the city. And, best of all, the people are contented and happy. Not a sound or murmur of complaint could be heard; and the people seemed to look up to their presiding officers, in confidence, as fathers and protectors.

"Our next camp was at Box Elder, and all that we have said of Ogden may be said with equal propriety of Brigham City. A kind welcome and liberal fare was ready for all, as we formed our camp near the house of President Snow. Union, peace, and growing prosperity were manifest on every side."

It was on the afternoon of Wednesday, June 6th, that the group of visitors arrived in Brigham City. After the kind reception by the inhabitants, a meeting was held, at which President Young spoke at some considerable length. I shall quote only a few paragraphs, for want of space:

"The people here are rich. Look at those who were in Missouri, in Nauvoo, and in Winter Quarters, and there are only very few but what are now worth more than they ever expected to be. The Lord has increased our flocks and herds until some are sorry that they have so many for the Indians and thieves to drive away. Look at the fields, the settlements, the good houses and the numerous comforts and conveniences calculated to make home useful and happy. Throughout the Territory you see a people more industrious than any other people in the world, and one that produces more than any other that we are acquainted with. . . .

"I love the Latter-day Saints, and think as much of them as I ever did. It is three years since I was here, and I will tell you what I think of some things that have happened in that time. I think that those who undertook to civilize us have learned that the undertaking did not answer their expectations. . . .

"Those who live their religion will enjoy the spirit and that enjoyment will increase. And if we will be faithful, the Lord will make our feet as firm in these valleys as are the everlasting riches in these mountains, and no power can remove us. He will give us a sure place in these mountains, until we go forth to redeem Zion!"

The following morning, all were up bright and early, and "President Young led the way up Box Elder canyon. After a gradual ascent of about four miles, one of the most beautiful plateaus opened out before us. It was the dairy ground of Brigham City, and most excellent was the selection. On we went, not toiling and struggling, but traveling leisurely and happily on a pleasure trip—now through narrow ravines—again over high hills, until we reached the dividing pass that led us to what would almost seem another country. . . .

"After crossing the divide, we commenced our descent, and soon entered Caterpillar canyon. The name is most appropriate. On every side this destructive insect had made its marks.

"The first settlement in Cache, Wellsville, was reached at 4 p.m.

"Elder Maughan, the presiding bishop in Cache county, met us here and in the name of the citizens of Wellsville, and indeed of the whole county, gave us not only a hearty, but a most substantial welcome. A sumptuous dinner was prepared. A bowery had been erected by the citizens, and long broad tables groaned under the weight of carved joints of fatted beeves and mutton. Nor were the more rare luxuries of life wanting. The most critical epicurean could scarcely have been disappointed as he scanned the board."

After dinner Brother Brigham addressed the citizens of Wellsville and those gathered around him.

"Though many have moved here this spring with but limited supplies of provisions, how many do you think I could count in this congregation who go hungry day by day? Do you think there is even one person who has not as much as he can eat, at least as often as once a day? Go to your native lands in foreign countries . . . and you may find thousands who could tell you that they never saw a day in which they had all they wanted to eat. Are there such times in Cache Valley? No! Reflect, and ask yourselves whether you have the least cause for complaint in the exchange of your countries. . . .

"This is a splendid valley, and is better adapted to raising Saints, than any other article that can be raised here. . . .

"Learn how to apply your labor. Build good houses, make fine farms, set out apple, pear and other fruit trees that will flourish here, also the mountain currant and raspberry bushes; plant strawberry beds and build up and adorn a beautiful city. . . .

"Learn to improve the earth and to sustain and preserve yourselves upon your inheritances, and then pray and exercise faith that the Lord will make our feet fast here—that they shall never be removed until we have the privilege of going to build up the center stake of Zion."

After a night's rest at Wellsville, the brethren were up early, and by forcing their teams along, they reached Franklin, a distance of thirty miles. "This is at present the frontier settlement of the north," writes The News correspondent, "and as yet is but in course of formation."

In the evening President Young addressed the Saints who were gathered round him in the new settlement.

"I propose that Brother Preston Thomas be ordained bishop of this settlement," he said. "He is residing in Lehi, but came with us intending to visit Bear Lake and Soda Springs, but has since concluded to settle here. I propose that he settle here and that we make him your bishop and presiding officer. . . .

"You are very much exposed here. The settlements in this valley are, as it were, a shield to the other settlements; you must therefore, prepare as speedily as possible to make yourselves secure. You have a beautiful location and plenty of excellent water. This valley is capable of sustaining a multitude of people. It is the best valley we have."

Halting at Richmond on the afternoon of the 9th, President Young again expressed his praise regarding Cache Valley.

"So far as I know," he said, "no other valley in this Territory is equal to this. This has been my opinion ever since I first saw this valley. . . .

"Fill up this valley with those who love and serve God—make your settlements as it were, Zion, an earthly Paradise—and you will in the highest degree gratify my feelings and desires. It all depends upon us, brethren, whether Satan shall gain dominion over us in this kingdom God has set up, or whether he shall not. My faith is and my prayers day by day are that the Lord will reign in the midst of His Saints."

The nights of the 9th and 10th were spent at Logan, and Brother Brigham again gave practical advice to the inhabitants.

"I recommend the brethren in this valley to build saw-mills, and prepare to build with lumber. They are the cheapest and best houses I can think of under your circumstances. I do not wish the brethren to cut all the timber to put it into log houses. Erect saw-mills and make lumber, which will be far better than building log houses. We have no timber to waste. . . .

"Keep the valley pure; keep your towns as pure as you possibly can; keep your hearts pure; and labor what you can consistently, but not so as to injure yourselves. Be faithful in your religion. Be full of love and kindness towards each other."

"Leaving Logan on the morning of the 11th," writes The News correspondent, "the company diverged from the regular line of travel and made a passing call at Providence, a small but flourishing and promising settlement, and formed camp for the night at Wellsville. Time did not permit a call at the three other settlements of the valley, Paradise, Mendon and Hyrum. Reports, however, well authenticated, satisfied us that they were at least up with their neighbors."

On the afternoon of June 12th, Ogden was reached, and a meeting was held in the large and commodious Tabernacle there, at which the President spoke.

"You have built a commodious Tabernacle where but a few years ago was a swamp. But a few years ago there were no inhabitants here. When we first visited this place, after the people began to move here, there was hardly a settlement between here and Great Salt Lake City. There were a few families at Willow Creek (Willard) but none north of that; and only a few between here and Great Salt Lake City. Now you may ride until you are weary, and pass through settlement after settlement. . . .

"There is a great work for the Saints to do; progress and improve upon and make beautiful everything around you. Cultivate the earth and cultivate your minds. Build cities, adorn your habitations, make gardens, orchards and vineyards, and render the earth so pleasant that when you look upon your labors you may do so with pleasure, and that angels may delight to come and visit your beautiful locations. In the meantime seek to adorn your minds with all the graces of the Spirit of Christ."

On the 13th of June the brethren returned to their homes in Salt Lake City. "Never was a more pleasant and agreeable trip," writes the correspondent, "made at any time or in any place, or ever a warmer welcome or more hearty 'God bless you' given by the citizens through whose cities and hamlets we traveled."

III

On Saturday the 25th of August, 1860, there might have been seen emerging from the mouth of Emigration Canyon and wending its way across the bench now occupied by Fort Douglas, the Overland Stage, completing its long journey of eleven hundred thirty-six miles from St. Joseph, Missouri, to Great Salt Lake City, which it had successfully done, by frequent change of animals, in nineteen days.

Among the weary passengers was one Richard F. Burton, an Englishman, thirty-nine years of age, "Captain in Her Majesty's Army; Fellow and Gold Medalist of the Royal Geographical Society." This young man, by his extensive travels in Africa and Arabia, had already made himself famous. He was the first Englishman to enter Mecca, the first to explore Somaliland, and the first to discover the Great Lakes of Central Africa. Now he had made what he termed "a flying trip" to Utah, to get a "first-hand" look at the Mormons and write a book about them. In due time this book appeared, printed by Harper and Brothers, in New York in 1862, and entitled "The City of the Saints." (I have this book before me as I write.)

It is because of its intimate account of Salt Lake City, the Saints, and particularly President Brigham Young, that I shall devote some space to it here. Of insight into the "Kingdom," the deep underlying motives of the Saints being in the mountains, Burton had next to none—or, rather, none at all. In fact, I have never found one of the non-Mormon writers whom it is not worse than useless to read about the object and purposes of Mormonism.

Peering out of the stage as it rambled across the bench, Burton gives us this look at the city, as it lay before him there with its "eight thousand odd inhabitants." "The city revealed itself, as we approached from behind its screen, the inclined terraces of the upper table land, and at last lay stretched before us as upon a map. . . .

"None of the buildings," he observes, as he entered the city, "except the Prophet's house, were whitewashed. The material, the thick sun-dried adobe, common to all parts of the eastern world, was of a dull leaden blue, deepened by the atmosphere to a gray, like the shingles of the roofs. . . .

"The dark clumps and lines of bitter cottonwood, locust, or acacia, poplars and fruit trees, apples, peaches and vines—how lovely they appeared after the baldness of the prairies. . . .

"The houses are almost all of one pattern, a barn shape, with wings and lean-tos, generally facing, sometimes turned end-ways to the street, which gives a suburban look to the settlement; and the diminitive casements show that window glass is not yet made in the valley. . . . The best houses resemble east Indian bungalows, with flat roofs and low, shady verandas, well trellised, and supported by posts or pillars. All are provided with chimneys and with substantial doors to keep out the piercing cold."

And then there is this cautious comment. "I looked in vain for the harems, in which certain romancers concerning things Mormon, had informed me that wives are kept, like any other stock. I presently found this but one of the multitude of delusions. Upon the whole the Mormon settlement was a vast improvement upon its contemporaries in the valleys of the Mississippi and Missouri."

Drawing up in front of Salt Lake House, on Main street, "the principal, if not the only establishment of its kind in New Zion," Burton and his fellow travelers dismounted, secured rooms and a meal, "which put us all in the best of humor, despite the closeness of the atmosphere, the sadness ever attending one's entrance into a new place, and the swarms of emigration flies."

Among all people that Burton was curious to see in this inland city, according to his own statement, was "Mr. Brigham Young." This opportunity was not afforded him until six days after his arrival, and then only through the courtesy of Governor Cumming, who accompanied him while making the call. "I met Governor Cumming in Main street, and we proceeded together to our visit. After a slight scrutiny we passed the guard, who was dressed in plain clothes, and to the eye unarmed, and walking down the veranda, we entered the Prophet's private office. Several people who were sitting there arose at Mr. Cumming's entrance. After a few words of introduction, Mr. Brigham Young advanced, shook hands with complete simplicity of manner, asked me to be seated on the sofa, and presented me to those present. . . .

And then there is this pen picture of Brother Brigham:

"The Prophet was born at Whittingham, Vermont, on the 1st of June, 1801. He was consequently in 1860, fifty-nine years of age; he looks about forty-five. I had expected to see a venerable looking old man. Scarcely a gray thread appears in his hair, which is parted on the side, light colored, rather thick, and reaches below the ears with a half curl. He formerly wore it long, after the western style; now it is cut level with the ear lobes. The forehead is somewhat narrow, the eyebrows are thin, the eyes between gray and blue, with a calm composed and somewhat reserved expression.

"The nose, which is fine and somewhat sharply pointed, is bent a little to the left. The lips are close like the New Englanders. The cheeks are rather fleshy, and the line between the alae of the nose and the mouth is broken; the chin is somewhat peaked, and the face clean shaven, except under the jaws, where the beard is allowed to grow. The hands are well made, and not disfigured by rings. The figure is somewhat large, broad-shouldered, and stooping a little when standing.

"The Prophet's dress was neat and plain as a Quaker's, all gray home spun, except the cravat and waistcoat. His coat was of antique cut, and like the pantaloons, baggy and the buttons were black. A necktie of dark silk, with a large bow, was loosely passed around a starched collar, which turned down of its own accord. The waistcoat (vest) was of black satin, single breasted, and buttoned nearly to the neck, and a plain gold chain was passed into the pocket. The boots were Wellingtons, apparently of American make."

Such, to the physical eye of Captain Burton was the appearance of President Brigham Young. A plain man stood before him, "with baggy trousers and coat of antique cut," but had Captain Burton been able to see with the spiritual eye, which he could not—he would have recognized a spiritual giant before him, a man engaged in the sublimest of all tasks, that of building up here upon earth "the Kingdom of God." But we will thank Burton for this pen portrait; it was the best he could do.

Continuing, he noted a few of the President's characteristics. "His manner is at once affable and impressive, simple and courteous. . . . He shows no signs of dogmatism, bigotry or fanaticism, and never once entered—with me at least—upon the subject of religion.

"He impresses a stranger with a certain sense of power. . . . He is neither morose nor methodistic, and, where occasion requires, he can use all the weapons of ridicule to direful effect, and 'speak a bit of his mind' in a style which no one forgets. . . . His powers of observation are intuitively strong and his friends declare him to be gifted with an excellent memory and a perfect judgment of character. If he dislikes a stranger at the first interview, he never sees him again. Of his temperance and sobriety there is but one opinion. His life is ascetic; his favorite food is baked potatoes and a little buttermilk, and his drink, water."

We shall close this description, and I hope it will add to the reader's knowledge of President Young, his appearance, his manners and habits. He is 59 years of age now, almost in the best part of his life, presiding over all the activities and affairs of the Saints, as he has done since the fall of 1844. But he has now achieved many of his objectives; he has established himself and his people on the earth; he is a strong man, universally recognized as such.

On Monday, September 3rd, 1860, Captain Burton relates in his book, that he strolled about the city, taking in the various sights, here and there. Suddenly he came upon the "square" or block where a company of emigrants had just arrived, thirty-six wagons, under command of Captain James D. Ross. They had made the weary journey by wagon all the way from Winter Quarters, from which place they had departed on the 17th of June. Now they had arrived in Zion, this very day. I wonder if Captain Burton beheld in that weary, dusty, tired group of emigrants, a little boy eleven years of age, barefooted, with pants and shirt made out of an old piece of tent canvas; a bright, cheerful little fellow, looking about him with wonder and awe at the city in the wilderness. If Captain Burton saw him there, he beheld my honored father, Charles W. Nibley. That was the day, and that was the company, in which he and his parents arrived in Salt Lake Valley.

While Captain Burton was in the city he heard President Young deliver a number of sermons in the Tabernacle, some of which he noted down with meticulous care. Captain Burton confesses that he could not comprehend the religious ideas of the President; but all Latter-day Saints will readily understand them. In a sermon on September 2nd, Brother Brigham said:

"Let everyone get a knowledge for himself that this work is true. We do not want you to say that it is true, until you know that it is; and if you know it, that knowledge is as good to you as though the Lord came down and told you. Then let every person say: 'I will live my religion, though every other person goes to hell! I will walk humbly before my God and deal honestly with my fellow beings.

"I can say honestly and truly before God, and the holy angels and all men, that not one act of murder or disorder has occurred in this city or territory that I had any knowledge of, any more than a babe a week old, until after it had transpired. . . .

"Out of this Church will grow the kingdom which Daniel saw. This is the very people that Daniel saw would continue to grow and spread and prosper; and if we are not faithful, others will take our places, for this is the Church and people that will possess the kingdom forever and forever. . . .

"I wish to impress upon your minds to live your religion, and when you come to this stand to speak, not to care whether you say five words or five thousand, but to come with the power of God upon you, and you will comfort the hearts of the Saints. All the sophistry in the world will do no good. If you live your religion, you will live with the spirit of Zion with you, and will try, by every lawful means, to induce your neighbors to live their religion. In this way we will redeem Zion and cleanse it from sin."

Then there is this from a splendid sermon on September 23rd, 1860:

"The Kingdom of God is all that is of real worth. All else is not worth possessing, either here or hereafter. Without it, all else would be like a dry tree prepared for the burning; it is all consumed, and the ashes are driven to the four winds.

"Let the brethren who go forth upon missions, go with the power of God upon them, and shun every appearance of evil, love the Gospel and cling to the Lord. Seek unto Him by day and by night, that you may have His Holy Spirit to be with you, to guide your feet and your affections, and give you wisdom to ask and answer questions; then you will not be apt to fall into temptation and be caught away in the snares of the devil."
