Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

THE national election on Tuesday the 6th of November, 1860, was perhaps the most important ever held in the United States.

For many months the Union had been disintegrating. Under the weak and vacillating policies of President Buchanan several of the southern slave-holding states had announced their intention of withdrawing from the Union and setting up their own governments.

The Democratic party, which was in power, was itself hopelessly divided on the question of the extension of slavery, consequently it had split into three factions and had held three separate nominating conventions. The Republican party, which opposed the extension of slavery, had chosen as its candidate, Abraham Lincoln of Springfield, Illinois, and when the votes were cast it was found on the morning of November 7th, that he had triumphed, although his party had polled only about one-third of the total vote. Thus does Providence direct the destiny of nations.

To President Brigham Young and the Saints living in the peaceful valleys of Utah, the events in the east were of little immediate consequence. They were so far removed from the activities of the States that it was weeks before the news of current happenings reached them. But still President Young was aware of the tremendous importance of saving the Union, and abiding by the Constitution, if only good men could be found to administer the laws.

Abraham Lincoln was not entirely unknown to the Saints. During their residence in Illinois he had been their neighbor, and, being a member of the state legislature at the time, had rendered some considerable aid in securing the Nauvoo charter.

In December, 1840, when the charter was approved, one of the brethren, writing in the Times and Seasons, (Vol. 2, p. 267) states as follows: "Many members of the House were warmly in our favor, and with only one or two dissenting voices, every representative appeared inclined to extend to us all such powers as they considered us justly entitled to, and voted for the law; and here I should not forget to mention that Lincoln, whose name was erased from the electoral ticket in November (not, however, on account of any dislike to him as a man, but simply because his was the last name on the ticket and we desired to show our friendship to the Democratic party by substituting the name of Ralston for some one of the Whigs) had the magnanimity to vote for our act, and came forward after the final vote to the bar of the House and congratulated me on its passage."

There is another interesting story relative to Lincoln and the Latter-day Saints which transpired shortly after he became president, as related by Thomas Stenhouse.

Stenhouse informs us that he was in Washington, and at the instance of President Brigham Young he called on Lincoln to ascertain what course he intended to pursue with the "Mormons" in Utah. Lincoln was silent for some moments and then said: "Stenhouse, when I was a boy on the farm in Illinois there was a great deal of timber on the farms which we had to clear away. Occasionally we would come to a log which had fallen down. It was too hard to split, too wet to burn and too heavy to move, so we plowed around it. That's what I intend to do with the Mormons. You go back and tell Brigham Young that if he will let me alone, I will let him alone."

Lincoln's inauguration took place on the 4th of March, 1861. By that time several of the states had definitely withdrawn from the Union. But Brother Brigham's attitude was that Utah would not secede. At a meeting of the First Presidency and Twelve in the Historian's office on March 10th, according to Wilford Woodruff, who kept notes of the meeting, President Young said, "he did not wish Utah mixed up with the secession movement," and when the first telegraph message was sent over the newly constructed line to Utah in October, 1861, President Young stated to the president of the company, J. H. Wade, "Utah has not seceded, but is firm for the Constitution and laws of our once happy country."

Yet the President was pleased that the Saints were far removed from the wars and contentions of the nation and the world. In his sermon on the opening day of conference, April 6th, 1861, he said:

"I am thankful that we live to see this day, and have the privilege of assembling ourselves in these valleys. We are not now mingling in the turmoils of strife, warring, and contention, that we would have been obliged to have mingled in, had not the Lord have suffered us to have been driven to these mountains—one of the greatest blessings that could have been visited upon us. It has been designed for many generations to hide up the Saints in the last days until the indignation of the Almighty be over. For his wrath will be poured out upon the nations of the earth. We see the nations steadily driving along to the precipice. The Lord has spoken from the heavens, and he is about to fulfill the prophecies of his ancient and modern prophets. . . .

"This is the best place on the earth for the Latter-day Saints. Search the history of all the nations, and every geographical position on the face of the earth, and you cannot find another situation so well adapted for the Saints as are these mountains. Here is the place in which the Lord designed to hide up his people. Be thankful for it; be true to your covenants; be faithful, each and every one."

It is interesting to me to note that the fine, practical mind of Brother Brigham set to work immediately on plans to make the Saints self-sustaining, with the approach of the Civil war, when he realized that the supply of manufactured goods was likely again to be shut off.

On the second day of conference, April 7th, he launched into a vigorous discourse along this line.

"We have the elements to produce as good wheat as grows. The elements here will produce the apple, the peach, the pear, the plum, the apricot, the cherry, the currants, and every kind of fruit in abundance, and every variety of plant and vegetable we desire. Have you the ability to bring any of these things forth from the native element? Yes; here are men who know how to raise fruit, and here are women who know how to dry and cook it. Here are men who know how to raise sheep, and how to take their fleeces, and deliver them into the hands of their families to be manufactured. Here are women who know how to spin, weave, and make the finest of cloth. So with the flax, and so with every material calculated to make us comfortable. . . .

"I look forward to no distant time when this people called Latter-day Saints will be obliged to sustain themselves."

On May 2nd, 1861, President Young dictated a long letter to George Q. Cannon, who was presiding over the Saints in England. It reviews the situation of the Saints and gives us an intimate picture of what was going on. It follows in part:

"By last night's pony (referring to the pony express) which brought dates to the 26th ult., we learn that excitement in the states is constantly waxing fiercer, all parties merging under the geographical distinction of North and South, and with increasing bitterness taking sides, in accordance with said geographical line, with every prospect of their speedily precipitating themselves to civil war. Under existing circumstances the turning of our immigration into the northern route and away from St. Louis was manifestly designed for good, and it is not likely that they will be seriously inconvenienced by the present troubles; at least, not during this season. It is supposed by some that the Indians on the route east of the mountains may be inclined to be a little troublesome, but, the four companies from here are particularly instructed to be on the alert, and at no time be so far apart but what they can assist each other upon short notice; and Brothers Joseph W. Young, Ira Eldredge, Joseph Horn, and John R. Murdock, with brothers Jones and Gates, will organize and arrange all the companies to travel in like manner, and each company reasonably strong in itself. As 'there is no danger in being safe' we trust that the immigration will be faithful and prudent in their conduct, and that their faithfulness and good conduct will so secure them the blessings of heaven in their travelings and campings, that they will be privileged to arrive safely in our mountain retreat.

"I was gratified to learn that even so many as there are were about to emigrate from Scandinavia, Switzerland and the British Isles, and many here could rejoice in being able to speedily deliver from bondage all who desire to join their faith and works with us in building up the Kingdom of God on the earth. But we feel satisfied to bide the time and ways of the Lord for carrying on his work, realizing that all things have their times and seasons, and trusting that the Saints abroad will diligently unite their faith and good works with ours for their escape to this peaceful refuge appointed for the hiding of Israel, until at least a portion of the indignation of the Almighty be past."

For a period of seven years, due to the press of strenuous events, President Young had not visited the settlements of southern Utah, and this year he determined to again make such a trip. Accordingly, on the 15th of May, together with a number of his brethren, he departed for the south. He looked forward to these excursions with pleasure, for he was certainly in his element, visiting with the Saints and advising them as to their temporal and spiritual welfare.

The first day out he arrived at American Fork, where "a new and elegant meeting house" was dedicated. The next day Provo, Springville and Payson were visited. The following day Nephi was reached, and another group joined the traveling party, which now numbered sixty-four. They now traveled leisurely through Fillmore, Beaver, Parowan, and by way of Mountain Meadows to Santa Clara, where the return journey was begun. On June 1st (President Young's sixtieth birthday) he was traveling a dust road between Fort Harmony and Cedar City. Sixty years old that day, and what accomplishments he had crowded into his busy life!

In reporting his southern trip to George Q. Cannon, under date of June 13th, after his arrival home, Brother Brigham relates as follows:

"The company highly enjoyed the trip, and returned much refreshed and invigorated for the renewed prosecution of their duties. The settlements south of the Rim of the Basin are as yet small, but it is expected that they will rapidly strengthen and increase as the demand for cotton increases under increased facilities for its manufacture. They can also furnish a large amount of fruit to settlements north of them, in exchange for wheat, etc.; also wine, olive oil, castor oil, indigo, molasses and sugar—a trade so mutually beneficial that we trust soon to see it expand more commensurately with the wants of the people. . . . .

"Prospects for an abundant harvest of fruit, wheat, and other rich products of the earth continue favorable, and with the people very generally, there is, to all appearance, a constantly increasing zeal and energy in seeking first the Kingdom of God and its righteousness."

II

On the evening of Friday the 17th of May, 1861, while President Young was on his trip south, Alfred Cumming, Governor of the Territory of Utah, "together with his lady," departed by coach for the eastern states.

With the election of Lincoln, and the transfer of governmental affairs to the opposition party, he was well aware that a new governor would be appointed; and possibly, too, with the great upheaval going on in the nation, he was anxious to be at home in the south, and look after his own interests.

There was no ostentation about his departure, as there had been with his entrance into the valleys. The Deseret News of May 22nd, 1861, in commenting upon his leave taking states:

"His entrance into Great Salt Lake City, on the 12th of April, 1858, was attended with some considerable parade and ceremony; but being somewhat eccentric, it seemed to be his wish to avoid any demonstration of his friends on the occasion of his departure, carefully concealing from them, as far as possible, the time when it might be expected to take place; and few, if any, knew when he went, as he was moving about briskly from place to place, during the day, closing up his business affairs, and late in the afternoon started out so unceremoniously, that it was not generally known he had gone till the next morning.

"In passing up Emigration canyon, at or near the last crossing of the creek, before ascending the Little Mountain, by some unexplained operation, one of his wagons was upset, and its contents immersed in the creek. Fortunately, some men were passing at the time, who rendered efficient service in getting the wagon right side up, and the wetted freight therein, for which they received a liberal compensation."

Thus we will take our farewell from Governor Alfred Cumming, and leave him there in Emigration canyon, in the shadows of evening, busily engaged in picking up his "wetted freight." He came to Utah to become governor, to replace Brigham Young, and was backed by an army of twenty-five hundred men. No soldier, or friend, looks after him in his departure. He goes quietly into oblivion now, and we do not hear of him again; only once in passing, as he was an exchange prisoner during the Civil war. The man whom he came to replace grows daily in the estimation of thinking people, assumes his place gradually, as one of the most capable and able of the empire builders that this nation has produced. "I have noticed, in hauling gravel," President Golden Kimball once remarked, "that the big rocks work to the top, and the little ones to the bottom." It is even so.

Early in July, 1861, all the troops at Camp Floyd were ordered to leave for the east as they were urgently needed by President Lincoln for the "impending conflict." William Clayton describes this event in a letter to George Q. Cannon, in England, under date of July 16th. "Today commences the sale of all the government property at Camp Floyd, by auction—buildings, grain, hay and everything except arms and ammunition, soldiers' clothing, wagons and teams. They will move away for the states within two weeks, and thus ends the great Buchanan Utah expedition, costing the government millions, and accomplishing nothing, except making many of the Saints comparatively rich, and improving the circumstances of most of the people of Utah. You may well believe that merchants and speculators look blue and gloomy enough, and the true Saints feel well in proportion; while some, who think more of money and riches than they do of eternal life, feel nearly as bad as Gentiles."

Again, with reference to the troops, Gilbert Clements, writing under date of August 25th, 1861, to his friends in England, "Elder Mills" states that, "the troops are gone. Camp Floyd, which for three years past has resounded with the orgies of the ungodly, and become a nest for every unclean thing, has reverted to its wonted quietude and simplicity."

So much then for the name and fame of Johnston's army.

In this same letter Gilbert Clements, a merchant in Salt Lake City, pays a fine tribute to President Brigham Young:

"The good work of our God, which you, in common with the brethren on missions, seem so actively engaged in forwarding, is moving onward in this territory. There seems to be a spirit of zeal among the people who walk more strictly in obedience to the counsel of our beloved President, and those associated with him in the government of the Church. This arises in a great measure, I believe, from the frequent association the President of late has had with the people. When in the city, scarcely a meeting is held without his being in attendance, and the words of life, with which he seems at all times so fully endowed, are freely dispensed to the people, encouraging the weak, reproving the wayward, and building up all who seek to do the will of our Father. It is a source of great joy to the faithful to observe that advancing years add increased usefulness to our prophet and leader; and his judgment, ripened by a lifetime of experience and uniform integrity and faithfulness, sees a long way ahead for the good of Zion."

Another event of these months of 1861 was that, according to a correspondent in the Millennial Star writing from Salt Lake City, "a new and magnificent theater is being erected. It will be one of the most costly structures in the Territory, and will reflect credit on those who have projected and are carrying on the work."

The entire supervision of the construction of the building was under President Young, while William H. Folsom acted as architect. Writing to George Q. Cannon, under date of November 18th, 1861, William Clayton relates that "the new theater (which was only commenced on the first of last July and is a very large building) they are now putting on the roof timbers and expect to have it in use by the beginning of January." President Young was able to report under date of January 7th, 1862, also to Elder Cannon, that, "we expect, in a few weeks to have our new theater so far completed, as to be ready for use."

Also during this same year, the work on the Temple, which had been idle since the advent of the army in 1858, was again resumed and President Young could report in the above mentioned letter, that "the stone cutters have already prepared nearly all the granite blocks that were hauled for the Temple previous to the state road's becoming too soft for such heavy loads."

Thus Zion grew and prospered, under the able direction of Brother Brigham. No part of the work escaped his constant and capable attention.

With the opening of the spring of 1862, he resumed his drive for the continuation of work on the Temple. Addressing the Saints in the Tabernacle on February 2nd, he said:

"I have a few items of business that I wish to lay before you this morning, and the first is a call upon the brethren for teams to haul the granite blocks from little Cottonwood to the Temple block. Last fall the road became so muddy that the teams were sent home, but we understand that the road is very good now. This county, Davis, Tooele, and the northern part of Utah county can forward teams in a day or two, and if the road again becomes bad, they are not so far from their homes but what they can easily return. I wish to have all the teams that can be gathered from this city and the adjoining neighborhoods and wards to go to work immediately so that our stone cutters may have constant work. Some of them are from a distance, and we do not like to have them out of work through want of rough blocks. It requires a large quantity of rock for the first story of the Temple, and we would like to complete the walls of that story, and as much as possible during the present season."

Helping poor emigrants across the plains was another problem that he attacked with particular vigor during this year. In the same sermon as the above I find the following:

"I have another call to make upon the people now, which I wish to go out from this place. You will recollect that a year ago this coming spring we sent some two hundred teams to the frontiers to bring the Saints to this territory. We wish to send three hundred this year and they are as few as will answer to accomplish the purpose. Last season I think there were rising of sixty teams went from this city. I shall now propose that we divide as we did last year and let this city take the lead, and if we are not over one quarter in number we ought to be in faith and in good works. We know that the people in this city and in the regions round about are wealthy in cattle, and you know very well that it is against my doctrine and feelings for men to scrape together the wealth of the world and let it waste and do no good. We have more stock than we well take care of. We want to send some twelve hundred yoke of cattle to the states for freight and people, and we want to send down cattle to sell and purchase things that are needed for families when crossing the plains, for we wish to bring all the poor that we can get to the frontiers, in time to come this season."

With the progress of the Civil war in the east, it became increasingly difficult to get manufactured goods, and President Young was alert to the fact that the seventy or eighty thousand people in the Territory would now have to look to themselves for the necessities and comforts of life. In the sermon on February 2nd, 1862, he brought up this subject:

"At no distant period, merchandising in imported goods will cease in this territory, and the fabrics we wear will be manufactured by ourselves—imported fabrics will not be here. . . . .

"I feel like urging upon the people the necessity of preparing to grow and manufacture that which they consume. .

"My doctrine is to put every dollar to use for the building up of the Kingdom of God, whether it is much or little. I want the brethren to take out their teams, and send them down three hundred this season, and four or five hundred when required. And then I want to see the brethren join together their teams and money and send for machinery, besides sending teams for the poor; and thus we will fill the Territory with the necessary articles of machinery for a self sustaining people.

"It is necessary for us to sustain ourselves or we will be left in poverty, nakedness and distress, as a consequence of the war, and the breaking up of the general government. We even now meet men who seemingly have a very little clothing—they wear patch upon patch. I would not by this remark have it understood that clothing ought not to be neatly and somewhat extensively mended, but I have seen men wear pantaloons so patched that it would puzzle you to place your finger upon a piece of the original material. They have wives and daughters but they do not spin. In Exodus we read, "And all the women that were wise-hearted did spin with their hands.' If, instead of our wives and daughters passing their hours of idleness, folding their hands and rocking themselves in their easy chairs, they would spin a little wool, and a little cotton from our Dixie, or that grown in their own gardens and fields, and make some good warm clothing for the men and boys, and some linsey frocks for the women and girls, they could with propriety be called wise women in Israel."

III

The spring and summer of 1862 passed pleasantly for President Brigham Young. On the 8th of March the Salt Lake Theater was opened to the public, and two performances were given, entitled, "Pride of the Market," and "State Secrets." Brother Brigham was fond of the theater and seldom missed attending a performance when he was in the city. He encouraged members of his family to take part in the plays, which, in the beginning, consisted entirely of home talent.

The April conference of 1862 met as usual in the old Tabernacle. The President spoke at nearly all the sessions and gave the people excellent and timely counsel and advice.

"We are met in this conference," he said on the opening day, "for the purpose of enlarging our views upon the importance of our priesthood and duties; that our love for God, truth, and the household of faith may be increased; that our sensibilities may be sharpened to a keen relish for goodness and a just sense of right; that our judgments may become more impartial and discreet in all their conclusions, so that when we go from this conference, whether as bishops, elders, high priests, high councilors or as members of the Church and Kingdom of God in the last days, we may find ourselves sensibly improved, our aspirations more elevated, our natures more divested of low selfishness, and in every way better prepared to judge in Israel, and to lead the sheep of the fold of Christ in a manner more acceptable to the Great Shepherd."

This is a splendid clear statement of the object and purposes of a general conference. There was eloquence and literary talent in this man of a high order, which he had gained solely through observation, listening to the sermons of others, and years of practice himself. Of book learning, his life on the frontiers had afforded him no opportunity at all, and as for schooling, as I have stated in a previous chapter, all that ever was afforded him was "eleven days" in some backwoods school.

There is another paragraph taken from this sermon which shows again the practical turn of Brother Brigham's mind in his work of building up the kingdom.

"A portion of this community will not improve, will not plant out a fruit tree nor a shade tree, expecting to be driven from their homes. Such neglect of duty is the very way to bring the power of the Devil upon us. Let every man go to with his might and build a good house for his family to live in, and make them comfortable and happy and gather around them an abundance of the blessings and comforts of life, and do it by the power of God and the Spirit of the Holy One, in all diligence and faithfulness; then let us preach the Gospel, send the Elders to gather the poor and the meek of the earth, each one doing all he can to accumulate means to accelerate this great and glorious work in the name of Israel's God, being full of faith, humility and charity; then we have done our duty, and all we can do to further the Kingdom of God."

President Young's health was particularly good this summer.

"I am better now than I was 20 years ago," he had said in a sermon earlier in the year. "I shall soon be 61 years of age and my spirit is more vigorous and more powerful today than it has been in any day I ever saw. It is more quick to comprehend, more ready to discern, the understanding is more matured, more correct in judgment, the memory more vivid and enduring, and discretion more circumspect."

He attributed this condition to the fact that he had lived his religion.

"If we live our holy religion and let the spirit reign, it will not become dull and stupid, but as the body approaches dissolution the spirit takes a firmer hold on that enduring substance behind the veil, drawing from the depths of that eternal fountain of light, sparkling gems of intelligence, which surround the frail and sinking tabernacle with the halo of immortal wisdom."

Again, as a means of helping the poor Saints of Europe, particularly of England, to emigrate to Zion, President Young this year directed that teams should be sent to Florence to help them across the plains. Early in May, two hundred ninety-three men, with two hundred sixty-three wagons, two thousand eight hundred and eighty oxen and one hundred and forty-three thousand three hundred and fifteen pounds of flour, moved out eastward towards the Missouri river on this unselfish and helpful mission. Thus was Zion built up, and many thousands of Europe's poor found in these peaceful valleys competence and independence.

On September 1st, President Young with a company of brethren, set out on a visit to the southern settlements. He was particularly interested in the growth of cotton which had been begun in the vicinity of St. George, and which now was more and more needed for the manufacture of cloth.

Describing his visit in a letter to George Q. Cannon, under date of October 15th, 1862, he states: "I made a tour through our southern settlements, visiting nearly all of them, and returning on the 25th, having in that short time traveled some eight hundred miles and held thirty public meetings, in twenty-four of which I addressed the congregations. We found the brethren in Washington county very energetic and zealous in developing the resources of that region, though the unprecedented high water the past season so damaged their dams that they labored somewhat at a disadvantage. They are, however, raising quite an amount of cotton, much of it of excellent quality, a great amount of cane, and starting large vineyards and orchards. The brethren manifested much joy in our visiting them; we were pleased to meet with them in their several localities, and returned with the assurance that our trip had benefited both visitors and visited. . . .

"The weather continues very pleasant, our crops are abundant, the people are healthy and home affairs continue peaceful and prosperous."

Even while President Young was writing these words, a condition was approaching which was to bring disquiet and unrest into the "home affairs." Daily nearing the city from the west was a group of soldiers, seven hundred and fifty in number, the California volunteers, who had enlisted to fight in the Civil war, under command of Colonel Patrick Edward Connor. By some strange order from Secretary of War Stanton, they had been requested to halt in Salt Lake City, and guard the overland trail and the telegraph line.

At first it was thought that the California troops would take up their quarters at the abandoned Camp Floyd, but Colonel Connor had determined otherwise, and boldly marching through Salt Lake City, "with fixed bayonets, loaded rifles and shotted cannon" they formed their camp at the mouth of Red Butte canyon, on a site overlooking the city, and which they shortly afterwards designated as Camp Douglas.

It was not Colonel Connor's wish that his troops should be halted in Salt Lake City. Both he and his men were disappointed that they could not participate in the battles of the Civil war. Writing to General Halleck he said, "Brigham Young offers to protect the entire line with one hundred men. Why we were sent here is a mystery. It could not be to keep Mormondom in order, for Brigham can thoroughly annihilate us with the five thousand to twenty-five thousand frontiersmen, always at his command!"

Colonel Connor stated further that the men had enlisted for the purpose of fighting traitors, that the infantry was of no service in the territory, as cavalry alone could effectually act against Indians, and there were enough men of that arm, to protect the mail route. But against all protests the California volunteers were kept in Utah for the duration of the war.

It was unfortunate for the citizenry, particularly of Salt Lake City, that this condition was brought about. Colonel Connor and his men quickly formed an association with Governor Harding, Lincoln's appointee, and the federal judges, Waite and Drake, and the entire coterie manifested a bitter anti-Mormon feeling and attitude which resulted in much unhappiness for the community, and concern on the part of President Young.

The national Congress during this year had passed laws prohibiting both slavery and polygamy in the territories, and now Connor and the judges connived to arrest President Young on the latter charge. He, however, submitted to arrest before Judge Kinney, who was friendly to the Saints, and was released on bail, before the anti-Mormon coterie could act. But this was the beginning of many years of persecution on the part of the federal officers against President Young and his brethren.

Brother Brigham was not one to stand idly by and take persecution without fighting back, as I have shown many times in the preceding chapters. When he learned the attitude of Colonel Connor and his men, he launched out at them vigorously in a sermon in the Tabernacle on March 8th, 1863. After referring to the time when on the banks of the Missouri river, Captain Allen had asked the Saints for five hundred volunteers to fight in the Mexican war of 1846, he added:

"We told the brethren to enlist, and they obeyed without a murmur," he said: "In this way we have proved our loyalty; we have done everything that has been required of us. Can there anything reasonable and constitutional be asked that we would not perform? No. But if the government of the United States should now ask for a battalion of men to fight on the present battlefields of the nation, while there is a camp of soldiers from abroad (California) located within the corporate limits of Salt Lake City, I would not ask one man to go."

That was strong language. But Colonel Conner, and the Governor and the judges understood it. President Young demanded fair treatment for himself and the Saints, and by every reason he was entitled to it.

During October, 1862, President Young and his brethren made a pleasant trip northward through Davis, Weber, Box Elder and Cache counties, visiting the settlements. Wherever meetings were held the President gave "cheering and encouraging sermons" to the people. At Ogden, according to the reporter, John V. Long, "he called upon them to build good and comfortable habitations for their families, to labor for the building up of the literal Kingdom of God upon the earth in the last days; told the brethren to do all they could to make everything around them inviting and agreeable, and thus make their homes so many little heavens below."

At Brigham City, he said, "he rejoiced to behold the prosperity of the Latter-day Saints; but when he saw the fruits of the earth bestowed upon them in such abundance he felt anxious to "see the people adopt measures to take care of, and use wisely, those earth bounties, which our Heavenly Father is constantly pouring into the laps of the Saints."

On January 2nd, 1863, George A. Smith, in writing a letter to George Q. Cannon, in England, takes occasion to record the following: "President Young enjoys excellent health; cares multiply around him. He personally superintends everything of a public nature as far as possible. To conduct his private affairs would seem work enough for any man. He attends the bishops' meetings, visits the Endowment House, on almost every occasion, being as near as a man can be 'everywhere present;' preserving in his communications with the brethren the same simplicity of intercourse and implicit dependence upon the providence of God, as when he used to travel and preach without purse or scrip."
