Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

IN the summer of 1863, a man by the name of Ogilvie was logging in Bingham canyon. He picked up a piece of attractive looking ore which he sent to General Connor at Camp Douglas to be assayed. It was found to be a valuable specimen, containing gold and silver.

A few days later a party of Camp Douglas officers and their wives went to Bingham canyon "on a picnic"; the officers discovered a vein of ore and staked off a mining claim. Shortly afterwards, General Connor held a miners' meeting at Gardner's mill, on the Jordan, where mining laws or rules drawn up by the General were adopted, and a mining district was organized called, "West Mountain Mining District."

This was the beginning of mining in the great camps around Salt Lake City.

From the first President Young was opposed to the opening of these mines. He had seen the hordes trek through the city for California, when gold was discovered there, seeking "the God of this world." He knew that as far as his purposes were concerned, the opening of the mines would bring in an undesirable population; a group that would be opposed to all that he was trying to accomplish.

Speaking to this subject on the 25th of October, 1863, he said:

"It is a fearful deception which all the world labors under, and many of this people too, who profess to be not of the world, that gold is wealth. On the bare report that gold was discovered in these west mountains, men left their threshing machines, and their horses at large, to eat up and trample down and destroy the precious bounties of the earth. They at once sacrificed all at the glittering shrine of the popular idol, declaring they were now going to be rich, and would raise wheat no more. Should this feeling become universal on the discovery of gold mines in our immediate vicinity, nakedness, starvation, utter destitution and annihilation would be the inevitable lot of this people. Instead of its bringing to us wealth and independence, it would weld upon our necks chains of slavery."

And then calling the attention of the Saints to the real foundations of their prosperity:

"Can you not see that gold and silver rank among the things that we are the least in want of? We want an abundance of wheat and fine flour, of wine and oil, and of every choice fruit that will grow in our climate; we want silk, wool, cotton, flax and other textile substances of which cloth can be made; we want vegetables of various kinds to suit our constitutions and tastes and the products of flocks and herds; we want the coal and the iron that are concealed in these ancient mountains, the lumber from our saw mills, and the rock from our quarries; these are some of the great staples to which kingdoms owe their existence, continuance, wealth, magnificence, splendor, glory and power; in which gold and silver serve as mere tinsel to give the finishing touch to all this greatness. The colossal wealth of the world is founded upon and sustained by the common staples of life."

Such was the great wisdom of President Young. But General Connor had an entirely different viewpoint; nothing in short, except the destruction of the Church by inviting to Utah a large gentile population. Writing to a fellow officer in San Francisco, under date of July 21st, 1864, he said:

"My policy in this territory has been to invite hither a large gentile and loyal population, sufficient by peaceful means, and through the ballot box, to overwhelm the Mormons by mere force of numbers, and thus wrest from the Church—disloyal and traitorous to the core—the absolute and tyrannical control of temporal and civic affairs, or at least a population numerous enough to put a check on the Mormon authorities and give countenance to those who are striving to loosen the bonds with which they have been so long oppressed. With this in view, I have bent every energy and means of which I was possessed, both personal and official, towards the discovery and development of the mining resources of the Territory, using without stint the soldiers at my command, whenever and wherever it could be done, without detriment to the public service."

Who was General Connor that he should appoint himself to "loosen the bonds" of those who "had been so long oppressed?" Who had informed him that they were oppressed? Really, when I consider the great effort which President Young had put forth in his lifetime to build up "the Kingdom of God"; coming to these valleys in poverty and penury, to be free from gentile persecution, and then to be followed up and harassed by men of the type of the California volunteers, whose self-appointed mission was to tear down and destroy, I wonder how he and his brethren could peacefully submit to such treatment. But Brother Brigham knew that right would triumph, that the Kingdom would prevail, and that justice—even though delayed—would be done.

On the 6th of October, 1863, at the fall session of the general conference, President Young asked a few pertinent questions regarding the actions of the Camp Douglas soldiers.

"Who feeds and clothes and defrays the expenses of hundreds of men who are engaged in patroling the mountains and canyons all around us in search of gold? Who finds supplies for those who are sent here to protect the two great interests—the mail and telegraph lines across the continent—while they are employed ranging over these mountains in search of gold? And who has paid for the great number of picks, shovels, spades and other mining tools that they have brought with them? Were they really sent here to protect the mail and telegraph lines, or to discover if possible rich diggings in our immediate vicinity, with a view to flood the country with just such a population as they desire, to destroy, if possible, the identity of this 'Mormon' community, and every truth and virtue that remains?"

Again, in another sermon on the same day, President Young makes this reference to the opening of the mines.

"If the Lord permits gold mines to be opened here he will overrule it for the good of his Saints and the building up of his Kingdom. We have a great many friends who are out of this Church—who have not embraced the Gospel—and if the Lord suffers gold to be discovered here, I shall be satisfied that it is for the purpose of embellishing and adorning this Temple which we contemplate building, and we may use some of it as a circulating medium."

Brother Brigham knew also that in their quest for gold the miners had to have food, and that they would be almost entirely dependent on the Saints for their supplies. He was ready to meet them on this issue. Again quoting from his sermon on October 6th:

"I will say to the Latter-day Saints, when they come to you with well filled sacks of gold dust, to buy your produce, do not be afraid to ask six dollars a hundred for your flour, and more if it is worth it."

And then he continued: "I mean to watch them with a sleepless eye. Understand it, ye elders of Israel. Whether you do as you are told or not, I shall tell every man to take care that he is ready for every emergency—to sleep with one eye open, and, if he has a mind to, with his boots on and one leg out of bed. I shall not be found off my watch."

General Connor continued to search for gold, but did not find it as readily as he had anticipated. The ores of Utah were principally low grade copper and silver, containing little of the precious yellow metal. Consequently, the "rush" he hoped to bring about never materialized. However, during these months of 1863 and 1864 he and his men continued busily to prospect every canyon and ravine adjacent to Salt Lake valley. Connor himself was the first to discover silver bearing rock at the head of Little Cottonwood canyon and in 1864 he erected the first smelting furnace in the territory at Stockton in Tooele county.

As stated above, President Young continued to watch the soldiers' efforts. Writing to George Q. Cannon in England under date of November 30th, 1863, he said:

"The troops and others at Camp Douglas remain very quiet, the Lord having thus far thwarted their evil designs. At present the great majority of them are in the mountains getting out wood for camp use. Their past plans having failed, they at present are trying to induce an influx of outsiders by inflated representations of rich gold and silver deposits, in Utah's mountains, awaiting discovery and development. I think they will have to wait a good while."

And then in February, 1864, he wrote again to Elder Cannon as follows:

"The Utah diggers, on the bench east of the City, are the meanest lot of diggers that I have yet heard of, for after ransacking the country from side to side, in the mountains, in the canyons, among the hills, everywhere, trying to hire Indians and whites to tell them what they know about gold in Utah, and finding none, they still keep crying, printing and writing, gold, gold, gold in abundance in Utah, and that too when they cannot so much as provide themselves with bread without depending on the community for it. Bishop Sharp, notwithstanding they rejected his bid to furnish them with flour, has, at my request, for some time been keeping them in bread-stuff, and will endeavor to do so as far as possible, but that extra amount being supplied, causes wheat and flour to be rather high, the latter selling for $12 to $14 in legal tenders, and still the Utah diggers on the bench, the ones we are supplying with flour, are using every effort to induce an influx of poor people to a region where they have not only found no gold, but where they themselves are dependent for supplies."

Here I must not forget to mention that Colonel Connor and his California volunteers performed a hazardous service in January of this year (1863) when they marched into Cache valley, over snow and ice, and on Bear River, twelve miles north of Franklin, completely annihilated some three hundred Bannack and Shoshone Indians, under Chiefs Pocatello and Bear Hunter. Since the settlement of that valley these tribes had been a menace; insolent, haughty, plundering emigrants and settlers alike. Aid being requested of Col. Connor, he no doubt went on the theory that the only good Indian was a dead one, for he and his men did not cease firing until all the adult members of the group were killed. "This defeat," says Bancroft, "completely broke the power and spirit of the Indians, and the result was immediately felt throughout northern Utah, especially where settlements could be made on new and favorable sites, hitherto considered insecure."

II

In 1863 President Brigham Young began the erection of the great new Tabernacle. The earliest mention I can find of this famous building is in a letter from President Young to George Q. Cannon in England under date of April 20th, 1863, in which he says:

"I start this morning on a visit to our southern settlements, accompanied by Pres. Kimball, some of your quorum, and other brethren, and expect to be absent some six weeks. Pres. Wells tarries at home to over-see business in general, and to expedite the erection of a large and commodious Tabernacle, west of the Temple foundation."

It had long been President Young's expressed desire for a building that would hold all the people who were able to attend the Conference. The old Tabernacle had proved inadequate, and the weather permitted the using of the Bowery at the rear of the Tabernacle only in favorable seasons of the year. Therefore, with his splendid practical knowledge, and the resources which were at his command, he began the erection of the commodious building, which stands firm and strong today, as a monument to his genius and ability.

Further describing the progress of the building in 1863, George A. Smith, in writing to Richard Bently in England, under date of October 14th states that, "sixteen abutments, eight on each side of the new Tabernacle, are completed; a considerable amount of timber is on the ground towards the construction of the arch; the room is planned to be sixty-five feet in height without a column, two hundred thirty-two feet long, one hundred thirty-two feet wide, inside, the straight sides of the building being one hundred feet long, with half circles at each end."

Besides the labor, the planning, the means, the energy necessary to construct the great new Tabernacle, President Young put forth this year his utmost endeavor to have the work on the Temple continued with all diligence. Speaking to this end, on the opening day of the Conference in October, 1863, he said, in answer to his own question, "Why do we build Temples?"

"We build Temples because there is not a house on the face of the whole earth that has been reared to God's name, which will in anywise compare with his character, and that he can consistently call his house. . . . .

"We have already built two Temples; one in Kirtland, Ohio, and one in Nauvoo, Illinois. We commenced the foundation of one in Far West, Missouri. You know the history of the one we built in Nauvoo. It was burned, all the materials that would burn, and the walls have since been almost entirely demolished and used for building private dwellings, etc. I would rather it should thus be destroyed than remain in the hands of the wicked. If the Saints cannot live so as to inherit a Temple when it is built, I would rather never see a Temple built. . . . .

"God commanded us to build the Nauvoo Temple, and we built it, and performed our duty pretty well. There are Elders here today who labored on that house with not a shoe to their feet, or pantaloons that would cover their limbs, or a shirt to cover their arms. We performed the work, and performed it in the time that the Lord gave us to do it in. Apostates said that we never could perform that work, but through the blessings of God, it was completed and accepted of him. Apostates never build Temples unto God; but the Saints are called to do this work. . . . . .

"This Temple is to be built, but God forbid that it should ever be built for the hypocrite, the ungodly, the apostate, or any other miserably corrupted creature, that bears the image of our Creator, to enter into it to pollute it; I would rather never see it built than that this should transpire. . . . .

"I want to see the Temple built in a manner that it will endure through the Millennium. This is not the only Temple we shall build; there will be hundreds of them built and dedicated to the Lord. . . . .

"I want that Temple to stand as a proud monument to the faith, perseverance and industry of the Saints of God in the mountains, in the nineteenth century. . . . .

"We want to build that Temple as it should be built, that when we present it to the Lord, we may not have to cover our faces in shame."

In November, President Young took a trip south, with a number of his brethren, which he duly reported to George Q. Cannon in England, under date of November 30th, 1863:

"On the 16th inst., in company with Elder John Taylor, my sons Joseph A., Brigham Jun., and John W., and several others of my family, also quite a number of our home missionaries and others of the brethren, I started on a short visit to San Pete. We went by way of Nephi to Manti, and returned by the road through Spanish Fork canyon, reaching home on the 25th, having enjoyed a very pleasant, and, we doubt not, mutually beneficial trip. I spoke at only a few of the meetings, having caught cold in a meeting at Lehi, on our way south, which somewhat interfered with my speaking, though not with my traveling, and from which I am pretty well recovered."

On the 9th and 10th of January, 1864, President Young with his counselors, Heber C. Kimball and Daniel H. Wells, together with some of the Quorum of Twelve, held special services and dedicated "the new meeting house at Farmington." This splendid building, built of the native rock, sturdy and strong, is still in use by the people of Farmington, and is capable of housing generations yet to come.

The great work that Brigham and his brethren were doing in these years was bearing fruit. Writing to George Q. Cannon in England, under date of February 12th, 1864, George A. Smith records: "In our experience we never saw Zion so healthy—morally, physically, socially and politically—and so well prepared for a storm." And then, as if to exult over the rapid progress of Zion, he writes further: "Let the minions of hell blow high, or low, the Kingdom is ready to roll over and grind to powder the little obstacles that may impede its progress."

The April Conference in 1864 convened from the 6th to the 10th, with President Young in charge and all meetings held in the old Tabernacle. On Sunday, the closing day, Brother Brigham, according to George D. Watt, the reporter, "delivered a very impressive discourse, showing that the Gospel of the Kingdom could never be powerful to save, unless the Holy Ghost dictated the speaker, and carried home to the souls of the hearers the words of life; that the wisdom and learning of men never did bring the people to a knowledge of the truth."

On the 15th of May President Young again took the stand in the old Tabernacle.

"My name is had for good and evil upon the whole earth," he said, "as promised to me. Thirty years ago, Brother Joseph, in a lecture to the Twelve said to me, "your name shall be known for good and evil throughout the world," and it is so. The good love me, weak and humble as I am, and the wicked hate me; but there is no individual on the earth but what I would lead to salvation if he would let me. I would take him by the hand, like a child, and lead him like a father, in the way that would bring him to salvation."

From the 16th to the 26th of May, inclusive, the President and several of the Twelve made their first trip to visit the new settlements which were forming in Bear Lake valley, under the leadership of Charles C. Rich. The journey was made to Cache valley; then up Bear River to Paris, and thence to the various settlements as far as Fish Haven. "We found the brethren busy," said President Young, "prosperous, peaceful and happy, with excellent prospects for abundant harvests."

June 1st, 1864, was President Young's 63rd birthday. At the President's "farm home," (which I suppose was on the present site of Liberty Park) he invited Heber C. Kimball, George A. Smith, and members of their families to "a splendid dinner." The reporter who was there relates that "two roast turkeys were on the table and strawberries and cream were served for dessert."

On June 11, the President was at Ogden city, where he occupied a portion of the time in a meeting in the Tabernacle.

"Brother Kimball and myself have come here," he said, "and expect to go to other places with the Twelve, to speak the things that are in our hearts. First of all, it is the Kingdom of God in our hearts; it is the Kingdom of God or nothing. The Almighty has commenced his work of sending forth his angels from the heavens, and revealing his will. He gave us Joseph, and others, and bestowed the holy priesthood upon his servants. We are sharers in the gifts and graces that God has bestowed upon his people. This is a day of days, and a time of times; this is the fulness of times, in which all things that are in Christ are to be gathered in one. This is a momentous period, and we feel an earnestness to lead the minds of those who profess to believe in Jesus, in Joseph, and in the Latter-day work, to comprehend the great duties of life by the spirit of the Lord, that they may be one in heart, one in sentiment, and thereby be made one in action, that we may behold the glory of God; this is my desire and the desire of my brethren."

Was ever a clearer or more beautiful statement made as to the object and purposes of the great latter-day work, which Brother Brigham had assisted so mightly in establishing here in these valleys?

In September of this year, the President made his annual trip to visit the southern settlements. I am again indebted to George D. Watt for an account of this trip. (Deseret News, Oct. 5th and 12th, 1864).

"On the 1st ult., President Brigham Young and company left Great Salt Lake City to visit our southern settlements. He was absent 29 days and traveled between 700 and 800 miles. Of the Twelve, George A. Smith, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, Ezra T. Benson, Lorenzo Snow and Franklin D. Richards joined the company in Great Salt Lake City; Orson Hyde at Sevier River bridge, Amasa Lyman at Fillmore, and, on the return, Erastus Snow joined the company at Round valley. There was no formal organization in traveling, for every person seemed to know his place and duty, and not a single murmur of discontent, unhappiness or fault finding occurred to ruffle the continued peace that prevailed during the journey.

"Thirty-seven settlements were visited and thirty-nine meetings were held, in which one hundred twenty-four discourses were delivered.

"The reception given to the President and his company evidenced the universal confidence and good feeling of the people towards the constituted authorities of the Church. The President's visit was made a time of jubilee, feasting and rejoicing; the schools were out, headed by their teachers, and children gave their joyous bows of welcome as we passed; young men and young maidens said, "Welcome to President Brigham Young and company;" the stalwart farmer, mechanic and lumberman, ceased for a time their labor to rejoice in the general rejoicing and merry-making, and the veterans bared their silvered heads in token of welcome. Companies of horsemen and bands of music, with colors flying, and in some instances platoons of beautiful girls dressed in white, met the company to escort them into the cities and bid them welcome.

"At Nephi—C. H. Bryan, bishop—a wagon and team was fitted out for the brass band of that place, who courteously tendered their services to the President and company during the trip. It would be no easy task to say too much in praise of the brethren composing that band, for they were ready on all occasions to awaken their beautiful strains, and both man and beast were comforted and inspired by the sweet influences of their music. The brass band of Nephi formed an important item in the President's trip, and they will be held in grateful remembrance. . . .

"When the company descended to the settlements south of the rim, they feasted upon the fruits of the vine. The cotton plant was exposing its fiber to the busy fingers of the gatherer, and every person seemed alive in the work of improvement and self-preservation. May the heavenly impressions received during the President's trip south in September, 1864, never be effaced from the minds of the participants."

III

In the Bowery, at the rear of the old Tabernacle, on Sunday, the 6th of November, 1864, President Young preached an interesting sermon.

He had been listening to a number of his brethren report their missionary labors, and after they had spoken he arose to make a few comments. He began by cautioning them that now they had returned from their missions they should not lose the spirit of their great calling, but should continue faithful, at home as well as abroad.

"There is one thing I wish to say to the elders," he continued, "who have returned from their fields of labor, do not, for your own sakes, lay aside the garments of the priesthood and think your missions at an end; for have we not enlisted to build up the Kingdom of God on the earth, and establish truth and righteousness, and is not this the work of a lifetime? . . . .

"Let not my brethren consider that their mission is at an end, if they wish to continue to increase in influence, power, judgment and truth, in righteousness, and in the knowledge of God, which he may please to constantly reveal unto them through their faithfulness; but let every man be faithful in spirit, striving continually to conquer every passion, and to subdue every wrong feeling, and bring into subjection every unholy aspiration of his being, and be willing for the spirit of truth—the spirit of the Gospel—to lead and guide him from day to day, from hour to hour, and from moment to moment." . . . .

And then he proceeded to paint for them a beautiful picture of the glories of the Kingdom to which they belonged, and the magnanimity of the King who presides over it.

"There is a peculiar trait in the character of the Kingdom of God, that is diverse from all other Kingdoms that have, do or will exist; and the King we have enlisted to serve is different from all other kings, for he wishes all those over whom he reigns, to share with him in the glory of his Kingdom. . . . . .

"The King whom we serve has promised to make all who overcome the world, the flesh, and the devil, kings, like unto himself. What king, besides the Lord of Glory, has made such a promise to his subjects? Not only will the worthy subjects of the Kingdom of God become kings, but more, each one will become a king of kings and a lord of lords. . . .

"When the holy priesthood, which is after the order of the Son of God, is upon the earth, and its organizations, ordinances, gospel, powers, authorities and blessings, are enjoyed by the children of men, then by means of sealing powers and keys, and an everlasting covenant, the sons of men become the sons of God, by regeneration, and are entitled, every man in his order, to the privileges, exaltations, principalities and powers, kingdoms and thrones, which are held and enjoyed by the great Father of our race." . . . . .

Thus Brother Brigham presents to his hearers his own clear view of "the glories of the Kingdom" and the power it has to exalt mankind. And he holds out to the faithful this beautiful promise, that if they are true to the King they serve, they may "share with him in the glory of his Kingdom."

On Friday, the 11th of November, five days after giving the above sermon in the Bowery, President Young, accompanied by Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, George A. Smith, George Q. Cannon, and his two sons, Joseph A. and John W. Young, began a trip to visit Ogden and the intermediate settlements. Writing to Daniel H. Wells, in England, under date of November 18th, he gives an interesting account of this trip.

"We left the city on Friday the 11th inst., and held meetings on Saturday and Sunday, the 12th and 13th inst., in Kays ward. Leaving Kays ward for Ogden on the evening of the 13th, we held meetings there on Monday and Tuesday, the 14th and 15th inst., and had besides a very interesting trip up Ogden Canyon, on the new road, to Huntsville, a distance of about twelve miles from Ogden City. A party in the evening of the 15th at Ogden, ended our labors there, and on the morning of the 16th we started on our return journey, expecting to reach the city that afternoon. When we had traveled about a mile on this side of Kay's ward, we were caught by a violent storm of wind, which raged so furiously, and carried the snow, which had fallen the previous night, so fiercely in our faces, that it seemed quite questionable for a time whether we would be able to reach Farmington or not. We were compelled to stop there all the afternoon and night—the storm being so violent all that time that it was quite impossible to travel. The wind lulled yesterday morning, and we were able to resume our journey homeward. This storm is said to have been the heaviest, so far as the strength of the wind itself is concerned, that has been experienced by our people in Davis county. Much serious damage has been inflicted upon the citizens there: fences and out-buildings have been leveled and seriously shaken; fourteen dwellings have been un-roofed in Bountiful alone, besides their meeting house, and it is estimated that one-fourth of the feed in that place has been blown away and destroyed during the storm."

Today, as we roll along the smooth highway between Kaysville and Farmington in closed automobiles, it is difficult to picture Brother Brigham, pushing his team against that storm, the snow beating fiercely in his face; but such were the rigors and discomforts of pioneer life.

The year 1864 drew to a close. It had been a pleasant and profitable year for the President; one of the best of his life. His health had been good, his work had been successful, and all about him were evidences of the growth and prosperity of Zion. The enemies of the Church, too, for the time being, were silent.

In writing to Finley C. Free, a young missionary in England, three days after Christmas, he records the following:

"Everything is quiet here in the valleys, and the Saints are peaceably pursuing their ordinary avocations. The winter has been a mild one thus far; considerable rain has fallen, which has been of immense benefit to the ground in soaking it thoroughly. On the night of the 26th, the snow fell to the depth of 12 inches on the level; but it is a soft snow, and the weather being mild, it is fast melting away. The Legislature is in session; but the members have adjourned for Christmas holidays. We are having the usual run of parties for this season, and they are passing off pleasantly. The Saints are generally enjoying their religion, and our meetings are interesting. Our enemies are hoping to see us suffer and be broken up through their machinations, but they will be disappointed this time, as they always have been. The army on the bench have been so contemptibly insignificant that nobody notices them, and they are sinking lower and lower every day."

And then Brother Brigham adds in this letter to the young Elder Free, one of his splendid admonitions, and timely bits of advice, which so mark him as a man of wisdom. It should be read by all elders and missionaries.

"I am pleased to see the feeling which you manifest in your letter and that you have a desire to magnify your priesthood and calling, and honorably fill the mission which has been assigned unto you. By cherishing these desires, and carrying them into practical effect, your mission will be a great blessing to you, and to the people in whose midst you labor; and in years to come you will be able to reflect with pleasure upon your present operations and associations.

"A young man, during his first mission, has the opportunity afforded him of establishing a character among his brethren, and the people of God, for diligence, integrity and virtue, which will be of great service to him throughout his future life, if that life should be in accordance with these principles. A bad impression left upon his brethren by a young elder on his first mission, is afterwards difficult to eradicate. Hence, young men should be exceedingly careful in their movements; they are not the only ones, however, who should be careful; all, both young and old, must exercise great care in resisting temptation and sin. If you live strictly in accordance with the requirements of our religion and take up your cross and deny yourself all worldly pleasures while you are absent on your mission, you will feel happy to stay, and continue your labors, or you will feel happy should you be released to return; and when you do return under such circumstances, having been faithful in all things, you will experience a peace and joy that will amply recompense you for your faithfulness, and any privations that you may have to endure and that you never could know anything about were you to be unfaithful."

On Saturday, the 4th of March, 1865, Abraham Lincoln was for the second time inaugurated president of the United States. The victories of the Union army, the preservation of the Union, and the inauguration of Lincoln, were made the occasion for a great celebration by the citizens of Salt Lake City. The leadership in the celebration was assumed by the soldiers at Camp Douglas, consequently the brethren were not requested to take a prominent part, but we have an interesting account of the whole affair, as related by President Young, in a letter to Daniel H. Wells in England, under date of March 13th, 1865. His comments are well worth hearing:

"The celebration of the 4th inst. passed off very quietly. There was quite a large demonstration on the occasion, the procession reaching about one mile in length. The people from the bench played a rather insignificant part in the procession, they not exceeding 250 men, probably, all told. After parading the principal streets, they collected on Main street, opposite the new market house, and between Kimball and Lawrence's and Jennings' stores. Judge Titus made an oration of an hour and a half's length—a dry, uninteresting, pointless affair, that fell very flatly upon the ears of his auditors, his friends among the number, in fact the latter were very much annoyed in listening to his remarks, for, without doubt, they fully expected to astonish the people, with his display of legal and historical lore, and to draw a wide distinction in their minds between the men of erudition, such as are now here as officers, and the people's leaders in the priesthood. But no man ever made a greater mistake. In no other city in the Union could such a crowd of people, variously estimated at from five to ten thousand, have been kept together so patiently, under such circumstances, to listen to such a speech—the speaker would have been cried down. The weather was cold and the people had to stand in melting snow for upwards of two hours, during the proceedings. Captain Hooper followed in a speech of about fifteen minutes' length, which was right to the point, and elicited several cheers. . . ."

"After the celebration, several of the officers," continued President Young, "stated to the mayor and some members of the council, how much pleasure it would give the commanding General (Connor) and the officers, to have a ball tendered by the City Council to him previous to his leaving for Denver, which he intended to do on the 8th inst. The City Council felt that 'if the General and the other officers could accept an invitation to the ball, after saying what they had respecting us, they were quite willing to tender him one, and thus have them give the lie to all the stories which they had published against us.' He and the officers accepted the invitation gladly, and the ball came off on the evening of the 7th. They professed to be delighted, and the General was profuse in his acknowledgments of the honor which had been done him.

"What a change do we here behold!" President Young continued. "You know how loftily they held their heads, and how much they hoped to accomplish when they came here. Gaily and jauntily, with all the pomp and circumstances that would be likely to impress the citizens here with respect and fear, they came into this city—a large command, with horses fat and fine, and all the et ceteras necessary for the accomplishment of their purposes. They felt to say—'Let our eyes look upon Zion, and let her be defiled.' But they knew not the thoughts of the Lord, neither did they understand his counsel. Their numbers have dwindled to probably 300, and they have scarcely a horse that can be used; money is so scarce that they cannot even pay for going to the theater, and the celebration of the anniversary of the Bear River battle had to be deferred for want of funds to carry it out, and even when the celebration did come off, the money to pay for it had to be borrowed."
