Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR

ON Monday, the 5th of June, 1865, President Brigham Young, accompanied by John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Franklin D. Richards, George Q. Cannon, his son, John W., and a number of other prominent brethren, started on a trip to Utah county, where they were joined by George A. Smith.

The object of the trip was to assist Col. O. H. Irish, the United States Indian agent, in making a treaty with the Indians, by which the Indians claiming lands in Utah Territory were requested to sell their lands to the government, and remove to the reservation in Uintah Basin. Col. Irish did not feel quite capable of going ahead with these negotiations without the assistance of President Young.

In writing about this trip to his counselor, Daniel H. Wells, in England, under date of June 20th, President Young relates as follows:

"The Indians had been gathered from all parts of the Indian farm at Spanish Fork. On the way down we met with the Saints at Springville. The next day we met the Indians at the farm, and after considerable speechifying on the part of the Indians and the agent, and some remarks by myself, the reluctance which they evinced against selling their lands was removed. We met the same evening with the Saints at Payson. The next day we repaired again to the farm, and after the treaty was signed by the chiefs, we went to Spanish Fork and met with the people in their new meeting house at that place.

"The next day we went to Springville and met with the Saints there again, and then returned to Payson. The next day, the 10th inst., our meeting commenced at that place, and was continued for two days. The people turned out in large numbers, and the meetings were very excellent. The four choirs, and the Salt Creek band, which were present, added much to the interest and pleasure of the meetings. We returned to the city on the 12th inst."

And then, going more into detail about the treaty with the Indians, he continues:

"In arranging this treaty with the Indians, the influence which the Lord has given me as the leader of his people, was plainly manifested. The Indians had an idea, that if they disposed of their lands, we would have to leave them also, and this they did not wish, as they already looked upon us as the bona fide owners of the land, and they wished their children to grow up with ours, and themselves to live with us as they had done. They could not be induced to entertain for a moment the idea of selling their lands, until I spoke to them, and told them my wishes, when all opposition vanished. They bore strong testimony to our treatment of them. They told Colonel Irish—who in all these transactions cordially desired my counsel and cooperation—that the agents who had been here before him, had two tongues, two faces and two hearts; but that I had always spoken in one way, and with one tongue to them, and had never deceived them. The superintendent received evidence, if he needed any, to convince him, that our humane and fatherly treatment of the Indians had had its effect, and given us justly grounded influence."

Upon his return to Salt Lake City on Monday, the 12th of June, President Young learned that several distinguished visitors had arrived during his absence, who were anxiously waiting to interview him. In the same letter as the above to Daniel H. Wells he states: "We found Hon. Schuyler Colfax, Speaker of the House of Representatives of the United States; Lieut. Gov. Bross of Illinois, and Messrs. Richardson and Bowles of the New York Tribune and the Springfield (Mass.) Republican, in the city."

These gentlemen were making a leisure trip across the continent for the purpose of interest and education. Speaker Colfax was especially desirous of gaining knowledge of the western portion of the country which he felt greatly in need of in his work as presiding officer of the House of Representatives. Colfax was a young, ambitious man, forty-two years of age, soon to become vice president of the United States under President U. S. Grant.

On the afternoon of June 14th there was an interview between Speaker Colfax and President Young, which Bowles describes as "a pleasant, generous, gossiping sitting, two hours long." The speaker complimented the President on the appearance of the city and this sentiment was voiced by Mr. Bowles in a letter to his paper, a paragraph of which is as follows: "Surely great worldly wisdom has presided over their settlement and organization; there have been tact and statesmanship in the leaders; there have been industry, frugality and integrity in the people; or one could not witness such progress, such wealth, such varied triumphs of industry and ingenuity and endurance as here present themselves."

President Young further describes their visit to Daniel H. Wells as follows: "Our citizens have paid them every attention, and they have expressed great gratification at the kindness they have received, and delight at the beauty of our city and the fruits of our industry, which are everywhere visible."

Samuel Bowles, in his book, "Across the Continent," published later in the year (1865) gives a pen picture of President Young. "He is a very hale and hearty looking man, young for sixty-four, with a light gray eye, cold and uncertain, a mouth and chin betraying a great and determined will." Perhaps President Young was justified in being "cold and uncertain" to these strangers. He had endured enough abuse and calumny in his life-time to make him cautious towards newspaper men who came to Salt Lake City to write up Utah, the Mormons, and particularly himself.

On Sunday, June 18th, President Young addressed a large congregation of Saints in the Bowery, and had the distinguished visitors in his audience. He was plain spoken in his language.

"There cannot be found a people upon the face of the whole earth," he said, "who are more perfect in the belief and practice of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, than are the Latter-day Saints, and there exists no people who are more easily governed. We have been gathered from many nations, and speak many languages; we have been ruled by different nationalities, and educated in different religions, yet we dwell together in Utah under one government, believe in the same God, and worship him in the same way, and we are all one in Christ Jesus. . . . .

"If the message which the Lord is sending among the nations is rejected by them they will crumble and fall and cease to exist. The set time has come for the Lord to favor Zion; he is sending his servants to the uttermost parts of the earth to declare the truth to the inhabitants thereof, which they can receive or reject, and be saved or be damned.

"To me, it is the Kingdom of God or nothing upon the earth. Without it I would not give a farthing for the wealth, glory, prestige and power of all the world combined, for like the dew upon the grass, it passeth away and is forgotten, and like the flower of the grass, it withereth and is not. Death levels the most powerful monarch with the poorest starving mendicant, and both must stand before the judgment seat of Christ to answer for the deeds done in the body."

On June 19th, Speaker Colfax and his party resumed their journey westward by overland stage. They were to return again in four years and pay a second visit to the City and Territory.

Writing to Daniel H. Wells again, under date of July 24th, President Young continues his narrative:

"Since my last to you, myself and the brethren who usually accompany me, made a trip to Nephi, and dedicated the new meeting house. We held a two days meeting there, holding meetings also at several of the settlements on our way going and returning. We left the city on the 21st of June, and returned on the 27th. On Friday the 6th inst., (July) we again started south on a preaching tour; on the 7th and 8th we held a two days meeting at Provo; on the 9th we met at Santa Quin; on the 10th we held a meeting with the folks at Moroni, Sanpete County; on the 11th and 12th, held a two days meeting at Mt. Pleasant; afterwards held meetings at Springtown and Fort Ephraim, and on the 14th and 15th, held a two days meeting at Manti. We returned home on the 18th inst. During this last trip we met with the Saints on 18 different occasions, and preached a very great number of discourses, and in every instance the Spirit of the Lord was poured out upon the speakers and the people, and we all rejoiced together. . . . .

"At no previous time have I ever felt more calm, composed and at ease respecting the schemes of our enemies and their success, than I do at the present. . . . .

"We have cultivated the earth, raised our flocks and herds, developed the resources of the country, established settlements, built cities, pursued our labors as we have seen proper, and worshipped our God and lived our religion Without let or any hindrance of any consequence thus far in these mountains, despite of all their plotting and threatening. The gladdening rays of the sun, the fertilizing rains and snows, the crystal streams from the mountains, and all the varied and beneficent operations of the seasons, have all been experienced by us since our residence here, to as goodly an extent as though we had not an enemy in the world, or never had a menace hurled at us; and why should we not enjoy them, and thank our Father and God for their bestowal? Every promise He has made us has been and will be fulfilled. It is the privilege of the wicked to threaten the people and Kingdom of God, if they so wish, and receive the punishment which such a course brings and it is the privilege of the Saints to be peaceful and happy, and enjoy every blessing they can obtain, without being in the least disturbed by any of the demonstrations of the ungodly. This is the course for us to take."

Thus President Young expresses his faith, and outlines with great wisdom the path for the Saints to follow.

It was on this trip south than an interesting circumstance occurred which President Young relates to his son, Brigham Young, Jun., with some detail, in a letter under date of August 22nd. The young man was on a mission in England.

"In San Pete county, during our visit there, when there was an anxiety manifested by the presiding officers, about giving notice to the people, to attend the watering of their crops, which if they had done would have called off their attention from the meetings, I requested the privilege of giving out the notice. I told the Saints that if they would leave their houses and settlements from depredations of the Indians, that I would promise them, in the name of the Lord, that they should have better crops than if they were to neglect the meetings and attend to watering. That night the rain began to descend, and during the remainder of our stay, it rained every night, and we were threatened with showers through every meeting, and on the last day had to adjourn to a house to be out of the rain. the Lord has proved, and is still proving to his Saints, that, if they will be faithful to him, he will provide and care for them."

In September President Young and party made a trip south as far as Saint George and return. In writing to Brigham Young, Jun., under date of October 3rd, 1865, George A. Smith relates:

"Our visits to the south become annually more important. There is great anxiety manifested by the Saints to see your father and hear him preach, many of them hearing him for the first time, thus showing the rapidity of the increase of population, both by artificial and natural immigration. He went beyond his strength many times in preaching to them; in some instances his remarks were cut short for lack of strength. It was astonishing to see the large assemblies which met at those points where meetings were held for one or two days."

II

During the October Conference of 1865, President Young again seized upon the subject of "home manufacturing," which was very vital to him and which he had advocated with all his power since the settlement of the Saints in the valleys. On the occasion he began by addressing the Sisters:

"I am addressing myself to the ladies of the Kingdom of God; to those who know how to keep their houses, furniture and beds pure and clean; who can cook food for their husbands and children in a way that it will be clean, tasteful and wholesome. The woman that can do this I call a lady. In this view I differ from the world generally; for the lady of the world is not supposed to know anything about what is going on in the kitchen; her highest ambition is to be sure to be in the fashion, at no matter what cost to her husband and father; she considers that she may as well be out of the world as to be out of the fashion."

And then he went straight to his subject, and called upon the sisters—

"To listen to the will of God concerning them, that they go to now and manufacture from straw, grass, or any other fitting material that grows in these valleys, their bonnets and hats, and cease to sell the barley, the oats, the wheat, etc., to buy imported ones, or when the wheat and the oats and the barley are all sold, to get your husbands to run into debt, for that which you can as well make yourselves as not. . . .

"There has been a great deal said upon the subject of home manufacturing; and the article of straw is the readiest to come at of any other material of which clothing is made. Now, my sister,s will you hearken to those who spend all their time to do you good, who traverse the world over to gather the Saints, to preach the Gospel, make believers, and gather them together that they may become Saints—will you hearken to this counsel and obey it?

"Rye should be sown in the spring, and cut in the proper season, and cured as it should be to make good straw for hats and bonnets, and our boys and girls should braid it, and have it made up, and save the immense amount of ready means which we have to have to pay out for that article along. Will the sisters belonging to the Kingdom of God do this?"

Following this admonition to the sisters, Brother Brigham continued his sermon with a strong and convincing argument in favor of the Saints "doing their merchandising." This subject had been on his mind for some time, and now he determined to advocate it. He could not see any use in building up the "gentile merchants," whom, he said, "would use their means to destroy the Kingdom of God, if they could."

"My next discourse will be upon merchandising," he continued. "We are here in these valleys of the mountains, organized as a people, and we know how we came to be here; and we know the designs of God and the designs of our enemies concerning us; we know the distinction which is drawn between this people and the world; these things we understand."

Then he launched boldly into his proposal.

"Now, we propose to the bishops, presiding brethren, and leading members of the Church, who are here assembled to represent the kingdom of God upon the earth, and all those who are not here, who act in these capacities in the various places where there are Saints gathered together, to do their own merchandising and cease to give the wealth which the Lord has given us to those who would destroy the Kingdom of God and scatter us to the four winds, if they had the power.

"Cease to buy from them the gewgaws and frivolous things they bring here to sell us for our money and means—means that we should have to bring the poor here, to build our temples, our towers, ornament our public grounds and buildings, and to beautify our cities. For, as merchandising has generally been conducted here, instead of having our has generally been conducted here, instead of having our means to perform these public works, it has been borne away by our enemies by the millions. . . .

"I know that it is the will of God that we should sustain ourselves, for, if we do not, we must perish, so far as receiving aid from any other quarter, except God and ourselves."

Brother Brigham had lived long enough in the Kingdom, and had had a sufficiently strenuous experience, to know that no aid could be expected from the outside. The strength that the kingdom developed would have to be developed from within. "Why should we build up our enemies?" he asked, "when they would immediately turn around and scatter us to the four winds if they could." There was only one answer that the Saints could give: they must look to themselves.

It was in this year of 1865 that President Young began another of his forward looking improvements, a telegraph line, north and south through the settlements. For more than a year the great continental telegraph line had been operating successfully between California and the Atlantic Coast, through Salt Lake City. President Young appreciated this means of communication and realized what a help it would be in connecting the scattered settlements of the Saints. During a recent trip to Cache valley, in the month of August, he had said:

"I wish to present before the people the subject of a telegraph wire through our settlements. It is a subject which is worthy of our attention, and an enterprise which, when completed, will be of immense benefit in many ways, to our country. This work we can do almost entirely within ourselves. We can get the poles from the mountains and plant them; the wires and insulators we shall be under the necessity of importing from abroad, and for which we must pay money. the freighting, we can do ourselves."

To this end, them, he issued a circular on the 9th of November, 1865, "To the Bishops and Presiding Elders of the various wards and settlements of Utah Territory, from St. Charles, Richland county, in the north, to St. George, Washington county, in the south: Brethren—The proper time has arrived for us to take the necessary steps to build the telegraph line to run north and south through the Territory, according to the plan which has been proposed. The necessity for the speedy construction of this work is pressing itself upon our attention, and scarcely a week passes that we do not feel the want of such a line. Occurrences frequently happen in distant settlements, which require to be known immediately in the other parts of the Territory; and, in many instances, public and private interests suffer through not being able to transmit such news by any quicker channel than the ordinary mails. We are rapidly spreading abroad, and our settlements extend to a great distance on every hand. We now require to be united by bonds which will bring us into more speedy and close communication with one another; the center should be in position to communicate at any moment with the extremities, however remote; and the extremities, however remote; and the extremities be able, with ease and speed, to make their wants and circumstances known to the center. Instead of depending altogether upon the tardy operations of the mails for the transmission of information, we should bring into requisition every improvement which our age affords, to facilitate our intercourse and to render our intercommunication more easy. These requirements the Telegraph will supply, and it is well adapted to our position and the progress of the age in which we live.

"This fall and winter will be a very suitable time to haul and set the poles along the entire line to set the poles along the entire line to set the wire; and we wish you to take the proper steps immediately in your several wards and settlements, to have this part of the labor efficiently and entirely accomplished, so that we may be able to stretch the wire as soon as it can be imported and put up next season. From settlement to settlement let the men of judgment select and mark the route for the line to run, so as to have it as straight as possible, and yet convenient to the road. The poles should be 22 feet long, eight inches at the butt, and five inches at the top; and, to be durable, they, should be stripped of their bark, and they should be set seventy yards apart, and be put four feet in the ground.

"The collecting of the means needed for the purchase of wire has been deferred until the present time, through the representations of many of the Bishops to the effect that after harvest, the people would be in a better position to advance the money. The grain is now harvested, and the time as suggested as being the most convenient for collecting of this means has arrived. We wish each of you to take immediate measures throughout your share of the wire, and it should all be paid in by the first of February, 1866, as by that time it will be needed to send east.

"The wire, insulators, etc., will probably weigh fifty-five tons, or upwards, and to bring these articles from the frontiers, teams will have to be sent down from each settlement this spring, with the teams which we send down for the poor."

Thus says B. H. Roberts, "Was a telegraph line built by a Church!"

I must say something here of the "Black Hawk war," which began in this year, 1865, and which during this and the two succeeding years, caused President Young and the Saints considerable trouble and anxiety, bringing about an expense of more than a million dollars, and resulting in the death of seventy-five of the citizens of the Territory. The raids conducted by Black Hawk and his band were principally in the southern settlements, from Thistle valley, in Sanpete county, to Kanab and Pipe Springs, on the Arizona border. Hundreds of cattle and horses were stolen by these marauders, and in many instances the brethren guarding them were ruthlessly slain; indeed events came to such a pass that the counties of Piute and Sevier, and the settlements of Berrysville, Winsor, Upper and Lower Kanab, Shunesburg and Springdale, had to be abandoned.

During all this time President Young took a pacific attitude towards the Indians, and, in his sermons, I can find no trace of bitterness or revenge; on the contrary, he was willing to lend them a helping hand, and sympathized with them "In their degraded state."

Speaking on this subject at Springville, on the 28th of July, 1866, he said:

"The Lord has brought us here and it is all right. We are not intruders but are here by the providence of God. We should now use the Indians kindly, and deal with them so gently, that we will win their hearts and affections to us more strongly than before; and the much good that has been done them and the many kindnesses that have been shown them, will come up before them, and they will see that we are their friends. We could circumscribe their camps and kill every man, woman and child of them. This is what others have done, and if we were to do it, what better are we than the wicked and the ungodly? It is not our duty to kill them; but it is our duty to save their lives and the lives of their children.

"Shall we do as the Lamanites do? No. I forbid it in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ—I forbid any elder or member of this Church slaying an innocent Lamanite, any more than he would slay an innocent white man; but treat them as they are in their degraded state. . . .

"We shall have an end to this Indian war; they are not going to slay us by any means; no; they will see the time they would rather defend this people than slay them. The present difficulties will end in the benefit of the Latter-day Saints, and the exaltation of the poor, ignorant Lamanites; and the person or persons who supply the Lamanites with powder and lead, and foster and encourage them in killing the Saints, will find that their iniquity will turn upon their own heads. Let the Indians live, and help them to live. . . . Let us set an example for all mankind to follow, in the high road to peace, love, union, fellowship and confidence, restoring to the world that which that which has been lost."

III

President Young's health was not good during the winter of 1865 and 1866; he was troubled with colds and rheumatism and was frequently confined to his home. George Q. Cannon, in writing to Brigham Young, Jun., in England, under date of March 24, 1866, relates:

"Your father has been confined to his home with a cold and rheumatism for about nine days. It settled upon his lungs, and he has had a severe cough. He is improving rapidly, and I expect he will be out in the office in a day or two at farthest. This cold, with a severe cough, is quite an epidemic at the present time here, and a good many are affected by it."

Under date of April 9th, President Young wrote to his son, Brigham, Jun.

"I have been suffering from a very severe cold, accompanied with rheumatism, which has prevented me from attending to much business. My health has improved very much of late, so much so that I was able to attend the afternoon meeting in the Tabernacle on the 5th . . . . As the weather becomes more mild, and I can go out and take the air, I feel that my health will soon be fully restored. Colds with a severe cough and a species of lung fever have been very common of late."

Despite all hindrances Brother Brigham kept at his tasks. He was in attendance at all sessions of the April Conference, and spoke at several meetings with great power and vigor. When the discussion came up regarding the men who were to be sent to the Missouri River to bring in the immigrants, the clerk of the Conference relates that, "President Young instructed the Bishops to select praying men for teamsters to go for the immigration—good men who use good language and are of good habits; men who will be fathers to the people, kind to the Saints and kind to their teams."

At the closing session of the Conference he left the following beautiful blessing with the people:

"I bless my brethren of the Apostles in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ of Nazareth. I bless the High Priests, and the Seventies and the Elders, and ask God my Father in Heaven to pour upon them the richest blessings of heaven and earth; to bless them with the things of the earth, the mysteries of the Kingdom, and the glories of the upper worlds; with wisdom, with knowledge, and with understanding. I also bless the bishops and the lesser priesthood with the same blessings; and I bless this congregation and the community of the Latter-day Saints, and all the honest in heart upon the face of the whole earth. I bless you as fathers, as mothers, as brothers and sisters. I bless our musicians; I bless our brothers and sisters who have come here from a distance, to make melody in our hearts by their singing; and I bless our choir in this city, and each and every one in this congregation—our friends, our brethren, our sisters, our houses, our barns, our fields, our flocks and our herds, and everything that belongs to us.

"I feel to bless the mountains and valleys and the land of Joseph—the land of Zion, and pray may the peace of God rest upon the Latter-day Saints, and all who wish well to Zion. Receive ye the blessings of the Lord, my brethren and sisters; go in peace to your homes; be faithful to your covenants and holy callings; be true to each other, to your covenants and holy callings; be true to each other, to your God and to your country, that we may be worthy to enjoy the blessings of a land of freedom and equal rights, and those things which the Lord will give unto us. Be ye blessed; and I bless you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Amen."

If anyone doubts the spiritual leadership and the spiritual greatness of President Young, let him read and re-read this blessing. The soul of the man is revealed here.

The Spring and Summer of 1866 passed pleasantly in Salt Lake City. Writing to his son Brigham, Jr., under date of July 5th, the President states that "everything is moving along quietly here in the city. The health of the people generally is very good. The promise for grain, vegetable and fruit crops is very encouraging."

On July 13th, the President, accompanied by Heber C. Kimball, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith, F. D. Richards, George Q. Cannon and a number of other brethren, left the City for Grantsville, to dedicate the new meetinghouse there. At Black Rock they were met by Bishop J. Rowberry and Capt. J. Gillespie and a company of mounted men who accompanied them the remainder of the journey.

At the opening meeting, in speaking to the people, according to R. L. Campbell, the reporter.

"President Young expressed himself that his sole object in visiting the Saints is to do good. The blessings of food, lodging and the association of friends, he enjoyed at home. But our great aim ought to be to build up the Kingdom of God. We have gathered here for that purpose, and in gathering we have brought ourselves with our peculiarities along. He cautioned the Saints against allowing the word of God to be choked by the cares of the world, for many are loving the world, in their haste to get rich, as though they had for-gotten that the things of the world perish with the using. Riches are good in their place; but when a love for them takes the place of a love for the light of God, and those virtues which ought to rule in our hearts, they become a course instead of a blessing."

Writing to his sons, Brigham, Jun., and John W., both of whom were now on missions in England, President Young relates considerable news, under date of August 11th.

"The companies which have started on their return here with the emigrating Saints are, so far as heard from, making good progress on their journey. the first company, under Captain Thomas E. Ricks, passed Sweetwater bridge today. Captain S. D. White's train passed Horse Shoe today. His is the second company. We hear that the last company left New York for the frontiers on the 1st inst., and we are daily expecting to hear of their arrival of Wyoming, and their departure for the plains. . . .

"Our home telegraph poles are set and ready for the wire, which is being brought by the teams. We have ordered five hundred miles of wire, with insulators, etc.

"Everything is moving on smoothly and quietly in the city. General health and peace prevail, and we are as busy at work as bees. The elder's families, so far as known, are in good health.

"The new Tabernacle is being pushed ahead, but the lateness of the season and the heavy rains have retarded the getting out of lumber and delayed the work.

"We are living in a day and at a time, when all persons, especially those who profess to be Latter-day Saints, should stretch forth their hands and exert themselves, to roll forth the work of God and to establish his righteousness. The Saints in Zion have shown their faith by their works, and they are witnessing constantly unto the heavens, and the earth, that they love the work of God.

"This year alone, the cost of the outfit sent to the frontiers, to bring up the poor Saints, is little if any less than half a million dollars. This amount is ventured ungrudgingly and without murmuring. Besides this there are the other numerous calls to be responded to. These Indian troubles have called away hundreds of our young, ablebodied men from their labor, and at a time, too, when their services were most needed.

"Then there are roads to build and keep in repair, water ditches and canals to open, school houses to erect, and a great variety of other public labors to attend to, all of which the people of Zion go to with their might to perform. It is a noticeable fact that the more they do the more they are able to do—their exertions increase their capacities."

In September, President Young made a trip north as far as Logan in Cache valley, visiting the various settlements. In reporting this trip to his son, Brigham, Jun., he states that,

"This trip has been exceedingly pleasant; an excellent spirit has pervaded all the meetings, and the teachings have been to the point, and adapted to the circumstances of the people. Health and peace are enjoyed in all the settlements which we visited. The crops are excellent—the earth having yielded a most bountiful and gratifying harvest to repay the husbandman for his toil."

And then he continued:

"We have had no more quiet time for years in the Territory, than we are having at present. No thanks to the wicked for this; for our enemies have been untiring in their efforts to bring about our overthrow. Their labors have been attended with no success this year, and if we continue to do right, their machinations will all be fruitless in the future as in the past."

One great improvement which was being accomplished this year, 1866, was the beginning of the building of the Union Pacific railroad westward from Omaha. This was to be a great held to President Young in the immigration of the Saints, as the distance was yearly being materially shortened which the emigrants would have to travel by wagon. For nineteen years all of the seventy to eighty thousand settlers in the Territory had made their way wearily by foot, on horseback, or in wagons from the Missouri river to Salt valley; but now, with the coming of the "iron horse," the trip was to be made with speed and safety.

Writing to Orson Pratt, Under date of October 29th, 1866, the President said:

"It is not our intention to send any teams from here next season to bring up the poor. They are pushing the railroad ahead very fast from the east, and if nothing should interfere to prevent, they will have shortened the distance for the teams to travel, by 1868, to at least one-half what it has been this year."

When the Desert Telegraph Line was completed from Salt Lake City to Ogden in December, 1866, the First message sent was from President Brigham Young to Lorin Farr and Chauncey W. West. John C. Clowes was the operator. It was as follows:

"To President Lorin Farr and Bishop chauncey W. West, and the Saints in the northern country, who gave up freely when called upon; Greeting. In my heart I dedicate the line which is now completed and being completed, to the Lord God of Israel, whom we serve, and for the building up of His Kingdom; praying that this and all other improvements may contribute to our benefit, and the glory of our God; until we can waft ourselves by the power of the Almighty from world to world, to our fullest satisfaction.

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

A reply was immediately returned by President Farr and Bishop West. The operator was a fourteen-year-old boy, Joseph A. West, (father of the present Church Commissioner of Education, Franklin West). It follows:

"President Brigham Young,

Salt Lake City.

"From our hearts we say amen to the dedication which you have just uttered, and we congratulate you, as the great mover of this enterprise, on its successful accomplishment thus far, considering it is one of the great helps in the building up of the Kingdom of our God. We trust that not only will the Saints who have contributed to this great work continue their efforts but that others will also assist in developing other improvements for the Saints and by their integrity be comforted.

"LORIN FARR,

"CHAUNCEY W. WEST."
