Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

DURING the latter part of 1866 President Young had, on several occasions, taken the Saints taken the Saints to task, as I have previously recorded, for trading with certain "gentile merchants," who, he said, "would turn around and use their means to scatter us to the four winds if they could."

In December, these merchants replied to this accusation, in the public press, stating that if President Young would collect their outstanding accounts, and buy their goods, they would withdraw from the Territory. To this communication the President gave an immediate answer, which sets forth his views so clearly and forcibly that I desire to reproduce it:

"Your communication of December 20th, 1866, addressed to the leaders of the Mormon Church, was received by me last evening. In reply, I have to say, that we will not obligate ourselves to collect your outstanding accounts, nor buy your goods, merchandise, and other articles that you express yourselves willing to sell. If you could make such sales as you propose, you would make more money than any merchants have ever done in this country, and we, as merchants, would like to find purchasers upon the same basis.

"Your withdrawal from the territory is not a matter about which we feel any anxiety; so far as we are concerned, you are at liberty to stay or go, as you please. We have used no intimidation or coercion towards the community to have them cease trading with any person or class, neither do we contemplate using any such means, even could we do so to accomplish such an end. What we are doing and intending to do, we are willing that you and all the world should know.

"In the first place we wish you to distinctly understand that we have not sought to ostracize any man or body of men because of their not being of our faith. The wealth that has been accumulated in this Territory from the earliest years of our settlement, by men who were not connected with us religiously, and the success which has attended their business operations, prove this. In business we have not been exclusive in our dealings, or confined our patronage to those of our own faith. But every man who has dealt fairly and honestly, and confined his attention to his legitimate business whatever his creed has been, has found friendship in us. To be adverse to Gentiles, because they are Gentiles, or Jews because they are Jews, is in direct opposition to the genius of our religion. It matters not what a man's creed is, whether it be Catholic, or Episcopalian, Presbyterian, Methodist, Baptist, Quaker or Jew, he will receive kindness and friendship from us, and we have not the least objection to doing business with him, if in his dealings he acts in accordance with the principles of right, and deports himself as a good, law-abiding citizen should.

"There is a class, however, who are doing business in the Territory, who, for years, have been the avowed enemies of this community. The disrupture and the overthrow of the community have been the object which they have pertinaciously sought to accomplish. They have, therefore, used every energy, and all the means at their command, to put into circulation the foulest slanders about the old citizens. Missionaries of evil, there have been no arts too base, no stratagems too vile for them to use to bring about their nefarious ends. While soliciting the patronage of the people, and deriving their support from them, they have, in the most shameless and abandoned manner, used the means thus obtained, to destroy the very people whose favor they found it to their interest to court. With the regularity of the seasons have their plots and schemes been formed; and we are warranted by facts in saying that could the heart's blood of the people here be drawn, and coined into the means necessary to bring their machinations to a successful issue, they would not scruple to use it.

"They have done all in their power to encourage violations of law, to retard the administration of justice, to foster vice and vicious institutions, to oppose the unanimously expressed will of the people, to increase disorder, and to change our city from a condition of peace and quietude, to lawlessness and anarchy. They have donated liberally to sustain a corrupt and venal press, which has given publicity to the most atrocious libels respecting the old citizens.

"And have they not had their emissaries in Washington to misrepresent and villify the people of this Territory? Have they not kept liquor and surreptitiously sold it in violation of law, and endeavored to bias the minds of the judiciary to give decision favorable to their own practices? Have they not entered into secret combinations to resist the laws and to thwart their healthy operations, and refused to pay their taxes and to give their support to schools required by law?

"What claims can such person have upon the patronage of this community? And what community on the earth would be so besotted as to uphold and foster men whose aim is to destroy them? Or does the Constitution of the United States bind us to enter the stores of our deadliest enemies and purchase of them. If so, we should like that provision pointed out to us. It is to these men, whom I have described, and to these alone, that I am opposed, and I am determined to use my influence to have the citizens here stop dealing with them and deal with honorable men. There are honorable men enough in the world with whom we can do business without being reduced to the necessity of dealing with the class referred to. I have much more to say upon this subject.

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

"Great Salt Lake City,

"December 21st, 1866."

This entire document speaks for itself, so that I shall not comment upon it further; suffice it to say that the merchants found they had no ground to stand upon when they arrayed themselves against President Young. When he took a stand against any evil, he was adamant.

The year 1866 drew to a close. Two days before Christmas President Young preached an interesting sermon in the Tabernacle. He began by asking a question, as he often did in his sermons: "Are the people who are living in this mountainous country, who profess to be members of the Church of Christ, Latter-day saints indeed?" And then he answered the question himself.

"It is true that they have left their former homes and friends and come to this distant land to enjoy the privilege of worshiping God according to the revelations He has given unto us, where no one could molest, or make us afraid, or break us up as a community again, drive us from our homes, take possession of our farms, and rob us of everything we possess.

"We are here for the purpose of enjoying the fruits of our labors, for the purpose of serving God with an individual heart. Still we are prone to wander and come short of faithfully fulfilling our duties. We are nevertheless in these mountains. You inquire if we shall stay in these mountains. I answer yes, as long as we please to do the will of God our Father in Heaven. If we are pleased to turn away from the holy commandments of the Lord, as ancient Israel did, every man turning to his own way, we shall be scattered and peeled, driven before our enemies and persecuted, until we learn to remember the Lord our God, and are willing to walk in his ways. . . . .

"The great object of my life is to establish the Kingdom of God upon the earth. . . . . .

"If the Latter-day Saints were one politically and financially and in all their endeavors to build up the Kingdom of God, there would be a great power in the midst of this people."

Writing to his Son, John W. Young, in England, on February 5th, 1867, President Young comments on the quietness of the winter.

"We have had very quiet times in the city and territory this winter.

"The winter has been open, but we have had very bad roads, so much rain and snow having fallen, it has made our main roads almost impassable. General good health prevails."

And then the remarks concerning the railroad building westward from Omaha.

"Traveling to the states is not what it was before the railroad had been pushed so far this way. The time spent in staging is much shortened, lessening the fatigue and the duration of the journey. It is interesting to us out here to see the eagerness with which they are pushing this great work ahead. It will be sure to help us, and be advantageous to the Zion of our Lord, though the wicked are contemplating terrible things respecting us as soon as they can finish the railroad."

And then he points out that improvements are necessary to the advancement of the Kingdom of God.

"Improvements will progress; railroads and telegraph lines and cables will be built and stretched; but instead of these things as a check to the growth of the Kingdom of God, and as an aid to our enemies, they will increase our facilities, and accelerate the progress of the work of the Lord."

In the middle of March, the 16th, to be exact, President Young wrote a letter to his son, Oscar B. Young, who was laboring in England on a mission. The President now had three sons in this field of labor; he was very proud of them and hoped they would follow in his footsteps as preachers of the Gospel and laborers in the upbuilding of the Kingdom. To Oscar he writes:

"I am desirous of seeing my sons honor the Holy Priesthood, and be faithful and reliable servants of God. Nothing connected with them would give me greater pleasure than this, for I know if they take this course, everything else will be added to them. You and your brothers have my prayers for your continued preservation from every evil, and for your safe return in peace and purity to your home."

And then he give Oscar a little news about what is going on in the city and territory.

"We have had very peaceable times in the city this winter, and but little or no rowdyism or drinking. Money is very scarce and times dull. The strangers here have but little money to spend in drink, the result is that Dr. Clinton has but little to do. The few soldiers who are here are scarcely noticed, and were it not for the presence, occasionally, of an officer or soldier in uniform on our streets, we would not know that there was a camp in our vicinity. The regulars who are here are much more peaceable than the volunteers we had here a year or two ago.

"The winter has been rather mild, but we have had considerable rain and snow. We are having colder weather now than we had previously during the winter. There is a prospect of high water. The banks of the river Jordan are now full, and there is the probability that all the streams will be filled to their utmost capacity.

"The telegraph wire is in successful operation from Logan to St. George, and there is a branch line leading from Nephi to Manti In San Pete. All the offices are occupied by our boys as operators, and they do very well. This institution is a great benefit to the people and the territory.

"With love to yourself and Brigham and John W., and all the Elders and Saints who may be with you, and praying the Lord to fill you with His Holy Spirit, to give you wisdom and power to discharge the duties of your mission faithfully and acceptably before Him, and to bring you home in safety,

"I remain, your father. BRIGHAM YOUNG."

II

The April Conference in 1867 came on as usual. At the opening meeting held on Saturday, the 6th, according to E. L. Sloan, the reporter,

"President Brigham Young gave as a text for the Elders, never to cease their efforts and their labors until the Latter-day Saints become of one heart and of one mind. Men pray for the Lord to protect us from the wicked, yet they will seek their society, trade with them, and aid their influence, and thus seek to bring about the very thing which they pray God to save them from. The wicked have life and death offered to them as the righteous have; and while they continue to reject the good, they are not fit society for those who desire to be sanctified before the Lord. A people can never become one while they possess the spirit of the world.

"He addressed the sisters on the use of tea and coffee, showing that the means so expended might be applied to better purposes, and that increased health would be the result of abstaining from their use. The poorest in dollars and cents can do good, and aid in strengthening the interests of righteousness. He instructed the sisters to practice industry, teach their daughters to be industrious, to be economical and good housewives, competent and efficient in the performance of the varied duties devolving upon a wife and mother, and showed that in this way they can do a great amount of good. Much of the means that might be saved by knitting, weaving, hat making, and other things now neglected by the bulk of the people, might go to assist the Perpetual Emigration fund, or to support families of the Elders who are now on missions.

"He enjoined upon them to teach their daughters and sons not to use tea and coffee, and for all to be saving, neat and active, making the articles worn by themselves and families; and in all things seeking to do good to themselves, to their families, their brethren and sisters and the Kingdom of God."

Many times in these pages I have mentioned the ability of President Young to give good, sound practical advice pertaining to the affairs of the world. In this respect, none equaled him. He knew how the people should live. He knew how to teach them to live. I cannot recall any character in history who was so able in directing his people in all the practical affairs of life as was President Young.

Ten days after the Conference, in writing to his son, Brigham, Jun., under date of April 18th, President Young relates some of the passing events:

"Our conference has been excellently attended, though the roads were so bad that the country people were scarcely expected. Probably no conference that we ever held here was more numerously attended. I gave the following text to the Elders, "Never cease your labors until you get this people, called Latter-day Saints, to be of one heart and of one mind," upon which every speaker dwelt more or less to the edification of the people. Much good will undoubtedly result from the instructions given. You will see the discourses as they are printed in The Deseret News. The Word of Wisdom was considerably dwelt upon, and the necessity of the people being united in temporal matters as well as spiritual. . . . .

"On Monday next, in company with a few of the Twelve, and some other brethren, I intend to start, the Lord willing, on a visit to Dixie, and shall probably be absent twenty-six or thirty days. My cotton factory has been started, as I learn by telegram from there, and is now in operation.

"Your mother and the rest of the folks are all in their usual health. Accept of my love to yourself, in which Presidents Kimball and Wells, and Brother George Q. join. Remember me to brothers Orson and Franklin, also to Oscar, Katie and the family, and all the Elders. I am writing to John W. by this mail.

"Praying the Lord to bless you, I am, your father,

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

The trip to "Dixie" was carried out as planned. I should like to go into detail regarding this journey, and relate some of President Young's talks to the people of the various settlements as he went along, but space forbids. One interesting thing to me is to note that Joseph F. Smith, 28 years of age then, accompanied the brethren on this trip and acted as correspondent for The Deseret News. I shall pass over that account which relates to the journey to St. George and return and note only the great and spontaneous welcome which the people gave to President Young on his return to salt Lake City. To me this event is highly significant, as it gives abundant evidence of the esteem in which the President was held. The account from The News follows:

"It was known throughout the city, on Tuesday, the 14th of May, that President Young would return the next day; and there was a very general feeling manifested to give him a warm and hearty welcome back, after his temporary absence. Though entirely spontaneous, the dimensions of the demonstration of Wednesday proved how widespread and deeply rooted in the hearts of the people are the feelings of respect, esteem and love, entertained for him.

"On Wednesday forenoon the Stars and Stripes began to be displayed from stores, public buildings and other places; stray carriages drove down the State road with a view to meet the President's party; and it was intimated that some of the schools their respect on the occasion. A company of cavalry, under the command of Col. H. P. Kimball, formed a little before 4 p. m. to meet the returning party as an escort in, and were joined at the city hall by Presidents H. C. Kimball and D. H. Wells, Bishop Hunter and counselors, General Burton, members of the city council, and other prominent citizens in carriages, with Captain Croxall's and Captain Eardley's brass bands. . . .

"The party proceeded down the State road to Cottonwood, and at half past four they met President Young and company, with those who had met him further on towards the point of the mountain. All commenced traveling to the city, and as its outskirts were reached, the first of the juveniles appeared, lining the streets, being the second ward schools. Coming nearer the center of the city, the scene was exceedingly animating, and stirred deeper feelings within the heart than any ovation of man-worship for some popular idol of the hour. . . .

"It was the outspoken esteem of thousands of hearts, and manifested in a variety of ways. The big bell rang out cheerily; artillery spoke its welcome in a loud and startling voice; the bands made sweet melody, aided by Major Huntington's martial band, and a mammoth flag, hung, with bright stars and stripes, across the road at Second South street. At this point there were over fifty carriages in the procession, with the cavalry, and all passed between two rows of children, representing some twenty-two or twenty-three schools. . . . They were out in immense numbers, neat and clean, well dressed, healthy and intelligent looking, their little faces showing unmistakably that they appreciated the occasion. . . .

"After that President passed through the Eagle Gate, the street being lined up to that point with schools, the cavalry formed in front of his office, the carriages drove by, and the schools marched past the office gate, the music playing at intervals; and after all were passed, the concourse dispersed to their homes, satisfied that they had, unbidden, testified their love and esteem for him who is first in place and first in the hearts of the people of Israel!"

This spontaneous outpouring of good feeling and good fellowship towards President Young was not merely a thing of the moment, but was rather the result of many years of labor among the people in which he had built up thousands and thousands of friendships. President Young had the capacity to make and keep friends. The people loved him because he was one of them. Any member of the Church could enter his office and discuss any problem with him, on equal terms. To all of them, when they grasped his hand, he was Brother Brigham.

George Gibbs, who was President Young's secretary for nine years, once told me this story; One day he and the President were in the office going over the day's mail when there was a knock at the outer door. This particular door was seldom used as an entrance, all visitors coming in through the clerk's office to the west. The President arose and said, "I wonder who that could be." He stepped to the front of the room, unlocked the door and opened it. There before him stood an elderly little woman, whom the President seemed at once to recognize. "What is it, Sister—?" "Brother Brigham," she replied, "I've knit you these socks, and I've come all the way from Draper to bring them to you." At the same time holding up to him and presenting him with a pair of good woolen knitted socks. "President Young took her in his arms and kissed her," George Gibbs told me, "and told her how pleased he was to get the socks, and that he would surely wear them."

Incidents like the above show the love the people had for Brother Brigham, and the love he had for them. He held his high place among the people, not because they feared him nor because they admired him. He held his high place by virtue of the confidence he had built up among them; by virtue of his friendship and love for the people, and theirs for him.

The following letter from President Young, under date of August 29th, 1867, addressed to Franklin D. Richards in England, recounts a few of the events of the summer.

"President F. D. Richards,

"Dear Brother—I have just heard that the health of Brother Moses Thatcher is not good, and that he was a quite feeble last winter. I would like you to make inquiries regarding his condition, and if his health is failing, release him and send him home. Should there be any other of the Elders whose health is feeble, and likely to fail under the effect of the climate, they also should be released and permitted to return.

"Myself and the brethren of the twelve—Orson Pratt, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith, and George Q. Cannon—returned yesterday from Utah county, during which we held two days' meetings at Provo, and dedicated the new meeting house at that place. We were absent five days, traveled about one hundred and fifty miles, and held eleven meetings. The meetings were crowded and were very interesting to both speakers and hearers. Brother Orson Hyde joined us at Provo, and after the meeting there he left for the city. We went to Payson, and thence to Goshen, and returned to this city by the west side of Utah lake. We intend to leave the city on Monday next, the 2nd prox., for Bear Lake valley, holding meetings at the various settlements on the way up. Brothers Orson Hyde and Erastus Snow will accompany us.

"The health of the people is good, and they are zealously pursuing their labors. The summer has been a very warm one. The grasshoppers have been very numerous, and their ravages have been in many places very destructive. Our fields and gardens have suffered to some extent, but not so severely as other places. The Saints should take warning, and if they are wise, they will, and prepare for another year, for should these hoppers lay their eggs, they will be very apt to be numerous next year; but this will be as the Lord directs.

"With love to yourself and the elders, in which Presidents Kimball and Wells, and Brother George Q. join, and praying the Lord to bless you continually with every blessing necessary to qualify you for the discharge of the duties of your high and holy calling, I remain, your brother,

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

III

The chief event for President Young and the Saints during the Fall of 1867 was the completion of the great new Tabernacle, in time for the October Conference. Writing to his brother, Franklin, in England under date of Sept. 15th, S. W. Richards goes somewhat into detail regarding the building:

"Our new Tabernacle will be in readiness for the October Conference, three weeks hence. It is onward to completion at a very rapid rate; nearly 300 men are employed. The platform, raised about four feet, occupies about one-third of the space, and is in the west end. About one-third of the center is level floor, and from that the floor raises gradually to the east end. It will all be seated with easy and comfortable seats. The Bishops' stand is in the center of, and directly under, or in front of, the raised portion and on the level floor. In the front and center of the platform is first, the seat for the Presidency of the stake, in rear of that the seat for the quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and in rear of that again the seat for the First Presidency, each raised above the other, and directly in rear of all, the immense organ, on a platform still higher, while the choir will be seated on either side and in front of the organ, in the rear of which are two entrances to singers' seats. This building may well be considered the wonder of the American Continent in architectural achievements. The ceiling is full of small round ventilators, which pleasurably add to its appearance, and with the many large side doors and windows, will make a very healthy and airy place for summer, even with densely crowded audiences."

It was at 10 o'clock, on the morning of Sunday, Oct. 6th, 1867, that President Young called the first meeting to order in the great building. A reporter, writing of the event in the Salt Lake Telegraph, records that "long before the hour named for the opening of the gates on the south and west side of the Temple Block, the people began to assemble, and by 9 o'clock there was such a dense crowd around these entrances, that there was no passage along the side-walks. The streets were also was no passage along the side-walks. The streets were also filled with carriages, wagons and horses, indicating that there had been an early and large ingathering that morning from the country, in addition to the vast numbers that had reached the city on the days preceding."

I shall go somewhat into detail regarding this historic Conference in order to give the reader a picture of it. Continuing the report:

"Before 10 o'clock, the time appointed for the Conference, the seats of the great Tabernacle were filled, and the passage ways, the entrances on the north, south and east, were also fully occupied with those eager to be present at the opening. The side seats on the stand were also well filled with the Priesthood, and the various choirs who were present to take part in the services. Altogether the Tabernacle was full, and literally verified what had been so often said (by President Young) that "no building could be constructed large enough to hold the Saints." . . .

"On the stand at the opening meeting were Presidents Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and Daniel H. Wells; beside them Elder Brigham Young, Jun.

"Of the Twelve Apostles in their order and place were, Orson Hyde, Orson Pratt, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith, Ezra T. Benson, Charles C. Rich, Lorenzo Snow, Erastus Snow and George Q. Cannon.

"On the first seat fronting the audience were Elders Daniel H. Spencer, George B. Wallace and Joseph W. Young, the Presidency of this Stake of Zion, and beside them were, John Young, president of the High Priests' Quorum; his counselor, Bishop E. D. Wooley; Bishop Phineas Young; Elders W. W. Phelps, William H. Hooper, Levi Hancock, John Van Cott and Horace S. Eldredge.

"On the Bishops' seat, in front of the stand, were Edward Hunter, the Presiding Bishop, with his counselors, Leonard W. Hardy and Jesse C. Little; beside them Bishop Hoagland, the clerk of the quorum of bishops—Elders George Goddard and John D. T. McAllister.

"On the stand, in addition to the Presiding Authorities named, were the Salt Lake Choir, under the leadership of Elder Robert Sands, numbering about 150, with Organist Joseph John Daynes. To the left of the speakers benches was a large choir, uniting the choirs of Springville, Payson and Spanish Fork, under their respective leaders, Elders Fredrick Waight, William Clayton and William R. Jones. Reporters, Elders George D. Watt, E. L. Sloan and David W. Evans."

"Calling the conference to order, the President kindly expressed to the workmen the thanks of all the Apostles, and all the brethren and sister,s for the steady perseverance and faithfulness that they had manifested in completing thus far the building. For one, he said, he had not ceased to pray for them, that no accident might befall anyone, and that we might rejoice together in such a work. He left to bless them, and to continue to pray for them still, and the took the opportunity of expressing that he would be very much pleased did he witness as resolute a spirit in the elders of Israel to favor the early completion of the Temple. He thought it proper to say something of the unfinished condition of the organ. Not over one-third of the pipes were up, and till the casing was built, they had thrown around it a loose garment. It was now only about fifteen feet high, but when completed it would be forty feet high. Brother Ridges, and those who had labored with him, had done the best they could, and notwithstanding their diligence by early day, noon and night, they had been unable to have it property tuned. It was, however, in a condition to accompany the choir, and he was pleased with it."

After the opening hymn, President Young again arose to offer the prayer. Note the beauty and the deep devotion of this prayer. It was all so characteristic of him; the solemn, reverent, deep feelings of his heart.

"He expressed to the Most High the grateful feelings of the Saints, for the favors which He had multiplied upon them, enabling them to have finished thus far, an edifice in which they could assemble and worship Him, their Creator, in the name of His Son Jesus Christ, imploring the aid of the Holy Spirit to teach them how to pray, and what to ask for, acceptably in His sight.

"He implored the blessing of the Lord upon the congregation assembled, and those who might assemble during conference; upon the Priesthood, and all in authority in His Church and Kingdom, that they might enjoy the outpouring of the Holy Spirit to qualify them in the discharge of every duty; that the workmen who had labored upon that house might feel blessed, and feel satisfaction in that labor, and recompense in the love of Christ; that the Apostles might be blessed and qualified to discharge the duties of their Holy Apostleship; that the Apostles might be blessed and qualified to discharge the duties of their Holy Apostleship; that the Bishops might have all the ability their arduous labors demand, and be filled with wisdom, kindness, patience and forbearance, and so be fathers to the people; that the High Priests, Seventies, Elders, Priests, Teachers and Deacons, might all enjoy the power and blessing of their callings.

"He asked that the blessings of the Almighty might continue to increase upon the people, that all their efforts to build up the Kingdom of God might be prospered; that the people might be preserved in these mountains, multiply, increase, and gather round them from the elements what was necessary for their consumption.

"He craved the blessings of the Lord upon the children of the Saints; that the power of the Almighty might heal the sick; that the Saints in foreign lands might be the object of His care; that the missionaries among them might have the ability to do their duty, be preserved, and be returned again to the Church in Zion; that the poor Saints might be blessed and prospered, so they may gather with the Saints here, and that the emigrants who have lately arrived, may seek to do right, and be blessed and prospered.

"He implored the blessings of the Most High upon our families, our wives, our children, and upon our fields, our barns, and all we possessed; asked the Lord to inspire the speakers, the signers, the hearers, during conference, so that all might be done according to His Holy Will."

The Conference continued for four days, with great enthusiasm. Among its accomplishments was the naming of one hundred, sixty-three young men, many of them married, to move south, "and strengthen the southern settlements."

On Tuesday afternoon President Young delivered a lengthy sermon. He said, in part:

"He often thought that when he looked at the people he had a thousand things to say to them. He thought of them by day and by night. It seemed to him that they could scarcely get together, sing and pray, till it was time to dismiss. He would have liked to remain together till they had said all that they wanted to speak about, but it became a question with him, how much could they remember of what they had heard. The Church had been traveling now some thirty-seven years. On their former history they had been tossed from pillar to past and driven from place to place; but here the people shall stay, if they keep the commandments here the people shall stay, if they word to gather up, go back and build up the Center of Zion.

"Some entertained the idea that we came here to hide ourselves up from the world; but we very soon learned that our light had been placed where the inhabitants of the earth could see that we had the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Light of the world; We have a mission to preach the Gospel to all nations before the end shall come. It devolves upon the people here to set an example for the nations to pattern after. Some of the people gathered here with the idea that they had to pattern after the people that they had left. That is wrong. It is contrary to the will of God.

"The question then came up, shall the Saints pattern after the world with all its weaknesses, follies and vices, or shall they accomplish that which the Lord wants them to do? He thanked the people for their faithfulness in keeping the Word of Wisdom; he thanked the workmen for their labors, and the sisters who had assisted them to come early to work. The Lord wishes us to show to our neighbors, friends and foes, how to live, how to be great, how to live a hundred years in the beauty of life.

"He would say to the Latter-day Saints that there was nothing in life, in the heavens, in the earth, but what was incorporated within our religion. We had not to go outside of our religion to learn what to do, and what nourishment we should use. We should turn our attention to cheaper living, using everything that was nourishing, and milk, butter, fish, fruit, vegetables contributed to temperate living. He had much to say on that subject, and if the ladies would get up meetings for instruction, he would come and lecture to them. And if the ladies would get up societies by which they could promote the home labor of their sex, they would do what was well pleasing in the sight of heaven.

"He wanted the young ladies to learn everything that was useful in the domestic circle, and never mind whether a young man who asks them to marry has thousands of dollars, carriages, horses, etc. Let the young ladies be able to say we can knit, we can bake, we can feed the chickens, we can do any work that becomes a woman to do.

"He alluded again to the rock hauling for the Temple, and to the completion of that edifice."

As I have said before, this first session of the General Conference held in the new Tabernacle continued until Wednesday afternoon, the fourth day. It proved to be the largest Conference, from the standpoint of attendance, that had ever been held in the Church. Zion was growing, thriving and prospering under the leadership of Brother Brigham.
