Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX

THE winter of 1867-68 passed without any unusual hapenings. President Young remained in fairly good health, though frequently troubled with rheumatism; but he kept at his tasks and directed all the affairs of the Church. Preparations were made during the Winter to send to the terminus of the Union Pacific railroad, which was now at Cheyenne, Wyo., five hundred teams, to bring to Utah all the emigrants who had means to get that far. It was the last year that the Saints had to make this great effort to bring in their friends, as the railroad reached Ogden in 1869.

President Young, in writing to Franklin D. Richards, in England, under date of March 28, 1868, records the preparations that were being made to meet the emigrants:

"The bishops are now busily engaged in raising 500 four-yoke teams to start for the terminus, in time to reach there about the middle of July, with flour, dried fruit, beans, etc., sufficient for those who are assisted by the fund or donations. It is expected that these teams will be able to transport all who can reach the terminus this season . . . The spirit for assisting the poor is very great, and the donations are marvelous under the great scarcity of money. Many cattle have been donated and many more are ready to be, but as yet we have no money offers for them that meet our views. . . . Nothing but the want of money prevents our emigrating this year all who wish to come."

Thus ended twenty years' effort on the part of Brother Brigham to assist the poor Saints who would arrive at the frontiers without sufficient means to make the journey across the plains. It had been a mighty effort on his part and on the part of the Saints, but it had been successful. The parents and grandparents of many of the leading families in Utah today, were assisted over this laborious part of their westward journey by the donations and unselfish labors of those who had already arrived here.

The annual Conference came on in April, the second to be held in the great Tabernacle. Again there was a very large attendance, the meetings continuing for three days.

On the last day, April 8th, President Young preached one of his practical sermons, detailing to the Saints their manner of life; full of wisdom, conducive to their comfort and prosperity.

"I will give each of the young men in Israel," he said in this sermon, "who have arrived at an age to marry, a mission to go straightway and get married to a good sister, fence a city lot, lay out a garden and orchard and make a home, and especially do not forget to plant a proper proportion of mulberry trees. This is the mission that I give to all the young men in Israel. And I say to you sisters, if you do not know how to feed the cows, you can soon learn. If you do not know how to feed chickens, get them and learn how, and if your husband takes you to live in ever so small and humble a cottage, make it neat and nice and clean and set out flowers around the doors, and let the husband plant fruit trees and shade trees, and let wives help their husbands that they might be encouraged to take hold of more important business that will create an income sufficient to sustain their wives, and by economy and care become wealthy in a short time, and have your carriage to ride in.

"I have a short sermon for my sisters. . . Ask your husbands to furnish you some straw for hats and bonnets, and when you get it, put more than three straws over your head, and make a hat that will shade you from the scorching sun. I have a great desire to live to see the prosperity of this people, and one thing among the rest, I would like to see the time when our sisters will take more pains to beautify their children. When your children arise in the morning, instead of sending them out of doors to wash in cold, hard water, with a little soft soap, and wiping them as though you would tear the skin off them, creating roughness and darkness of skin, take a piece of soft flannel, and wipe the faces of your children smooth and nice, dry them with a soft cloth, and instead of giving them pork for their breakfast, give them good, wholesome bread and sweet milk, baked potatoes and also butter milk if they like it, and a little fruit and I would have no objections to their eating a little rice. . . .

"Train up your children to be beautiful and fair, instead of neglecting them until they are sunburned and become like the natives of our mountains. Let the sisters take care of themselves and make themselves beautiful. . . . Make yourselves like angels in goodness and beauty. Let the mothers in Israel make their sons and daughters healthy and beautiful, by cleanliness and a proper diet. Whether you have much or little clothing for your children, it can be kept clean and healthy, and be made to fit their persons neatly. Make your children lovely and fair that you may delight in them. Cease to send out your children to herd sheep with their skins exposed to the hot sun, until their hands and faces appear as though they lived in an ash heap. . . . .

"I pray you in Christ's stead to let gold hunting alone, and pray the Lord to cover it up in our region of country that it cannot be found. Those among us who are anxious to find rich gold deposits, are equally anxious to destroy themselves. . . . They would not only destroy themselves, but all around them if they had the power to do it. Instead of hunting gold, let every man go to work at raising wheat, oats, barley, corn and vegetables, and fruit in abundance, that there may be plenty in the land.

"Oh, ye elders of Israel, who are greedy for gold, instead of wasting your time in search for it, gather around you, the comforts of life, with which the elements are loaded, and make yourselves rich in all the elegancies and conveniences by means of economy and industry. . . .

"Young men, fit you up a little log cabin, if it is not more than ten feet square, and then get you a bird to put in your little cage; you can then work all day with satisfaction to yourself, considering that you have a home to go to and a loving heart to welcome you.

"Sisters, do not ask your husbands to sell the last bushel of grain you have to buy something for you out of the stores, but aid your husbands in storing it up against a day of want, and always have a year or two's provisions on hand. . . . Mothers in Israel, sisters, ask your husbands to take care of the sheep they have got, and not willfully waste them; but multiply them and bring your wool to the factories to be manufactured, or trade it for yarn and cloth. . . .

"All this is embraced in our religion, every good word and work, all things temporal, and all things spiritual, things in heaven, things on earth, and things that are under the earth, are circumscribed by our religion. We are in the fastness of the mountains, and if we do things, and delight in doing right, our feet will be made fast and immovable like the bases of these everlasting hills. We ought not to desire anything, only on righteous principles, and if we want right, let us then deal it out to others, being kind and full of love and charity to all."

So spoke Brother Brigham at the April Conference in 1868. His words will equally apply today, and are as true as when they were uttered many years ago. There never will be any material prosperity for the Latter-day Saints except on the principles enunciated here; the old fashioned principles of thrift and industry.

Early in May, several of the officials of the Union Pacific Railroad came to Salt Lake City, and induced President Young to take a contract to grade about seventy miles of road running east from Ogden to the head of Echo canyon. He was pleased to get this work for the Saints, as times were dull, money was scarce, and the emigrants coming to the valleys this season would be out of employment. His practical mind readily grasped this opportunity. On May 23rd, 1866, he wrote to Franklin D. Richards in Liverpool:

"Dear Brother—I have contracted for the grading and masonry on the Union Pacific Railroad, from near the head of Echo Canyon to the lake shore or to this city, depending upon which end of the lake the road passes. To complete this work by the time agreed upon will require a large number of laborers, perhaps some thousands more than we can well spare from farming and other necessary home operations. To help us in this work, as our trains will leave here so as to reach the terminus by the middle of July, I wish you to close with the steamers upon the best terms you can, in time to have our emigration reach New York in season to be forwarded to the terminus by the middle of July. I mention steamers, among other good reasons, because there is so little difference in their price for passage, and you can calculate upon their time, which is an important item, when you want to make so important a connection as the one at the terminus. . . . .

"All men physically able to work on the road will be passed free from Omaha to the terminus, and can at the same time travel with their families and friends in the cars, and so on with the trains to this place, where they can be distributed on the work required. . . .

"For many reasons that will readily occur to you, this contract is viewed by the brethren of understanding as a God-send. There is much indebtedness among the people, and the territory is drained of money, but labor here and coming we have in large amount, and this contract affords opportunity for turning that labor into money, with which those here can pay each other, and import needed machinery, and such useful articles as we cannot yet produce, and those coming can pay their indebtedness, and have ready means with which to gather around them the comforts of life in their new homes."

There was great surprise in the East when it was learned that President Young had lent his aid to the construction of the railroad. The tongues of abuse and slander, which all his lifetime had operated against him, had circulated the rumor that Brigham Young was opposed to the railroad line, as it would penetrate the settlements of the Saints, and disrupt his kingdom. But there were also those who took a sensible view of the situation.

The Omaha Herald, under date of May 24th, 1868, expressed the opinion of its editor:

"Habitual haters of the sagacious ruler of the Mormons in Utah predicted, not more than two years ago, that the leaders of that people would do all in their power to hinder and obstruct the building of the national highway to Salt Lake. What must have been the surprise of those people when they read yesterday's special telegram to the Herald, which announced that the far-seeing Brigham, instead of impeding the great work, had actually taken the entire contract to build it from Echo Canyon to the city of the Saints. . . .

"The Union Pacific Company are fortunate, doubly fortunate, as fortunate as they have been wise, in having secured the powerful aid of Brigham Young in the prosecution of their great work. It is due to him to acknowledge that, from the incipiency of the enterprise, it has had his constant co-operation and assistance, down to the present hour; and that he steps in with so large a control of labor to strengthen the hands of the company in pushing the Union Pacific to speedy completion, is a feather in Brigham's cap, and it will go far, we doubt not, to conciliate the acrimonious hostility hitherto preached and practiced against that able man."

II

On Monday, the 22nd of June, 1868, at twenty minutes to eleven o'clock in the forenoon, at his home on North Temple Street, Salt Lake City, President Heber C. Kimball passed to the great kingdom beyond. His death was no doubt due to an accident which befell him some weeks previously.

It appears that he had instructed one of his sons to deepen a ditch near his home at Provo. Arriving there from Salt Lake City, late at night, a few days afterwards, he apparently forgot about this particular excavation and drove his horses into it; they leaped across, and the carriage struck violently on the opposite side, throwing President Kimball into the roadway.

He was stunned and lay for some time in an insensible condition before he could make his way to the house. After a few days he seemed to recover from the shock, but apparently he had sustained a permanent injury, as his strength began to fail, and on the 19th of June he was stricken with paralysis in the right side of his body. When President Young visited him on the 20th and 21st he was able to greet him with a smile, but could not speak. Early in the morning of the 22nd he lapsed into a coma, and quietly breathed his last, as I have related, shortly before noon.

In the passing of Heber C. Kimball, President Young lost his greatest and best friend. Since boyhood the lives of these two men had run strangely parallel. Both were born in Vermont, within two weeks of each other, President Young on the first of June, 1801, and Heber C. Kimball on the 14th of the same month. Their early manhood was spent together in Mendon, New York, where they were baptized into the Church on the same day, April 14th, 1832.

In September of the same year, Brigham's wife, Miriam Works, died, leaving him with two small daughters. Heber C. Kimball and his wife, Vilate, took the children, and gave them a home for two years until Brigham married again. In 1833, Brigham and Heber sold out their possessions in New York and moved to Kirtland, Ohio, the home of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Here, due to their great diligence and loyalty, they both became prominent elders, and on the 14th of February, 1835, they were selected members of the first quorum of Twelve Apostles.

In the fall of 1839 they went to England together, working their way thither without purse or scrip, but the success they attained in that country during the following year, has never been equaled in the history of the Church. In 1844 they were both absent on missions to the Eastern states when they learned of the death of the Prophet. They hastened home to Nauvoo, and the quorum of Twelve took charge of the affairs of the Church.

Two years later they led the Saints out of Nauvoo towards the Missouri river; the following Spring they were together during the historic march of the little band of pioneers to Salt Lake valley. On the return to Winter Quarters, Brigham Young was selected to be the President of the Church, and he chose his faithful friend and brother, Heber C. Kimball to be his first counselor. Heber remained in this position, loyally by Brigham's side, aiding him as no other man did or could, for the following twenty years—until death took him hence.

On June 24th, the funeral was held in the new Tabernacle. According to newspaper accounts, "long before the hour for the commencement of the services, the streets were alive with the thousands of Israel, wending their way to the new Tabernacle, to pay the last tribute of respect to the remains of the great and good man, a prince, a ruler, a father, and a savior in Israel."

President Young presided at the services, and spoke feelingly.

"I will relate to you my feelings concerning the departure of Brother Kimball," he said. "He was a man of as much integrity, I presume, as any man who ever lived on the earth. I have been personally acquainted with him for forty-three years, and I can testify that he has been a man of truth, a man of benevolence, a man that was to be trusted. . . . I have not felt one particle of death in his house, nor about it, and through this scene we are now passing, I have not felt one particle of the spirit of death.

"He has fallen asleep for a certain purpose—to be prepared for a glorious resurrection; and the same Heber C. Kimball, every component particle of his body, from the crown of his head to the soles of his feet, will be resurrected, and he, in the flesh, will see God and converse with him, and see his brethren and associate with them, and they will enjoy a happy eternity together. . . . The earth and the fulness of the earth, and all that pertains to this earth, is no comparison with the glory, joy and peace and happiness of the soul that departs in peace. . . . What can we say to one another? Live as he has lived; be as faithful as he has been; be as full of good works as his life has manifested to us."

After the death of his dear friend and associate, President Young went back to his work; heavy laden no doubt, and with many reflections as to the length of his own years. But he continued diligently at his tasks, and in August, in company with a number of the Twelve, visited and held meetings in all the northern towns between Salt Lake City and Logan.

The first day out Kaysville was reached, where he was "hospitably entertained by Brother John R. Barnes." During the evening the Kaysville Brass Band serenaded before the house, in honor of President Young.

The following morning the company was up and off at seven o'clock. "Traveling across the sand ridge between Kaysville and Ogden," relates the correspondent who accompanied President Young, "was better, we thought, than usual, probably it was our lively team that made the road seem less heavy. Just as we crossed the sand ridge we saw a company of cavalry riding rapidly towards us, with the stars and stripes waving at their head. It was the Ogden escort under command of Major Gilbert Wright. It was necessary to ford the Weber river; "parts of the fine bridge which had once spanned the stream, and which had been carried down the river this Spring, lay scattered around."

Arriving in Ogden, the President found "a long line of people who had assembled to give him welcome; the brass band, under the leadership of Captain William Pugh, discoursed most excellent music. So much has been said in praise of this band, that if we said anything, it would be but a repetition of previous encomiums."

"The hospitable gate of Bishop C. W. West was thrown open to receive the carriages of the company, and he himself stood ready to give us smiling welcome, and his boys and men to unhitch and help take care of the teams. President Farr was there to greet the company, and to invite a portion of them to put up with him."

Meetings were held for two days in the Ogden Tabernacle. On the second day the President spoke, and gave one of his fine practical sermons.

"It is the duty of the Latter-day Saints," he said, "to accumulate all they can, so as to be better able to build up the Kingdom of Zion, and be independent people, independent of every creature beneath the celestial world. We should make our own articles of clothing. Immense sums of money have been carried away from this Territory. It was plain to see in the early days that we were being impoverished; but we were destitute of tanneries to make leather, factories to make cloth, and other conveniences. Now, however, we are in a position to manufacture many needed articles here, and there is no longer a necessity for us to send our means abroad to procure them. . . . .

"I do not wish to find fault with the people. No people since the days of the Nephites have made the progress in the same length of time that we have made. And it is even doubtful whether they, or even Enoch and his city, had done any better in the same time."

The fourth day of the trip Brigham City was reached. Two miles south of the city the President and company were met by "two companies of uniformed cavalry under the command of Captain Carlos Loveland, and a company of lancers, boys, in gay uniform, under command of Captain Wight. A four horse wagon, with postilions dressed in the uniform of the lancers, carried eighteen young ladies dressed in white and blue sashes, and a banner bearing a suitable inscription. Another four horse wagon carried eighteen little girls, and another the brass band. There were a number of carriages also belonging to citizens, among which were President Lorenzo Snow and some friends. The citizens were drawn up in line as we entered the city, and the company passed slowly along, responding to their salutations and welcome." During the afternoon a meeting was held in the Bowery. "The night was spent by President Young and the greater part of the company under the hospitable roof of President Lorenzo Snow."

On Friday, Aug. 21st, about noon, Wellsville was reached, and the President addressed the citizens. "What a contrast," he said, "between the present time and thirty-five and even twenty-five years ago. Then, perhaps, the Elders in traveling, might meet with a Saint once in fifty miles, and be turned away from many houses and not allowed to stop there. But now, everywhere we go—and we cannot visit nearly all the settlements—we meet a brother and a friend."

Continuing the journey the company arrived at Logan at five p. m. "We passed through a large and very tasteful arch of evergreens," the correspondent relates, "the word WELCOME in large letters showing conspicuously over the center of the arch, the whole being crowned by the national flag. As we drove by the band saluted, and old and young manifested their respect. The procession then formed in the rear and marched to the residence of Ezra T. Benson, where the Sunday School children sang."

I shall not go into any further details regarding this August trip of the President to Cache valley, but it is interesting to note the increasing devotion of the people to their leader. There was the man who could direct them aright, who could speak the words that would satisfy their souls. They looked to him; and he did not fail them.

The correspondent of The Deseret News sums up the trip in these words:

"It would be difficult to place too high an estimate upon the value of these visits of President Young to the various settlements. The people have local officers, whose counsels and instructions are sound and reliable; but a visit from the Presidency and Twelve is refreshing to the officers and people. They partake of the spirit which prevails at headquarters, and can better keep pace with their brethren who reside there. Without these visits the people might become narrowed up in their feelings and sectional.

"In the early days of our residence here, when President Young and his brethren visited the settlements, they had to go prepared to camp out. They took with them their own food, feed for their animals, bedding, etc., and they slept in their vehicles. But now all this has changed. The settlements are close together, and he and his companions can now travel from Salt Lake City to the extreme north and the extreme south, without being under the necessity of carrying any provisions or bedding, or camping out a single night. A still greater change awaits us ere long. It is not too much to expect that in a few years hence we will have a line of rails laid from one end of the Territory to the other, and if President Young wishes to attend a conference at St. George, he can step into the cars on Saturday morning, and be there by evening and with a night's rest be ready for meeting next morning."

During September the President made a trip south, visiting the settlements as far as Manti in Sanpete valley. Everywhere he was tendered the same consideration which he had received on his trip north. On September 28th he arrived back in Salt Lake City in time to prepare for the October Conference.

III

In his address to the Saints on the last day of the Conference on October 8th, 1868, President Young took occasion to refer to a few events in the past history of the Church. Always forward looking, and intensely interested in the pressing problems of the day, he seldom called to mind the events of troublesome, disagreeable times that were past, but on this occasion he had been advising the Saints that it was not good policy for them to build up their enemies here in Zion; that their enemies had not established the people here nor had they lent their aid to found this commonwealth.

"We made and broke the road from Nauvoo to this place," he said. "Some of the time we followed Indian trials; some of the time we ran by the compass. When we left the Missouri River we followed the Platte. And we killed rattlesnakes by the cord in some places; and made roads and built bridges till our backs ached. Where we could not build bridges across rivers we ferried our people across, until we arrived here, where we found a few naked Indians, a few wolves and rabbits, and any amount of crickets; but as for any green tree or a fruit tree, or any green fields, we found nothing of the kind, with the exception of a few cottonwoods and willows on the edge of City Creek. For some 1,200 or 1,300 miles we carried every particle of provisions we had when we arrived here."

That was the condition under which the Saints had entered this valley. They had prospered. The Lord had blessed the land and made it fruitful and productive; he had done this in answer to the prayers of the people.

"Talk about these rich valleys, why, there is not another people on the earth that could have come here and lived. We prayed over the land, and dedicated it, and the water, air and everything pertaining to them unto the Lord, and the smiles of heaven rested on the land and it became productive, and today yields us the best of grain, fruits and vegetables."

Should we hold the advantage we have gained, he asks, or should we yield it to our enemies? And then he continues:

"There is an idea abroad that the Mormons 'are going to give way.' But there is no fear that the Kingdom of God—Mormonism—will ever give way. The only thing for you and me to fear is whether we will build up the Kingdom; whether our souls are in the Kingdom or not. Here is the fear; it is not with regard to the Kingdom, it will stand forever and ever; but you and I may not. The Kingdom is pure; you and I are not pure. The doctrine we preach is pure and holy, and if we will abide it, it will make us pure and holy."

This was the doctrine that President Young had been consistently preaching now for over thirty-six years; the doctrine that the Kingdom of God had been set up upon the earth, and that it would endure forever; that no opposition could stay it; that it would roll forth until it filled the whole earth.

About six weeks after the Conference, on November 18th, 1868, President Young addressed a letter to Elder H. C. Jacobs, who was laboring in Manchester, England, and who had written him in a friendly way. The President gives some good sound advice and reviews a few of the passing events:

"Elder H. C. Jacobs.

"Dear Brother: Your letter of the 24th ult. was safely received and read with pleasure. It always affords me great satisfaction to receive communications from the Elders, expressive of their faith and good desires, whilst laboring in the cause of truth in foreign lands.

"I trust that the sentiments you express and the feelings you manifest in your letter will ever guide and influence you through your whole life. There is no higher pleasure to be enjoyed by a servant of God than to preach the Gospel to the nations who sit in the darkness of unbelief, and it is a labor in which he can increase in knowledge and every other gift that will make him respected and beloved by his fellows.

"Continue to labor faithfully and with all your might in the field assigned to you; seek unto the Lord in prayer day by day, that you may have his Spirit to guide you in all your counselings and teachings, and you will gain influence all the time with the Saints for their good and salvation. Take this course and follow it faithfully and you will not want for anything while on your mission; and when you return home you will do so with a conscience void of offense, and possessed of a joy that will more than repay you for all your labors; and you will feel that you are acknowledged of the Lord and are a co-laborer with his prophets and servants in carrying out his mighty purposes.

"We are enjoying peace and plenty, beautiful weather, abundance of work for all willing to labor, and the prospects of plenty more for some time to come.

"The great majority of the people have with earnestness taken hold of the doctrines the leaders of Israel have been teaching to them for many years, but more especially advocated at our last Conference and are striving to become one in temporal things as they are now one in spiritual things. This they must be, before the purposes of God can be consummated and his Kingdom established in its fulness upon the earth.

"It is quite possible that you will see some of the boys in England before long, as I purpose sending some few of them on missions next spring.

"With love to yourself and the Saints under your watch care, and praying the Lord to sustain, direct and comfort you in all of your labors, I remain, as ever your brother in the Gospel,

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

To make a young elder feel and know that he was a "co-worker with the Lord in carrying out his mighty purposes," what more stimulating bit of encouragement could be given than that?

Of special interest to President Young and the Saints generally during these winter months of 1869, was the approach of the Union Pacific railroad towards Ogden from the east and the Central Pacific from the west. There are two letters from the President addressed to Albert Carrington in Liverpool during January and February which express this interest. The first is dated January 5th, 1869.

"Work on the Union Pacific Railroad," he relates, "is being prosecuted with untiring vigor; the locomotive is now half way down Echo canyon, and the ties are laid beyond the mouth. The company are bringing swarms of their forces to bear on the tunneling in Weber Canyon, while Bishop Sharp's men withdraw to other work. This relieves us of our hardest, heaviest work. I could not have asked Dr. Durant to confer a greater favor. Two surveys for branch lines from Ogden to this city are nearly run, probably one is completed."

And then he gives an account of a recent visit to Ogden.

"Myself, President Smith and Elders Woodruff, F. D. Richards, Cannon and B. Young, Jr., have just returned from a visit to Ogden and its neighborhood. . . . While there I met Dr. Durant and Governor Stanford; we had a very pleasant time looking out a site for the new depot; the location is not yet determined, but probably will be very soon. Dr. Durant expressed himself much pleased with our excursion and tendered me much thanks for information and suggestions with regard to the construction of a part of the railroad. The time was very profitably and interestingly spent!"

To me, this was a very interesting meeting, between Dr. Durant, Governor Stanford and President Young. They were all very outstanding and noted men. Dr. Thomas C. Durant was the master spirit back of the construction of the Union Pacific Railroad; daring, adventurous, aggressive, a man of unlimited energy; he was ideally suited to prosecute this great work. Leland Stanford, California's Governor during the Civil War, described as "a man of hearty, ruddy aspect, of high principles, of immaculate garb and suave manners, but of forceful presence," was the genius of the Central Pacific. And then there was President Young—the founder of this inland empire—and more. It would have been interesting to the historian to have listened to their conversation as they strolled about on this day looking out a site for the Ogden depot.

In his autobiography, my father, Charles W. Nibley, makes mention of Governor Leland Stanford, with reference to his ideas concerning Mormonism and President Young. The event described took place in the early winter of 1869; my father, then twenty years of age, was working at Brigham City.

"While working at the store and the hotel that winter, we more than once had as guests the big men of the Union Pacific Railroad and especially the big ones of the Central Pacific Railroad, which latter was building from California east. Governor Stanford and some of his partners and trusted assistants were at our little old hotel more than once. Stanford was a very prominent man in those days. He had been Governor of the State of California, and was afterwards made United States Senator. He was always friendly to our people. Later on he endowed the Stanford University with its millions. One evening after supper, in the little old sitting room at Rosenbaum's house, I heard Stanford and his company discussing Mormonism. He remarked that it was a wonderful thing that Brigham Young should have been able to build up such a community and to govern and control it as he did. 'But,' he said, 'as soon as Brigham Young with his master mind passes away, that will be the end of Mormonism.' I thought to myself, Well, now we shall see. That is the conclusion of this wise man. According to man's wisdom that conclusion was the very best that could be given. I thought to myself, 'Wait and see.'"

It has turned out that the judgment of the twenty-year-old boy was far more accurate than that of Governor Leland Stanford.

The second letter of President Young to Albert Carrington, dated February 4th, 1869, goes more into detail regarding the railroad.

"The weather continues remarkably mild, which is very favorable for the construction of the railroads. The progress thereof is wonderful, especially on the eastern line. The Central Pacific is now near Humboldt Wells. The Union Pacific has reached Slate Point, some nine miles down Weber canyon. Our work on the lower tunnel was completed last Saturday, and Slate Point will probably be through by Saturday first. The big tunnel which the company's men took off from our hands to complete in a hurry, has been proffered back again. They have had not less than four men to our one constantly employed, and, withal, have not been doing over two-thirds as much work. Superintendent Reed has solicited us to resume it again. We were well pleased to have the job taken off from our hands when it was, as it enabled us to complete our other work on the line; but now that it is so nearly completed, probably we shall finish the tunnel. Bishop Sharp and Joseph A. Young are using the nitro-glycerine for blasting, and its superiority over powder, as well as the sobriety, steadiness and industry of our men, gives us a marked advantage. It is fair to suppose that the locomotive will be in Ogden early in March.

"I am happy to inform you that I am well, as also are Brothers Smith, Wells, Cannon, Joseph A., Brigham, Jr., and John W., all of whom desire to be kindly remembered to you, as well as all the brethren in the office. . . . I pray God to bless you long to do good.

"Your Brother in the Gospel,

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."
