Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

THE fortieth annual Conference of the Church convened in the new Tabernacle on April 6th, 1869, with President Young presiding. On the forenoon of the last day of the sessions, April 8th, the President spoke at some length, treating a variety of subjects. One of the topics which was near and dear to his heart, and which he mentioned rather sharply on this occasion was "the payment of just debts." The newspaper account records that

"The President understood that many of the Saints had borrowed money from their friends in the old countries to assist them to come here, and have not paid it back. Even Elders in Israel had obtained money and had not returned it. Such excused themselves by saying that they received it as a gift. He wished all such to pay such moneys back with interest that the gift may go around. If any should refuse to refund what they had borrowed, the bishops should cut off such from the Church."

That was strong doctrine, but Brother Brigham meant exactly what he said. All his lifetime he had observed with scrupulous care, the habit of paying his own just debts, and he expected the Saints to do the same.

In this connection, W. W. Riter once told me this interesting story. He said that in the early 60's he was called to go on a mission to England. Before leaving Salt Lake City President Young asked him to call at his office. Upon doing so the President took from his desk a memorandum, detailing certain small debts which he had contracted before joining the Church in Mendon, New York, thirty years before.

He said: "William, when I left Mendon, thirty years ago, I owed these small sums to various people there. I could not pay them. I now wish that you would stop off on your way east and look these people up and pay them the amounts I owe them, if they are still living. If not, find out who their nearest relatives are and pay the money to them."

Elder Riter did as he was directed. He said that the total amount of all the bills was not more than thirty dollars, but that the President, probably having mislaid the memorandum for many years, and suddenly coming upon it, directed that the amounts be paid. This incident speaks for itself, as revealing the honesty and integrity of President Brigham Young.

A few weeks after the April conference, there took place on Promontory Summit, in Box Elder county, an event which was heralded around the world; the completion of the great trans-continental railroad. On that day a telegram was sent to President U. S. Grant at Washington, as follows:

"Promontory Summit, Utah,

"May 10th, 1869.

"The last rail is laid, the last spike driven. The Pacific Railroad is completed. The point of junction is 1086 miles west of the Missouri river, and 600 miles east of Sacramento city.

"Leland Stanford,

"Central Pacific Railroad.

"T. C. Durant,

"Sidney Dillon,

"John Duff,

"Union Pacific Railroad."

While the ceremonies were under way at Promontory Summit incident to the driving of the last spike, a great celebration was being held in the new Tabernacle at Salt Lake City. "The principal business places, stores and manufactories were closed, and work suspended for the rest of the day. In about an hour's time (after the driving of the last spike) the citizens began to assemble in the new Tabernacle, and at two o'clock there were between six and seven thousand present."

I have regretted that President Young was not present on this occasion, but he had not returned from a trip he was making to the southern settlements. However, John Taylor gave an excellent address, and related some historical facts of interest.

"I can very well remember," he said, "the time when there was no such thing as a railroad in existence. I rode on the first that was ever made, soon after its completion; that was between Manchester and Liverpool, England. . . . .

"A few years ago a number of us left what was then called the United States, and came out here into the wilderness. We came with oxen, and for years it took from three to six months to have intelligence conveyed from the states here, for it was brought by ox teams. It was not thought then, by the inhabitants of the eastern states, that any such thing as a railroad or telegraph line would ever pass through this desolate region. . . .

"Now the magnates of both divisions have met, and placed the last tie, laid the last rail, and driven the last spike in Utah, thereby completing the grandest engineering and mechanical achievement of the nineteenth century. Now the Iron Horse from the Atlantic, leaving the east, can traverse unobstructed the great western plains, dash through our mountain gorges, defy the rugged heights of the Sierra Nevada, and lave his smoking nostrils in the peaceful waters of the broad Pacific."

Shortly after this celebration President Young returned from his southern trip and began preparations to build a branch railroad line from Ogden to Salt Lake City. Writing of this event to Albert Carrington, under date of May 22nd, the President relates:

"On the 17th inst., the First Presidency broke ground at Ogden, for the railroad between Ogden and Salt Lake City. There was no great display, no speech making; though somewhat unexpectedly, a large concourse of people assembled to witness the ceremony. I merely cut out a sod, using a spade for the occasion, which I considered more appropriate than a pick, as being the right tool in the right place. The sod, I am informed was afterwards borne away in fragments, as a memento of the event."

With the completion of the railroad there was almost immediately a great increase in the number of visitors who came to Salt Lake City. During June, General Philip Sheridan and William H. Seward were entertained by the citizens. Seward was one of the most prominent men in the country, having been Secretary of State in Lincoln's cabinet and himself a candidate for the presidency. It is regrettable that President Young was not in the city, but he was again away visiting the settlements in northern Utah. From the porch of the Townsend House, Secretary Seward delivered a happy little speech to the citizens who gathered to welcome him.

"Fellow citizens, it would be impossible for me to speak so as to be heard by so large an audience as this; and were it otherwise proper, the circumstances under which I am traveling through the country forbid me from engaging in any kind of discussion of public or political affairs. They do not forbid me, however, acknowledging the hospitality and kindness which have been shown me by my fellow citizens. That is all I can do, and I do it with a free, kind and good heart. I thank you for the hospitality you have shown me since I came to your city. I thank you for your attendance tonight, and I pray God that the great marvel which I witness here may result in establishing a good civilization in the heart of the American continent, and be a sign, token and assurance to mankind in every nation of the earth that it cannot fail, if it be prosecuted by industry and virtue, in advancing the welfare of the whole human race. Accept my thanks once more for this kind greeting and permit me to bid you a cordial good night."

On Sunday, July 11th, President Young (having returned from his trip north) addressed a large congregation in the new Tabernacle. He took up a variety of subjects. I shall briefly quote a few excerpts from this sermon. He began by expressing his timidity in addressing the Saints:

"Although I have been a public speaker for thirty-seven years it is seldom that I rise before a congregation without feeling a child-like timidity; if I live to the age of Methuselah I do not know that I shall outgrow it."

He then took up the principles of the Gospel.

"The first principle of the Gospel is faith in God—faith in a supreme being. This is a point that meets the infidel, and is one upon which I have reflected and talked a great deal, and I have come to this conclusion, that good solid sound sense teaches me never to judge a matter until I understand it, and infidels should never pass their opinion with regard to the character of a Supreme Being until they know whether there is one or not. If this principle were an article in the creed of the infidel world, I think they would not be quite so skeptical as they are; I think we should not meet with any person who would deny the existence of a Deity."

In regard to the desirability of life, there is this in the same sermon:

"Our spirits once dwelt in the heavens and were as pure and holy as the angels; but angels have tabernacles and spirits have none, and they are anxious to take tabernacles, and they come to the meanest, lowest and humblest of the human race to obtain one rather than run the risk of not doing so. I have heard that the celebrated Mr. Beecher of Brooklyn once said that the greatest misfortune that could ever happen to a man was to be born; but I say that the greatest good fortune that ever happened or can happen to human beings is to be born on this earth, for then life and salvation are before them; then they have the privilege of overcoming death, and of walking sin and iniquity under their feet, of incorporating into their lives every principle of life and salvation, and of dwelling eternally with the Gods."

The summer of 1869 went rapidly by, with President Young extremely busy at his multifarious duties. He summed up a few events of interest in a letter to Albert Carrington early in September.

"Salt Lake City, U. T.,

"September 4th, 1869.

"President Albert Carrington:

"Dear Brother: Again we have the pleasure of writing you with a view to giving you general news items, and such other matters as may occur to us. We have constant reason to praise the Giver of all good for His manifold blessings bestowed upon His people. Notwithstanding the malice of many enemies, Zion still flourishes, and the Saints are increasing in faith and good works.

"Business also continues to increase with the growth of the Kingdom. We are in receipt of gratifying news from Elder John Sharp, in Boston, who telegraphs, "Amicable settlement," (for work done on the Union Pacific railroad) and iron and rolling stock for the railroad between here and Ogden will start immediately.

"Business of late has been so pressing that it has seemed almost impossible to get away from the city for a brief respite, but we will take opportunity to visit Brigham City, and expect to start tomorrow on a short tour.

"The grasshoppers have been very destructive here in some localities this season, and have deposited large quantities of eggs, boding us no good for next year, but notwithstanding these pests we are having an abundant harvest. Barley and oats are somewhat injured, and the corn severely so. Still there will be a plentiful harvest.

"For the last three days my health has not been so good, though I feel very much better this morning.

"The grand organ is rapidly nearing completion. It is certainly a handsome specimen of art, and is pronounced by those who visit us as a perfect masterpiece.

"We have cheering accounts from the Elders in the states, who report that there is considerable interest in the work of the Lord in that field of labor, and our missionaries, particularly in the Southern States, are in great demand.

"We are pleased with the success attending the immigration thus far, and anticipate the like favorable results for the future.

"Praying continually for your welfare, in common with all Israel, and that you may have every blessing needful for your important calling.

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

II

The October Conference in 1869 convened in the new Tabernacle, and meetings were held for five days.

"The weather was most propitious," relates the reporter, "and the immense new Tabernacle was crowded, from which it may be assumed that about 10,000 people assembled from various parts of the Territory to worship the Lord, and to deliberate about the best means to further the great work in which we are engaged."

On the last day of the sessions President Young addressed the congregation.

"The whole business that the Latter-day Saints have to look after," he said, "is the building up of Zion on the earth; no matter whether they came here 22 years ago or are newcomers; whether they are just baptized or have been in the Church for years. Your labor is to build up the Kingdom of God."

And then he gave this personal reference—a thing which he rarely did:

"Sometimes, to illustrate, I have referred to myself. I expect I was about as poor a man as ever gathered with the Saints. The little property I had when I came into the Church I gave to my friends, and I went preaching the Gospel, everywhere I could, until I was called to the gathering place, and was as poor as any man ever need be. The first inquiry of mine to the Prophet was, 'What can I do to build up Zion?' The Prophet had told us never to spend another day to build up an outside city, or a city of the world, for the business of the Latter-day Saints was to build up Zion. . . . I have worked for Zion from that day to this."

Then he follows in this sermon with an enlightening definition of the Priesthood. After stating that it is impossible to build up the Kingdom without the direction of the Priesthood, he continues:

"The Priesthood of the Son of God is from everlasting to everlasting; it is without beginning of days or end of years, or time. It is without father, without mother, without descent; it is the power by which the worlds are and were created, and the power by which they are now held in existence, and by which all that are yet to come will be organized, governed, controlled and sustained.

"This Priesthood must come to the children of men, in order for them to understand the modus operandi of establishing the Kingdom of God upon the earth. This Priesthood must govern and control the people who undertake to build up this Kingdom; and the rule of the Priesthood of the Son of God will extend to every avenue, and will control every department of the labor of those engaged in this great work. This Priesthood must govern and control, or else the people will never become perfect."

During the last week of October, President Young, "accompanied by George A. Smith, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, Joseph F. Smith, Joseph Young, H. S. Eldredge and A. M. Musser, and others, left Salt Lake City on a tour through Utah, Juab, and San Pete counties."

George A. Smith, in writing about this trip to Albert Carrington, in England, relates that, "On October 27th, I started with President Young, our party being composed of twelve brethren and two sisters. We held twenty-seven meetings in twenty towns, and returned November 6th. Our meetings averaged from two to three hours. Our audiences were generally composed of all that could get in the house, or around it. The people are rejoiced in an abundance of wheat, potatoes, and other vegetables; the oats, barley and corn being lessened by grasshoppers. I never enjoyed a better feeling among the Saints, who seemed determined to learn everything they could from our instructions. President Young was much fatigued from his journey and labors, as he drove his own carriage, and the last three days he drove forty-five miles a day."

Considering the fact that President Young was now approaching his seventieth year, these long trips by carriage, and "driving his own team," must have been quite an effort for him. But he kept at his tasks, nevertheless.

The chief work of the President during the winter months of 1869 and 1870 was the building of the railroad between Salt Lake City and Ogden. I glean the following item from The Deseret News: "Presidents Brigham Young, George A. Smith and Daniel H. Wells; Elders John Taylor and George Q. Cannon, Bishop John Sharp, and Elders Robert L. Campbell and John Henry Smith left Salt Lake City, December 1st, on an excursion to Ogden. Two hours buggy ride brought them to Farmington, thence to Ogden. Twenty-two miles was accomplished per rail in an hour. Gov. Stanford of the C. P. R. R., and Assistant Superintendent Meade of the U. P. R. R., had an interview with President Young in relation to the location of the junction of the two roads. The return trip occupied about the same time."

It did not take long to lay the rails from Farmington south, and on January 10th, 1870, President Young was able to wire Albert Carrington in England: "Last rail laid, last spike driven in the Utah Central at two o'clock." Salt Lake City was now connected by rail with the east and west. The days of the pioneer journey across the plains by wagon, horseback or on foot were over forever.

On this occasion a speech prepared by President Young was read by George Q. Cannon:

"Whilst joining in the pleasing ceremonies of this eventful and auspicious day, our minds naturally revert to the circumstances which led this people to undertake their weary but hopeful journey across the desert plains, and rugged mountains, to these then sterile valleys—to our condition at the time of our advent here, poor, and destitute of the common necessities of life; driven from our homes and possessions, and bereft of all that makes life comfortable in consequence of our faith in God and in His Son Jesus Christ, and our obedience to His Holy Gospel, and without a friend in this wide world to whom we could look for help, except God our Heavenly Father alone; on whom we could rely.

"Since the day that we first trod the soil of these valleys, have we received any assistance from any of our neighbors? No, we have not! We have built our homes, our cities, have made our farms, have dug our canals and water ditches, have subdued this barren country, have fed the stranger, have clothed the naked, have immigrated the poor from foreign lands, have placed them in a condition to make all comfortable, and have made some rich. We have fed the Indians to the amount of thousands of dollars yearly, have clothed them in part, and have sustained several Indian wars, and now we have built thirty-seven miles of railroad.

"Who has helped us do all this? I will answer the question. It is the Lord Almighty. What are the causes of our success in all this? Union and oneness of purpose in the Lord."

President Young went more into detail about this occasion in a letter which he wrote to Albert Carrington on Feb. 2nd, 1870. In this letter he shows his enthusiasm for the new railroad:

"One of the most interesting events that has ever transpired here, took place on Monday, January 10th, for on that day we laid the last rail of the Utah Central Railroad. It was a general holiday, and a very large concourse of people assembled to witness the ceremonies. In addition to our own most prominent citizens, there were present about twenty officers of the U. P. and C. P. R. R. and about fourteen army officers from Camp Douglas. I had the honor of driving the last spike, which took place nine minutes past two o'clock. After prayer by Elder Woodruff, speeches were delivered by myself, Vice President Jennings, Supt. Joseph A. Young, Colonel B. O. Carr, and Engineer T. B. Morris, U. P.; Elder John Taylor and Mr. Campbell, C. P. In consequence of a cold, Elder Cannon read for me a short speech which I had prepared for the occasion; he also read congratulatory telegrams from representative men, East and West, who were unable to personally attend.

"In the evening a grand complimentary ball was given in the Theater to a very brilliant assemblage, and never did the Theater appear to greater advantage. Officers, civil and military, and public men, without regard to religion, party or politics, were invited, and all expressed themselves delighted with the whole affair.

"A large bonfire on Arsenal Hill and a general illumination of the City were attractive features of the program. So now the railroad to Salt Lake City, from the Atlantic Ocean on the one side, and the Pacific Ocean on the other, is a fixed fact.

"While I write, the whistle of one of our new locomotives announces that it has just arrived; two others are on the way. The railroad is so far a success, and already proves of great value and convenience to our local trade."

Two weeks after writing this letter, George A. Smith, in a letter to Albert Carrington, records that "President Young has been confined to his room for some days with the mumps. He had them fifty-five years ago on one side, and has now been having them on both sides."

Soon recovering from the mumps, the President, accompanied by a group of leading brethren, began, on February 24th, a trip which took him to the fartherest point south that he reached during his entire residence in the west—the junction of the Virgin and the Colorado rivers. Meetings were held in the settlements as the party journeyed south, St. George being reached on the 10th of March, where a halt was made for two days. "Near Washington the company was met by cavalry and Captain Milne's artillery company, the infantry and school children were drawn up in two lines. The artillery saluted the party as they came in sight, and the St. George and Santa Clara bands and the St. George martial band, filled the air with enlivening music." Traveling south on the 13th, the party made their way over the mountains, and down the south slope to Moapa valley, where they arrived at St. Thomas March 17th, continuing on the same day to the mouth of the Virgin. On the return journey St. George was reached at noon on the 24th.

In writing to Albert Carrington under date of April 23rd, 1870, President Young goes into detail regarding this trip:

"Dear Brother: Through the kind providences of the Almighty, I am favored with another opportunity of writing you a few lines, having returned from a lengthy tour in the south, which occupied from the day we started, the 24th of February, just 52 days. The company consisted of myself, President George A. Smith, Brigham, Jr., John W., and a few others, among whom was Brother Savage, the photographer, who took a number of very excellent views of the country in the region of the Colorado, the Rio Virgin, etc.; scenes probably unsurpassed anywhere for wild, romantic grandeur.

"We traveled over eleven hundred and fifty miles, and held upwards of sixty meetings. I drove my own team all the way, and I am thankful to be able to say that my health during the entire time has been extremely good. I did not miss a single meal. As you may imagine such a journey was naturally a fatiguing one, but it was a change, and the warm-hearted reception extended to us by the Saints on every hand, relieved in a great degree the sense of fatigue, while the pleasure afforded us in beholding the faces of the Saints, and giving them such instructions as were suggested, more than compensated for the labor of the journey.

"The general health continues good; the Saints, notwithstanding the howling of the adversary, enjoy peace, and as a general thing are trying to live their religion. May God help us all to do so, and may He bless the faithful and preserve His Elders upon the land and upon the sea, that we may all live long to do His righteous will.

"Your brother in the Gospel.

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

III

On account of the absence of President Young in the south, the usual annual April Conference in 1870 was postponed until May 5th. The new Tabernacle was also undergoing repairs, as the galleries were being installed.

The Deseret News, under date of April 16th, 1870, records the return of the President to Salt Lake City: "President Young and party, after an absence of about two months from this city, on a preaching tour in the extreme southern portions of the Territory, returned this afternoon. During their absence they have traveled about twelve hundred miles, and have encountered much severe and snowy weather, which must have rendered their journeyings ofttimes far more toilsome than pleasurable. However, the latter is of slight consideration with President Young when duty has to be attended to, as is evidenced by the fact of him undertaking such a journey at his advanced age—nearly seventy years—at such an unsettled portion of the year."

And then the correspondent continues: "The demonstrations of welcome extended to the President on his return this afternoon are suggestive of one fact—namely, that though some here have proved false and recreant to every principle of honor, and totally regardless of truth, the majority still remember that they are Latter-day Saints, and are ready to do honor to him who stands at the head of the Kingdom of God upon the earth, whose whole course through life has shown that the interests of that Kingdom and of its true-hearted citizens are first with him.

"The manifestations of welcome extended to President Young on his return today were never more numerous and enthusiastic, citizens of all classes and in very great numbers, accompanied by bands of music and hundreds of Sunday School children, giving the most unequivocal expressions of their joy and gladness at his reappearance in their midst."

Shortly after the President's return, on the 27th of April, 1870, John Young, his eldest brother, died in Salt Lake City. He was ten years the senior of the President; a faithful, good and just man. Of five brothers, the youngest of whom was approaching seventy, he was the first to depart in death.

On May 5th, at 10 o'clock in the forenoon, the General Conference convened in the new Tabernacle. The President gives a splendid account of this Conference in a letter to Elder Carrington under date of May 11th, 1870:

"Our fortieth Annual Conference," he states, "closed its session on Sunday, after a most happy and instructive reunion, lasting four days. It was by far the largest gathering of Saints that has taken place in this generation, and though a gallery, capable of seating nearly four thousand, had been erected since our last Conference, we found it still true that the Latter-day Saints had not succeeded in building a house large enough to accommodate all who wished to hear the word of the Lord. As many as thirteen thousand people assembled at some of the meetings, yet, many hundreds turned aside at the doors, unable to obtain a comfortable seat. The erection of this gallery has done much to improve the acoustics of the building, for now a clear speaker can be heard distinctly in almost every part of the house.

"At this Conference all the members of the First Presidency and of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles were present, yourself alone excepted, all of whom addressed the congregated Saints with words of wise counsel and encouragement. The Authorities were sustained by the vast congregation with the usual unanimity, Elder Elias Smith being appointed to fill the vacancy in the Presidency of the High Priests Quorum caused by the death of Elder John Young.

"To witness the thousands of joyous faces, and hear the happy greetings everywhere abounding during the last few days, was an experience few would expect to meet within the midst of a people whose enemies, numerous and powerful, as the world counts, threaten to rob them of every right sacred to those who love liberty. Any people not possessed of a living faith in the providences of the Most High and the righteousness of their cause, could not be as calm, as happy, and as hopeful as the Latter-day Saints today.

"For myself, I never felt more full of peace and pleasant anticipations than now, and fear nothing the enemies of the truth can attempt against the Saints if we but live our holy religion."

In June, the President, his counselors, and several of the Twelve, went by train to Brigham City, from thence to Clarkston, Oxford and Soda Springs by team, at which latter place they remained for several days. They returned by way of Bear Lake valley, and Franklin in Cache valley. On June 24th they were back in Salt Lake City.

Just prior to the President's trip north Bayard Taylor, who was more or less a famous author of the day, called at Salt Lake City and through George Q. Cannon, obtained an interview with President Young which was published in the New York Tribune. "At the first glance, you would take him to be a successful bank or railroad president," writes Taylor, "and his quick, straightforward, business-like manner carries out the impression. After he is seated, however, and you have a chance of observing his features more closely, the signs of a quality with which bank presidents are not accustomed to deal, begin to manifest themselves. He is both short and broad, but his thickness gives the impression of strength, rather than corpulence. Although sixty-nine years old, there is no gray in his sandy hair, and his small blue eyes are keen and full of power. His head is large and approaching to squareness in form, and his complexion is a strong healthy red. His thin, firm-set mouth and large jaws express an indomitable energy. The general expression of his face is at once reticent and watchful. . . . While he was talking I studied his face sufficiently to detect the three chief qualities—great prudence, great determination and great belief in himself."

Such was the appearance of President Brigham Young to Bayard Taylor, traveler, author, lecturer—forty-four years of age—and soon to become United States minister to Berlin, Germany.

Today, the name of Bayard Taylor is in the realm of "the forgotten man," but that of Brigham Young rises higher and ever higher in the minds of thinking people.

On Monday, July 25th, 1870, at a meeting held in the new Tabernacle to commemorate Pioneer Day, the President spoke at some length and related a few of his adventures and trials in helping to establish the Kingdom.

Coming from him these remarks constitute source information.

"I am disposed to refer to a little of the history of this people, called Latter-day Saints," he said, "in their journey to these valleys of the mountains, in the first place making this statement—some five times the first members of this Church have suffered the loss of all things for their religion. This has been my case. I have been fortunate enough to accumulate around me the comforts of life from the time that I first started in business. Five times I have forsaken all my worldly goods for Christ's sake. Last of all we had to pull up stakes and pack up whatever we could, and leave the State of Illinois for Vancouver's island or some other place, though it was our design to come to the valleys of the Great Basin in the interior of America. This was the understanding of the few, but the masses knew nothing about where we were going. Three members of Congress visited us in the fall of 1845. Joseph was killed in 1844. These members of Congress visited us making a request on behalf of the people of the United States, that we, the Latter-day Saints, should leave the confines of their territory. Upon this we sat down in council and directed letters to every governor in every state and territory in the Union, asking them and their legislatures, if they would grant us an asylum within their domains. Two of those gentlemen deigned to answer our letters, but the residue held us in respect by their silence, or in disgrace, whichever we have a mind to call it. But there was no place for the Latter-day Saints.

"Now, this is the history of this people. It may be painful for us to speak of it, or to hear of it; nevertheless these are the facts. When we had completed our work and were ready to take up the line of march from Nauvoo, we crossed the river in the dead of winter. A few crossed in January, the most part in the first days of February, and so on into March and April, making our camps on the west of the Mississippi river, facing to the west. We marched from time to time as we could. In consequence of storms, bad roads, and being entirely destitute of provisions, we had to send men down into the settlements to work to get us a little provisions, so that we could travel another hundred miles. We journeyed thus until we came to a place where we stopped and built a little town called Garden Grove. Here we tarried for a few weeks, plowed up considerable ground, put in a good deal of seed, made many hundred rods of fence, built perhaps one hundred or one hundred and fifty log cabins, and the poor that we could take no farther we left in those cabins. We then took up the line of march for the West.

"While on our way to the Missouri river, some kind of a spirit, whether it was intuitive knowledge, prescience or promptness of intellect, no matter—something told me that the government of the United States would make a demand on the Camp of Israel for troops to go to the Mexican war. If the God of Heaven did not reveal it to me I should like to know who did.

"When we were about eight miles off the Missouri river, with perhaps fifteen hundred wagons, a gentleman named Allen, who was a captain in the army, from Fort Leavenworth, made his appearance in our camp. We called a council of the first men of the camp. We assembled ourselves together—he read a few documents from the government. The war department required us to furnish five hundred men to go to the Mexican war. My first thought was "yes" as it had been before. Then when I realized and saw men, women and children, destitute of provisions and three hundred miles from where we could obtain any, I said in my heart I would see them in a warm place first. I did not say it aloud as I do now. Then on mature reflection I said to my brethren, "We will beat them at their own game. We will furnish the men." We furnished them five hundred and three men, and we selected our best men for officers. They were enrolled, and took their line of march, with a few members of their families, to Fort Leavenworth. This caused a serious break in our camps.

"In April, one hundred and forty-three pioneers took up the line of march with our ox teams, with our cows, and with what we could pick up. We made our own roads from day to day and from week to week. I was one that hunted up the road. Heber C. Kimball, my first counselor, and myself took the lead to hunt the road and kill the rattlesnakes. When the wagons were in the mud my shoulder was one of the first that ever lifted the wagon wheel. We pulled them out of the mud, sought our camping places, cut our roads through these canyons, and located on this place, about half a mile south of this. We came up here, and looking around, we decided in a very few days that this should be the Temple block.

"I will say here that Wilford Woodruff brought me into this valley sick in his carriage. He is our chaplain of the day, who offered up the prayer. Professor Pratt came with instruments that we had purchased to take observations; he had his carriage loaded with them, and as we came along we took observations. George A. Smith, the brother that has just spoken to you, was one of our right hand men and one of the Twelve Apostles; but your humble servant had the honor to lead the company. We are the pioneers into these valleys."

As I have said before, it was seldom that President Young referred to past history, but when he did he always portrayed it vividly and related facts that prove very valuable to the historian. I have quoted a considerable part of this sermon for the enlightenment of my readers.
