Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT

ON Tuesday, the 30th of August, 1870, about 7:30 o'clock in the evening, a passenger train from Ogden pulled into the Salt Lake depot. Edward Stevenson, a prominent elder of the Church, stepped down from the cars and assisted an elderly man, who followed him. It was Martin Harris, one of the three witnesses of the Book of Mormon, in his 88th year, coming to Utah to again ally himself with the Mormon people. For over thirty-two years he had been away from the Church, he had wandered far and wide; now in his old age he had come to Salt Lake City, to accept the leadership of President Brigham Young, in the Church which he himself had materially assisted in founding. It was a grand act for Martin Harris to do, and it should have effectually obliterated any memory of his indiscretions in the days of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

The matter of the return of Martin Harris to the Church was brought about in this manner: Edward Stevenson, a splendid, spiritual man, was called on a mission to the Eastern States in 1869. In course of his travels he visited Kirtland, Ohio, and attended a meeting there in the Kirtland Temple. Coming out of the meeting he encountered Martin Harris, whom he had known thirty-six years before. "He took from under his arm," relates Elder Stevenson, "a copy of the Book of Mormon, the first edition, I believe, and bore a faithful testimony, just the same as that I heard him bear thirty-six years previously. . . . After patiently hearing him I felt a degree of compassion for him, and in turn bore my testimony to him. . . . My testimony impressed him.

"After my arrival in Utah in 1870, I was inspired to write Martin Harris, and soon received a reply that the Spirit of God, for the first time, prompted him to go to Utah. Several letters were afterwards exchanged, and President Brigham Young, having read the letters, through President George A. Smith, requested me to get up a subscription and emigrate Martin to Utah, he subscribing twenty-five dollars for that purpose. Having raised the subscription to about two hundred dollars, I took the railroad cars for Ohio, July 19th, 1870, and on the 10th of August, filled my appointment, preaching twice in the Kirtland Temple, finding Martin Harris elated with his prospective journey. . . . Although in his 88th year he possessed remarkable vigor and health, having recently worked in the garden, and dug potatoes by the day for some of his neighbors. . . . August 19th, 1870, in company with Martin Harris, I left Kirtland for Utah, and on the 21st he was with me in Chicago. . . . On the 29th of August we arrived in Ogden, and on the following day in Salt Lake City."

Soon after his arrival in Utah, Martin Harris was rebaptized by Elder Stevenson. During the October Conference in 1870, President Young called him to address the Saints. Seymour B. Young, who was present, relates that he said as follows: "I had the honor of being the scribe for the Prophet Joseph Smith in translating a portion of the Book of Mormon, but through my carelessness and through my want of foresight, the manuscript that I had written was lost, and never regained, and I justly received censure and reprimand from the Prophet Joseph Smith. Now I have returned to the bosom of the Church with the hope and prayer in my heart that I may again be admitted a member."

It is interesting to me, how President Young reached out his hand and opened his purse to help bring this aged friend and brother back again to the fold. He had a fondness for Martin Harris; he recalled that it was Martin who had come forward with the money to print the first Book of Mormon; indeed it was Martin who, together with Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer, had selected him to be a member of the first quorum of Twelve. Now he was able to re-unite Martin with his friends and family, and bring him comfort and joy in his declining years. Today a granite shaft marks the grave of Martin Harris in the little cemetery at Clarkston in Cache valley—the only one of the three witnesses to reach the gathering place of the Saints in the valleys of the mountains.

On Friday, November 25th, 1870, President Young, accompanied by George A. Smith, Brigham Young, Jr., and a number of the brethren, began a trip south, with the intention of holding meetings in the settlements, and remaining in St. George throughout the winter. On November 28th, they were at Payson, and held a meeting there. The President reported the weather to be "clear and cold, the roads dusty." On the 29th they were at Nephi. "Party all well," was the message he sent back to the city. On December 8th George A. Smith telegraphed from St. George as follows: "On Monday evening we preached at Parowan, President Young, Dr. M. M. McCune and myself occupied the time. The meeting house is nicely finished. The audience was large. On Tuesday forenoon we traveled in a snow storm, and at eleven o'clock preached at Cedar City. We remained at Kanarra Wednesday night, while Elder B. Young, Jr., and myself went to Harrisburg. Arrived here (St. George) safe at 12 o'clock. The roads have been good and the weather mostly fine. The black rocks in the road are as abundant as ever. Our journey has been entirely prosperous, and we have had no accident, with the exception of a few damaged carriages."

"President Young's excessive labors during the past season, and on the journey, preaching almost every day, and driving his own team, were entirely too much for a man of his age. Since he came here he has endeavored to rest. He has not spoken in public, but as long as a telegraph wire runs from here to Salt Lake, his mind is kept on almost a constant strain, answering questions by telegram, as well as by letter. He has been somewhat afflicted with rheumatism, a disease with which he has been tortured occasionally from his youth."

It is interesting to me to note how President Young spent his time at St. George, visiting with old friends, viewing various points of interest, attending meetings, parties, etc. Regarding this, George A. Smith writes in the same letter as the above: "This part of the Territory contains a great number of old acquaintances and friends, some of whom have been in the Church forty years, and we are every day renewing acquaintances made in Kirtland, Missouri and Nauvoo, on the plains and in the early settlement of Salt Lake valley."

During the winter there were "plays" given in the St. George Hall. On the night of December 11th, "The Golden Farmer" and "Andy Black," were presented. President Young was in attendance to enjoy them. On the 13th he inspected "the springs that furnish water to the city," and "the red sandstone quarry where rock was being hewn for the new meetinghouse." (This building stands firm and strong to this day). On the 16th he visited "the cotton farm at Heberville, which has not been cultivated for several years, in consequence of the loss of the dam in the Rio Virgin." On the 29th he was at Washington, and inspected the machinery at the cotton factory, "a portion of which is in successful operation. The factory is producing a quality of cotton yarn superior to any produced heretofore."

The weather was pleasant during the winter. On January 1st, 1871, the maximum temperature at St. George was 70 degrees; a congregation of Saints assembled in the open air and were addressed by the President. On January 3rd, Joel H. Johnson, of Bellevue, was ordained a patriarch in the Church, "under the hands of Presidents B. Young and George A. Smith." Such was the manner in which the President spent the winter, until February 2nd, when he began the return journey to Salt Lake City. After nine days of driving, averaging about forty miles a day, he arrived in the city on the evening of February 10th, "all well, and in the evening was serenaded by Prof. George Careless and the Tabernacle choir."

Six days after his arrival home the President addressed the following interesting letter to Horace Eldredge in England:

"Salt Lake City, U. T.,

February 16th, 1871.

"President Horace Eldredge:

"Dear Brother: Your welcome news letter of the 21st of January has come to hand. We are rejoiced to hear from you. We hail your letters with pleasure, and any news pertaining to the interests of the Church in the British Isles, Scandinavia and Europe generally, or from any spot on mother earth where our elders are laboring, is of the first importance to all who have the progress of the Kingdom of God at heart.

"As you are aware, my duties called me to the southern part of the Territory this winter, where I have traveled some seven hundred miles, accompanied by President George A. Smith, B. Young, Jr., and other brethren, our chief point of location being at St. George. Our visit and travels have proved of great mutual advantage, so far as I can judge from the expressions of the brethren, and it is cheering to see the progress made by the Saints in the south, notwithstanding the very many drawbacks they have to contend with.

"We started on this trip on the 24th of November, and returned on the 10th of February following, teaching, counseling and exhorting the Saints in the various settlements, doing all the good, and the very least portion of harm we possibly could.

"As you are also aware, we started for the Kanab country on the 27th of August, and returned on the 24th of September. These two visits to our 'Dixie,' with so short a time between, may evince our interest in affairs at the south, while at the same time we contemplate at no distant day to throw a force into the north country, in addition to what has already been done, and so increase, extend, build up, and improve, trusting that, with the blessings of high Heaven upon our labors, righteousness may increase as the Saints increase, and that our settlements, buildings and improvements, may be made with an eye single to the glory of God.

"My health continues good, for which I feel very thankful. Exposure to the weather brought on a renewal of the old attack of rheumatism, but I trust that with a little nursing and attention, now that I am home again, the attack will soon be defeated. President Smith is also well, and the brethren generally with whom we associate.

"We are pleased to hear of the steady progress of the work in the British Isles, and particularly in the Scandinavian mission, and we trust that by continued diligence on the part of the elders, and the blessings of heaven upon their labors, numbers will yet be gathered from among the nations, who will love and serve God and keep His commandments. But whatever be the result, it is nevertheless our duty to bear faithful testimony and relax not our diligence.

"Our winter is passing away without the extra severity that so many predicted. Milling and mining have been carried on more or less through the winter, and lately the weather has been quite mild.

"We hear from all quarters of the great excitement about Utah, her mineral wealth, etc., and it is probable that a large emigration and a consequent increase of business will be the direct result. There is need of money to pay the government for our lands, to stock and improve our farms, etc., and if in the providences of the Almighty, these mines should for three or four years create an active circulating medium and thus enable the brethren to secure and improve their homesteads, we shall have reason to be thankful.

"Truly the Saints have reason to praise the Lord for His goodness constantly manifested towards His people. May we ever seek to live His praise that His blessings may crown our labors for the welfare of Israel.

"May God bless you and all who are laboring with you, that you may faithfully perform the mission assigned you, and be preserved to return in peace and safety.

"Your brother in the Gospel,

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

II

On the evening of Washington's Birthday, February 22nd, 1871, in the Fourteenth Ward hall, "the Young Ladies' Retrenchment Society" gave a "Retrenchment Dinner." Among the honored guests were President Young, Daniel H. Wells, John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff. The committee on arrangements for the occasion were Julia Horne, Sophia Taylor, Georgia Fox, Jennie Seaman, Harriet Taylor, Beulah Beattie and Mary Pratt.

On this same day, February 22nd, a correspondent for the "Chicago Times," was in Salt Lake City, writing an article to his paper. "Twenty-four years ago, where I am now writing," he states, "the sage grass and the tuft grass of the plains flourished undisturbed, and the primeval gloom of the wilderness held undisputed sway. But today, Salt Lake City contains 20,000 people—happy, contented, industrious, sober, and religious people. Their labors and privations have been gigantic and full of fortitude and faith.

"Call them what you will, they have shown more faith by their works than any other religious denomination in America. And it is only doing simple justice to acknowledge this truth, and to state fairly and squarely the facts about this peculiar and zealous people. After some days sojourning here, and much candid and patient investigation, I am led irresistibly to the following reflections:

"Brigham Young is their leader. He is the head of the Church. He is now seventy years of age. His personal appearance is far different from the stereotyped descriptions which have for many years been going the rounds of the newspapers.

"Brigham Young is of fine physical structure, rather lymphatic in temperament, small boned, and yet staunchly and compactly built. He stands straightly, about five feet ten inches, shows no sign of age in his walk, and weighs about two hundred pounds. His head is large, well-shaped, well-balanced, and covered with a luxuriant suit of auburn hair, among which, here and there, a silvery few may be seen. His forehead is ample and high. His eyes are blue, not large, but sharp, searching, and capable of varied and great expression.

"His nose is aquiline, quite prominent, but symmetrical, and, with his well formed mouth, which shuts firmly and tightly together, gives indication of great mental energy and indomitable pluck. And altogether, the face of Brigham Young indicates a man of iron inflexibility, much forecast, extraordinary ability and a vast fund of good humor."

So much then for the picture this writer gives us of Brother Brigham in February, 1871. It is pleasing to find one of the eastern correspondents who could at least approximate telling the truth.

The Forty-First Annual Conference of the Church came on in April, 1871, and continued for four days, with President Young presiding. On Sunday, April 9th, the last day of the Conference, the President preached an unusual sermon. He began by advising the brethren that it was their duty to pay more attention to their own lives and not to worry about the welfare of the Kingdom.

"I want to say for the consolation of the Elders of Israel, and those who go forth to preside, you need to have no trouble with regard to the building up of this Kingdom, only do your duty in the sphere to which you are assigned. I think there is more responsibility on myself than any other one man on this earth pertaining to the salvation of the human family. Yet my path is a pleasant path to walk in, my labors are very agreeable, for I take no thought what I shall say; I trouble not myself with regard to my duties. All I have to do is to live, as I have often made the comparison, and keep my spirit, feelings and conscience like a sheet of blank paper, and let the Spirit and power of God write upon it what he pleases. When he writes I will read; but if I read before he writes I am very likely to do wrong. If you will take the same course you will not have the least trouble."

And then he referred to the fact that travelers and writers were saying that it was the genius of Brigham Young that was guiding the Mormon people. This he denied.

"What do you suppose I think when I hear people say, 'O, see what the Mormons have done in the mountains. It is Brigham Young. What a head he has got. What power he has got. How well he controls the people.'

"These people are ignorant of our true character. It is the Lord that has done this. It is not any one man or set of men; only as we are led and guided by the spirit of truth. It is the oneness, wisdom, power, knowledge and providences of God; and all that we can say is, we are His servants and handmaids, and let us serve Him with an undivided heart."

In closing this sermon Brother Brigham gave the sisters a little practical advice, as he often loved to do.

"It is my privilege, if I were capable, to teach every woman in this Church and Kingdom how to keep house, and how to sweep house, cook meat, wash dishes, bake bread without any waste, etc. I may go to a house and what do I see? Perhaps the bottom or top of the bread is burnt to a coal. Why did you not do different? 'O, these are accidents.' Yes, because you never think of the business on your hands.

"If I only had time I would teach you how to knit stockings, for there are very few women nowadays who know how many stitches to set on to knit stockings for their husbands or for themselves; or what size yarn or needles they require, and when their stockings are finished they are like some of these knitted by machinery—a leg six inches long, while the foot is a foot and a half long; or the leg is only big enough for a boy only ten years old, while the foot is big enough for any miner in the country. You know this is extravagant, but it is a fact that the art of knitting stockings is not nearly so generally understood among the ladies as it should be."

Thus his mind reached out in all directions for the betterment of the condition of the Saints, both temporal and spiritual.

A few days after the Conference, President Young, in writing to Horace S. Eldredge, reviewed some of the work going on in Zion; the letter is dated April 7th:

"Steps are being taken to let the building of the Temple by contract, and a meeting of stone cutters and others interested in this work will be held today in the City Hall, to thoroughly canvass the subject, fix prices, etc., so we trust a new impetus will be given to the building of the Temple, not only by this means, but by the speedy completion of the railroad so as to facilitates the shipments of granite from the Cottonwood quarry.

"We intend also to commence the erection of a Temple in St. George, in the fall. For this purpose all the tithing south of Beaver will be appropriated, as well as such other assistance as may be necessary. This building will be one hundred and forty-two feet long by ninety-six feet wide and eighty feet high. It will be built of stone, plastered inside and outside, and will consist of two stories and a basement.

"We anticipate that, notwithstanding repeated failures of crops, considerable means will be raised to assist in the immigration of the poor, but we are not yet advised of the amount. Elder William C. Staines will start in eight or ten days for New York, to arrange with the railroad companies for rates, etc., and be prepared to receive and direct the immigration from that point.

"My health continues good. President George A. Smith has not been well since Conference, but is better now. All the brethren join me in kind remembrance, praying that you may be preserved to return in peace and safety, with the rest of your brethren.

"Your brother in the Gospel,

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

Continuing his work of "empire building," President Young began early in 1871 to promote a railroad running to the settlements south of Salt Lake City to be known as the Utah Southern Railway. Gathering around him a group of his own brethren, he was able to perfect this organization and begin actual work on May 1st. I glean the following from The Deseret News under date of May 3rd:

"The ceremony of breaking ground for the Utah Southern Railroad took place at 10:50 a.m. May 1st, at the northwest corner of the Old Fort block (present site of the Denver and Rio Grande depot) Sixth Ward. Among those present were: President Brigham Young, George A. Smith, Daniel H. Wells and Elder George Q. Cannon; also of the officers of the road, F. Little, General Superintendent; William Jennings, Director; Jesse W. Fox, Chief Engineer; George Swan, Secretary, and a number of leading private citizens. The dedicatory prayer was offered by Elder George Q. Cannon, and ground was broken by President Young, followed by D. H. Wells, William Jennings and F. Little. Contractors and operatives were ready to commence work on the road immediately. Four miles of the road were already contracted for."

Immediately after the above ceremony, a special train "of three carriages," containing a large party headed by President Young, left for Ogden to welcome home from the east Delegate to Congress, William H. Hooper. "On the arrival of his train from the east, there was a welcome extended such as none receive but those who have a firm hold on the affections of the people. On every side, from hundreds of people, there were salutations and warm greetings, to which music and singing lent additional earnestness." Such was the manner in which in those early interesting days, the people welcomed home from Washington, their public servants.

On Thursday, June 1st, 1871, at his home and office in Salt Lake City, President Young celebrated his seventieth birthday. "Among the noticeable demonstrations of respect," relates The Deseret News, "was the adjournment of the Deseret University for the day, and a serenade in the morning by the Theatrical Orchestra and Brass Band. The counselors of the President, and members of the Quorum of the Twelve at present in the city, and other Church dignitaries, called upon the President in a body, when Elder John Taylor on behalf of the Twelve, in most feeling and appropriate remarks tendered their congratulations and good wishes for his prolonged life and continued prosperity."

The News relates that John Taylor said on this occasion:

"Brother Brigham: We, a few of the Twelve who are now in the city, have called upon you to congratulate you upon the seventieth anniversary of your birthday. We are happy to find you in the enjoyment of good health, and that your bodily strength and general appearance indicate such remarkable preservation after an earthly sojourn of seventy years. We rejoice that through the blessings of Israel's God, you have been able to lead forth His people, from the lands of the far off east, to these beautiful valleys of the mountains, which under your counsel, aided by the Spirit of our Heavenly Father, have spread and expanded to their present magnificent proportions.

"We look upon you, under the direction of Almighty God, as our leader in the dictation of His Church and Kingdom in this land, and through the world; and as we have enjoyed your communion, counsel and fellowship for so many years past, we sincerely hope that your life may be prolonged to you for many years to come, and that we may have the pleasure of your association in this world, and then be eternally united in the Celestial Kingdom of our God."

What leader could ask for a finer birthday tribute from his closest associates than that given by Elder Taylor and the Twelve on this occasion?

III

Two days after his seventieth birthday, on Saturday, June 3, 1871, President Young, his counselors, and a number of the Twelve, went by train to Ogden, with the object of holding there a two days' conference. Needless to say, the Tabernacle was filled to overflowing. There were many children present, and the President addressed his remarks "to the parents as well as the children," at the opening session.

"If you who have children will contemplate the responsibilities that rest upon you," he said, "you will determine never to do anything you are not willing for your children to imitate. How often we see parents who demand obedience, good behavior,. a sweet voice and a bright eye, when they themselves frown at the child, and are full of bitterness. How unreasonable!"

And then he continued:

"Never permit yourselves to speak improperly to a child. . . . Never use language to a child that we would not like them to use before good company. If we give to our children language that is proper to use in refined society, we shall not be under the necessity of taking them aside and asking, 'Why do you use such language?' Carry this out in every principle, and always set that example before our children that is worthy of our highest admiration and imitation."

The principles we should teach our children are plainly set before us.

"If we bring up our children according to what God has revealed to us, it will be comparatively easy for them to walk in the path of life. We have the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the book of Doctrine and Covenants, the history and sayings of the Prophet Joseph and of the Elders of Israel, and we have our own experiences in the Church of God, and I think we should be very culpable if we should say we are ignorant, and do not know enough to teach our children, so that they can grow up unto Christ, our living head."

In closing his sermon, the President addressed himself directly to the children, with this beautiful bit of advice:

"Children, study all good books, obey your parents, and never suffer yourselves to do that which will mortify you through life. In your youth, preserve yourselves in integrity so that in age you can look back on your past lives without regret, and have an honorable name among the good and pure, and an inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven."

During the summer of 1871 President Young and party made a trip north through Cache valley, as far as Soda Springs; on the 4th of July they were in attendance at a celebration at Paris, on the Bear Lake; they returned in time to participate with the citizens of Ogden in their celebration of Pioneer day on July 24th.

In September the President and a group of his brethren began a trip to the southern settlements. At Provo "he learned that certain charges were being preferred against him in Salt Lake City, by the grand jury; he immediately turned back and came to the city, at considerable personal inconvenience, to meet any and all such charges." This was the beginning of a severe persecution against President Young, on the part of the Federal Government, which had determined at all costs to end the practice of polygamy. On Oct. 2nd, at his home on South Temple Street, President Young submitted to arrest "by United States Marshal Patrick." On the 9th he appeared in court before Judge McKean, "in a room over Faust's stable," where he posted bail in the amount of $5,000, William Jennings and John Sharp being Sureties.

The Saints were greatly concerned and incensed at the arrest of President Young. On Saturday, Oct. 7th, at the Conference, David McKenzie addressed the congregation: "In the days of Joseph Smith, the Prophet," he said, "there was not a true Elder in the Church who would not have freely sacrificed his life rather than that Joseph's blood should have been shed." He asked to know whether the feelings of the people were different this day with regard to President Young. The response of the vast congregation was "No."

Among those least concerned about the persecution being heaped upon him was the President himself. Consequently he continued calmly at his task of "building up the Kingdom," and on the 24th of October left for St. George, with a number of his brethren, for the purpose of dedicating a site for a Temple there. This occasion is well described in a letter from D. D. McArthur to George Reynolds, in England, under date of Nov. 12th, 1871.

"Dear Brother—At noon on the 9th inst., the Saints assembled on the block selected for the site of the St. George Temple, for the purpose of dedicating the ground. About five hundred persons were in attendance. It is a barren spot of mineral land, but so situated that the Temple, when built, will catch the eye of the visitor from any direction as soon as he reaches the crest of the mountains which surround the valley in which St. George is situated.

"The site for the building had been surveyed under the direction of President B. Young, by Elders Daniel Stark and Joseph W. Young, from a ground plan furnished by Elder Truman O. Angell, architect for the Church. It is one hundred forty-two feet in length, by ninety-five feet wide, and the center of the building is to be on the center of the block, which is thirty-two rods square.

"No program had been previously arranged. The attention of the audience was called by President Young, when music was discoursed by the Santa Clara Brass Band. The St. George Choir then sang an appropriate hymn, followed by a few remarks by President George A. Smith, who offered a dedicatory prayer.

"President Brigham Young delivered a short address on the subject of building the Temple, giving instruction in regard to the management and application of labor thereon. A numerous vote was passed approving of the counsel of the Presidency in building a Temple, also to sustain the authorities here in carrying it out. . . .

"President Brigham Young, with a shovel in his hand, marked the ground where the southeast corner stone would be laid, and where the records of the Temple would be deposited, as also in the cap-stone, directly over it. He then said: 'We will now break ground, praying that our enemies may never hinder this work, but that a Temple may be reared to administer the ordinances for the living and the dead.' Then breaking ground by throwing out a few shovelfuls of the soil, he handed the shovel to President George A. Smith, who did the same, followed by President Erastus Snow, Elders Joseph W. Young, Levi W. Hancock, Henry Harriman, Jacob Gates, James G. Bleak, Patriarch Perkins and William Faucett and Bishop D. D. McArthur.

"President E. Snow spoke briefly, referring to those who came here with him in December, 1862, as pioneers of the Southern Mission, and who have been faithful to their calling; also to the prospect of an early completion of the handsome Tabernacle now in progress. He was reminded of the vision of President Young in regard to seeing a beautiful city, with its Temple towering to the heavens, where St. George now stands, and hoped to see it rapidly pushed forward and accomplished. . .

"President Young, standing upon a chair, led and explained the holy salutation of Hosannah to God and the Lamb, in which the assembly joined, it being repeated three times. A joyful spirit rested upon the people, who were then dismissed, the Brass Band discoursing music."

Such was the beginning of the St. George Temple, which today graces the pretty valley of the Virgin like a white jewel in a crimson setting.

While still enjoying the winter at St. George, President Young learned with astonishment that Judge McKean had set his case for trial on the 9th of January, 1872. He, therefore, began immediate preparations to return, though many of his friends advised him not to do so at such an inclement season of the year. However, he maintained that the "voice of the Spirit" urged him to return, and consequently, on the afternoon of Sunday, December 17th, after holding meetings in St. George he began the northward trip. "The second day's journey brought them to Kanarra," relates B. H. Roberts. "Here they met the veteran life guard of the Prophet Joseph Smith, John D. Parker, who wept like a child because President Young was going back to face his enemies in the court room, which he considered an act of madness. "This feeling was very general with all the people the party conversed with as they passed through the southern country," says the journalist of the party, "but President Young told the people that God would overrule all for the best good of Zion."

"At Cedar, on the 20th of December, the President's party was met by Orrin P. Rockwell, Joseph A. Young and Orson Arnold, who came to act as President Young's teamster. Beaver was made by the 21st, and up to this time the weather had been mild. It was the intention of the party to make an evening drive to Cove Fort, but as the teams were being set to the vehicles a blinding snowstorm came on and the drive was abandoned. . . .

"The next day the President's party drove to Cove Fort. About a foot of snow had fallen in Wild Cat pass, and in Pine Valley mountains. Telegraph wires were down. At Cove Fort the party was joined by Culbert King and five others from Millard county, bringing fresh horses to break the road through the snow if needed. Enroute to Fillmore, through Dog valley, the storm was so fierce as to render it difficult to see the animals or keep on the road. Luckily, however, the wind was from the south; the roads extremely muddy. The party learned at Fillmore that it had taken the stage twenty-nine hours from Fillmore to Nephi—sixty-two miles. Telegraph communication was interrupted north of Nephi.

At Round valley the party picked up telegraphic communication with Salt Lake City and ascertained the coast was clear; roads muddy ahead. "Several brethren accompanied us, temporarily supplying the places of the weaker animals with their fresh horses. President Young's horses were led."

"On the 26th President Young left the rest of his party and started from Nephi at 6:30 a. m., riding with Bishop John Sharp in an open buggy. The Bishop had joined the party at Nephi. They faced a severe storm from Nephi to Payson in Utah county; thence drove to Provo; and later to Draper, the terminus, at that time, of the Utah Southern Railroad. Here they were met by Daniel H. Wells, and others, with a special train, which carried them to Salt Lake City, "arriving at about 11:45 p. m. on the 26th of December." Such was the journey of three hundred fifty miles, in mid winter, which Utah's great pioneer made at the age of seventy-one, to face his enemies in a United States court!"

This winter trip by President Young, through snow storms and bitter cold "to face his enemies in court" is entirely characteristic of him. Always he met every issue. If there was trouble, he was there to find out about it, and to face it. He did not run around or try to dodge any matter that personally concerned himself or the Church. Such was the character of this great man. Nor did he object to persecution. "Hatred and persecution have been the lot of every man," he said, "that ever lived upon the earth holding the oracles of the Kingdom of Heaven to deliver to the children of men. Wicked men, Satan, and all the powers of hell and hate are at war with every holy principle that God wishes to place in the possession of His children. That is the true reason of the hatred and persecution meted out to us."
