Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE

BESIDES the charge of "unlawful cohabitation" an additional charge of "murder" had been filed against President Young, by the non-Mormon grand jury, during his absence in St. George. This latter charge grew out of the confessions of the notorious Bill Hickman, and dated back to the year 1857, when, Hickman related, a certain Richard Yates had been put to death in Echo Canyon, at the instance of President Young.

These two charges the President faced when he appeared in Judge McKean's court on the afternoon of the 2nd of January, 1872. When the attorney for the President asked for bail, it was refused by Judge McKean, who ordered that President Young be held a prisoner in his own house, under guard of the United States Marshal, until such time that his case could be tried. Thus President Brigham Young became a prisoner in his own home, in the city which he had founded.

One week after the President's appearance in court, George Gibbs, in writing to George Reynolds in England, describes the manner in which the President was guarded. "The deputy occupies what we call your bedroom, although I believe you seldom occupied it. The Telegraph Company had it fitted up for the operator to sleep in, so it just came in handy. He stays in the outer office during the day. I am sorry for the poor fellow, for he dares not be seen outside without the President is with him, and the President seldom goes out, so he is a pretty close prisoner. He goes to bed when he feels like it. His name is Captain Evans; he is about thirty-five years of age, served during the rebellion and was on General Pleasanton's staff when the war closed. I understand he came out here on mining business. So far he has acted as a gentleman."

Week after week went by and the President's case was not called for trial. The United States attorney pleaded that there were no funds with which to carry on. He even went to Washington seeking funds, and seeking advice from his superiors. The officers all seemed to be puzzled as to whether they should proceed with the charges against President Young or not.

Meantime, the President was not perturbed. Horace Eldredge, in writing from New York to George Reynolds, in England, under date of Feb. 12, 1872, states:

"I had the pleasure of riding out with President Young three successive days before I left home. I am happy to say he was in good health and spirits, and in no wise discouraged, and he never intimated to me that he had any idea of yielding one point in our holy religion to gain favor, affection, or even the admission of Utah into the Union. What a blessing it is to have the privilege to be associated with men of firmness and sterling integrity, and to realize and know that God rules and reigns, and holds the destinies of men and nations, though the heathen rage and the people imagine a vain thing."

Finally, on April 15, 1872, something happened which cleared the tense atmosphere in Utah, and gave President Young his freedom. On that day the Supreme Court of the United States rendered a decision in "an appeal from the decision of the Supreme Court of the Territory of Utah, in the case of 'Clinton et al vs. Engelbrecht et al,'" which, among other things stated "that the juries which have been drawn in Judge McKean's Court during the past year, both grand and petit, have been illegal."

Therefore the indictment against President Young was illegal, and of no avail, and as a consequence the President was released from the custody of the Marshal on Thursday, April 25th. Needless to say, there was general rejoicing among the Saints.

On Sunday morning, April 28, at 10 o'clock, President Young appeared on the stand in the Tabernacle for the first time in over three months.

"A word to the Latter-day Saints," he said, "Good morning." The congregation responded, "Good morning," and then he continued, "How do you think I look after my long confinement?"

And the congregation replied, "First rate." Then the President went on:

"I do not rise expecting to preach a discourse or sermon, or to lengthen out remarks. I spoke a few minutes yesterday in the school, but I found that it exhausted me very soon, but I will say a few words to you. The Gospel of the Son of God is most precious. My faith is not weakened in the Gospel, in the least.

"I will answer a few of the questions that probably many would like to ask me. Many would like to know how I felt the past winter and so much of the spring as is now past. I have enjoyed myself exceedingly well. I have been blessed with an opportunity to rest, and you who are acquainted with me and my public speaking can discern at once, if you listen closely to my voice, it is weak to what it used to be and I require rest. I feel well in body and better in mind. I have no complaint to make, no fault to find, no reflections to cast, for all that has been done has been directed and overruled by the wisdom of Him who knows all things."

Regarding the courts. "I have no reflections to cast upon these courts. . . . I have nothing to say with regard to their conduct. It is before the world; it is before the heavens continually. The Lord has known the thoughts of the hearts of the children of men, and he has overruled all for His glory, and for the benefit of those who believe and obey the truth in Christ."

Thus Brother Brigham went forward in life with the supreme conviction that all was well with the world, for the God of Heaven ruled over it. What was done to him would be of small moment and of no avail, for in spite of all, the great purposes of the Almighty would be carried on.

On May 19th, 1872, President Young describes his feelings, in a letter to Albert Carrington.

"Since my release I have been kept very busy, and pass considerable of my time out of doors. My health is good, as is also that of my associates. Everything appears to be working as well as we could expect, and truly we have very good reason to be thankful to God, for His abundant mercy and goodness. . . . Remember me affectionately to the brethren, and accept my good wishes."

The 1st of June was the President's seventy-first birthday. The editor of The Deseret News, George Q. Cannon, paid him this eloquent tribute in an editorial that day:

"This first day of June is the seventy-first anniversary of the birth of President Brigham Young, and tens of thousands heartily unite with us in wishing him 'many happy returns.' We see no reason why he should not live many years to come, to continue in the career of usefulness which has so preeminently marked his course in the past. It is a source of great pleasure to the multitude of his sincere friends and admirers, that although past the allotted age of man, his general health is good and his mental faculties are unimpaired, bright and clear as ever. . . .

"Thousands and thousands look upon President Young as one of the greatest benefactors of the race, and by such he is respected and esteemed. What he has accomplished, in connection with others, has not been the result of the greatness of his own mind, although many who do not understand the genius of Mormonism, attribute it entirely to that cause. He himself attributes the results of the remarkable labors of his life to the fact that he has been guided and led by a supreme and divine power to act as he has. The people who have prospered under his wise advice and counsel understand also that this is the Almighty's work, and that he and many others are the instruments used by the divine power to bring about the purposes of the Creator."

On Saturday morning, May 25th, 1872, the President, accompanied by his counselors, George A. Smith, Daniel H. Wells and a number of the Twelve, including Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow and Franklin D. Richards, met with the Saints of Weber Stake, in the Ogden Tabernacle, for the purpose of holding two days' meetings. At all sessions the building was crowded to the utmost, and many were forced to stand on the outside. On the afternoon of the second day the President launched into one of his splendid practical talks:

"President Young showed that the Saints of the present day were in a more favorable position to advocate the truths revealed to them than the ancients were, because they have the records of the past to refer to as proof of their testimony, and could read in the scriptures the same truths they had embraced, and see therein what was to be the result of their labor—the fulness of glory, shining at the end of this vale of tears.

"He then advised the people if they wanted wealth, riches and happiness not to be in a hurry; but to be calm, contented, and not let their pulse run up to one hundred and twenty, but to keep it down to seventy or seventy-five, and, whenever a meeting was called, to attend it, listen to every word that was said, that they might weigh and discern between what was of God, and what was not, and that they might grow in grace and in a knowledge of the truth. Also not to work till that last minute before starting to meeting, but to take time to prepare themselves, and then be prompt to the minute. This was the way to get rich.

"Outside of this people there was not a community, as a community, who were so well off as the Saints in these mountains. More women and children, with their husbands and fathers, slept under their own roof in Utah, than an equal number in any other place, and fewer went without food and clothing, than in any other part of the earth. How many here had been taken from cellars and garrets where five dollars would have purchased all they owned, and were brought here and taught how to cultivate the soil and make themselves comfortable. Yet, after becoming comparatively independent, they would lift their heels against the Almighty. People could be seen here now with their fine new wagons and carriages and teams, while their barns were full of hay and their granaries full of wheat, who before, could not keep even a cat, for they had nothing to feed it with.

"The Saints in Utah needed preaching to more than any other people on the earth. They knew the way, but were forgetful and needed someone continually to remind them of their duties. Then, he would say, attend these two days, meetings which have been appointed. Never eat a mouthful of food in the morning till they had called their families together and prayed with them, asking that they might do something during the day for the benefit of the Kingdom of God on the earth. Men were in such a hurry they had no time to pray, and did not know what to do first; and women were the same. That was not the way to get rich. He would reduce his advice to a simple saying, 'Keep your dish right side up, so that when the shower of porridge comes, you can catch your dish full.'"

In closing his sermon the President said:

"We want the Spirit of God in all our labors, from the lowest to the highest in the Kingdom of God. We want the Spirit of God to guide and direct us through this world, that we may learn how to gather earthly riches, and also the riches of eternal life."

Two weeks following the Conference in Ogden, the President and his brethren held a two days' conference in Brigham City. "The meetings were held in a commodious bowery, which was newly covered with foliage, affording a delightful shade for the large and attentive congregation."

On Sunday forenoon, "President Young referred to the rest he had been blessed with, in what might be called confinement in his own house, for which he felt very grateful, and showed that what was designed for the overthrow of this people, had resulted in good to them, and evil upon those who had planned it; and concluded by exhorting the Saints to chastity, faithfulness, justice and honor, one toward another, honesty and integrity of feeling and action, to live for the benefit of the human family and for the promotion of truth and righteousness upon the earth."

II

On July 23rd, 1872, President Young addressed a letter to Albert Carrington in England, in which he detailed a few of the passing events of the summer:

"Never in our history has there been so excellent a prospect for crops. Labor is also in great demand, and is well paid for. The opening up of railroads and mines, as well as the agricultural interest creates this demand and money is circulating quite freely among those who formerly received but little. We intend making another call through the press in behalf of scattered Israel, and our home missionaries are quite zealous in this behalf through all the settlements.

"We returned from our two days' meetings at Payson last Monday night, where we dedicated a handsome meeting house, a building highly creditable to that city.

"Sanpete and the little settlements in Sevier have had a heavy tax upon them in feeding the Indians lately, and it has required no little skill and prudence to avert hostilities, and counteract the evil intent of unprincipled white men, but we hope the danger is over.

"The 4th passed off as you have doubtless read without any public festivities. Railroad excursions and picnic parties appear to be in order, and it is worthy of notice that five wards, including Draper and those in its vicinity, made the trip to Ogden and return at the rate of $50 per car, which is less than one dollar per adult. We shall continue to keep excursion rates at the same low figures, so that all may have the opportunity of enjoying themselves.

"My health is rather improved by our trip to Payson, and I am beginning to feel as if the severe cold which has pressed so hard upon me, has really left me, for which I feel extremely thankful."

On the 16th of August, the President, his counselors and several of the Twelve, left Salt Lake City to visit the Saints in Cache valley. Describing this visit in a dispatch to The Deseret News, dated at Logan on August 17th, A. M. Musser relates as follows:

"President Young and company left your city at 5 a. m. yesterday, and reached Hampton Station at 10:45 a. m., whence to this place we came in carriages furnished by the brethren of Cache settlements. We arrived here at 1:45 p. m., somewhat demoralized by excessive dust. Today the fine large bowery was nearly filled with people from all parts of the county. Elders George Q. Cannon, F. D. Richards and President George A. Smith addressed the congregation this morning. A splendid feeling seemed to exist. Crops were never before more promising. The red men are here in considerable numbers, all peaceably disposed. The people everywhere are pleased to see the Presidency and the Twelve. Yesterday a grand procession of nearly all ages, was out with music, banners, flags and flowers, to greet the visitors and give them welcome."

In closing his sermon on the afternoon of the second day of this conference President Young left his blessing with the Saints and taught them some splendid spiritual truths:

"I say, as I always do, God bless you. Peace be with you, and love be multiplied upon the people. I pray for the good all over the earth. My desire is to see the Kingdom of God prosper. We are prospering in many things, but we are not prospering in the grace of God and in the spirit of our holy religion as much as we should. Herein we come short. But if we will try and improve our minds, school and train ourselves to overcome every evil within us, every passion, every unruly thought, I know by experience, by a close application of any individual to himself in schooling and training his mind, he can cease to think evil thoughts, and he will be able to think good, that is, his mind will be filled with pleasant reflections. This I know by experience. I heard Brother Taylor preach a sermon once on revelation, which contained the most pleasant ideas. . . .He illustrated the principle of living perfectly for God day by day, showing that we could do so until God lived within us, and until we ourselves became a fountain of revelation, instead of having to ask, plead, and pray the Lord to give us a vision and to open our minds, we could live for God until a fountain of light and intelligence was within us, from morning until evening, and from evening until morning, week after week, month after month and year after year. This is the fact. Then let us live so that the spirit of our religion will live within us. Then we have peace, happiness, joy and contentment, which makes such pleasant fathers, pleasant mothers, pleasant children, pleasant household, neighbors, communities and cities. That is worth striving for, and I think the Latter-day Saints ought to strive for it."

There were no untoward events to mar the summer of 1872 for the President. He went about his tasks daily, and whatever he attempted was well and faithfully done. In September the Deseret National Bank of Salt Lake City was organized, "with a paid up capital of $200,000." President Young was elected president.

The semi-annual Conference came on in October. It was largely attended and great interest was manifested in the discourses delivered by the brethren. On the last day of the sessions the President directed his remarks on the subject of "home industry," a teaching which he was very serious about, and which to him held the secret of the temporal salvation of the Saints. It was a doctrine he had taught since the first settlements were made here.

"I want the brethren and sisters to take an interest in sustaining ourselves here in these mountains," he said. "It is the duty of the Bishops to see that the members of their wards take a course that will build up the Kingdom of God, not only in providing food and raiment, but see that the people do their duty with regard to the law of God in preserving themselves in purity.

"My mind is now upon those things which some people call temporal and I wish to urge them upon the Latter-day Saints. I want them to save their wool and keep it in this Territory. If we have not factories sufficient to work up all the wool that grows in this Territory and in these mountains, we will send and get more machinery, and build more factories and work up the wool for the people. It is the duty of those who grow wool to keep it here.

"If we do not follow this course, and manufacture our own clothing," he continued, "we will be left in a very destitute condition."

A pleasing event for President Young was the arrival in Salt Lake City, in November, 1872, of his tried and true friend, General Thomas L. Kane, of Philadelphia, who with his wife and two sons had come to Utah to visit the President. Almost fourteen years had passed since General Kane had come as a messenger of peace to Utah during the crisis brought about by the arrival of Johnston's army. His admiration for, and his interest in, the Mormon people and President Young, had not diminished with the years.

Unfortunately General Kane's health was poor, and President Young, who was just preparing to spend the winter in St. George, prevailed upon the General and his family to accompany him there.

President Young describes the events of these months in a letter to Albert Carrington, under date of December 11th, 1872.

"President A. Carrington.

"Dear Brother:—Nothing of special importance occurs to my mind to write to you, but, as we intend to start south tomorrow, a few items may be of interest.

"General Kane, wife, and two children are visiting here, and intend going south with us. The General's health is rather poor, but we think the change of air will do him good. He, so far, appears to enjoy his visit remarkably well, and has numerous callers, among whom are many old friends and acquaintances.

"Work has been suspended on the Utah Southern railroad for some time through lack of iron. The southern depot is at Lehi, and there is a narrow guage track temporarily laid upon our ties between that point and American Fork. The amount of traffic on the two roads between Ogden and Lehi is astonishing, and it is steadily increasing. The Utah Northern is being pushed ahead with vigor and it is expected that the trains will be running to Logan in about two weeks. Other railroads are in contemplation, branching east and west from the Utah Southern; the one up Little Cottonwood will facilitate the building of the Temple by through railroad communication between the granite quarry and the Temple Block; another will run to Tintic; another to Spanish Fork Canyon, and still another beginning at Nephi, through Salt Creek Canyon, and thence south through Sanpete and Sevier counties, facilitating the supply of Sanpete coal for smelting and other purposes.

"Business in general is steady, although there are indications that speculation in silver mines is rather on the wane.

"For several weeks past the Tabernacle has been closed on Sundays, and meetings for sacrament and instruction are held in the various wards. We expect one result of this arrangement will be a better attendance at meetings during the winter, as the ward meeting houses are generally commodious, and within easy distances. At present these meetings are well attended and are becoming very interesting.

"President Joseph Young has been quite ill for some weeks past and some fears have been entertained for his recovery, but he appears to be improving, though slowly. My health has been rather poor for ten days past, through a severe cold, but I am thankful to say I now feel better."

The trip south was undertaken on December 12th as planned. It was rather late in the season to begin such a journey, but the President and party were well equipped, and went through to St. George without discomfort or accident. On their arrival there on December 23rd, A. M. Musser, who was a member of the party, wired back to Salt Lake City, as follows:

"President Young and party reached here this afternoon in usual health and spirits. Meetings were held at Parowan and Kanarra, Elders Young, Sheets, Staines and Musser were the speakers on subjects of general interest to Saints and strangers. We have had beautiful weather all the way and have met with no mishap. The roads were never before so rutty and dusty. The animals stood the journey remarkably well. No rains or snows in this country for a long while. We found President Snow and the people generally in good health."

From St. George President Young wrote a letter to Bishop Edward Hunter at Salt Lake City, under date of January 11th, 1873.

"My health is much improved since I left your city. I am having a good rest, both mentally and physically, in this mild climate. We had a most beautiful rain a few days ago. The weather since has been delightful. Thermometer ranging from 56 to 68 degrees in the shade at noon. The brethren are sowing grain, pruning vineyards, working in their gardens, etc., while the birds are singing as though it were May. The people in St. George and other settlements are healthy. Meetings have been held in most of the towns by the brethren. All of these have been well attended, and I learn that both speakers and hearers have enjoyed a goodly portion of the Spirit of the Lord. The 'Clara settlement,' consisting of twenty families, twelve of whom are Swiss and were sent here by the P. E. Fund ten years ago without a dollar, have all got houses, lands, vineyards, horses, wagons and cattle, and are sending 100 children to school, besides having a number too small to go. The Fast Day donations they handed in to Bishop Bunker, he sent to the poor in St. George, they having no poor. . . .

"God bless you.

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

III

On February 27th, 1873, President Young, General Kane, W. C. Staines and others who had spent the winter in St. George, arrived back in Salt Lake City. The Deseret News of that day states that the President "is in good health and excellent spirits, and looking as well as he has done for years."

While enjoying the quietness of the winter months in the south, the President had no doubt given serious consideration to his advancing years, and the many burdens which rested upon him. He therefore determined to transfer some of his tasks to younger men, to divest himself of the many arduous duties which he had performed for so many years, and to encourage others to "bear off the burden of the Kingdom."

Acting in conformity with these views, almost immediately upon his return home, he resigned the presidency of the Deseret National Bank and Zion's Co-operative Mercantile Institution. At the April Conference, he transferred the duties of Trustee-in-Trust for the Church to his counselor, President George A. Smith, who was to serve with twelve assistant Trustees, viz: John Sharp, Joseph W. Young, John L. Smith, Le Grande Young, Elijah F. Sheets, Joseph F. Smith, Moses Thatcher, John Van Cott, A. M. Musser, James P. Freeze, F. A. Mitchell, and Thomas Taylor. He also named five additional counselors to himself, viz: Lorenzo Snow, Brigham Young, Jr., Albert Carrington, John W. Young, and George Q. Cannon.

When word reached the east by telegraph that President Young had made these changes, there was immediate speculation as to what his future course would be, and the Editor of the New York Herald telegraphed him for the information. To this inquiry President Young replied in considerable detail, and I take pleasure in reproducing his answer in full.

"Salt Lake City, Utah

April 10th, 1873.

"To the Editor of the Herald:—

"Your telegram is received. I thank you for the privilege of representing facts as they are; I will furnish them gladly at any time you make the request.

"For over forty years I have served my people, laboring incessantly, and I am now nearly seventy-two years of age and I need relaxation.

"My resignation as Trustee-in-Trust for the Church, as President of Zion's Co-operative Mercantile Institution, and of the Deseret National Bank are made solely from secular cares and responsibilities, and do not affect my position as President of the Church. In that capacity I shall still exercise supervision over business, ecclesiastical and secular, leaving the minutiae to younger men. Our institutions are all established and competent to succeed me, and my own investments remain as they were.

"H. S. Eldredge is now President of the Mercantile Institution. He is a merchant of long experience and well known to business men in the East. The paid up stock of this institution is nearly three quarters of a million. It carries a stock of merchandise of about a million and a half. The purchases for the past half year are over a million and a half in currency, and about one hundred and forty thousand dollars in coin. The business done during six months reaches two and a half millions. It paid for the half year a dividend of ten per cent.

"My successor in the Deseret National Bank is the Hon. William H. Hooper, well known as our delegate to Congress. This institution is perfectly sound and is conducted on the safest business principles.

"Our railroads are in good condition. The Utah Central Railroad is thirty-seven miles long; its gross earnings in 1872 were $420,000. The expenses in round numbers were $210,000; the net earnings were $210,000. I state these facts as efforts may be made to damage the credit of these institutions.

"We have another railroad here doing good business. The Utah Southern is built about 32 miles, narrow guage. Roads connected with this are being constructed into Little Cottonwood, Bingham Canyon and American Fork, to meet the demand for transportation to and from the various mining camps of these regions. The Utah Northern is being constructed from a junction with the Central Pacific through our principal northern settlements into southeastern Idaho, and other narrow guage roads are in construction or in contemplation.

"We intend establishing settlements in Arizona, in the country of the Apaches, persuaded that if we become acquainted with them, we can influence them to peace, in accordance with President Grant's Indian policy, and open up that country to settlement by the whites. Our cities, towns and villages extend about 400 miles in that direction; and, in view of the railroad crossing that country, we hope to be prepared to assist in its construction, and when completed bring a large portion of our emigration that way to settle the country.

"In Utah we have a fine country for stock raising and agriculture and abundance of minerals awaiting development, and we welcome all good citizens who love peace and good order to come and settle with us. It has been our policy from the first to promote the agricultural interests, seeing this was the foundation of all others, and we have been for years furnishing staple products to the surrounding States and Territories, and we are now able to supply any demand likely to arise for grain, vegetables, etc., at the market prices, to those engaged in mining pursuits.

"We have iron ores and coal in rich abundance. We have called merchants in every department of business, but we lack capital, and there is no safer place to be found in the United States, where property of almost every kind is less taxed and better protected—all reports to the contrary notwithstanding.

"It has been frequently published that I have a deposit of several millions of pounds sterling in the Bank of England. Were such the case I would most assuredly use the means to gather our poor Church members from the old countries and bring them here, where their condition might be improved. All my means are invested here in improving this Territory in agriculture, manufactures and commerce.

"The result of my labors for the last 26 years, briefly summed up, are: The peopling of this Territory by the Latter-day Saints of about 100,000 souls; the founding of over 200 cities, towns and villages inhabited by our people, which extend to Idaho in the north, Wyoming in the east, Nevada in the west, and Arizona in the south, and the establishment of schools, factories, mills and other institutions calculated to improve and benefit our community.

"All my transactions and labors have been carried on in accordance with my calling as a servant of God. I know no difference between spiritual and temporal labors. God has seen fit to bless me with means, and as a faithful steward I use them to benefit my fellowmen—to promote their happiness in this world in preparing them for the great hereafter.

"My whole life is devoted to the Almighty's service, and while I regret that my mission is not better understood by the world, the time will come when I will be understood, and I leave to futurity the judgment of my labors and their result as they shall become manifest.

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

The above brief account gives an excellent summary of the work which President Young was doing and had done since the Latter-day Saints settled in the valleys under his direction. He was proud of that work and regretted only that it had not been understood—that he had not been understood; but he looked confidently forward to the day when the people of the United States, and the world generally, would have a proper comprehension and understanding of his life's work. He was willing to leave to "futurity" the judgment of his labors.

The Forty-third Annual Conference of the Church convened in the new Tabernacle on the 6th of April, 1873. The President presided at all sessions and spoke frequently during the three days that Conference was held. On the opening day, according to the recorder who wrote the minutes,

"He dwelt upon the causes that induced the Latter-day Saints to gather to these valleys, and also upon the causes which led some, after they had gathered, to slide away from the principles of truth and become engrossed in worldly things. Those who came up here and devoted themselves to things pertaining to the world might heap up gold and silver, but in due time it would go from them and would prove their destruction. Some of the Latter-day Saints had an idea that they could take the follies of the world in one hand, and the Savior in the other, and expect to get into the presence of the Lord Jesus. They would, however, find themselves mistaken."

On the second day, the President directed his remarks

"To the ladies of the Relief Societies. These organizations had accomplished a good work in relieving and sustaining the poor, and it was desirous that their labors should be increased. There was an excellent paper mill here, and the ladies of the Societies might co-operate in seeing that the rags throughout the Territory were not destroyed, but husbanded, that they might be used for the making of paper. He also wished the ladies to learn type-setting. It never looked well to see a large man engaged in the light business of type-setting, or measuring tape. Ladies could do the light work, while men should do the laborious work. . . . It was probable that a building would be erected for a printing office for the ladies. Some might advance arguments to the effect that women could not do the work of a printing office, but such arguments are ill founded, as they were as quick, and even quicker, to learn than the men."

It was also at this Conference that President Young delivered a short discourse on "the order of Enoch," a work which was to become so important to him in his remaining years.

In reporting the Conference to Albert Carrington, in England, under date of April 19th, 1873, the President went into considerable detail:

"We had an excellent time at Conference, the attendance was quite large, notwithstanding stringent orders were issued deterring all who had in any way risked exposure to the small-pox, from meeting with the people. The disease has been quite prevalent in Sanpete, although not of a fatal character, and there have been cases in other settlements, and a few in this city, but it has nearly disappeared.

"The missionaries for Arizona are starting out for the various settlements and gathering at Winsor Castle, where they will be organized under the direction of Elder Joseph W. Young, and sent forward to make settlements among the Moquitch Indians. We expect them in time to make acquaintance with the Pimas, Maricopas, Navajoes, Apaches and other Indians, as we hope by the blessing of our Heavenly Father, to be able to induce many of those to abandon their present habits, and labor as we do. We have favorable reports from many of those Indians; they are anxious that we come amongst them; they wish it understood that they mean to provide for themselves, and only ask that we instruct them how to do so. . . .

"You will be gratified to learn that we are now shipping granite from the quarry to the Temple, by rail all the way. A narrow gauge road is building, mostly by our own people, running up from a junction with the Utah Southern, at Sandy station. On April 4th, I witnessed the loading of the first rock shipped over this road, and we brought it in on our train. . . . .

"The Gas Works are approaching completion, the mains are mostly laid, and the piping and chandeliers are being introduced into houses. If successful, as we think it will be, the business part of the city will soon be lighted with gas, and a large sum now sent east annually to purchase oil, will thus be retained in our midst.

"My health continues excellent, for which I feel extremely thankful. I was able to speak every day at Conference, and sometimes at considerable length, and without any injury to myself. With relief from the great labors of business that have devolved upon me, I expect to devote my energies more fully to counseling the Saints, and will be left free to travel through the settlements, or remain at home, as wisdom shall dictate. . . .

"May peace be with you, and all Israel.

"Your brother in the Gospel,

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."
