Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER FORTY

DURING the summer of 1873, President Young made frequent trips among the settlements, and spoke to congregations of Saints on almost every Sunday. On May 18th, he was at Ogden, where he delivered a strong, inspirational discourse. Among other things he said:

"I know that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God, and that he had many revelations. Who can disprove this testimony? Anyone in the world can dispute it, but there is no one in the world who can disprove it. I have had many revelations; I have seen and heard for myself, and know these things are true, and nobody on earth can disprove them. The eye, the ear, the hand, all the senses may be deceived, but the Spirit of God cannot be deceived; and when inspired with that spirit, the whole man is filled with knowledge, he can see with the spiritual eye, and he knows that which it is beyond the power of man to controvert. What I know concerning God, concerning the earth, concerning government, I have received from the heavens, not alone through my natural ability, and I give God the glory and the praise. Men talk about what has been accomplished under my direction, and attribute it to my wisdom and ability, but it is all by the power of God, and by intelligence received from him."

On June 28th, the President was at Logan, where he expressed his appreciation, in a public service, for the great blessings which had come to him:

"The Lord has blessed me; he has always blessed me; from the time I commenced to build up Zion, I have been extremely blessed. I could relate circumstances of so extraordinary a character in regard to the providences of God to me, that my brethren and sisters would say in their hearts 'I can hardly give credence to this.' But my heart has been set in me to do the will of God, to build up his Kingdom on the earth, to establish Zion and its laws, and to save the people. . . . I do not love, serve or fear the Lord for the sake of getting rid of being damned, nor for the sake of getting some great gift or blessing in eternity, but purely because the principles which God has revealed for the salvation of the inhabitants of the earth are pure, holy and exalting in their nature. In them there is honor and eternal increase; they lead on from light to light, strength to strength, and glory to glory. . . . It is purely for the love of holy principles, that will exalt the people, that we may receive and gain more and more, and keep receiving forever and ever, that I try to serve the Lord, and build up his Kingdom."

Late in August President Young, George A. Smith, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon and others of the Church Authorities, took the train at Salt Lake City, again bound for Cache Valley. At Logan they were provided with teams and carriages by the brethren who joined them there, and a large party began the journey to Bear Lake valley, by way of Blacksmith Fork Canyon, over "a new road recently constructed at a cost of seven thousand dollars, by the enterprise of Bishop O. J. Liljenquist and the citizens of Hyrum." On the second day out Laketown was reached, and from there they visited the settlements of St. Charles and Bloomington on the western edge of the lake, arriving at Paris on August 30th, where "meetings were held for three days in a shady grove, which had been prepared for that purpose."

On Sunday, August 31st, at Paris, President Young preached a lengthy sermon, dealing with a variety of subjects, all splendidly suited to the time and occasion. In concluding, he touched upon a topic which was now growing in his mind, namely, "the united order," or "the order of Enoch." The introduction of this order among the Saints in the valleys, was to be the last great work of his life.

"One thing I want you to observe in these settlements," he said, "and it is one of the simplest things in nature; I want you to be united. If we should build up and organize a community, we would have to do it on the principle of oneness, and it is one of the simplest things I know of. A city of one thousand or a million people could be united into a perfect family, and they could work together as beautifully as the different parts of a carding machine work together. Why, we could organize millions into a family under the order of Enoch."

And then he continued:

"Brethren, if you will start here and operate together in farming, in making cheese, in herding sheep and cattle, and in every other kind of work, and get a factory here and a cooperative store, and operate together in sheep raising, store keeping, manufacturing, and everything else, no matter what it is, by and by, when we can plant ourselves upon a foundation that cannot be broken, we shall then proceed to arrange a family organization, for which we are not yet quite prepared. . . . We can do this and keep up cooperation, and, when we can we will build up a city after the order of Enoch."

Thus Brother Brigham was formulating in his mind the plan of the "united order;" a plan, which it is believed by many today, will solve all the economic problems of mankind.

Continuing an account of this trip north, I take the following from a sermon delivered by George A. Smith on September 7th, after his return to Salt Lake City:

"After spending three days at Paris we visited some of the neighboring settlements. We had a meeting at Montpelier, and passing through Bennington, Georgetown, Ovid, and some other small settlements, we visited Soda Springs, where we remained a day and a half, having two meetings with the people. We then resumed our journey, following down the Bear river, camping out on our route, until we reached the settlement of Franklin, and thence on to Richmond, Smithfield and Hyde Park, holding meetings in each. Yesterday we started from Logan and reached home in four hours and twelve minutes in special trains. We had been gone two weeks and one day, having traveled two hundred miles by carriages, through the mountains, and two hundred miles by railroad. The Elders of our party scattered among the settlements and held twenty-six meetings. We visited the Sunday Schools and different organizations and found them all alive to their several duties.

"In almost every town we visited, we were saluted on our arrival by a body of Sunday School children, who turned out by hundreds. It almost seemed impossible that there could be so many children in the country as came out to meet us.

"President Young was suffering on this journey from an attack of rheumatism, which rendered him uncomfortable. But still he preached a number of long, excellent sermons, sometimes speaking an hour and twenty minutes. He addressed all the large meetings, and did it in more than his usual energetic, eloquent and interesting style, and returned from the journey in a better state of health than when he went away, for then many of his friends thought it very doubtful whether he would be able to proceed on his journey; but he accomplished it and returned improved. For a man of his years, performing, continually, as he does, a vast amount of labor, of both mind and body, it seems almost miraculous that he could take this journey, attend so many meetings and councils, and endure the riding over a country as rough as the one we passed over."

On October 3rd, 1873, after his return home, President Young reviewed some of the events of the summer and fall, in a letter to Albert Carrington in England.

"Dear Brother: Since my last of September 19th, I feel truly thankful to be able to say my health is quite recovered.

"As Conference draws nigh, the brethren keep dropping in upon us, and the Deseret Agricultural and Manufacturing Society's Annual Fair, which opened yesterday, has doubtless brought many in a little sooner than they otherwise would have come. The Fair is a very creditable exhibition, and is tolerably well attended. We cannot quite determine what it will be before it closes, as the brethren are rather slow in bringing in their specimens, and many things will doubtless be added to the exhibition before it closes, which will not be until the evening of the 7th inst.

"Work on the Temple progresses finely, and is very satisfactory. We are increasing the number of hands on the quarry, and getting all the stone cutters we can to work on the block.

"The financial crisis east has not affected us to any serious extent. Hussey's First National Bank has suspended; beyond that there is no visible sign of any disturbance in the money market, although all the business men have been complaining for some time of a lack of currency.

"Work on the Utah Southern railroad still progresses, although somewhat slowly. We have all, or nearly all the iron on hand, to carry us to Provo, and we expect to reach there about the end of this month, or early in November.

"Zion's Savings Bank and Trust Company opened for business on Thursday last. This institution is a cooperative one, and we think it is likely to meet with favor. The interest allowed is at the rate of ten per cent per annum, compounded semi-annually. It will be found of considerable advantage to those who wish to save money for the emigration of their friends, as the interest is large; and sums as low as $1 will be received, which, if continually added to, will soon reach a considerable amount, and the depositors will hardly miss the money. We expect in time to have branches of this bank all over the Territory, and perhaps extend it to Europe, so that the Saints there may have the advantage of a higher rate of interest. One important lesson is taught us by the late financial panic, and that is to husband our resources, and to avoid, as much as possible, all entangling alliances. Although the lesson has cost us nothing, it is none the less important.

"The Theater reopened on the first, under the new proprietorship. It is undergoing extensive improvements, and already shows a very superior appearance, and, considering the dullness of the times is well attended.

"The Utah Northern Railroad is being pushed northward, and the people of Weber and Box Elder counties are at work making connection with Ogden.

"The Street Railroad is completed about half way to the Warm Springs Bath House. It is intended to connect with the track on South Temple Street, in a straight line from the bath house, along Second West Street. It will doubtless prove a great convenience to our citizens generally and will certainly be an advantage to invalids who require the baths.

"The business of the Gas Works is steadily increasing. Between seventy and one hundred street lamps are already lighted with gas, and others are in process of erection.

"You have labored long and assiduously in charge of the European Mission, and we think it right and proper that you should have a rest, and therefore deem it advisable to release you for a time. The emigration business of the year will have closed by the time this reaches you, so that we trust you will be able to start before severe weather sets in. You can appoint Elder Lester J. Herrick to take temporary charge of the mission, until your successor shall arrive. We think of sending Elder Joseph F. Smith to succeed you, but we wish him to attend the Legislature this winter, before he starts.

"Praying for your continued prosperity, I remain your brother in the Gospel. "BRIGHAM YOUNG."

II

On Friday, November 28th, 1873, President Brigham Young, George A. Smith, and a few friends, departed for St. George to spend the winter. They went by train to Provo, which had just recently been reached by the rails of the Utah Southern railroad. Here they paused long enough to join with the citizens of Provo in celebrating the building of the road to that city; a celebration which brought together several thousand of the inhabitants of Utah valley. Speeches were given by Mayor A. O. Smoot, George A. Smith, Dr. John M. Bernhisel and Fermorz Little. An excellent address written by President Young was read to those assembled by David McKenzie. I shall quote only parts of it.

"Friends and fellow citizens: Assembled to celebrate the completion of the Utah Southern Railroad to this city, I gladly join in your rejoicings, feeling a deep interest, in common with you, in the successful progress of a work fraught with so many benefits to the people of this Territory.

"I deem this a fitting occasion for briefly tracing our progress in the grand and steadily 'onward and upward' march of praiseworthy improvement."

And then he outlines the progress of the Saints from the beginning of the Church, until the Pioneer group began their journey to Salt Lake Valley, continuing:

"In April, 1847, the Pioneer company, numbering one hundred and forty-three men, three women and two children, began their journey westward, in search of a location where we could unmolestedly serve the Lord our God, in accordance with His commandments. I remember that, when riding in advance of that company, with my then first counselor, Heber C. Kimball, and others, to search out the route for the wagons to follow, we were carefully watching for and frequently conversing about a route for a railroad across the continent.

"In 1849, President George A. Smith presented, in the legislature of the Provisional State of Deseret, a memorial to Congress, for the construction of a national railroad to the Pacific coast, which said legislature adopted. In 1853 he presented a like memorial in the legislative assembly of the Territory of Utah, which was also adopted under the following title, 'Memorial to Congress for the construction of a great national central railroad to the Pacific coast.'

"It is thus clearly shown that from the time of our leaving the Missouri river, our attention was drawn to and our influence exercised in favor of an inter-oceanic railroad, and so continued until the completion, early in 1869, of that great work, the Union and Central Pacific railroads, to the construction of which the inhabitants of Utah rendered most efficient aid.

"Soon after the completion of the Union Pacific railroad, the people of Utah, unaided by government grants, began the construction of the Utah Central, and speedily completed it between Ogden and Salt Lake cities.

"We are on the point of connection with Franklin, in the extreme north of the territory, by our own railroads, a distance of some one hundred and seventy miles nearly due north and south, with branches to Little Cottonwood and Bingham canyons in Salt Lake county, and American Fork in Utah county, and the road from Echo to the coal beds in Summit county, to lend their powerful aid in facilitating transportation and travel, so necessary to the rapid advancement of our agricultural, mining and all other material interests.

"From the arrival of the pioneers in 1847 until now, the people of this territory have at all times labored assiduously and untiringly, amid many adverse circumstances, for the prosperous settlement of the Great American Desert, and the region bordering, and for the best and most rapid development of the resources of these valleys and mountains.

"As some of the results, under the blessings of Israel's God, our cities, towns and villages are now numbered by the hundreds, and extend from the Soda Springs, in the Territory of Idaho, some two hundred thirty miles north of this city, to the settlements in Arizona, some four hundred miles south. Orchards, gardens and farms have widely multiplied, where barrenness had sway for ages; commodious dwellings, school and meeting houses are fast supplanting the ruder buildings that circumstances at first compelled; numerous factories have relieved the slow and tedious processes of hard labor in the manufacture of textile fabrics; saw and grist mills have been multiplied to meet increasing wants.

"In speaking of the acts of men it has been wisely said, 'By their fruits ye shall know them.' A few of the fruits of this people during the past forty years, have now been passed in a review, deemed best to be brief; and in my reflections I often wish that the whole world would do themselves the justice to carefully and candidly scrutinize our course, all our acts and purposes, anywhere and everywhere, when we have been true to our faith, from our earliest history until now, and learn by our fruits, whether or not we are fast friends to all our fellow beings, so far as they will permit, and ever laboring to the utmost for the most rapid improvement, in all things conducive to the temporal and eternal welfare and happiness of mankind.

"Friends and Fellow Citizens: Permit me again to congratulate you in now being in communication with all steam lines by land and sea throughout the world, and to wish peace, union and abundant prosperity to your beautiful city and to all who are laboring to promote true progress and advance commendable improvements."

The day following this splendid address, the President and party resumed their journey southward by carriage, pausing here and there among the settlements to hold meetings with the people. On December 12th they reported their arrival at Kanarra, "snow two feet on the level; weather clear and cold." About seventy-five men and teams started on the 11th, from Kanarra and Toquerville, to open the road. On December 12th, a dispatch from Kanarra relates that, "President Young and party went about two miles, but the snow was so deep that they could not get through, and they had to return." However, they had better luck the following day, and the roads became dryer as they descended to Leeds and Washington. On the 15th they arrived in St. George, "all in good health." President Young moved into his new house, which, however, was still unfinished. Christmas and New Year's Day, he spent there among his friends.

The progress of the building of the Temple was of great interest to the President during this winter, and he stimulated the brethren in his discourses to increased diligence. On January 29th, it was reported that "One corner of the Temple wall is within two feet of the first story course." However, the thoughts that filled his mind principally concerned the United Order, or the Order of Enoch, and he determined to make a beginning while he was here among the southern settlements. A more or less detailed account of his activities is given in a letter which George A. Smith wrote to Joseph F. Smith in England, under date of March 15th, 1874.

"Dear Brother: Since we have been in St. George we have been moved by the Holy Spirit to preach to the people more fully the principles of the United Order of Enoch, and many of the brethren have requested to be organized for the purpose of carrying them out. One company is established, and will cultivate what has heretofore been known as the Heberville District; they have good land, and abundant water, as they draw it directly from the Rio Virgin river. They will cultivate cotton largely, as well as other agricultural products. The farmers of Santa Clara and Washington, as well as St. George, have been organized into companies for the same purpose.

"On the 2nd of March, President Young and myself, in company with several others, started to visit the brethren along the Rio Virgin, in Kane County. Five meetings were held at Tokerville, four at Virgin, one at Duncan's Retreat, three at Rockville and two at Shunesburg. President Young preached in all these places; much of the preaching was done by John Young, A. M. Cannon and C. P. Liston.

"On our return we were met by Elder Erastus Snow, who preached in the evening at Tokerville. Three wards—Tokerville, Virgin City and Rockville—were then organized in the United Order of Enoch, by the election of a President, two Vice-Presidents, Treasurer and Secretary. They entered immediately into measures to combine their labor and means, so as to produce the greatest good for the whole. . . . We receive applications daily from the different settlements to be organized. Brothers Erastus Snow, Milo Andrus and A. M. Cannon have now gone to organize Pine valley, Pinto and Hebron, all thriving settlements that have sent in their requests to be organized.

"The difficulty of boarding hands who work on the Temple, has caused President Snow to move his family out of the mansion, and Brother A. F. McDonald has converted it into a boarding house in the interest of the Temple. Fifty workmen are now boarding there.

"President Young's health is very good. He thinks of going home by Kanab, Long Valley and Sevier. It will be some time yet before the roads are settled.

"My love to yourself and the brethren, your associates.

"Your affectionate cousin,

"GEORGE A. SMITH."

Four days after writing the above, George A. Smith again addressed a letter to Joseph F. Smith in England, in which he further outlines his own and President Young's plans.

"In consequence of the late snow storm, President Young and myself will not visit Kanab, but arrangements are being made to attend meetings and organize the United Order of Enoch in Kanarra, Cedar, Parowan, Beaver, Fillmore and Nephi. We will probably start from here about the 10th of April, if the roads are passable. They are reported to be now in a wretched condition. The President's health is very good.

"With regards to yourself and associate Elders, I remain, your brother in the Gospel.

"GEORGE A. SMITH."

On Wednesday, the 1st of April, 1874, before leaving St. George, President Young had the pleasure of attending a ceremony at the Temple, when a box, containing the principal works of the Church and a silver plate, bearing the names of the Authorities of the Church, was deposited in the Temple wall. The President offered the dedicatory prayer as follows:

"Father in Heaven, in the name of Thy Son Jesus Christ, we Thy servants present ourselves before Thee on this occasion; and as we have deposited this box containing these records of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which Thou hast caused to be organized according to Thy will and commandment in these our days, we desire that this box and all that it contains may remain here in safety, undisturbed, until it is Thy will that they should be brought forth.

"We dedicate unto Thee this box, and the materials of which it is composed. We dedicate its contents; the paper upon which the records are printed and written, the ink with which this has been done; the plate and the engraving thereon, together with all other material and labor used in getting this deposit ready to be placed in this wall. We dedicate unto Thee this rock which has been prepared for the reception of this box; and we dedicate unto Thee these walls, as far as they are completed, together with the ground on which they stand. We also dedicate the material which is upon the ground and that which is yet to be brought and used in the construction of this Temple, which is being erected to Thy Holy Name, to be used according to Thy will and commandments, as a holy place, in which to attend to the ordinances of the Gospel, for the living and for the dead.

"We dedicate ourselves, our wives, our labors, our brethren and sisters and all that we have and are unto Thee, and ask Thy acceptance of this dedication; praying Thee to bless us, and all Israel in our labors for Zion, in advancing the cause of truth upon the earth. These blessings we ask for ourselves, our brethren and sisters, the Lamanites, and for all the honest in heart, in the name of Thy Son Jesus Christ. Amen."

III

The journey northward from St. George was begun during the first week of April. Stops were made at the principal settlements, and organizations of the "United Order of Enoch" were effected. At Nephi, meetings were held for two days, and on Saturday, April 18th, the President delivered a lengthy sermon, setting forth his ideas and plans pertaining to the establishment of the new order.

"'I have been steadily watching and waiting," he said, "just as steadily and as earnestly and faithfully as ever a mother watched over an infant child, to see when this people would be ready to receive the doctrine, or the first lessons or revelations given when the Center Stake of Zion was first located, to consecrate their property, and be indeed the servants and handmaidens of the Lord, and labor with all their hearts to do His will and build up His Kingdom on the earth, and I have never seen the time when we could organize one little society, or one little ward; but thank God, the time has come; the Spirit of the Lord is upon the people."

And then he proceeded to explain the Order which he proposed to establish among them.

"We now want to organize the Latter-day Saints, every man, woman and child among them, who has a desire to be organized, into this holy order. You may call it co-partnership, or just what you please. It is the United Order of the Kingdom of God on earth, but we say the Order of Enoch, on the same principle you find in the revelation concerning the priesthood, which, to avoid the too frequent repetition of the name of the Deity, is called the Priesthood after the order of Melchizedek. This order is the order of Heaven, the family of heaven on the earth; it is the children of our Father here upon the earth, organized into one body or family to operate together."

It was not the possessions of the people that President Young desired, but rather their time and effort.

"As individuals, we do not want your farms, we do not want your houses and city lots, we do not want your horses and cattle, we do not want your gold and your silver." And then he asks the question, "Well, what do you want?" And he answers, "We want the time of this people called Latter-day Saints, that we can organize this time systematically, and make this people the richest people on the face of the earth."

Again he asks a question, "What are we to have when we enter this order?" Meaning, no doubt, what are we to receive as our portion. And again he answers, "What we need to eat, drink and wear, and strict obedience to those whom the Lord sets to guide and direct; that our sisters, instead of teasing their husbands for a dollar, five dollars or twenty-five dollars, for a fine new dress, bonnet, or artificials for themselves or their daughters, may go to work and learn how to make all these things for themselves, being organized into societies or classes for that purpose. And the brethren will be organized to do their farming, herding and raising cattle, sheep, fruit, grain and vegetables; and when they have raised these products, every particle will be gathered into a storehouse or storehouses, and everyone have what is needed to sustain him."

Thus poverty would be done away with, the Saints would be self-sustaining and there would be a large surplus to be used in the building up of the Kingdom.

"Should we spend our means in folly and nonsense?" he inquires, in closing this sermon. And he answers, "No, not a dollar of it, but put it all into the general fund, for the benefit of the Kingdom."

So much then for the "United Order" as President Young taught it in April, 1874. To him the plan was perfectly clear and feasible—all parts of it fitted in so as to work harmoniously together.

On the forenoon of April 19th, President Young and party left Nephi and drove to Payson, where they remained overnight. The following morning they left Payson "at about twenty minutes to eight, and reached Provo at eleven o'clock, driving through a storm of snow and rain the whole distance." At Provo "they took the cars" and arrived at Salt Lake City at four in the afternoon.

An account of their arrival as given in The Deseret News, states that "hundreds of people, including many children, were at the depot in this city to greet the President and his companions, and bid them welcome home. South Temple Street, all the way from the depot, was lined on both sides by assembled thousands, who desired to manifest their respect for President Young, President Smith and others."

The usual annual conference of the Church had been postponed this year until May 7th. On this day the assembled thousands gathered in the Tabernacle, with President Brigham Young presiding. In his opening remarks,

"He requested that the brethren who would speak during the Conference, should express their views regarding the system of cooperation called the United Order. He described the benefits that would accrue to a community that would combine their interests. He spoke of objections that were raised against the Latter-day Saints joining together, but said, notwithstanding the obstacles that some might place in their way to prevent the establishment and progress of a United Order or Brotherhood, the Saints intended to go to work and spread, foster and increase peace, happiness and prosperity among themselves, and extend those elements as far as their influence could be felt, until the whole earth was subdued, and harmony, peace and plenty prevailed everywhere."

During the last week of May there was a notable arrival in Salt Lake in the person of General A. W. Doniphan, of Missouri, who, it will be remembered, was the object of much respect among the Latter-day Saints, inasmuch as he had saved the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith, through his refusal to carry out the orders of General Clark in Missouri in 1838, which were to execute the Prophet and six of his associates in the public square in Far West. General Doniphan had a pleasant visit with President Young and a few of the brethren at the President's office on South Temple Street.

On Sunday, May 24th, George A. Smith paid him this eloquent tribute in the services at the Tabernacle:

"There are few men whose names have been identified with the history of our Church, with more pleasant feelings to its members, than General Doniphan. During a long career of persecution, abuse and oppression, characters occasionally present themselves like stars of the first magnitude, in defense of the right, who are willing, notwithstanding the unpopularity that may attach to it, to stand up and protest against mob violence, murder, abuse, or the destruction of property and constitutional rights, even if the parties who are being thus abused, robbed, murdered or trampled under foot, have the unpopular name of 'Mormons'."

The summer of 1874 was a busy one for President Young. On almost every Sunday he addressed a congregation of Saints. On June 27th and 28th he was in attendance at a Conference at Brigham City, where "he spoke to a very large congregation, assembled in the new and magnificent Bowery which was erected for the occasion."

On July 24th, at a Sunday School convention of the four counties—Utah, Salt Lake, Davis, and Weber, held in the Tabernacle, the President

"Delivered a short, but most eloquent, impressive, and instructive address, principally directed to the children, in which he contrasted their condition to that of their fathers and mothers twenty-seven years ago, traced the providence of God as being over the Saints, enabling them to obtain their present desirable condition of comparative prosperity and exhorted all to be true to the principles for which their parents had suffered, and which some had sustained at the sacrifice of everything earthly, their lives included."

On August 9th, he was at Lehi, where an organization of the United Order was effected. On September 9th The Deseret News reports that the President had spoken the previous evening in the 20th Ward.

"Last evening the meeting was held in the Twentieth Ward School House. Besides the Bishop of the Ward and his counselors, Presidents Brigham Young, George A. Smith and D. H. Wells were on the stand. President Young addressed the congregation for nearly an hour and a half, in an easy, pleasant and instructive manner; in fact, a sounder or more useful discourse, or one which contains more true philosophy, is seldom listened to. No unbiased person could have heard it without being delighted at the amount of sound, godlike principles with which it abounded, and the wisdom displayed by the speaker. The main purport of the discourse was to show the Latter-day Saints how they could live in peace, harmony and unity, and establish, spread and promote the principles of truth and righteousness on the earth."

During the latter part of September there were rumors about Salt Lake City that President Young was very ill at his home on South Temple. Upon investigation it was learned that he had suffered "a severe spell of influenza," but that he was rapidly recovering. The Salt Lake Herald of September 30th issued the following statement:

"To correct the false rumors that are being circulated through the city, we will again state that President Young is fast regaining his accustomed health. Since he commenced to recover from his late severe illness, his health has improved daily; all reports to the contrary are incorrect."

The semi-annual Conference came on early in October, the first meeting convening on the 6th, and continuing for three days. The President was in attendance at all sessions, but was in a weakened condition and was unable to take part.

The Salt Lake Herald relates that "President Young has so far recovered as to be able to attend every day of the session up to the present time, but it has not been considered prudent for him to take any active part in the proceedings. His advice and counsel have, however, guided the deliberations quite as much as though he personally participated in the public exercises."

On account of his weakened health the President decided to depart for St. George earlier this year than previously. On October 29th, accompanied by George A. Smith, he left Salt Lake City "by special train" for Provo. Here he remained for a few days to rest and recuperate, and then began the balance of the journey by carriage. Turning off through Salt Creek pass he visited the settlements in Sanpete and Sevier counties. On November 5th, he departed from Richfield "by way of Cove Creek" for Beaver and Cedar City, where short stops were made. As the journey continued, his health improved, and the teams were pressed forward more rapidly, until George A. Smith could wire from St. George on November 11th: "President Young and party arrived here at 1 o'clock today. The President's health is rapidly improving, and all other members of the company are well."
