Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER FORTY-ONE

THE winter of 1874 and '75 in St. George was not unpleasant for President Young. The mild climate of the valley of the Virgin was favorable for the restoration of his health. He was comfortable in his own commodious dwelling. He was surrounded by relatives and friends who loved and adored him. His attention was occupied with the building of the St. George Temple, which he seemed desirous to hasten to completion.

On November 26th, two weeks after the arrival of President Young and George A. Smith in St. George, the latter addressed a letter to Joseph F. Smith in England, in which he relates a few of the passing events.

"Dear Kinsman: I received a letter from you just as I was leaving the city, which the hurry of starting prevented my answering. . . . I have met with the brethren two Sabbaths since I came to St. George. A good spirit pervades the meetings. The extraordinary expenses in building the Temple are beyond the income of that office, as the crops in all the counties composing the southern district have been light, and the tithing is consequently small. A large number of men who have come from the north, bringing their own provisions, excepting beef and potatoes, are moving the Temple work forward rapidly at the present time. A great difficulty is to obtain lumber. Our mills at Mt. Trumbull are about sixty-five miles distant, forty of which is without water, the great difficulty being to get the lumber hauled. Snow is now eighteen inches deep at Mt. Trumbull and we are compelled to carry the hay one hundred fifty miles to support the cattle that furnish the mills with logs, and grain has to be hauled much farther. The road from here to Mt. Trumbull has some feed on it in winter, and we expect to haul some lumber with oxen and the balance with mules. About one hundred men are at work in the quarry. The scarcity of money to meet the demands for cash articles is severely felt, both on this and the Salt Lake Temple. The walls of this Temple are between thirty and forty feet high, and the work is first class masonry, every stone being well laid on its natural bed. There is a good deal of spirit manifested by the brethren to push its construction forward. Elder William H. Folsom is now here taking charge of the architectural department, and Bishop Nathan Davis of the Seventeenth Ward, is here, making arrangements for casting the Baptismal Font, and the oxen upon which it is to stand. They are to be of Utah iron, finished with bronze. He has visited the iron works at Iron City, and is much pleased with the prospect of Utah being supplied with this indispensable metal from our own mines."

These were a few of the problems that President Young had to face and cope with in the construction of the St. George Temple, but under his guiding wisdom and encouragement the work moved steadily forward.

An item in The Deseret News of December 12th, states that "by dispatch from St. George we learn that President Brigham Young and George A. Smith, visited and inspected the quarry and the Temple yesterday, December 11th, and that the health of both was good. Three hundred tons of rock were laid on the walls of the Temple last week."

However, the news about the President was not so encouraging, the following months, January and February, 1875. In a letter from St. George to his son, John Henry Smith, in England, under date of January 3rd, George A. Smith relates that "President Young is in feeble health, but able to ride out nearly every day. He goes to the Temple and instructs the workmen. Brother Folsom stayed here a few days, but suffered so severely from the climate that he was compelled to return to the Basin where he could get lighter air, for you will remember that we are only twenty-seven hundred feet above the sea, while Salt Lake is forty-four hundred feet. Brother Romney broke his leg by falling on the steps of the Tabernacle about three months ago, and is still confined to his room. President Young is our only architect."

And so, in his feeble health during this winter, President Young rode to the Temple every day and instructed and encouraged the workmen. All that was done and all that was planned was under his supervision. "He is our only architect." What strength, what leadership, still showed itself forth in this marvelous man—and he was now well past three score and ten.

In February, before leaving St. George for Salt Lake City, the President dictated a long letter to his son, Ernest I. Young, who was laboring as a missionary in England. It is so full of excellent, good advice, and sound counsel and wisdom, that I desire to reproduce it in full.

"February 4th, 1875.

"St. George,

"Elder Ernest I. Young,

"Liverpool, England.

"My Dear Son Ernest:

"Your welcome letter of January 3rd, was duly received by last mail and was read with much satisfaction. I am glad that your health is so good in the English climate and trust you may continue to enjoy the blessings of health and vigor to minister in usefulness wherever the Lord may dictate you to labor.

"I am much gratified, my son, that you are able to write: 'I feel good continually, and feel that I am blessed beyond expectation.' It is your privilege to feel thus as a laborer in the vineyard of the Lord; for the powers of the Heavens are on your side, while you seek to walk in the path of your duty in trying to promote the interests of the Kingdom. True, you must be tested in the great school of mortal experience. There are, as you properly state "many temptations, seen and unseen, to lead one astray; the tempter being always ready to take advantage where he can.' This is the common lot of man, but especially of the young and unexperienced. There is no exception. It was written of our Savior that, 'he was in all points tempted like as we are.' But our duty is pointed out by him in the words, 'Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation.'

"One strong safeguard against doing evil is to cultivate good thoughts, and when evil ones are presented, to promptly and manfully reject them, to dismiss them from the mind at once. This habit, together with never knowingly or heedlessly putting yourself in the way of temptation, will greatly aid in proving to you, the truth of the scripture which saith, 'Resist the devil, and he will flee from you.' And further, this course will assist in cultivating that high moral and religious tone which is indispensable to those who would wield the power of the holy priesthood.

"I am pleased to read your expressed determination to pursue a course which shall be acceptable to our Heavenly Father. May God aid you in all your efforts to this desirable end. This determination is right, at home or abroad, at all times, and in every place. You and all the brethren with you, and all the Saints in every land, have my constant prayers, that the righteousness of God may increase on the earth.

"I am thankful to our Father that my health is reasonably good. I have deemed it prudent to refrain from speaking much in public this winter. Last Sabbath and the Sabbath before, I addressed the Saints in the St. George Tabernacle.

"I and Brother George A. Smith leave this city on the 10th inst., for Salt Lake City, if all is well. We expect to stay and attend the April General Conference at Salt Lake City, and then return to St. George.

"We are vigorously pushing forward the building of the St. George Temple; it is progressing finely. A goodly number of volunteers from the north are assisting and a good spirit prevails. Just as soon as the roof is on, and it is safe inside, we shall begin that great and all important work of baptizing for the dead; and attend to other ordinances of the Gospel as the building can be got ready.

"Remember me kindly to Brother Joseph F., and to the other brethren with you. May the God of Israel ever bless and empower you, my son, for every good word and work, is the fervent prayer and desire of your father.

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

On Wednesday, February 10th, President Young, George A. Smith, and a few of the brethren who accompanied them, departed from St. George, on their journey northward to Salt Lake City. It was the last visit that Brother George A. was ever to make to this city which had been named in his honor. His death was only a few months away.

Traveling from early morning until late at night, and frequently changing horses, the brethren were able to cover the three hundred forty miles in ten days, arriving home on the afternoon of the 19th, the latter part of the journey, from Provo, being made by train. The Deseret News of February 20, 1875, gives an account of their arrival.

"President Brigham Young and George A. Smith arrived in this city yesterday afternoon, February 19th, at twenty-five minutes to five o'clock, after an absence in southern Utah, of three months and three weeks, they having left this city for St. George on the 29th day of last October. The time of the arrival being generally understood, several hundreds of people of all classes gathered at the depot, to welcome the men, whose life work and achievements, under the blessings and guidance of the Great Director of destinies, have won the respect and affection of tens of thousands. After the train had run up to the platform, President Young, the venerable leader of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, made his appearance, and on seeing the large assembled crowd of people, uncovered his head and greeted them in a few brief and kindly words. First South Street, along which the President's carriage passed from the depot to his residence, was also lined with groups of people who had come out to see him. We are pleased to be able to state that the health of President Young is excellent, his residence in the genial south having, under the blessings of God, acted most beneficially upon him, so much so that he is now free from the rheumatic affection with which he was troubled before going to St. George."

On the 6th of April, 1875, the Forty-fifth Annual Conference of the Church convened in the new Tabernacle, with President Young presiding. Apparently his health was good as he presided at all sessions, and frequently addressed the congregation. This conference was remarkable in that it was held in continuous session for six days—from the sixth to the eleventh, inclusive. I have not space to go into detail regarding this interesting conference, which perhaps is the only one ever held for such an extended length of time with one exception, and I shall have to be content with a short synopsis of it taken from The Deseret News:

"The Annual General Conference, just closed, occupied six days, being the first and only conference, in the history of the Church, so far as we recollect, covering such an extended period, excepting that commencing April 6th, 1852, which also was held six days.

"At this conference, just expired, the snowy, cold weather was very unpropitious for outdoor labors, but correspondingly favorable for indoor business. The attendance and interest increased from the beginning to the end, culminating in the afternoon meeting on Sunday, when the vast capacity of the spacious new Tabernacle was absorbed by the thronging thousands, besides many who remained outside and near the building, and others who went away, unable to obtain seats within.

"During the conference many subjects of importance were taken up and lucidly enlarged upon by the various Elders who addressed the congregations. We may remark, as among the especially noteworthy incidents of this interesting occasion, that President Brigham Young attended every meeting, being in excellent health and spirits, and that the people were gratified with hearing him address them, at greater or less length, nearly every day of the conference, with renewed vigor and effect, upon various themes of current and lasting importance to the Saints."

II

Two events saddened the life of President Young during the summer and fall of 1875. The first was the death of his eldest son, Joseph A. Young, at Manti, on the 6th of August. This young man, who had passed his 40th birthday the previous October, was able, talented, distinguished, and gave promise of a brilliant and useful life among the Latter-day Saints. He had presided over the settlements in Sevier county since 1872. At the time of his illness, he was on his way to Manti to take charge of the building of the Temple there, having left Salt Lake City a few days previously.

"At Salt Creek canyon he had an attack of chills" which proved to be the forerunner of pneumonia. Two days later at Manti, "at 8:45 p. m." he passed away, "while conversing with his brethren." The body was brought to Salt Lake City, and the funeral was held at the Bee Hive House under the direction of his distinguished father—with what sorrow and harrowed feeling we may well imagine. Among the children of this excellent man was General Richard W. Young, who lived to bring honor and fame to his people and his state.

Three weeks after the death of his son, on September 2nd, 1875, President Young was called upon to part with his first counselor, his devoted friend and brother, George A. Smith, the man upon whom he depended, perhaps more than any other "to bear off the burden of the Kingdom." The loss of this man was a sore trial to the President. He describes his feelings in a letter to Albert Carrington in England, under date of September 10th.

"It is needless for me to enter into details of the sad event that so soon after your departure for Europe, cast its shadow over our lives, as the particulars of the last hours of Brother George A. Smith's sojourn in mortality have, doubtless, already reached you. By his removal to a brighter sphere, I lose a devoted friend, a wise counselor, and a life long companion. He leaves behind him, so far as my knowledge extends, and that is very extensive, a record as pure and as worthy of imitation as that of any servant of the Most High, who ever lived upon His footstool. He gave his heart, his mind, his energy, his love, in fact his all, to the furtherance of the great purposes of our God. In youth and in manhood, in sunshine or in storm, in peace or in persecution, he was true to his religion, his brethren and his God. And more than this, what can we say of anyone?"

At the funeral in the Tabernacle, President Young voiced his absolute and perfect faith in a literal resurrection.

"It would have been my delight, had I been able and had time, to take up the subject of the resurrection, and speak to this people upon it. But suffice it for me to say at this time, that the very body that lies in that coffin is the body that will be raised at the first resurrection, and will come forth; yes, Brother George A. Smith; and we will see him in the flesh just as we have seen him while associating with him; only he will be made pure, holy and immortal. And when we are made pure we shall associate together. The very flesh and the very bones, and the component parts that comprise the body of George A. Smith, now lying before us, will come forth in the resurrection."

Such was the beautiful and comforting doctrine taught by President Young on this occasion.

It would have been my delight to have written here a short account of the life and labors and accomplishments of President George A. Smith, for his ability was great and his accomplishments were many, but all that will have to be reserved for a later time.

On Sunday, October 3rd, 1875, the citizens of Utah were greatly pleased to welcome to Ogden and Salt Lake City the first President of the United States to visit the Territory, Ulysses S. Grant. The President and party were met at the mouth of Echo Canyon, by Governor George W. Emery and a few of the Federal officials. President Young, George Q. Cannon and a committee of prominent citizens from Salt Lake City went to Ogden by special train. Enroute to Salt Lake City, President Young was introduced to President Grant in the latter's private car. As he extended his hand President Young said, "President Grant, this is the first time I have ever seen a President of my country."

Arriving in Salt Lake City a parade was formed at the depot and marched slowly eastward on South Temple Street to Main. Both sides of the street were lined with Sunday School children. "Whose children are these?" President Grant inquired of Governor Emery. "Mormon children," replied the Governor. The President was silent for a moment, and then replied, "I have been deceived," remembering, no doubt, many malicious falsehoods he had heard about the Mormon people.

The Forty-fifth Semi-annual Conference of the Church convened in the new Tabernacle on October 6th and continued for five days. At the opening session President Young outlined the purpose of the meetings.

"We shall occupy the time throughout this Conference in talking to the Latter-day Saints, giving them such instructions and advice as we have for them, trusting that each and every heart may possess a due portion of the Spirit of God, so that the Saints may be strengthened, and that the truth may be taught in simplicity, and may commend itself to those who are as yet unacquainted with it."

At the closing session he fervently expressed the hope that the Saints would give their hearts to God and yield obedience to His principles.

"A few words to the Conference. We have been here now five days and I feel as though I had hardly commenced to say to the Saints what I wished to. Still I have said a good many things, but we want teaching just like children, and to be directed in everything; and we could wish, and do pray God, our Father in Heaven, in the name of His Son Jesus Christ, to give to the Latter-day Saints willing hearts to be taught, and a firm determination to obey; and we do pray to the Latter-day Saints to yield themselves obedient to the Spirit of God. When we do this we shall be one; but as long as we permit selfishness in our hearts we shall be divided, we shall have individual and self interest. But when we are actuated by the Spirit of the Lord, our interest is general, it is for the whole people, it is for the Kingdom of God upon the earth, it is to sanctify the people, to prepare for redeeming the nations of the earth, to assist all that is in our power, our Savior, our Elder Brother, who calls upon us to do our part; he has fulfilled his part, so far as the sacrifice is concerned, and he is still laboring, still toiling, still directing, to prepare the inhabitants of the earth that He may come and receive them, that He may come and reign in their midst, and that all may be redeemed who will receive the Gospel, and who would have received it had they had an opportunity while living in the flesh. Now we we pray you, be reconciled to God; and the word of the Lord is, directly, to those who call themselves Latter-day Saints; Son or daughter, give me thy heart. Let us give our hearts and our affections to God our Father."

Under date of November 4th, President Young, in writing to Albert Carrington, makes a few comments on the recent Conference.

"Our late Semi-Annual Conference will be long remembered by the Latter-day Saints as one conspicuous for the rich outflow of the Spirit of the Lord, the freedom of utterance felt by the Elders who addressed the congregations, the important truths advanced by the authorities of the Church, and the manifest renewal of life in the hearts of many who were disposed to feel indifferent to the vital interests and living powers of our Holy Faith. In connection therewith, also will be recollected that, during its sessions, the new Tabernacle was dedicated to the Lord as a house of worship sacred to His name. Since Conference many meetings of the priesthood have been held in this city, previous to the members of the various quorums renewing their covenants at the waters of baptism. At these meetings the brethren of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and others have spoken and counseled with the power of the Spirit of the Most High, calling on the Elders to awaken to newness of life, to shake off all lethargy, to settle any difficulties they had with their brethren, and if in the wrong to make restitution, and if not in fault to forgive. These teachings have been attended with the happiest results, many have arisen to a comprehension of the importance of the times and of the work in which they are engaged. Many little difficulties between brethren have been settled and unkindly feelings brushed away, whilst numbers are going forward and renewing their covenants, with the determination of living nearer to the Lord, and in more complete unison with the teachings of His divine Spirit than they have in days past."

It will thus be seen that President Young was confident that the Kingdom was moving steadily forward. But it was also plain to him that the Saints had to be continually instructed and encouraged. Gradually, however, selfishness would be overcome, and unison and unity would prevail.

The year 1875 was drawing to a close. It had been an eventful year for the President. Many things had taken place which had caused him sorrow and concern, but as to the ultimate outcome of the great work he was engaged in, he was sure.

In writing again to Albert Carrington, under date of December 28th, 1875, he summarized conditions and events:

"In a few days 1875 will be numbered with the mighty past. It has been a year that will be remembered by many as a year of storms, of hurricanes, of the sea heaving itself beyond its bounds, and of shipwrecks and disasters on the ocean. To the Latter-day Saints it has been a year of progress and peace. It would be difficult for our enemies to point out the place where they have accomplished any of their unholy desires; all their persistent efforts and zealous labors have resulted in nothing more than the annoyance of a few of our brethren for righteousness sake; in every other respect they have signally failed in all their unscrupulous warfare against the people of the Most High.

"On the other hand we can behold around us in Zion a marked increase of faith and good works among the Saints, and the close of the year is characterized by a greater spirit of unity and determination to do God's will, by the people, than marked its advent, whilst the reports that reach us on every hand from the missionaries now spread over this continent, speak of a time of such general inquiry with regard to the principles of the Gospel and willingness to listen to the teachings of the Elders, as has not been witnessed for many a year past. So also among the Lamanites, the desire and feeling to unite their interests and lives with those of the Saints is gradually, visibly and surely increasing and the work of the Father has evidently begun and is rapidly gaining strength in their hearts.

"The holidays are passing very pleasantly. The weather during the past few days has been mild, with much rain and a little snow, but reports reach us of very severe storms on the mountains and of snowslides in the canyons, one of which in Little Cottonwood proved fatal to three miners on Christmas day.

"May every blessing needful for you to fulfill the responsible duties of your calling, and enhance your own happiness, be yours, is the prayer of your brother in the Gospel. "BRIGHAM YOUNG."

III

The year 1876 dawned favorably for President Brigham Young. All around and about him were evidences of the growth and prosperity of the settlements of the Saints. The Kingdom was extending its influence, both at home and abroad. Several of his great undertakings were rapidly moving forward, notably the St. George Temple, which was now nearing completion. Work on the Salt Lake Temple was being pushed ahead with all the resources at his command. And last, but not by any means least, his health was better than it had been for some time. Writing to Albert Carrington under date of Feb. 24th, 1876, he relates as follows:

"My health is excellent and I am enjoying life; still after the busy season attendant on the meeting of the Legislature, the fitting out of the Arizona missionaries, etc., a short period of repose will be grateful to my feelings."

In this letter he reiterates his firm belief that "Providence is over all."

"Elder George Q. Cannon writes me very encouragingly from Washington, and though the enemies of God's Kingdom are as bitter and as untiring as ever, we realize every hour of our lives, that Providence is over all, and that they can do nothing but as His good pleasure permits."

He also mentions the fact that he intends to postpone a contemplated trip to St. George until "after the next April Conference."

The April Conference convened on the 6th, and continued until the 9th, with President Young presiding at the sessions of the first two days. On the succeeding two days, however, he was absent. He gives the reason in a letter to Albert Carrington under date of April 15th.

"Our Annual Conference convened on the 6th, and continued in session until the afternoon of the 9th. The weather was inclement and the Tabernacle cold. This brought a severe cold upon me, which prevented my being present at the meetings of the last two days."

He speaks of the principal subject taken up by the Elders during the Conference.

"The principal subject dwelt upon by the Elders who addressed the Conference, was the desirability of moving forward in the work of building the Temple in Salt Lake City, and the various Quorums of the Priesthood—Seventies, High Priests, Elders, etc.—were called upon, as quorums, to set good, thorough men to work forthwith, in quarrying, cutting, and laying rock, and in other labor that would tend to the erection of this House of the Lord. The brethren thus employed are to be sustained and paid by the quorums, through donations from the various members, without touching the tithing, which will be used in paying the freight on rock from the quarry, also in the purchase of iron, steel, and other material, etc., as there shall be need therefor; we hope by this means to have not less than two hundred men working on the Temple Block and at the stone quarry this summer, as we think each quorum of Seventies can on an average send two men, and the balance can certainly be supplied by the High Priests and Elders."

Thus by donation labor the work on the great Salt Lake Temple pushed forward and continued.

On the morning of May 1, 1876, President Young, Daniel H. Wells, "and a few friends" departed by special train for York in Juab county, the southern terminus of the railroad. Here they were to proceed by team and carriage to St. George. When the train arrived at York, "forty-nine wagons loaded with children and parents, and twenty horsemen in uniform from Santaquin and Goshen," were there to greet them. "A congratulatory address was read, to which the President responded with excellent remarks to parents and children. The choirs then joined in cheerful music, after which the President responded and blessed all the people."

After journeying for nine days, and stopping and holding meetings at the various settlements, St. George was reached on May 10th. A telegram to The Deseret News on that day states that, "Presidents B. Young and Daniel H. Wells and party reached St. George this afternoon at four o'clock, all well. President Young's health is excellent; he never stood the trip so well before, and never had a more pleasant journey south. The people manifested much pleasure at the arrival of the party. The Temple looks magnificent, in contrast with the surrounding country. A Conference of three days duration will commence on Friday. Vegetation is quite forward and the health of the people is generally good."

On the afternoon of his arrival the President visited the Temple. "He went upon the top of the main building and the tower."

The three days' Conference at St. George convened on May 12th, 13th and 14th, with President Young presiding. In his opening remarks he

"Expressed himself as being happy in the enjoyment of the opportunity of meeting with the people in the south once again. He said the people must not expect to hear him speak very much, but he trusted to be blessed of the Lord in speaking some during the Conference. He expressed his satisfaction with the labors of the people in the south, as far as he had seen, and as far as he had heard of those labors. He felt especial pleasure in the progress which had been made in erecting a Temple. He wished that the people called Latter-day Saints truly realized the great importance of the work intrusted to them. He blessed the people and all their substance."

June 1st, 1876, was President Young's seventy-fifth birthday. The love and esteem in which he was held by all the Latter-day Saints was beautifully expressed by the people of St. George. A. M. Musser in a telegram to The Deseret News on that day describes the demonstrations which were held.

"President Young's birthday has been the occasion of many congratulations and much genuine rejoicing here today, with the people of this city, Washington and Santa Clara. Early in the morning he was serenaded by the band; subsequently the St. George choir went to his house and sang original and other songs and invocations. Still later the people met in fast and prayer meeting in great numbers, in the fine new sandstone Tabernacle, when many testimonies were offered by the brethren and sisters, and inspiring hymns were sung by the choir. Before closing, a number of affectionate addresses, sentiments and invocations were read by Elder J. G. Bleak and Sister Susan Y. Dunford. The President then closed with a most searching and powerful exhortation to all the Latter-day Saints. I do not recollect ever hearing him speak with greater freedom or more to the point. At three p. m. the President met with some forty old gentlemen and ladies, veteran citizens of these settlements and old time members of the Church, at the Snow House where Elder MacDonald's family and others had previously prepared an excellent meal. The band was also in attendance and a hearty good feeling prevailed throughout. On President Young's return home he was met at the gate by a number of young misses, dressed in white, who sang a touching song, composed for the occasion, and suiting the action to the word, strewed flowers from the gate to the house for him to walk on."

There is no doubt but that the President felt great satisfaction in these demonstrations of loyalty and affection towards him, and certainly they were all justly due and merited.

The return journey of the President and party to Salt Lake City was made in the latter part of June, by way of Kanab, Long Valley, Panguitch, Monroe, Richfield, Gunnison and Nephi. At York they boarded a special train, and reached home "Saturday night, July 1st, all well."

The President recounts some of the events of the summer in a letter to Albert Carrington under date of July 14th.

"President Albert Carrington.

"Dear Brother: Your favors of June 15th and 16th, and your business statement of the 19th, reached here a few days ago. We have also had the pleasure of welcoming home my son, Elder Ernest I. Young, and Elder James Sharp, both of whom return to us in good health, and at great satisfaction of once more having the privilege of enjoying the society of the Saints in Zion. My sons Don Carlos and Feramorz L., are also with us, enjoying a summer vacation from their studies.

"Myself and party left Salt Lake City on May 1st for St. George. We traveled direct through the settlements, and not round by way of Sevier as was originally contemplated, and reached St. George on May 10th. President Wells and Elder Musser attended several meetings at the settlements on the way down, whilst I deemed it wiser, so far as I was individually concerned, to rest after the fatigues of the day. We found the work on the Temple far advanced; the plastering and the white-washing were completed on the outside, and the basement story nearly finished. We commenced calling carpenters, plasterers and other artisans from the northern settlements, with the view of completing the building by April 1st, 1877, when we anticipate holding our annual Conference in St. George.

"Our present intention is to go to St. George immediately after next October Conference, dedicate that portion of the Temple that is finished, organize the Priesthood, and commence to give endowments, baptize for the dead, etc. The Temple building has a magnificent appearance. The red bluffs on the north, the volcanic ridges on the east and west, the Rio Virgen, running through the valley on the south, and the beautiful city on the north and northwest, together form a lovely picture with striking and vivid contrasts. The cost of the Temple, up to date, has been about $350,000, and we estimate the entire cost will not exceed $500,000.

"We left St. George on the return trip on the 12th of June, and came by way of Kanab, where President Wells, Brigham Jr., and other brethren who had been into Arizona, rejoined us, and we came home through Long Valley, over the divide, and down the Sevier, and reached this city after a very pleasant and profitable trip, on July 1st. Since my return I have been suffering somewhat from rheumatism, otherwise my health is good."

On July 24th, a great pioneer Jubilee was held in the Tabernacle. The vast building was filled to capacity, about one-half the number being children. Among the speakers were Orson Pratt and President Young, who related in simple language the story of the first pioneer journey, and their entrance into the valley, twenty-nine years before. In concluding his address the President "blessed the fathers and mothers and the children, and the elders and teachers, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, also the quorums of the priesthood, and concluded in saying, "I pray you to follow after Christ, and set that example that will be worthy of imitation by those who are coming after us. Peace be with you in well doing."

During August and September the President remained in Salt Lake City with the exception of a brief visit to Logan to attend a conference on August 27th.

In October he presided at all sessions of the General Conference, which he described to Albert Carrington as "an exceedingly interesting one." He relates further:

"The weather was delightful and the attendance very large. The most important business brought before the people, besides the calling of the missionaries, was the election of my son, John W. Young, to be my first counselor, and the adjournment of the Conference to meet on the 6th day of April next at St. George. The Saints received a mission to build two more Temples, one in Cache Valley, and one in Sanpete, within five years, and to finish the one in this city as soon as they possibly can do so. Piute, Beaver, Millard, Sanpete, Sevier and Juab counties will unite together to erect a house to the Lord in Sanpete, where endowments can be given, and other ordinances pertaining to a Temple can be performed. Another will be built in Cache Valley by the Saints inhabiting Box Elder, Cache and Rich counties and those who dwell in the contiguous portions of Idaho."

Unfortunately the President was not to live to see the completion of the Temples at Logan and at Manti, but both of them were visioned and planned in his mind.

On November 1st, President Young, Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon, Brigham Young, Jr., "and members of their families" departed from Salt Lake City for St. George, where they arrived after a successful journey on November 9th. It was their intention to remain throughout the winter.
