Preston Nibley, Brigham Young: The Man and His Work ( 1960)

CHAPTER FORTY-TWO

FROM St. George, on December 24th, 1876, President Brigham Young sent the following Christmas message to his family and friends in Salt Lake City.

"My family and friends in Salt Lake City and elsewhere: The Compliments of the Season; wishing you all a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year. May you live to accomplish the work given you to do of our Heavenly Father, and I pray you to do it faithfully, that you may be prepared to dwell eternally in the Heavens. May God grant it. Amen.

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

This was the last Christmas message ever to be sent to his "family and friends" by this great man in this mortal world.

January 1st, 1877, dawned "fair and clear" at St. George. It was to be a great day for the Saints, for the "lower story" of the Temple was now completed and ready for use. At twelve o'clock noon over twelve hundred people had gathered inside the building and the ceremonies proceeded under the direction of President Young. Wilford Woodruff, "standing on the upper step of the font," made these significant remarks:

"We are this day blessed with a privilege that but few since the days of Adam have ever enjoyed. But few of the sons of Adam have ever entered into a Temple, built by the commandment of God, in which to administer the ordinances, both for the living and the dead."

President Young then addressed the congregation and called upon Elder Woodruff to offer the dedication prayer, after which the ordinance work was begun. It has continued until this day.

During January, February and March the President remained in St. George, and from there directed the operations of the Church. He had a small office built on the east of his residence, and spent his time in answering correspondence and consulting with his brethren. He also greatly enjoyed the privilege of witnessing the ordinance work going on in the Temple.

In April, from far and near, the brethren and sisters began gathering for the Forty-Seventh Annual Conference of the Church which had been called to convene in the St. George Temple. On the opening day, the 6th, the President addressed the congregation.

"I would like to say a great deal during this Conference to the Latter-day Saints, but I shall be able to talk but little, and therefore, when I do speak, I wish you to listen, and this I believe all of you will do.

"We have no business here other than to build up and establish the Zion of our God.

"This is the work of God, that marvelous work and a wonder, referred to by ancient men of God, who saw it in its incipiency, as a stone cut out of the mountain without hands, but which rolled and gathered strength and magnitude, until it filled the whole earth. We will continue to grow, to increase and spread abroad, and the powers of earth and hell combined cannot hinder it. All who are found opposing God and His people will be swept away, and their names forgotten in the earth. As the Prophets Joseph and Hyrum were murdered, and as they massacred our brethren and sisters in Missouri, so they would have served us years and years ago, if they had had the power to do so. But the Lord Almighty has said, Thus far thou shalt go, and no farther, and hence we are spared to carry on His work. We are in His hands; the nations of the earth are in His hands; He rules in the midst of the armies of heaven, and executes His pleasure on the earth; the hearts of all living are in His hands, and He turns them as the rivers of water are turned."

Such was the powerful testimony of this great man in the last year of his life.

In concluding this sermon he referred to his health.

"As to my health, I feel many times that I could not live an hour longer, but I mean to live just as long as I can. I know not how soon the messenger will call for me, but I calculate to die in the harness."

Thus he proceeded on daily with his work, waiting for the messenger to call, but continuing diligently with his tasks.

The return journey from St. George was made through Sevier valley, and at Manti, on April 25th, the site for a Temple was dedicated. The President kneeled upon the ground as he offered the dedication prayer. It was a most beautiful prayer, and I should like to reproduce it here, but shall quote only a few paragraphs.

"Wilt thou, O Lord, bless each one now before thee, and bless the ground, this Temple site, this hill, and the hills and valleys round about, and the waters, and the atmosphere, and the elements pertaining to this valley, that the same may be blessed and sanctified before the Lord. Give unto thy servants and handmaidens wisdom to use the gifts that thou art bestowing upon them, that they may not dispose of their substance unwisely, but that they may take care of it and waste nothing, storing up that which thou givest them. Inspire the hearts of thy servants, so that they may know how to procure the things of this earth, and to make use of the same for building up thy kingdom on the earth. Bless, O our Father, and pour out thy Spirit, upon thy people to this end.

"Preserve thy servants who may work on this building from every accident and every evil, both in handling the rock and the poles for putting up the scaffolding, and in removing it, and also in procuring the lime and the sand, that no accident may befall any of them.

"We ask thee, O Lord God of Israel, that thou wilt hold in remembrance the wicked and ungodly men who delight in their wickedness, who fight against thee and thy truth, and who feel to despise and deride thy holy Priesthood, and who heed not thee nor thy ways, but who delight in wickedness continually, and who will not turn therefrom. Have mercy upon such as will hearken unto thy counsel and repent before thee, and those who will harden themselves in iniquity and continue to do so, and will not repent, remove them out of their places, that they may be known no more, and may they not have power to hurt or injure thy servants, thy cause, or thy people.

"We also ask thee, O God our Father, to bless our families and thy Saints everywhere, and bless the good and the virtuous all over the earth. Bless also the Lamanites, who are a part of the house of Israel. Inspire the hearts of thy people, the Latter-day Saints, to do good to that fallen race, that they, in thine own due time may be found in the path of their duty, in returning to thee."

"Wilt thou hear our supplications and answer these our petitions, for we ask all, O Jehovah, in the name of Jesus Christ our Savior. Overthrow wickedness in the land and abomination of every kind. Enable us, thy children, to establish truth in the earth, never more to be taken away, to build up Thy Zion of the latter days and to accomplish every righteous desire of our hearts.

"Receive our thanks and the dedication of this land and our future work in rearing a Temple to Thy name, all of which we ask in the name of Jesus Christ, our Savior and Redeemer. Amen."

After the prayer, the President addressed a few words to those assembled, setting forth his ideas as to the manner in which Temples should be built, and the purposes for which they should be used:

"We now call upon the people, through the several Bishops who preside in this and the neighboring settlements for men to come here with teams and wagons, plows and scrapers, picks and shovels, to prepare this ground for the mason-work. Let this work be commenced forthwith; and as soon as possible we shall expect from fifty to one hundred men every working day throughout the season to labor here.

"We intend building this Temple for ourselves, and we are abundantly able to do it; therefore no man need come here to work expecting wages for his services. The neighboring settlements will send their men, and they can be changed whenever, and as often as, desirable; and they can get credit on Labor Tithing or on Donation Account for their services, and we expect them to work until this Temple is completed without asking for wages. It is not in keeping with the character of Saints to make the building of Temples a matter of merchandise.

"We want to rear this Temple with clean hands and pure hearts, that we, with our children, may enter into it to receive our washings and anointings; the keys and ordinances of the holy Priesthood; and also to officiate in the same for our fathers and mothers and our forefathers who lived and died without the Gospel, that they with us may be made partakers of the fruits of the tree of life, and live and rejoice in our Father's kingdom.

"The Gospel is free, its ordinances are free, and we are at liberty to rear this Temple to the name of the Lord without charging anybody for our services.

"We call upon the sisters also to render what assistance they can in this matter. They can do a great deal by way of encouraging their husbands and sons, and also by making clothing of various kinds for them, and in otherwise providing for them while they are working here.

"Now, Bishops, if any person should enquire what wages are to be paid for work done on this Temple, let the answer be, 'Not one dime.' And when the Temple is completed, we will work in God's holy house without inquiring what we are going to get, or who is going to pay us, but we will trust in the Lord for our reward, and he will not forget us. 'Behold the fowls of the air (says the Savior), for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they?"

"Let this work be commenced without delay. Building cannot be performed here in the winter, as in St. George. The rearing of this Temple will have to be done in the milder portions of the season, when the air is free from frost.

"God bless you, brethren and sisters; we hope and pray that you will be inspired to perform this work with honor to yourselves and glory to God. This is the work of the latter days that we are engaged in, and this is the way that Zion is to be built up. We will continue our labors at home, and we will carry the Gospel to all the nations of the earth, to the whole House of Israel, and the good work of redemption and salvation will continue until all is completed, and Jesus presents the kingdom to the Father. Amen."

Leaving Manti, the President and party traveled by team and carriage to York in Juab county; there they boarded a train and on April 27th, "at one thirty-five p. m.," arrived in Salt Lake City.

The principal work which the President now planned for the balance of the summer was to set in order the Stakes of Zion and see that all were working harmoniously together. Therefore important conferences, one after another were called. The first was held in Salt Lake City, on May 12th in the New Tabernacle. One week later, on May 19th and 20th, an organization of the Cache Stake at Logan was effected, with Moses Thatcher as President and William B. Preston and Milton D. Hammond as counselors. On May 24th, a special conference was called at Ogden, and the city was divided into four wards. Also the outlying settlements of Weber county were all completely organized under their respective bishoprics. All this work was done under the immediate direction and supervision of President Young, now approaching his seventy-sixth birthday.

In writing to Joseph F. Smith, in England, under date of June 6th, the President reports as follows:

"Since you left we have organized stakes in Cache, Weber and Utah counties and next Saturday and Sunday we hope to be in Brigham City, and the next weeks following at Farmington and Tooele. We shall then most probably go down into Sanpete county and so continue until we have organized the Latter-day Saints throughout these valleys, so that all can be known and looked after."

Again in a letter to Elder Smith, under date of July 12th, he reports that:

"With a few of the brethren I started on June 29th to visit the Saints in Juab and Sanpete counties and returned on the 10th inst. We had a very enjoyable trip, though the weather was exceedingly hot, and the roads excessively dusty. In both counties we organized Stakes of Zion, Elder George Teasdale of Salt Lake City being sustained as the President of Juab Stake, and Bishop Canute Peterson in Sanpete county. We found a good spirit prevailing and are well satisfied with our labors during our absence."

On July 24th, thousands of Sunday School children gathered in the new Tabernacle at Salt Lake City to participate in a Pioneer celebration. Among others, President Young addressed them and gave them a splendid recital of the Pioneer journey.

"Exactly thirty years today, myself, with others, came out of what we named Emigration Canyon; we crossed the Big and Little Mountains, and came down the valley about three quarters of a mile south of this. We located and we looked about and finally we came and camped between the two forks of City Creek, one of which ran southwest and the other west. Here we planted our standard, on this Temple block and the one above it; here we pitched our camps and determined that we would settle and stop.

"Children, we are the Pioneers of this country, with one exception, west of the Mississippi River; we established the first printing press in every state from here to the Pacific Ocean, and we were the first to establish libraries, and the first to establish good schools; we were the first to plant out orchards and to improve the desert country, making it like the Garden of Eden."

On Sunday, August 19th, the President was in attendance at a Conference at Brigham City, where "under a large bowery" he addressed a congregation of "at least two thousand five hundred people." The Box Elder stake was organized with Oliver G. Snow as president and Elijah Box and Isaac Smith as counselors. On Monday President Young and the visiting brethren returned by train to Salt Lake City.

Throughout the Thursday following, August 23rd, while working in his office, the President complained of a feeling of nausea, "with an inclination to vomit." At eleven o'clock at night, on retiring, he was seized with a severe attack of "cholera morbus" which continued until five o'clock in the morning, when, to relieve his suffering, a mild opiate was administered by Drs. F. D. Benedict and Seymour B. Young, who had been called to his bed-side during the night.

All day Friday, he was in considerable pain, "but endured it cheerfully, and occasionally made humorous remarks when he saw those about him inclined to be troubled." On Saturday afternoon "inflammation of the bowels" set in. He slept fitfully during the night and frequently moaned in his sleep. When asked if he suffered great pain, he replied, "No, I don't know that I do."

During Sunday and Monday he seemed to revive somewhat, "being frequently administered to by some of his brethren," but on Monday evening he sank into a comatose condition, from which it was difficult to arouse him. At 4 o'clock Tuesday morning, "he sank down in bed apparently lifeless." Artificial respiration was immediately resorted to, and "hot poultices were placed over the heart to stimulate action." "For nine consecutive hours artificial respiration was continued. At that time he seemed greatly revived and spoke to those around him, saying he felt better and wished to rest."

On Wednesday, Aug. 29th, it was apparent to anxious watchers at his bedside that the end was near. His last words, as he gazed fixedly upwards were, "Joseph, Joseph, Joseph," as though he communed with his beloved Prophet. At one minute past four o'clock in the afternoon, his breathing ceased; his great heart was stilled. The mortal life of one of God's noblest sons had come to an end.

II

The immediate reaction of the leading brethren of the Church to the death of President Brigham Young is well expressed in the words of George Q. Cannon.

"On Tuesday night," he states, "as I sat at the head of his bed, and thought of his death, if it should occur, I recoiled from the contemplation of the view. It seemed to me that he was indispensable. What could we do without him? He had been the brain, the eye, the ear, the mouth and hand for the entire Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. From the greatest details connected with the organization of this Church, down to the smallest minutiae connected with the work, he has left upon it the impress of his great mind. From the organization of the Church, and the construction of Temples, the building of Tabernacles; from the creation of a provisional state government and a Territorial government, down to the small matter of directing the shape of these seats upon which we sit this day; upon all these things, as well as upon all the settlements of the Territory, the impress of his genius is apparent. Nothing was too small for his mind; nothing was too large. His mind was of that character that it could grasp the greatest subjects, and yet it had the capacity to descend to the minutest details. This was evident in all his counsels and associations with the Saints; he had that power, that wonderful faculty, which God gave him, and with which he was inspired. And while I was thus thinking of all this, it seemed as though we could not spare him; he was indispensable to this great work. And while I felt it, it seemed as though a voice said, "I am God; this is my work; it is I who build it up and carry it forward; it is my business to guide my Saints."

III

The funeral of President Young was held on Sunday, September 2nd, in the great Tabernacle. The previous day, "at a quarter past eight o'clock in the morning," the body was conveyed from the Lion House to the Tabernacle, in order that the Saints might have "a farewell look upon the countenance of our loved and venerated President, Prophet and Brother." "About half past ten o'clock," the doors of the Tabernacle were opened and the anxious crowds admitted. From this time until night-fall "there was a continuous stream of living humanity passing through the Tabernacle," until, it was estimated, that at least 25,000 people "had taken their last farewell of the honored dead."

The following morning, Sunday, at ten o'clock, the doors of the Tabernacle were again opened, and by noon "the building was entirely filled, as were the aisles and doorways, and every available standing place. The congregation within the building numbered at least 12,000, while thousands of persons unable to obtain admission were in the grounds of the Tabernacle, or in the streets outside."

"At 12 noon" the immense congregation was called to order by George Q. Cannon. "The choir of 220 voices, led by George Careless, with Joseph J. Daynes presiding at the organ," sang, "Hark, from afar a funeral knell."

The opening prayer was offered by Franklin D. Richards, after which the choir again sang, "Thou dost not weep to weep alone."

The first speaker was President Daniel H. Wells, whom, with the others, I can quote only briefly. "I arise with an aching heart," he said, "but cannot let pass this opportunity of paying at least a tribute of respect to our departed friend and brother, who has just stepped behind the veil. I can only say, Let the silent tear fall that it may give relief to the troubled heart; for we have lost our counselor, our friend, our President; a friend to God, a friend to his Saints, a friend to the Church, and a friend to humanity."

Wilford Woodruff followed with a few remarks: "We have lying before us the earthly tabernacle of President Brigham Young. His voice is hushed in death, and all Israel has to submit to the mind and will of God. Israel will never again hear his voice until after the resurrection. I have no desire to occupy the time of this assembly, in eulogizing the life of President Young. His works and words are recorded in Heaven, and they are recorded here on the earth; and that is sufficient. Let those of us who remain a few days study the counsels, the sermons and principles, which have been revealed to us through the mouth of this Prophet of God. . . ."

Erastus Snow followed: ". . . It would be a small thing to add my testimony, but which I know would be the testimony of thousands before me, as well as thousands who are not with us today, more especially those who have been longest and most intimately acquainted with him; namely, the never failing devotion of his heart to the building up of the Kingdom of God, to the honoring of the holy priesthood he received, and the carrying out of the counsels of the Lord, and all things revealed through the Prophet Joseph. . . ."

George Q. Cannon then arose and read this remarkable statement which President Young had prepared in 1873, more than four years previously, regarding his funeral services and the disposition of his remains.

"I, Brigham Young, wish my funeral services to be conducted in the following manner:

"When I breathe my last I wish my friends to put my body in as clean and wholesome state as can conveniently be done, and preserve the same for one, two, three or four days, or as long as my body can be preserved in a good condition. I want my coffin made of plump 1 1/4 inch boards, not scrimped in length, but two inches longer than I would measure, and from two to three inches wider than is commonly made for a person of my breadth and size, and deep enough to place me on a little comfortable cotton bed, with a good suitable pillow for size and quality; my body dressed in my temple clothing, and laid nicely into my coffin, and the coffin to have the appearance that if I wanted to turn a little to the right or to the left, I should have plenty of room to do so. The lid can be made crowning.

"At my interment I wish all of my family present that can be conveniently, and the male members wear no crepe on their hats or on their coats; the females to buy no black bonnets, nor black dresses, nor black veils; but if they have them they are at liberty to wear them. The services may be permitted, as singing and a prayer offered, and if any of my friends wish to say a few words, and really desire, do so; and when they have closed their services, take my remains on a bier, and repair to the little burying ground, which I have reserved on my lot east of the White House on the hill, and in the southeast corner of this lot, have a vault built of mason work large enough to receive my coffin, and that may be placed in a box, if they choose, made of the same material as the coffin—redwood. Then place flat rocks over the vault sufficiently large to cover it, that the earth may be placed over it—nice, fine, dry earth—to cover it until the walls of the little cemetery are reared, which will leave me in the southeast corner. This vault ought to be roofed over with some kind of a temporary roof. There let my earthly house or tabernacle rest in peace, and have a good sleep, until the morning of the first resurrection; no crying or mourning with anyone as I have done my work faithfully and in good faith.

"I wish this to be read at the funeral, providing that if I should die anywhere in the mountains, I desire the above directions respecting my place of burial to be observed; but if I should live to go back with the Church to Jackson County, I wish to be buried there."

"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

"President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,

"Sunday, November 9th, 1873,

"Salt Lake City, Utah."

President Young did die "in the mountains," and his instructions were respected and carried out to the letter.

The concluding speakers were George Q. Cannon and President John Taylor:

"His value has not been properly estimated by the Latter-day Saints," said Elder Cannon. "There are none of us who will not feel this more and more, every day in the future. Today, now that we have lost him, we can examine our conduct, and the wish will arise that we had been more obedient, more willing to observe his counsels, and pay him that respect and reverence which his great qualities as a Prophet and leader deserved. . . . The time will come when the Latter-day Saints will appreciate him as one of the greatest Prophets that ever lived.

"I have been much with him. I look upon this association as the greatest privilege of my life, to have heard his counsels and to witness his life as I have. And in contemplating that life, it seems to me perfect. In my eyes, and to my feelings, he was as perfect a man as could be in mortality. . . ."

"We have before us," said President Taylor, the concluding speaker, "the body of the man who has led us for the last thirty-three years. Thirty-three years ago I was with, and witnessed the departure of our first President, Joseph Smith. He passed away in very different circumstances to those which surrounded President Brigham Young in his last hours. Immured in prison, surrounded by enemies who sought his life, and attacked by a ruthless mob, savage and relentless, they took away his life, and he died by the hand, and in the midst of vindictive and blood-thirsty foes, who, in the absence of legal offense, surcharged with deadly, venomous hate, clamored for his blood.

"President Young, after leading the Church, and buffeting the trials and persecutions to which the Church has ever been subjected, has, at length, in these valleys of the mountains, after having accomplished the object of his life, and done the work that has been represented here so truthfully by our brethren who have spoken, has laid down to sleep in the midst of a loving and affectionate family, and surrounded by faithful and tried friends. . . . Both of these Presidents had the faith and confidence of the Saints of the Most High, and the guidance and direction of the Lord. . . ."

After a closing hymn by the Choir, and the benediction by Orson Hyde, the body of President Young was borne to its last resting place, as he had directed. All that was mortal of him was given back to Mother Earth—his spirit had departed to the great Kingdom beyond.

IV

This concludes my account of the life of President Brigham Young. I am loath to lay down my pen and part company with him. It has been a pleasant task for me to follow this man through his life's pilgrimage; to partake of his joys, his sorrows, his trials and his triumphs.

I have seen him as a youth, growing up in western New York, under the care and tutelage of a wonderful mother, being taught all the fundamental principles that make for success in life—faith in God, love for fellow men, honesty, integrity, hard work and righteous living. I have seen him as a young man being taught the Gospel, as revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith, by humble elders who brought the message of glad tidings to his door. I have noted how he became inspired with the new doctrine, how it enthused him and how he dedicated all the labors of his life to the establishment of the Kingdom of God on earth. I have seen him at the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith, step forth boldly, and assume his place as Leader of the Saints, and I have marveled at his great foresight and ability in conducting the Saints across the plains to these valleys; an accomplishment which will stand as the measure of the man, throughout all the history of this nation. I have listened to the wonderful words of wisdom with which he taught the people in these valleys for over thirty years, and I have witnessed the manner in which he established them here, permanently, as an independent people, for all time.

As I have progressed with this story it has been easy for me to note the rungs of the ladder by which he climbed to greatness and fame. He seemed to possess all the attributes which were necessary to qualify him for his great labors. I shall attempt to enumerate a few of them as they have impressed me.

If I were asked to point out the principal thing, which, more than all others, made President Brigham Young the great man he was, I think I should reply, without hesitation, that it was his ability to believe—his great faith. First, faith in a living God, to whom he felt personally responsible and to whom he felt obligated to render up an accounting for all the deeds done in the flesh. Second, faith in every principle and doctrine revealed and taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith, and a firm and unyielding determination to shape his life according to those principles. Third, faith in himself, and in his ability to carry on the great work of establishing the Kingdom of God, the leadership of which had come to him after the death of the Prophet. Time and time again, in this history, I have been astounded by the strength of this man's faith; such faith I have never encountered in any other person. On his tombstone one might well have written "HE BELIEVED." Yes, he believed his religion, this great man, and he shaped his life to its principles, to his dying day.

Once possessing this great faith, this great belief, all things followed naturally in their course. He became a loyal man.

How curious it is in the early history of our Church that so many of the prominent men fell by the wayside—six of the Apostles, the three witnesses of the Book of Mormon and several of Joseph's counselors. Something happened that shook them from the tree of life, and they fell to the ground like dead leaves. But where in all the Church history is one single instance to show that Brigham Young ever faltered; ever proved disloyal or unfaithful to a trust? There is not one. Always to the day of his death he was faithful, loyal, true. The Prophet soon learned that here was a man he could depend upon. He therefore elevated him to a prominent place in the councils of the Saints, and made him a close friend and companion. When trouble became desperate around the Prophet, Brigham was there to defend him. He could say in later years:

"Scores and scores of nights I have lain on the floor, with a loaded revolver under my pillow to protect the life of the Prophet Joseph."

There was loyalty that brooked no questioning. Without that quality President Young could never have risen to greatness. Possessing it, he could, in a few years, assume a high place in the estimation of the Saints and his brethren about him.

Throughout this history I have been impressed, time and time again, with President Young's practical judgment, wisdom and good, sound common sense.

At all times and on all occasions he seemed to know what was the practical, the best thing to do. Had he not possessed this quality he might have failed in his great undertakings. With his faith, with his loyalty, he was also blessed with the quality of being a wise man—a man whose judgment in temporal matters was sound. When he gave advice, it was good. The Saints built up a confidence in his practical judgment which has not been equaled in the history of this Church. To go against President Young's advice was to court failure. He seemed to weigh all sides of a question, and to invariably decide wisely.

As to his practical judgment, I have noted with interest, that during the first trip across the plains, it was President Young who rode horseback ahead and selected the route. It was he who chose the camping grounds; he noted every man's wagon, and the load it carried; he noted the strength of the team, and its ability to pull the load. His precaution against Indian attacks was carried on with precision; he himself frequently standing guard under the stars, with rifle in hand. When he reached the valley, he could say that he had made the one thousand mile journey "without the loss of a man or a horse."

Of his selection of these valleys as a permanent place of residence for the Saints, with the historic declaration, "This is the right place," what can we say of that? Did not that show the superlative good judgment of the man? A grateful generation which has followed him is about to erect a one hundred thousand dollar monument on the site where those historic words were uttered. The Empire of the West was born that day—July 24th, 1847.

His founding of cities and towns in this intermountain region, and his selection of the men who were to preside over them, were carried out with a profound understanding of agricultural conditions and of human nature. In most instances he himself designated the ground where the settlement was to be built, he directed the location of the canals, the land that was to be irrigated, and he "blessed and set apart" the men who were placed to preside. During his last years he could look about him and behold upwards of two hundred villages, settlements, towns and cities, peopled with more than one hundred thousand inhabitants, prosperous, independent—out of debt mostly—all constructed during his thirty years of residence here, and under his immediate supervision and direction.

His building of Temples, the great Salt Lake Tabernacle, of telegraph lines and of railroads which extended north and south through the Territory, all betoken his genius as a master builder.

However, I do not wish to misinform my readers as to the central purpose of President Young's activities here in the west. It was not to build up an empire. The central purpose of all his activities, throughout all his life, from the time he joined the Church in 1832, until his death in 1877, was to build up, here on earth "the Church and Kingdom of God." He himself, in his sermons, on hundreds of occasions, enunciated this purpose. At the time of the death of the Prophet he declared it to the Saints in Nauvoo. "Brother Joseph has laid the foundation, and we can build upon it—we can build a Kingdom such as there never was in this world." All the activities of his life centered around this one purpose.

His knowledge of spiritual matters became as profound as his knowledge of practical affairs. On all points of doctrine, pertaining to the Kingdom, he became an authority. I have been amazed at the number and extent of his purely doctrinal sermons, and with what ease and clearness he could discourse on such subjects as death, the resurrection, immortality and eternal life.

It was as a leader of the Saints that President Young was supreme. He had been a faithful servant in the days of Joseph. When Joseph was taken away, he stepped forth in his place and took command. Immediately the Saints recognized that God had raised up a new leader in Israel, and they gathered loyally around him. Their confidence in him increased with the years—soon he was designated by them as "The Lion of the Lord." Confidence grew into love and affection. Frequently, as he went about among the settlements, thousands would stand on the roadside to greet him, and ofttimes, flowers were strewn in his path. I do not recall any leader of any people who was more honored and loved than was Brigham Young.

Yet, at no time did he lose "the common touch." He was always one with the people, and thousands familiarly called him "Brother Brigham." He did not set himself up to be great; he set himself up to be a servant of God, and he was one, in word and in deed.

President Young's life is a priceless heritage to the Latter-day Saints. All that we teach, and all that we stand for, is embodied in him. Generations yet unborn will turn to him for inspiration, counsel and advice. Even though dead, he lives in the hearts of all those who are engaged in the grand task of building on earth "the Kingdom of God."
