Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation ( 1998)

INTRODUCTION

The book of Revelation was written by John the beloved apostle. He identifies himself in five places in the book: four times by name (1:1, 4, 9; 22:8) and once as simply "a servant of God" (JST 1:1). John, called a "[son] of thunder" by Jesus Christ (Mark 3:17), was a son of Zebedee and brother of James. He was a fisherman during an early period of his life (Mark 1:19-20). He wrote the Gospel of John and at least three epistles (1, 2, and 3 Jn.), was called and ordained to serve as one of the twelve apostles, and served as a member of the First Presidency during his day. [^1] Eventually John was translated and became "as flaming fire and a ministering angel" to "minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation who dwell on the earth" (D&C 7:6; 3 Ne. 28:6-7). Our latter-day scriptures give additional insight into John and his sacred mission; we have, for example, the words of Nephi, who beheld a heavenly vision similar to John's (1 Ne. 14), as well as the words of Jesus (3 Ne. 28:6), Moroni (Ether 4:16), and Joseph Smith (D&C 7; 27:12).

It tells us much about John to know that he was blessed with the Second Comforter. Joseph Smith explained that this gift "is no more nor less than the Lord Jesus Christ Himself. . . . When any man obtains this last Comforter, he will have the personage of Jesus Christ to attend him, or appear unto him from time to time, and even He will manifest the Father unto him, and they will take up their abode with him, and the visions of the heavens will be opened unto him, and the Lord will teach him face to face, and he may have a perfect knowledge of the mysteries of the Kingdom of God; and this is the state and place the ancient Saints arrived at when they had such glorious visions—Isaiah, Ezekiel, John upon the Isle of Patmos, St. Paul in the three heavens, and all the Saints who held communion with the general assembly and Church of the Firstborn." [^2]

We are greatly blessed to be able to read, study, and ponder John's "glorious vision," received while on the Isle of Patmos, as set forth in the book of Revelation.

WHAT IS THE BOOK OF REVELATION?

The book of Revelation records John's "glorious vision" received "on the Lord's day" while he was banished to the Isle of Patmos for preaching the gospel and for bearing testimony of Jesus Christ. (Patmos is one of a group of islands in the Aegean Sea.) The opening lines of the book inform us that John received his vision from Jesus Christ, who sent it by a heavenly messenger (1:1).

The chief purpose of the book seems to be to prepare us for the last days and Christ's second coming, or "things which must shortly come to pass" (1:1), because "the time of the coming of the Lord draweth nigh" (JST 1:3). Major themes include the following:

Jesus Christ. The most important aspect of the book of Revelation is that it reveals Jesus Christ to us. The first chapter presents a view of the glorious resurrected Lord, and every subsequent chapter throughout the book sets forth doctrines pertaining to his atoning sacrifice, his love and mercy for us, his divine judgments upon the wicked, and his rewards for the righteous. The book of Revelation is a Christ-centered text, as indicated by its variety and number of names and titles of the Lord. There are forty-six names and titles of Deity in the book (including both the Father and the Son), used a total of 199 times (see Appendix 1).

The broad range of the names that John received in his revelation is instructive. The names or titles Christ (four times), First Begotten of the Dead, Jesus (five times), Jesus Christ (six times), Living God, Lord Jesus, Lord Jesus Christ, and especially Lamb (twenty-eight times) point to the atonement of Jesus. The name or titles Alpha and Omega (four times), Beginning and the Ending (three times), First and the Last (four times), and Him Which Is, and Which Was, and Which Is to Come (four times) indicate the eternal nature of the mission of Jesus, which spans the beginning of eternity through his atoning sacrifice to the judgment and end of the world. The names or titles Almighty, Almighty God, God (eighty-three times), God Almighty, God of Heaven, God of the Earth, King of Kings (two times), King of Saints, Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Lord (nine times), Lord God (three times), Lord God Almighty (five times), Lord God Omnipotent, Morning Star, and Prince of the Kings of the Earth refer to Jesus as the God of eternal power, authority, dominion, might, eminence, and glory.

The last days. Revelation is a guidebook for understanding the last days, or "things which must shortly come to pass" (1:1; 4:1; 22:6). Joseph Smith taught: "John saw that only which was lying in futurity and which was shortly to come to pass. See Rev. i:1-3, which is a key to the whole subject." [^3] Nephi prophesied that John would "write concerning the end of the world" (1 Ne. 14:22). One scholar noted, "By far the largest portion of the book describes the events that immediately precede the second coming of the Savior." [^4]

Several chapters of Revelation are devoted to the judgments of God. In addition, John presents many details pertaining to two prophets who will prophesy and minister in Jerusalem, the blessings designed for the righteous, and the judgments awaiting those who belong to Babylon.

The Second Coming. Almost all aspects of the book of Revelation seem to pertain in some way to the last days and the Lord's glorious second coming. John provides many glimpses into these future events, preparing us for the days ahead. Rev. 19, for instance, uses a multitude of images and symbols to describe the magnificent coming of Christ to the earth to "judge and make war" (v. 11). His names are Faithful and True (v. 11), The Word of God (v. 13), and King of Kings and Lord and of Lords (v. 16). This last name is written "on his thigh" (v. 16); he is dressed in red apparel that has been "dipped in blood" (v. 13); he is riding on a white horse; he wears many crowns upon his head; and "out of his mouth" proceeds the word of God (v. 15). Dressed in white linen and mounted on white horses, the armies of heaven follow him.

Good versus evil. Revelation is a book of contrasts between God and Satan, heaven and earth (and hell), Saints and sinners, righteousness and worldliness. The term heaven, for instance, is used fifty-six times by John; the word earth, often representing worldliness, is used seventy-nine times. These contrasts reflect Satan's attempt to counterfeit the things of God; they also apply to the continual spiritual battle between God and his Saints and Satan and his followers. Thus heaven stands opposite to earth, exalted Saints oppose damned souls, hymns of praise to God oppose the cries of anguish from the wicked, the number seven opposes the number 666, Michael and his angels oppose Satan and his angels, and Christ enthroned in the highest heaven opposes Satan dwelling in the abyss below (see Appendix 2).

God's judgments against the wicked. The book of Revelation lists God's judgments against sinners and the rebellious. In an orderly manner, and often one by one, God will send his judgments against the earth as a testimony and a warning to earth's inhabitants, with the desire that they repent of their manifold transgressions. The judgments, which accompany the opening of the sixth and seventh seals, the blowing of the seven trumpets, and the pouring out of the bowls, include earthquakes, signs in the heavens, the darkening of the sun, lightnings, thunderings, plagues, pestilences, and wars.

Safety for the righteous. Again and again the Lord indicates that the righteous will receive spiritual protection when God sends his judgments to the earth. Rev. 1:3 tells us very clearly that if we read and understand the things of the book, we will be "blessed." In the seven letters to the seven churches, we are told that those who overcome the world are given seven promises that pertain to the temple and to eternal life: The righteous will partake of the tree of life (2:7); they will not be hurt by the second death (2:11); they will receive hidden manna, a white stone, and a new name (2:17); they will have power over kingdoms (2:26); they will be clothed in white raiment (3:4-5); they will dwell in the heavenly temple (3:12); and they will sit upon the throne of Jesus (3:21).

The temple in heaven. John speaks of the "temple which is in heaven" (14:17) or the "temple of heaven" (16:17), which is John's name for the celestial kingdom. His description and detail of the temple in heaven is unsurpassed among all of revealed scripture. In fact, the temple in heaven serves as a backdrop for much of his vision: in Rev. 4:1, John looks and sees "a door . . . opened in heaven," and a voice instructs him to "come up hither" and enter the heavenly temple. He does so while "in the Spirit" (1:10) and sees many things that may have reminded him of the earthly temple of Jerusalem, such as the seven-branched lamp stand, trumpets, the altars of sacrifice and incense, sacred vestments, the altar's four horns, ark of the covenant, golden censer, incense and incense bowls, mercy seat (throne), priestly/angelic officiants, cherubim-like creatures, and the Lamb. We see other elements of the temple as we progress through the vision.

ISN'T THE BOOK OF REVELATION DIFFICULT TO UNDERSTAND?

Revelation contains scores of symbols and images that may make the book difficult to read and understand. John writes in veiled, symbolic language, using such images as beasts, stars, lamps of fire, a serpent, a dragon, a woman, a morning star, a white stone, ten horns, seven trumpets, a sea of glass, feet like fine brass, a thief, a rainbow, a lion, an eagle, a blood-red moon, a burning mountain, locusts, scorpions, a pit, lions' heads, a leopard, a lamb, waters, frogs, a millstone, a bride and her husband, precious stones, sand, gold, and crystal (for these and other symbols used in Revelation, see Appendix 3).

Although these symbols may at first intimidate us as we read, they are meant to be understood, especially with the spirit of prophecy and revelation and after much study. It may surprise us to learn that Joseph Smith taught that "the book of Revelation is one of the plainest books God ever caused to be written." [^5] An angel explained to Nephi that "the things which [John] shall write are just and true; and . . . at the time the book proceeded out of the mouth of the Jew, the things which were written were plain and pure, and most precious and easy to the understanding of all men" (1 Ne. 14:23; emphasis added).

On one occasion Elder Bruce R. McConkie asked, "Are we expected to understand the book of Revelation?" and then responded, "Certainly. Why else did the Lord reveal it? The common notion that it deals with beasts and plagues and mysterious symbolisms that cannot be understood is just not true. It is so far overstated that it gives an entirely erroneous feeling about this portion of revealed truth. . . . If we apply ourselves with full purpose of heart, we can catch the vision of what the ancient Revelator recorded." [^6]

Many resources are available to assist us in understanding the book of Revelation. Joseph Smith provided us with a number of insights found in his teachings, now published in a variety of formats: the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and D&C 77, 88, and 130. Many of the symbols used in the New Testament book of Revelation are also found in other books of scripture, including the Old Testament books of Isaiah, Ezekiel, Jeremiah, and Daniel. And many of the symbols and expressions of Revelation are explained in the book itself (see Appendix 3).

WHY SHOULD WE STUDY THE BOOK OF REVELATION?

Of all the books of the Bible, except perhaps Isaiah, Revelation may be the most valuable in helping us to understand the great events of the latter days. Revelation gives us a marvelous panoramic view of eternity—from the premortal existence to mortality to life in the celestial kingdom. Revelation is a Christ-centered text; it teaches us many important truths about his divine mission, mortal ministry, atoning sacrifice, resurrection, kingship, and glory. Revelation contains numerous truths pertaining to the last days that are not found elsewhere in the scriptures. Revelation, with its symbols, images, commandments, and detailed prophecies, helps us to prepare for the Second Coming.

THE FOCUS OF THIS BOOK

Perhaps more volumes have been written on the book of Revelation than on any other single book in the Bible. It has captured the imagination of people for centuries, and it holds particular interest for us today because much of it deals with events that may well transpire during our lifetimes. The book is so complex that entire volumes have been written on the few verses dealing directly with the seven seals, or on the even fewer verses that tell us of the number of the beast. Other volumes have treated issues of apocalyptic literature or John's first-century world view.

Of necessity, then, we have had to be selective in the kinds of issues we have discussed in this volume, and we made a conscious decision to omit certain areas of focus. We have not treated in these pages the various schools of thought on how to interpret Revelation. We have given only a limited amount of space to interpretations that seem to miss the mark, even though some such interpretations have become widespread. We have not discussed the nature of apocalyptic literature in general nor the place of Revelation in that genre in specific. As a rule, we have not dealt with the civil, religious, political, and cultural dynamics of the late first century. Each of these is important in its place, but space in this particular work seemed better used on John's specific message for our day.

It was our purpose from the outset to try to create a commentary that would be helpful to lay readers and scholars alike. But we are not seeking to create a comprehensive scholarly treatment of the book of Revelation. Our desire was to find meaning in John's vision for our day, to seek to understand what people in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries might need or want to know about what John saw and heard while "in the Spirit on the Lord's day" (1:10). At the same time, it was our desire to bear testimony of Jesus Christ, his power, his plan, and his love and to share the reassurances we found in Revelation that even though the last days will be days of tribulation, they will also be days of triumph: though we will have great occasion of sorrow in the Lord's judgments, we will have even greater occasion of rejoicing in his gracious deliverance.

Although we have spent considerable time, effort, and prayer in preparing this book, we would, frankly, be uncomfortable being viewed as the last word on any part of the commentary. We hope that readers will combine any insights they gain from these pages with others they acquire elsewhere, including from the Spirit and their own scriptural study, to come to an even more complete and deeper understanding of these important words of John the Seer.

TOOLS FOR UNDERSTANDING THE BOOK OF REVELATION

This volume contains tools that will help in understanding John's marvelous vision. First and most important, it uses the scriptures revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith—the Joseph Smith Translation, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price—and the teachings and sermons in which Joseph Smith interpreted different parts of Revelation.

The chapters of Revelation are divided here into individual units of thought, thereby helping us understand each part more fully. A phrase-by-phrase (sometimes word-by-word) commentary covers all twenty-two chapters of the book of Revelation. The resource most frequently used in creating this commentary was the words of the prophets, both ancient and modern. Helpful background to the words, images, and symbols used by John is also provided.

The text of the book of Revelation presented in Understanding the Book of Revelation includes alternate readings from the Joseph Smith Translation. It also includes clarifications of archaic words. Brackets in the text indicate a word or phrase that has been added or altered from the King James Version of the Bible. Ellipses indicate a word or words that are not present in the Joseph Smith Translation. Brackets and ellipses are accompanied by explanatory footnotes. Scripture citations with only chapter and verse numbers are from Revelation unless otherwise indicated. Citations such as 2:3a and 2:3b refer, respectively, to the first and second half of the verse cited. Phrases in quotation marks but without a source citation are from the passage of Revelation under discussion. Full references for the sources in the footnotes are found in the Bibliography.

Individuals who study the book of Revelation will better understand God's designs for the future of the world and its inhabitants and prepare themselves better for the days ahead. In doing so, such individuals will find peace and calmness in their lives, because the Lord has promised us, "If ye are prepared ye shall not fear" (D&C 38:30).

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Many authors have taught that Peter, James, and John composed the First Presidency of their day (see, for example, Taylor, Gospel Kingdom, 138). Joseph Fielding Smith, in Doctrines of Salvation, 3:152, wrote that "Peter, James, and John, acted as the First Presidency of the Church in their day."
[^2] 2 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 150-51; emphasis added.
[^3] 3 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^4] 4 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 52.
[^5] 5 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^6] 6 McConkie, "Understanding the Book of Revelation," 87.
