Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation ( 1998)

Rev. 2

TO THE CHURCH IN EPHESUS: THE RIGHTEOUS PARTAKE OF THE TREE OF LIFE (2:1-7)

The letters to the seven churches have a threefold application. First, the letters were likely sent to the seven churches of Asia, which may have been under the jurisdiction of the apostle John himself; hence, each letter contains information that fits a local and historical context.

Second, the number seven symbolically indicates completion or wholeness and thus has meaning for the entire church of Christ. Thus the contents of all seven letters apply to all Saints of all ages subsequent to the time of John's book of Revelation. Certainly the problems and challenges set forth in the letters are experienced by God's people in all ages, and the promises and rewards in the letters are directed to all Church members.

Third, the seven letters are personalized and directed to each member of the Church, regardless of geographical locale or dispensation. Note the many second-person personal pronouns—"thou," "thee," and "thy"—in the seven letters and the individual expressions "he that hath an ear" or "to him that overcometh." (A chart outlining the letters to the seven churches and their contents is contained in Appendix 4.)

The Lord, through John, is the author of the letter to the servant of the Church of Ephesus. Presumably the servant, a presiding authority, received the letter and read it to members of his congregation. The Lord commends the community of Saints for their faithful labor, patience during persecution and tribulation, and for hating the evil works of the Nicolaitans. He is also aware that the Saints cannot tolerate evil and that they successfully tested and then revealed false apostles who were among them. But the Church members need to repent for leaving their "first love."

Jesus Christ promises those who are spiritually alert ("he that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith") and who overcome the world that they will be permitted to partake of the fruit of the tree of life and become exalted souls.

Rev. 2:1-7

1 Unto the [servant] [^1] of the church of Ephesus write; These things saith he that holdeth the seven stars in his right hand, who walketh in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks;

2 I know thy works, and thy labour, and thy patience, and how thou canst not bear them which are evil: and thou hast tried them which say they are apostles, and are not, and hast found them liars:

3 And hast borne, and hast patience, and for my name's sake hast laboured, and hast not fainted.

4 Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou hast left thy first love.

5 Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.

6 But this thou hast, that thou hatest the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.

7 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches; To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

2:1 [servant] of the church of Ephesus. The servant is the ecclesiastical leader of the Saints in Ephesus, which was a major city of Asia Minor, now called Turkey. The city of approximately 250,000 residents had a theater, library, paved streets (the main road was lined with impressive columns), and baths. Ephesus was the center for the imperial cult, and one of its three temples, the temple of Diana (Artemis to the Greeks), was one of the seven wonders of the world. That temple, which contained an image of the goddess Diana, "whom all Asia and the world worshippeth" (Acts 19:27), was an impressive architectural structure, with intricate ornamentation, the finest Greek art, and one hundred marble columns (fifty-five feet high). The temple stood on a huge platform that covered approximately one hundred thousand square feet, which is the size of two American football fields.

Paul visited Ephesus during his third missionary journey and remained there for two years, preaching the gospel to both Jews and Greeks (Acts 19:8, 10). He later returned to Ephesus and preached repentance, prophesied, and stated, "I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears" (Acts 20:31). One of Paul's epistles (Ephesians) is addressed to the Saints of Ephesus.

he that holdeth the seven stars in his right hand. This person is Jesus, as we see in John's description of the resurrected Christ: "And he had in his right hand seven stars" (1:16).

who walketh in the midst of the . . . candlesticks. The language of this passage recalls 1:13: "And in the midst of the seven candlesticks one like unto the Son of man."

2:2 I know thy works. This phrase, given to all seven churches (2:9, 13, 19; 3:1, 8, 15), speaks concerning the Lord's omniscience. The scriptures bear witness that God "knoweth all things, and there is not anything save he knows it" (2 Ne. 9:20). D&C 38:1-2 similarly states: "Thus saith the Lord your God, even Jesus Christ, the Great I AM, Alpha and Omega . . . The same which knoweth all things, for all things are present before mine eyes."

The Lord has full knowledge of the deeds—good and evil—of all who belong to the seven churches. He knows their labor and patience and how they tried the false apostles. He is fully aware of their tribulation and poverty (2:9); he comprehends "where Satan's seat is" and knows Antipas who was martyred for the faith (2:13); he understands the charity, service, and faith of the Saints (2:19); and he recognizes that some of the Saints are lukewarm rather than cold or hot (3:15).

thou canst not bear them which are evil. The Lord commends the Saints for avoiding the wicked.

thou hast tried them which say they are apostles, and are not. The false apostles mentioned here may be the apostates from within ("of your own selves") of which Paul had warned the elders of Ephesus: "After my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them" (Acts 20:29-30). Paul encountered false apostles on other occasions (2 Cor. 11:13-14, 22-28).

The Lord established means for his ancient church to judge and prove those who claimed to be apostles. In our dispensation, he revealed: "For it shall come to pass that the inhabitants of Zion shall judge all things pertaining to Zion. And liars and hypocrites shall be proved by them, and they who are not apostles and prophets shall be known" (D&C 64:38-39).

2:3 hast borne, and hast patience. The Ephesian Saints bore many tribulations and much persecution and yet remained patient, looking forward to victory over evil and eternal life.

for my name's sake hast laboured, and hast not fainted. The Saints never tire of serving and ministering to their sisters and brothers in Christ's name. Nephi was a great example of this characteristic, for he "with unwearyingness declared the word" of God to his people (Hel. 10:4).

2:4-5 I have somewhat against thee . . . hast left thy first love. The Lord condemns the Church members here because they have abandoned their original love for him and for their sisters and brothers in the gospel. Biblical scholar Krodel writes, "Without love toward God, toward brothers and sisters, a church ceases to be a church in spite of its commendable orthodoxy and brave endurance of hardships." [^2] Because those in the Church have left their first love, they are "fallen" and commanded to "repent, and do the first works" by regaining their lost love of Christ.

2:5 I will come unto thee quickly. This expression, repeated several times in Revelation (2:16; 3:11; 22:7, 12, 20) and in the Doctrine and Covenants (D&C 33:18; 34:12; 35:27; 39:24; 49:28; 68:35; 88:126), warns us to be prepared always for the coming of the Lord, which will occur speedily.

The expression often accompanies statements of comfort and information, such as these: "I come quickly: blessed is he that keepeth the sayings of . . . this book" (22:7); "I come quickly; and my reward is with me" (22:12); "the kingdom is yours until I come. Behold, I come quickly" (D&C 35:27) and "I will be your ruler when I come; and behold, I come quickly" (D&C 41:4). Also it frequently is found with admonitions such as these: "Be patient in tribulation until I come; and, behold, I come quickly" (D&C 54:10) "Pray always, that ye may not faint, until I come. Behold, and lo, I will come quickly" (D&C 88:126) and "Be faithful until I come, for I come quickly" (D&C 112:34).

I . . . will remove thy candlestick. This candlestick represents the church at Ephesus (1:20). If the Saints do not repent for leaving their first love (1:4), the Lord will remove them from their place. Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught, "Any congregation of saints which is not true and faithful shall lose its place in the true Church." [^3]

2:6 hatest the deeds of the Nicolaitans. God commends the Church for hating the evil deeds of the Nicolaitans, because he hates their deeds, as well. The Nicolaitans "appear to have been characterized by sensuality, seducing Christians to participate in the idolatrous feasts of pagans, and to unchastity. . . . The Nicolaitans taught that, in order to master sensuality, one must know the whole range of it by experience; and that he should therefore abandon himself without reserve to the lusts of the body, since they concerned only the body and did not touch the spirit." [^4]

Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained that the Nicolaitans were "members of the Church who were trying to maintain their church standing while continuing to live after the manner of the world. They must have had some specific doctrinal teachings which they used to justify their course. . . . Whatever their particular deeds and doctrines were, the designation [Nicolaitans] has come to be used to identify those who want their names on the records of the Church, but do not want to devote themselves to the gospel cause with full purpose of heart. Thus, on July 8, 1838, the Lord said: `Let my servant Newel K. Whitney be ashamed of the Nicolaitane band and of all their secret abominations' (D&C 117:11)." [^5]

2:7 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith. Those who have the spiritual ears to understand God's messages declared by the Holy Spirit will do so. The subject is singular, for the injunction is directed to each individual with spiritual ears. This injunction is repeated seven times in the letters to the seven churches (2:11, 17, 29; 3:6, 13, 22; 13:9).

To him that overcometh. This phrase also is directed to each individual who overcomes the world. It is found seven times in the letters to the seven churches (2:11, 17, 29; 3:6, 13, 22; 13:9).

Individuals overcome Satan and the wicked world by being faithful (D&C 61:9; 63:20), believing that "Jesus is the Son of God" (1 Jn. 5:5), obeying the commandments (D&C 50:35), and being "born of God" (1 Jn. 5:4). Those who overcome will "eat of the tree of life" (2:7), "not be hurt of the second death" (2:11), "eat of the hidden manna" and receive "a white stone and . . . a new name" (2:17), receive "power over [many kingdoms]" (2:26), "be clothed in white raiment" (3:5), become "a pillar" in the celestial temple, and receive God's name (3:12). In short, individuals who overcome evil will inherit eternal life.

eat of the tree of life. Because of their transgression, Adam and Eve became mortal and were forbidden access to the tree of life (Gen. 3:22). Through the atonement of Jesus Christ, all who overcome death receive the promise and blessing to "eat of the tree of life," meaning the consequences of the fall of Adam have been overturned. Humanity will receive immortality, and the righteous will gain eternal life and "enter in through the gates" of the celestial kingdom (22:14).

TO THE CHURCH IN SMYRNA: THE RIGHTEOUS ARE NOT HURT OF THE SECOND DEATH (2:8-11)

The Lord, described as "the first and the last, which was dead, and is alive," is the author of the letter to the servant of the Church in Smyrna. The letter features many contrasting elements: "the first" and "the last," "dead" and "alive," "poverty" and "rich," they which "say they are Jews" but "are not," and "death" and "crown of life." These contrasts emphasize that Church members will suffer and receive tribulations during mortality but will ultimately, if they are faithful, be crowned with eternal life.

This is the shortest of the seven letters and, like the letter to the Saints in Philadelphia, it contains no condemnation of the Saints.

Rev. 2:8-11

8 And unto the [servant] [^6] of the church in Smyrna write; These things saith the first and the last, which was dead, and is alive;

9 I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, (but thou art rich) and I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not, but are the synagogue of Satan.

10 Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer: behold, the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried; and ye shall have tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life.

11 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches; He that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second death.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

2:8 [servant] of the church in Smyrna. The servant is the ecclesiastical leader of the Saints in Smyrna, which was a prosperous commercial center thirty-five miles north of Ephesus. It had at least two temples, one dedicated to the goddess Roma and the other built in honor of the Emperor Tiberius. Smyrna is now called Izmir and is a large city in present-day Turkey.

the first and the last. See commentary on 1:4, 8.

which was dead, and is alive. See commentary on 1:4, 18.

2:9 I know thy works. See commentary on 2:2.

I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not. The word translated "blasphemy" may also be translated as "slanderous accusations" (JB). One commentator explains: "The Jews of Smyrna may have called themselves the synagogue of God. John denounced them with bitter irony as a synagogue of Satan, because Satan, the devil, in the form of Roman authorities, uses Jewish slander to throw some Christians of Smyrna into prison." [^7] (See also Rom. 9:6; 2 Ne. 30:1-2.)

2:10 Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer. In verses 9 and 10, the terms "tribulation," "poverty," "suffer," "tried," "tribulation," and "death" represent our mortal suffering and experience. The letter to the church in Smyrna contrasts these terms with the promise of life ("crown of life") and power over the second death in verses 10 and 11.

devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried. Public authorities, while hearkening to the voice of the devil, will cast some of the Saints of Smyrna into prison.

ye shall have tribulation ten days. The period "ten days" denotes a time of testing or of probation (Dan. 1:12, 14), such as mortality. This number contrasts with such scriptural terms as "eternity," "everlasting," and "forever." The Saints will be tested for a short period (ten days) compared to the length of eternity.

thou faithful unto death. This expression is synonymous with the wellknown phrase "endure to the end" (1 Ne. 13:37; D&C 14:7).

I will give thee a crown of life. The crown of life is the crown of "honor, immortality, and eternal life" (D&C 124:55), which is reserved for each one who "endureth temptation" and loves the Lord (James 1:12), who has faith and["work[s] righteousness" (D&C 20:14), and who is "faithful unto the end" (D&C 81:6; see also D&C 66:12).

2:11 He that hath an ear. See commentary on 2:7.

He that overcometh. See commentary on 2:7.

not be hurt of the second death. John tells us who will receive the second death, and then he defines it: "The fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: which is the second death" (21:8; see also Jacob 3:11; D&C 63:17). The Book of Mormon calls the second death a "spiritual death," meaning to "die as to things pertaining unto righteousness" (Alma 12:16; Hel. 14:18). Spiritual death is also defined as separation from God (D&C 29:41). Here, the Lord promises us that if we overcome the world and evil, we will not be hurt by the second death.

TO THE CHURCH IN PERGAMOS: THE RIGHTEOUS RECEIVE HIDDEN MANNA, A WHITE STONE, AND A NEW NAME (2:12-17)

Church members in Pergamos were persecuted by those who were not Christians, especially members of the pagan community, who accused the Christians of "hatred against the human race," "atheism," and advocating a "mischievous superstition." It was the custom of the persecutors to cry out to the Christians, "Away with the atheists." [^8] Further, the Saints were evidently persecuted for refusing to worship pagan idols and were ostracized from social and political functions.

Jesus, the author of this letter, commends the Saints for holding fast to his name and refusing to deny the faith, but he criticizes a few for holding to the doctrines of Balaam and the Nicolaitans, which doctrines teach idolatry and sexual sin. He commands such to repent.

To those who overcome the world, Jesus promises "hidden manna," a "white stone," and a "new name."

Rev. 2:12-17

12 And to the [servant] [^9] of the church in Pergamos write; These things saith he which hath the sharp sword with two edges;

13 I know thy works, and where thou dwellest, even where Satan's seat is: and thou holdest fast my name, and hast not denied my faith, even in those days wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain among you, where Satan dwelleth.

14 But I have a few things against thee, because thou hast there them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a stumblingblock before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto idols, and to commit fornication.

15 So hast thou also them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate.

16 Repent; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against them with the sword of my mouth.

17 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches; To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

2:12 [servant] of the church in Pergamos. The servant is the ecclesiastical leader of the Saints in Pergamos (or Pergamum), which was in Asia Minor, or present-day Turkey. This city housed a world-famous library and several temples built in honor of Augustus, Rome, and other deities. One temple was dedicated to Asclepius, the god of healing, and sick people were presented at this temple with the hope of being healed. Another temple, built in honor of Zeus, stood on a hill overlooking the city, and its altar looked like a huge throne sitting upon a hill. Animal sacrifices were offered there day and night as a reminder to onlookers that the temple was extremely significant to the community.

he which hath the sharp sword with two edges. It is Christ who has the sharp sword (see commentary on 1:16).

2:13 I know thy works. See commentary on 2:2.

I know . . . where thou dwellest. Jesus is omniscient (see commentary on 2:2). It must have given the Saints at Pergamos peace of mind and courage in the midst of the persecution to know that God had full knowledge of their lives, their works, and even their place of residence.

where Satan's seat is . . . where Satan dwelleth. This passage may refer specifically to the enormous altar dedicated to the god Zeus, which had the appearance of a throne and stood on a hill overlooking Pergamos. It may also refer generally to the pagan cults of Athena, Asclepius, Dionysus, and Zeus, in which the power of Satan was manifest through false religious systems that promoted the worship of the emperor as a god. Satan's throne stands in stark contrast to the exalted and eternal thrones of Christ and God (4:2-4; D&C 76:107-8).

thou holdest fast my name. Apparently Christians who were sentenced to prison or death could save themselves by cursing Christ and worshipping at the emperor's altar. [^10] The Lord commends the Saints of Pergamos for confessing his name "before men" (Matt. 10:32-33).

Antipas was my faithful martyr. We know little about Antipas, other than that he was a martyr from Pergamos who died for the sake of Jesus and his gospel. See commentary on 6:9.

2:14 I have a few things against thee. Although Jesus commends the Saints of Pergamos for["hold[ing] fast" to his name (2:13), he calls them to repentance for believing the doctrines of Balaam and the Nicolaitans.

doctrine of Balaam. The doctrine of Balaam was to eat things sacrificed unto idols, to commit fornication (Num. 25:1-3), and to engage in priestcrafts. Balaam, the son of Beor, convinced many from Israel to commit fornication with Moabite women and to worship false gods (Num. 31:16) he was also involved in divining for hire with Balak, the king of Moab (Num. 22-24; Deut. 23:4; 2 Pet. 2:15-16; Jude 1:11). After meeting in council in Jerusalem, the early apostles had specifically enjoined the saints to "abstain from meats offered to idols" (Acts 15:6, 29).

Balac. This king of Moab (whose name is also spelled Balak) used money to encourage Balaam to curse the children of Israel (Num. 22-24; Josh. 24:9; Judg. 11:25).

eat things sacrificed unto idols. For religious and social reasons the Saints at Pergamos were encouraged by their fellow citizens to eat the meat sacrificed to the idols of the temples of Zeus, Augustus, and Rome. To do so, however, was to practice Balaam's doctrine (Num. 31:16).

commit fornication. This phrase refers to physical fornication, or sexual sin (9:21), as well as to spiritual fornication, or idolatry (14:8; 17:2, 4; 18:3, 9; 19:2).

2:15 doctrine of the Nicolaitans. See commentary on 2:6.

2:16 I will come unto thee quickly. See commentary on 2:5.

will fight against them with the sword of my mouth. The sword of God's mouth is the word of God (see commentary on 1:16). One way that God fights against the wicked "with the sword of [his] mouth" is through his judgments, which are decreed and sent by his word (see Lev. 26:25; Judg. 7:20; Isa. 34:5; Ezek. 14:21; D&C 101:10).

2:17 He that hath an ear. See commentary on 2:7.

To him that overcometh. See commentary on 2:7.

will I give to eat of the hidden manna. Manna is the food that Israel received from heaven for forty years while they wandered in the wilderness (Ex. 16:15, 35). The hidden manna refers to Jesus, who is the "true bread from heaven" (John 6:32). Jesus said: "I am [the] bread of life. Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead. This is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not die. I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever" (John 6:48-51). Jesus is "hidden," or unseen and unknown by the wicked, but is revealed to him or her who overcomes.

The phrase "hidden manna" may also refer to eternal truths from and about Christ that are revealed only in the temple, "mysteries" given only to those who seek diligently for them (see Matt. 13:11-12; 1 Tim. 3:16; 1 Ne. 2:16; 10:19; Alma 12:9; D&C 76:5-7).

give him a white stone. The white stone is a urim and thummim for each individual who enters the celestial kingdom; written upon this white stone will be a new name. D&C 130:8-11 explains: "The place where God resides is a great Urim and Thummim. This earth, in its sanctified and immortal state, will be made like unto crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants who dwell thereon, whereby all things pertaining to an inferior kingdom, or all kingdoms of a lower order, will be manifest to those who dwell on it; and this earth will be Christ's. Then the white stone mentioned in Rev. 2:17, will become a Urim and Thummim to each individual who receives one, whereby things pertaining to a higher order of kingdoms, will be made known; and a white stone is given to each of those who come into the celestial kingdom, whereon is a new name written, which no man knoweth save he that receiveth it. The new name is the key word."

new name. In a different context, Abraham (Gen. 17:5), Sarah (Gen. 17:15), and Jacob (Gen. 32:28) were given new names by the Lord. Isaiah prophesied that Israel would "be called by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name" (Isa. 62:2; 65:15). God revealed to John that "him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God . . .: and I will write upon him the name of my God . . .: and I will write upon him my new name" (3:12).

The new name is written on the white stone that is "given to each of those who come into the celestial kingdom. . . . The new name is the key word." The new name, similar to the white robe of Rev. 3:5, 6:11, and 7:9, symbolizes a new existence, or a new life.

TO THE CHURCH IN THYATIRA: THE RIGHTEOUS WILL HAVE POWER OVER KINGDOMS (2:18-29)

Jesus Christ addresses the Church members in Thyatira, declaring that he knows their works (the word works is repeated three times), charity, service, faith, and patience. Notwithstanding their positive behavior, Jesus condemns some of the members for permitting the evil Jezebel to teach fornication and idolatry among them. Jezebel and her followers, if they fail to repent, will die a spiritual death and will be cast into hell. Church members who refuse to follow Jezebel's teachings are commanded to endure to the end. If such overcome the world, they are promised they will be given "power over many kingdoms," which they will rule with justice and equity. They are also promised the "morning star."

Rev. 2:18-29

18 And unto the [servant] [^11] of the church in Thyatira write; These things saith the Son of God, who hath his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet are like fine brass;

19 I know thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy works; and the last to be more than the first.

20 Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou sufferest that woman Jezebel, which calleth herself a prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto idols.

21 And I gave her space to repent of her[fornication[s]; [^12] and she repented not.

22 Behold, I will cast her into [hell], [^13] and them that commit adultery with her into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds.

23 And I will kill her children with death; and all the churches shall know that I am he which searcheth the reins and hearts: and I will give unto every one of you according to your works.

24 But unto you I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira, as many as have not this doctrine, and which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak; I will put upon you none other burden.

25 But that which ye have already hold fast till I come.

26 And [to him who] [^14] overcometh, and keepeth my [commandments] [^15] unto the end, . . . [^16] will I give power over [many kingdoms]; [^17]

27 And he shall rule them with [the word of God]; [^18] [and they shall be in his hands] [^19] as the vessels [of clay in the hands] [^20] of a potter; [and he shall govern them by faith, with equity and justice], [^21] even as I received of my Father.

28 And I will give him the morning star.

29 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

2:18 [servant] of the church in Thyatira. The servant is the ecclesiastical leader of the Saints in Thyatira, the fourth of seven churches identified in Rev. 2 and 3. Thyatira, a city located in Asia Minor, or modern-day Turkey, was a commercial town of traders and craftsmen who included tanners, potters, bakers, leatherworkers, metal workers, dyers, and wool workers. A temple named after Tyrimnos, or Apollo, the son of Zeus, was an important religious symbol for this community.

These things saith the Son of God. Jesus Christ is the author of the revelation.

who hath . . . eyes like unto a flame/feet like . . . brass. The language recalls John's description of the resurrected Jesus recorded in Rev. 1:14-15. There the Lord is described as having "eyes . . . as a flame of fire, and his feet like unto fine brass." This passage anticipates another description of Christ's appearance in 19:12, which states that "his eyes were as a flame of fire." D&C 110:3 uses the same expression: "His eyes were as a flame of fire."

2:19 I know thy works. See commentary on 2:2.

I know thy . . . charity/service/faith/patience. Jesus commends the members of the Church in Thytira for their good works.

the last to be more than the first. The Jerusalem Bible reads, "I know how you are still making progress." The Saints' spiritual lives are improving and they are becoming better people, unlike the Saints of Ephesus, who have fallen (2:5).

2:20 I have a few things against thee. Even though the Lord commends the Saints for their fine works (2:19), he condemns them for permitting a woman called Jezebel to teach false doctrines.

Jezebel, which calleth herself a prophetess. This woman was not Jezebel, the wife of king Ahab, who helped lead Israel to idolatry (2 Kgs. 9:22; 1 Kgs. 16:31-33), although there are points in common between these two individuals. The Jezebel of the church at Thyatira was a false prophetess, who taught false doctrines, seduced some of the Church members to commit fornication, and encouraged them to eat food that was sacrificed to idols. Inasmuch as Jezebel refused to repent of her wickedness, God "cast her into hell" (JST 2:22).

to commit fornication. This passage may refer both to the sexual sin and to the spiritual sin of idolatry, which is spiritual fornication. Individuals and organizations in all ages act as Jezebel, leading those who will follow "into forbidden paths" where they are "lost" (1 Ne. 8:28; see also Rev. 2:14).

to eat things sacrificed unto idols. Thyatira was a city of craftsmen and merchants who belonged to guilds. These guilds periodically held religious banquets at which animals were sacrificed to their gods and then eaten. Jezebel may have taught that it was acceptable for Church members to participate in such occasions connected to idol worship and to partake of things sacrificed to idols. See commentary on 2:14.

2:21 I gave her space to repent of her[fornication[s]. The Lord's true prophets, possibly the apostle Paul or John himself, preached the true gospel and repentance to Jezebel. She had adequate warning to repent of her evil deeds.

2:22 I will cast her into [hell]. Nephi uses similar language, declaring that "all those who preach false doctrines, and all those who commit whoredoms . . . shall be thrust down to hell" (2 Ne. 28:15) he calls hell "that awful hell, which . . . was prepared for the wicked" (1 Ne. 15:29).

them that commit adultery with her. All souls who commit adultery (or idolatry, which is spiritual adultery) will be cast down to hell, unless "they repent of their deeds."

2:23 I will kill her children. Jezebel and Ahab's children suffered horrible deaths (2 Kgs. 10:1, 7), and in a similar manner the children of Jezebel of Thyatira will be destroyed. Another interpretation is that those who follow Jezebel in her sins, the children of her iniquities, will suffer spiritual death.

I am he which searcheth the reins and hearts. This expression recalls a passage in Ps. 7:9: "for the righteous God trieth the hearts and reins." God knows every thought and intent of all humans and is therefore able to judge accordingly and to "give unto every one of you according to your works." The New International Version renders the very literal expression "reins and hearts" as the more understandable "hearts and minds."

2:24 as many as have not this doctrine. Church members of Thyatira who do not accept Jezebel's false doctrines and seductions will not have the burdens of sin and guilt placed upon them. Fornication and idolatry, two extremely grievous sins, may be described as the "depths of Satan."

2:25 hold fast till I come. "Hold fast" means to endure to the end and recalls for us the iron rod. Lehi saw individuals "pressing forward; and they came and caught hold of the end of the rod of iron; and they did press their way forward, continually holding fast to the rod of iron, until they came forth and fell down and partook of the fruit of the tree" (1 Ne. 8:30). Church members who hold fast, or endure to the end, will eventually reach the tree of life and partake of its fruit (2 Ne. 31:20; Rev. 22:2, 14). The iron rod is the word of God, and we are promised that "whoso would hearken unto the word of God, and would hold fast unto it, they would never perish" (1 Ne. 15:24; 1 Thes. 5:21).

2:26-27 [to him who] overcometh. See commentary on 2:7.

keepeth my [commandments] unto the end. This language corresponds with the common Book of Mormon expression "to endure to the end" (see, for example, 1 Ne. 13:37; 22:31; 2 Ne. 9:24).

will I give power over [many kingdoms]. Those who overcome receive a promise similar to that given to Jesus, as recorded in Ps. 2:6-9, a section that deals with the temple, kingship, and the doctrine of divine sonship. The expression "will I give power over many kingdoms" in Revelation recalls "I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession" (Ps. 2:8) the phrase "he shall rule them with the word of God" parallels "Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron" (Ps. 2:9) and the expression "they shall be in his hands as the vessels of clay in the hands" corresponds with "thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel" (Ps. 2:9). Other parallels may also be noted. The implication is that we will receive as Jesus receives, being joint-heirs with him of the gifts and power and dominion of the Father (Rom. 8:17).

"Many kingdoms" refers to eternal kingdoms, not to temporal kingdoms. The Saints are invited to "come up unto the crown prepared for you, and be made rulers over many kingdoms" (D&C 78:15).

2:27 he shall rule them with [the word of God]. Exalted Saints will rule "many kingdoms" with God's word. Perhaps this expression means that the Saints will rule by the truth and correct principles that come from God (see commentary on 12:3).

[they shall be in his hands] as the vessels [of clay in the hands]. He who rules over many kingdoms is likened to a potter; the kingdoms are similar to clay vessels. The potter has control and power over his creation made of clay.

[he shall govern them by faith, with equity and justice]. The one who overcomes will rule and govern with faith (which is God's power) and with righteousness, having perfect "equity and justice."

even as I received of my Father. He who overcomes will receive eternal rewards (such as having "power over many kingdoms," 2:26), just as Christ received rewards from his Father. Such will be "heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ" (Rom. 8:17).

2:28 I will give him the morning star. This expression may have at least two meanings. First, Jesus Christ is "the bright and morning star" (22:16). The promise of "the morning star" may be the promise of the Second Comforter, which is that "when any man obtains this [Second] Comforter, he will have the personage of Jesus Christ to attend him, or appear unto him from time to time, and even He will manifest the Father unto him, and they will take up their abode with him, and the visions of the heavens will be opened unto him, and the Lord will teach him face to face." [^22] Second, God gives eternal life to those who overcome; they will become like Christ, who is the "bright and morning star."

2:29 He that hath an ear. See commentary on 2:7.

1 JST 2:1 replaces angel with servant.

2 Krodel, Revelation, 108.

3 McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:446.

4 Vincent, Word Studies in the New Testament, 439.

5 McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:446.

6 JST 2:8 replaces angel with servant.

7 Krodel, Revelation, 112.

8 Krodel, Revelation, 114.

9 JST 2:12 replaces angel with servant.

10 Krodel, Revelation, 116.

11 JST 2:18 replaces angel with servant.

12 JST 2:21 makes the word fornication plural.

13 JST 2:22 replaces bed with hell.

14 JST 2:26 changes the phrase he that to to him who.

15 JST 2:26 replaces works with commandments.

16 JST 2:26 omits to him.

17 JST 2:26 replaces the phrase the nations with many kingdoms.

18 JST 2:27 omits a rod of iron and adds the word of God.

19 JST 2:27 adds the phrase and they shall be in his hands.

20 JST 2:27 adds the phrase of clay in the hands.

21 JST 2:27 omits the phrase shall they be broken to shivers and adds the phrase and he shall govern them by faith, with equity and justice.

22 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 151.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Many authors have taught that Peter, James, and John composed the First Presidency of their day (see, for example, Taylor, Gospel Kingdom, 138). Joseph Fielding Smith, in Doctrines of Salvation, 3:152, wrote that "Peter, James, and John, acted as the First Presidency of the Church in their day."
[^2] 2 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 150-51; emphasis added.
[^3] 3 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^4] 4 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 52.
[^5] 5 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^6] 6 McConkie, "Understanding the Book of Revelation," 87.
[^7] 7 JST 1:3 replaces the relative pronoun that with the relative pronoun who. The JST also adds the word understand, which clarifies the meaning of the text.
[^8] 8 JST 1:3 replaces the expression the time is at hand with the phrase the time of the coming of the Lord draweth nigh to clarify the meaning of the text.
[^9] 9 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^10] 10 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^11] 11 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 51-52.
[^12] 12 JST 1:4 adds, omits, and alters many words of this verse.
[^13] 13 JST 1:5 adds a long note of clarification and identifies John as the faithful witness of Jesus Christ.
[^14] 14 JST 1:6 adds these important words.
[^15] 15 JST 1:6 omits the conjunction and.
[^16] 16 JST 1:7 adds the preposition For and clarifies that Jesus will come "in the clouds with ten thousands of his saints in the kingdom, clothed with the glory of his Father."
[^17] 17 JST 1:8 adds this phrase.
[^18] 18 JST 1:8 omits the word saith.
[^19] 19 JST 1:8 changes the relative pronoun which to who.
[^20] 20 On the other churches of the period, see Charles, Critical and Exegetical Commentary, 1:8.
[^21] 21 Ford, Revelation, 376.
[^22] 22 For a discussion of the temple in heaven, see Parry and Parry, "Temple in Heaven," in Temples of the Ancient World, ed. Parry, 515-32. See also the commentary on 21:22.
