Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation ( 1998)

REVELATION

TO THE CHURCH IN SARDIS: THE RIGHTEOUS WILL BE CLOTHED IN WHITE RAIMENT (3:1-6)

In Rev. 3:2-3, Jesus Christ directs five imperatives to the Saints in Sardis: "be watchful," "strengthen," "remember," "hold fast," and "repent." These five imperatives indicate the needs of the Church members in Sardis and were to assist them in their quest for righteousness. This passage also likens Jesus to a thief who will quickly come in judgment upon the wicked, who were not looking for his coming.

The next three verses contain marvelous promises directed to those who overcome the world, for such will be "clothed in white raiment," symbolizing eternal life because of personal purity and Christ's atoning sacrifice. Those who overcome will also have their names written in the book of life, meaning they will possess eternal life and will inhabit God's heavenly kingdom.

Rev. 3:1-6

1 And unto the [servant] [^1] of the church in Sardis write; These things saith he [who] [^2] hath the seven [stars, which are the seven servants of God]; [^3] I know thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and art [not] [^4] dead.

2 Be watchful [therefore], [^5] and strengthen [those who] [^6] remain, [who] [^7] are ready to die: for I have not found thy works perfect before God.

3 Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard, and hold fast, and repent. If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I will come upon thee.

4 Thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled their garments; and they shall walk with me in white: for they are worthy.

5 He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white raiment; and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name before my Father, and before his angels.

6 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

3:1 [servant] of the church in Sardis. The servant is the ecclesiastical leader of the Saints in Sardis. Once the capital of the ancient kingdom of Lydia, Sardis was a city thirty miles south of Thyatira, in Asia Minor, or present-day Turkey. This commercial city was known for its wealth, which it obtained in part through its trade in clothing.

he [who] hath the seven [stars]. This expression speaks of Christ, as we see in 1:16: "He had in his right hand seven stars." The seven stars represent the seven servants of the seven churches (1:20).

I know thy works. See commentary on 2:2.

thou hast a name that thou livest, and art [not] dead. The Saints of Sardis were not dead as to the things of the Spirit, although they still had need of repentance (3:2-3).

3:2 strengthen [those who] remain, [who] are ready to die. The Saints are instructed to strengthen those who are weak in the faith and close to spiritual death.

I have not found thy works perfect before God. God stated in the previous verse, "I know thy works." Here he adds that these works are less than perfect, suggesting they lack integrity, or wholeness.

3:3 Remember . . . thou hast received and heard. This phrase may indicate that the Saints were to remember that they have received the gospel with all of its blessings; they have heard the word of God.

hold fast. See commentary on 2:25.

repent. The Church members' works are not "perfect before God" (3:2), and therefore they are commanded to repent.

If therefore thou shalt not watch. The concluding verse of the parable of the ten virgins contains the command, "Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh" (Matt. 25:13).

I will come on thee as a thief. This expression is recorded twice in Revelation, here, and again in 16:15. Most scriptural texts state that it is not the Lord but "the day of the Lord" (1 Thes. 5:2, 4; 2 Pet. 3:10), "desolation" (D&C 45:19), or "the coming of the Lord" (D&C 106:4) that comes as a thief. The Lord himself will come in glory for all to see (19:11-16). A thief secures his goods by stealth, always quickly, unexpectedly, and usually under the cover of night; the second coming of Christ is likened unto such. Modern revelation makes it clear that Christ comes not as a thief to the "children of light" but to the "world" (D&C 106:4-5).

3:4 Thou hast a few names . . . which have not defiled their garments. The garments represent the individual who wears them. White garments signify a holy and undefiled person; defiled garments symbolize one who is evil and bears the stains of sin. In Sardis there were a "few names," or individuals, who were pure and undefiled, who had not spotted their garments with sin. Garments in this verse also has application to temples and temple covenants. See commentary on 6:11.

they shall walk with me in white. A few of the Saints will walk in white garments with Christ because "they are worthy"—they have been obedient to all the Lord required of them and have received of the blessings of the Atonement.

3:5 He that overcometh. See commentary on 2:7.

the same shall be clothed in white raiment. See commentary on 6:11. These are they who are transformed into new persons by Jesus' atoning sacrifice and who have no filthy spots created by the blood and sins of the world. Exalted persons are they who "have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb" (7:14); they who "have put on Christ" (Gal. 3:27; emphasis added). The white clothing, with the new name, signifies a new state of existence.

I will not blot out his name out of the book of life. The book that figures so prominently in the book of Revelation (13:8; 17:8; 20:12, 15; 21:27; 22:19) contains the names of those who will receive eternal life. It is the "record which is kept in heaven" (D&C 128:7), which contains the names of the righteous (Alma 5:58). The book belongs to the Lamb (21:27), who blots out the names of sinners from it (Ex. 32:32-33) but does not remove the names of those who overcome the world and are clothed in white raiment.

I will confess his name before my Father. Jesus taught, "Whosoever . . . shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven" (Matt. 10:32).

before his angels. The angels are heavenly witnesses; they will witness Jesus' acknowledgment of the names of the righteous before the Father (Luke 12:8-9; 1 Tim. 5:21).

3:6 He that hath an ear. See commentary on 2:7.

unto the churches. The message to Sardis (and to all seven churches) is for the Saints of every era.

TO THE CHURCH IN PHILADELPHIA: THE RIGHTEOUS WILL DWELL IN THE HEAVENLY TEMPLE (3:7-13)

Jesus identifies himself to Church members in Philadelphia as the one who is holy, true, and possesses "the key of David" (3:7). He commends the Saints there for keeping his commandments and for refusing to deny his name; he offers them no criticism. Because the Saints have kept Christ's words, he will keep them "from the hour of temptation," and he promises to "come quickly," a promise that was also made to the Church members in Ephesus and Pergamos. He also commands them to "hold . . . fast," a commandment also made to Church members in Thyatira and Sardis. Verses 11 through 12 contain terms that recall the ancient temple, including "crown," "pillar in the temple," "and "new name"; these same terms pertain to the righteous, who will wear the crown of victory, become permanently connected to the heavenly temple, and receive a new name.

Most of these words of admonishment, commendation, and promise apply to us, who live in the closing years of the dispensation of the fulness of times.

Rev. 3:7-13

7 And to the [servant] [^8] of the church in Philadelphia write; These things saith he that is holy, he that is true, he that hath the key of David, he that openeth, and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no man openeth;

8 I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it: for thou hast a little strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name.

9 Behold, I will make them of the synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews, and are not, but do lie; behold, I will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee.

10 Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth.

11 Behold, I come quickly; hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy crown.

12 Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I will write upon him my new name.

13 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

3:7 [servant] of the church in Philadelphia. The servant is the ecclesiastical leader of the Saints in Philadelphia, a city in Asia Minor thirty-five miles southeast of Sardis. Philadelphia was likely founded and named after Attalus II Philadelphos, a king of Pergamum. The city was well-known for its religious festivals and temples.

he that is holy, he that is true. These descriptive titles identify Jesus Christ as the speaker. He is both holy, meaning sanctified and godly, and true, meaning steadfast and just. Elsewhere Jesus is called "Holy One of God" (Mark 1:24), "Holy One of Israel," (2 Ne. 9:41), "Faithful and True" (19:11), "true God" (1 Jn. 5:20), and "true Messiah" (1 Ne. 10:14).

he that hath the key of David. Jesus Christ possesses the "key of David." Because David was the great king of Israel, to hold the key of David suggests holding the power of government. Christ, who "hath the key of David," is the rightful, eternal king of Israel (Isa. 44:6; Jer. 23:5; 1 Tim. 6: 14-15; 2 Ne. 10:14) and governor of the entire world (see Ps. 47:7; Alma 5:50; D&C 45:49). Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "In ancient Israel, David was a man of blood and battle whose word was law and whose very name was also a symbol of power and authority. Accordingly, when Isaiah sought to convey a realization of the supreme, directive control and power resident in our Lord, the Son of David, he spoke these words in the Lord's name: `And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder; so he shall open, and none shall shut; and he shall shut, and none shall open.' (Isa. 22:22.) . . . Thus, the key of David is the absolute power resident in Christ whereby his will is expressed in all things both temporal and spiritual." [^9]

he that openeth, and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no man openeth. Similar language is also found in Isa. 22:22 and is the same as the sealing power mentioned in Matt. 16:16-19 and Hel. 10:4-10. Jesus Christ, "the keeper of the gate" (2 Ne. 9:41), holds the keys to permit the righteous to enter the gates to the celestial kingdom as well as the keys to lock the wicked into an eternal prison (D&C 29:27-29; 76:44). Compare also John 10:7, 9, in which Christ is called the "door of the sheep."

3:8 I know thy works. See commentary on 2:2.

I have set before thee an open door. In the context of the previous verse, "open door" here refers to the opportunity to enter God's kingdom. For the early Christians, an open door represented having the opportunity to share the gospel (1 Cor. 16:9; 2 Cor. 2:12; Col. 4:3).

thou hast a little strength. The Lord commends the Saints for having spiritual strength, for being obedient ("hast kept my word"), and for refusing to deny his name. Yet they are not as strong as they might be, having but "a little strength."

3:9 synagogue of Satan. New Testament scholar Metzger comments: "Since John himself had been born a Jew, we must not take the expression `those of the synagogue of Satan' (3:9) in an anti-Jewish or anti-Semitic sense. The synagogue at Philadelphia was criticized, not for being Jewish, but for being hostile to Christians." [^10]

I will make them to come and worship before thy feet. Those who belong to the synagogue of Satan and who were hostile to faithful Christians will someday acknowledge the truth and know that God loves his Saints.

3:10 thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee. The Jerusalem Bible clarifies this challenging wording with this reading: "Because you have kept my commandment to endure trials, I will keep you safe in the time of trial which is going to come for the whole world."

3:11 I come quickly. See commentary on 2:5.

hold that fast which thou hast. See commentary on 2:25.

that no man take thy crown. Joseph Smith said of this verse: "If the Saints are not to reign, for what purpose are they crowned? In an exhortation of the Lord to a certain church in Asia, which was built up in the days of the Apostles, unto whom He communicated His word on that occasion by His servant John, He says [quotes Rev. 3:11]." [^11]

3:12 Him that overcometh. See commentary on 2:7.

will I make a pillar in the temple of my God. Exalted Saints are compared to the pillars of a temple, which are stable, strong, and permanent fixtures of the temple precinct. In a similar manner the Saints will stand forever in the heavenly temple, never to be removed by evil forces. John explains that such individuals will "go no more out" of the temple. Compare Gal. 2:9, in which Peter, James, and John were "pillars" in the church.

I will write upon him the name of my God. The first of three names that Christ will give the righteous is the name of his God (14:1; D&C 133:18), meaning the Saints will become like and will belong to their Father in Heaven; thus, those who have God's name upon them are gods (D&C 132:20). [^12]

name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem. The second of three names that Christ will give the righteous is "New Jerusalem," meaning they will become eternal citizens of God's celestial city.

I will write upon him my new name. The third of three names that Christ will give the righteous is his own new name. Because an individual's "new name" is kept private—"no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it" (2:17)—this suggests that those who receive Christ's new name will have become one with him. John explains that "his name shall be in their foreheads" (22:4; see commentary there).

3:13 He that hath an ear. See commentary on 2:7.

TO THE CHURCH IN LAODICEA: THE RIGHTEOUS WILL SIT UPON THE THRONE OF JESUS (3:14-22)

In this letter to Church members in Laodicea, Jesus identifies himself with three expressions: "the Amen," "the faithful and true witness," and "the beginning of the creation of God" (3:14). He repeats what he has told the other six churches, saying, "I know thy works" (3:15) and then follows that with the well-known phrase "Thou art lukewarm, . . . I will spue thee out of my mouth" (3:16). Jesus describes the lukewarm Saints with five terms: "wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked" (3:17), terms that apply to their spiritual state rather than their physical condition.

Christ counsels the Saints; he commands them to "be zealous" and to "repent" and invites them to open the door and receive great spiritual blessings, including the presence of the Lord. Those who overcome the world will receive a throne in Heavenly Father's kingdom.

Rev. 3:14-22

14 And unto the [servant] [^13] of the church of the Laodiceans write; These things saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of God;

15 I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot.

16 So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth.

17 Because thou sayest, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked:

18 I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest be rich; and white raiment, that thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou mayest see.

19 As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore, and repent.

20 Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.

21 To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne.

22 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

3:14 [servant] of the church of the Laodiceans. The servant is the ecclesiastical leader of the Saints in Laodicea, a city in Asia Minor, or present-day Turkey. Laodicea was founded by the Syrian king Antiochus II and named after his wife Laodice. It was settled at the junction of important trade highways and subsequently became an important center for commerce, banking, medicine, and industry. Its medical school produced a special ointment, or eye salve, that was exported throughout the land. Its industrial center produced linen and wool garments.

Amen, the faithful and true witness. These three titles of Christ attest to his divine character, for he is reliable, faithful, and true. "The word amen connotes the idea of that which has been unalterably confirmed (Num. 5:22), or that which is sure, trustworthy, and faithful." [^14]

beginning of the creation of God. Christ is the "firstborn of every creature" (Col. 1:15). In his own words he testified, "I was in the beginning with the Father, and am the Firstborn" (D&C 93:21).

3:15 I know thy works. See commentary on 2:2.

thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot. With all of its importance as a city of commerce and trade, Laodicea lacked sufficient fresh water for its inhabitants and visitors, so water was piped to this community from springs located several miles away. By the time the water arrived in Laodicea, it was likely lukewarm, unpleasant to drink, and good only to be "spewed out of the mouth." Hence, the water at Laodicea lacked the cold freshness for weary travelers and the healing elements for the physically ill and afflicted found in hot water.

Lukewarm water is a metaphor for some members of the Church in Laodicea (and in any era) who lack gospel zeal (see the command in 3:19 to "be zealous") and complete faithfulness. These may be the same of whom it is written, "These are they who are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus; wherefore, they obtain not the crown over the kingdom of our God" (D&C 76:79).

3:16 thou art lukewarm . . . I will spue thee out of my mouth. This metaphor speaks of Church members who are not valiant in their faith; such will God reject, as if ejecting them out of his mouth like bad water. See commentary on 3:15.

3:17 I am rich, and increased with goods. This phrase may refer to the wealthy conditions of the Church members of Laodicea, a prosperous city known for its banking center and clothing factories. The people say, "I am rich," referring to their silver and gold, but the Lord, referring to their spiritual condition, corrects them, saying, "Thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked." The people are "naked," without sacred garments (3:4-5), blind to gospel truths, and poor as to spiritual things.

3:18 I counsel thee. The "Wonderful Counsellor" (Isa. 9:6) advises his Saints to seek eternal riches, such as "gold tried in the fire" and "white raiment."

to buy of me gold tried in the fire. Here the Saints are counseled to "buy of me gold," perhaps meaning they are to pay the price for eternal riches and exaltation through obedience and sacrifice. "Gold tried in the fire" symbolizes Saints who are precious and pure and who, after the resurrection, become incorruptible. The Saints become like gold when they pass through the "furnace of affliction" (Isa. 48:10; 1 Pet. 1:7). Zechariah wrote, "And I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried: they shall call on my name, and I will hear them: I will say, It is my people: and they shall say, The Lord is my God" (Zech. 13:9).

that thou mayest be rich. He who is spiritually rich is he who "hath eternal life" (D&C 6:7).

white raiment. See commentary on 3:5; 6:11.

shame of thy nakedness. Shame and nakedness are often used synonymously in the scriptures (Isa. 47:3; 2 Ne. 9:14). Those who are not clothed in the white garment will be filled with shame.

anoint thine eyes with eye salve. The medical profession of Laodicea used Phrygian-powdered stone to create an eye salve that was used far and wide for healing. In this verse the Lord does not refer to the manmade eye salve, of course, but to a spiritual eye salve that permits individuals to see with their spiritual eyes (Matt. 6:22). Recall what the Lord said to Enoch: "Anoint thine eyes with clay, and wash them, and thou shalt see. And he did so"; and Enoch then saw things that "were not visible to the natural eye" (Moses 6:35-36; John 9:6).

3:19 As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. God's actions have always been motivated out of his love for us, "for whom the Lord loveth he correcteth" (Prov. 3:12), and "for whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth" (Heb. 12:6). He chastens us in order to turn us to him (1 Cor. 11:32; Hel. 12:3; D&C 95:1; 105:6).

be zealous therefore, and repent. Zealous means to be fervently devoted to a purpose. This command is directed to Church members who are lukewarm in their faith and who lack zeal in the gospel (see commentary on 3:15-16).

3:20 I stand at the door, and knock. God makes the initial contact with us by coming to our door and knocking. What is the door? Perhaps the door is our heart, which is the key to who we are and what we desire. It is our hearts that Christ wants to change; it is our hearts that must be broken. How does Christ knock? He sends the Spirit, prophets, teachers, and provides us with the scriptures. If we hearken to the voice of the Spirit, he will bring us more fully to Christ—so much so that eventually he will bring us to the Second Comforter, and we will enjoy an intimacy as expressed in the words, "I will sup with him and he with me." In short, we must open the door and invite Christ into our hearts and our lives (D&C 88:63).

I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. This very personal and sacred promise refers to Christ, the Second Comforter, who promises to "attend" the righteous and pure individual and "appear unto him from time to time, and even He will manifest the Father unto him, and they will take up their abode with him." [^15] The idea of supping with Christ suggests that not only will he visit them and quickly deliver a message but he will also spend time with them, sitting and breaking bread with them.

3:21 To him that overcometh. See commentary on 2:7.

will I grant to sit with me in my throne. God empowers those who overcome trial and temptation to become like him; the righteous become exalted beings, sitting as kings upon heavenly thrones. Enoch said to God, "Thou hast made me, and given unto me a right to thy thorne, and not of myself, but through thine own grace" (Moses 7:59). Similarly, Jesus promised the Twelve Apostles "twelve thrones" (Matt. 19:28). Joseph Smith defined the expressions "heirs of God" and "joint heirs with Jesus Christ," saying the righteous are to "inherit the same power, the same glory and the same exaltation, until you arrive at the station of a God, and ascend the throne of eternal power, the same as those who have gone before." [^16]

even as I also overcame. How do we overcome the world as Christ overcame it? Christ's instructions to his apostles have relevance to us: "Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations. And I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto me" (Luke 22:28-29). How did Jesus reach his exalted station? "Why; I do the things I saw my Father do when worlds came rolling into existence. My Father worked out his kingdom with fear and trembling, and I must do the same; and when I get my kingdom, I shall present it to my Father, so that he may obtain kingdom upon kingdom." [^17]

and am set down with my Father in his throne. When Jesus "shall deliver up the kingdom, and present it unto the Father, spotless, saying: I have overcome and have trodden the wine-press alone, even the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God," he shall "be crowned with the crown of his glory, to sit on the throne of his power to reign forever and ever" (D&C 76:107-8).

3:22 He that hath an ear. See commentary on 2:7.

1 JST 3:1 replaces angel with servant.

2 JST 3:1 changes the relative pronoun that to the relative pronoun who.

3 JST 3:1 replaces Spirits of God and the seven stars with the seven stars, which are the seven servants of God.

4 JST 3:1 adds not.

5 JST 3:2 adds therefore.

6 JST 3:2 replaces the phrase the things which with those who.

7 JST 3:2 changes the relative pronoun that to the relative pronoun who.

8 JST 3:7 replaces angel with servant.

9 McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:457-58.

10 Metzger, Breaking the Code, 41.

11 History of the Church, 2:20.

12 See also Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, 14:242-43.

13 JST 3:14 replaces angel with servant.

14 McConkie and Parry, Guide to Scriptural Symbols, 115.

15 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 151.

16 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 347.

17 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 347.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Many authors have taught that Peter, James, and John composed the First Presidency of their day (see, for example, Taylor, Gospel Kingdom, 138). Joseph Fielding Smith, in Doctrines of Salvation, 3:152, wrote that "Peter, James, and John, acted as the First Presidency of the Church in their day."
[^2] 2 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 150-51; emphasis added.
[^3] 3 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^4] 4 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 52.
[^5] 5 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^6] 6 McConkie, "Understanding the Book of Revelation," 87.
[^7] 7 JST 1:3 replaces the relative pronoun that with the relative pronoun who. The JST also adds the word understand, which clarifies the meaning of the text.
[^8] 8 JST 1:3 replaces the expression the time is at hand with the phrase the time of the coming of the Lord draweth nigh to clarify the meaning of the text.
[^9] 9 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^10] 10 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^11] 11 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 51-52.
[^12] 12 JST 1:4 adds, omits, and alters many words of this verse.
[^13] 13 JST 1:5 adds a long note of clarification and identifies John as the faithful witness of Jesus Christ.
[^14] 14 JST 1:6 adds these important words.
[^15] 15 JST 1:6 omits the conjunction and.
[^16] 16 JST 1:7 adds the preposition For and clarifies that Jesus will come "in the clouds with ten thousands of his saints in the kingdom, clothed with the glory of his Father."
[^17] 17 JST 1:8 adds this phrase.
