Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation ( 1998)

Rev. 4

THE THRONE ROOM IN THE TEMPLE IN HEAVEN (4:1-11)

While receiving his vision of Jesus Christ, John envisions (1:10) the holy place of the temple in heaven (1:12). It is in the holy place that he receives the revelation of the seven churches. Afterward John sees a door that "was opened into heaven," and a heavenly voice invites him to "come up hither" to receive "things which must be hereafter." John ascends to the holy of holies, or the throne room of the temple, which is one and the same as the celestial kingdom. Again, John is "in the spirit," meaning that though his body is likely still on the Isle of Patmos, he is viewing things as they appear in heaven and then describing his vision by using symbolic terms.

While in the throne room, John is permitted to behold the eternal glory of the Father, who is sitting upon the throne. Twenty-four elders, seven servants of God, and four beasts are all glorifying God. John uses symbolic language to describe the scene. God the Father is the center of activity as he sits upon his throne, surrounded by living creatures and exalted Saints. The vision does not describe God himself but provides a glorious description of the things around him, such as brilliant colors and glorious lights. God, like his heavenly messengers, is "glorious beyond description" (JS-H 1:32). Jesus Christ, who was introduced to John in Rev. 1:10-16 (see commentary there) stands in the Father's presence in the throne room of the temple of heaven (5:1).

John uses symbolism to describe the four beasts and their activities. The four beasts occupy a hierarchically significant position in the throne room, for they are located very near the throne. They rest neither day nor night but continually worship God by saying, "Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come." Each of the four beasts possesses eyes before, behind, and within, signifying light and knowledge. Each possesses six wings, "a representation of power, to move, to act" (D&C 77:4). The beasts worship God, and, as sentinels, protect God's holiness from the unauthorized trespass of unworthy, or unclean, things and individuals.

John also sees twenty-four elders worshipping the Father, submitting themselves before him by casting their crowns before the throne while exclaiming, "Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour and power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created" (4:11).

There are several brief songs or hymnlike passages in Revelation, two of which are in this section (4:8, 11).

Rev. 4:1-11

1 After this I looked, and, behold, a door was opened [into] [^1] heaven: and the first voice which I heard was as it were of a trumpet talking with me; which said, Come up hither, and I will [show] [^2] thee things which must be hereafter.

2 And immediately I was in the spirit: and, behold, a throne was set in heaven, and one sat on the throne.

3 And he that sat was to look upon like a jasper and a sardine stone: and there was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like unto an emerald.

4 And [in the midst of] [^3] the throne were four and twenty seats: and upon the seats I saw four and twenty elders sitting, clothed in white raiment; and they had on their heads crowns of gold.

5 And out of the throne proceeded lightnings and thunderings and voices: and there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are the seven [servants] [^4] of God.

6 And before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto crystal: and in the midst of the throne [were the four and twenty elders]; [^5] and round about the throne, were four beasts full of eyes before and behind.

7 And the first beast was like a lion, and the second beast like a calf, and the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast was like a flying eagle.

8 And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him; and they were full of eyes within: and they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.

9 And when those beasts give glory and honour and thanks to him that [sits] [^6] on the throne, who liveth for ever and ever,

10 The four and twenty elders fall down before him that [sits] [^7] on the throne, and worship him that liveth for ever and ever, and cast their crowns before the throne, saying,

11 Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour and power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

4:1 After this I looked. This formula indicates that a new vision has begun (7:1, 9; 15:5; 18:1; 19:1; Dan. 7:6-7).

door was opened [into] heaven. The door opens to the throne room of heaven, which may be parallel to the holy of holies in the earthly temple. John, while "in the spirit" (4:2), is about to view the most holy place, the place where God sits and rules (Ezek. 1:1).

first voice. The voice is that of Jesus Christ, first identified in 1:10-11.

trumpet. The voice of the Lord is as distinctive and clear as a trumpet (1:10). Trumpets are associated with the temple elsewhere in scripture; in Exodus (19:16, 19; 20:18), for example, the trumpet is associated with Mount Sinai, which served as a temple to Moses and the Israelites. [^8]

Come up hither. John is commanded to "come up" to the throne room, suggesting an ascension from the holy place to the most holy, as in the structure of the earthly temple. Similarly, Moses was commanded to "come up unto the Lord" (Ex. 19:24) to the mountain sanctuary.

I will [show] thee things which must be hereafter. Jesus himself shows John several scenes of heaven (4:2-5:14) and then events that would yet occur upon the earth. [^9]

4:2 I was in the spirit. See commentary on 1:10.

throne was set in heaven. The Jerusalem Bible renders this passage: "a throne was standing in heaven." Heavenly Father possesses and sits upon the throne (3:21; 4:2-3, 9-10; 5:7, 13; 6:16; 7:10; 12:5; 19:4; 22:1, 3), which is at the center of activity in the temple in heaven. Twenty-four exalted elders and their thrones (4:4); many angels (5:11; 7:11, 15); four living creatures (4:6); a "great multitude, which no man could number" (7:9); seven lamps of fire, signifying the seven servants (4:5); and the 144,000 high priests, in whose "mouth was found no guile" and who sing a new song (14:1-3, 5), are all "in the midst of," "round about," or "before" the throne of God. Jesus Christ is also "in the midst of the throne" (5:6; 7:17), which he shares with his Father (3:21; 22:1, 3). The golden altar (8:3) and the sea of glass (4:6) are before the throne as well. The throne is the source of lightnings, thunderings, and voices (4:5).

one sat on the throne. John refers to God the Father approximately twelve times as the "one seated on the throne," which represents God's kingship and dominion. In Abraham, Facsimile 2:3, God is pictured sitting upon his throne, "clothed with power and authority."

4:3 he that sat was to look upon like a jasper and a sardine stone. God the Father cannot adequately be described with mere words from the human language, so John portrays him "as the brilliance of light reflected from precious stones." [^10] Ezekiel describes the Lord in a similar manner (Ezek. 1:26-28; see also Ps. 104:2; 1 Tim. 6:16). Jasper and sardine stone are the last and the first of the twelve stones of the high priest's breastplate of judgment (Ex. 28:15-20), perhaps indicative of Christ as the "first and the last." They are also among the stones of the Garden of Eden (Ezek. 28:13) and the foundation stones of the heavenly city (21:19-20)—the first and last Zion communities on the earth.

there was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like unto an emerald. John uses symbols, the rainbow and the emerald, to denote the great brilliance, glory, brightness, and light that surround God and his throne. Ezekiel used similar language (Ezek. 1:26-28). The emerald is the fourth of the twelve precious stones of the high priest's breastplate (Ex. 28:17-21), representing the tribe of Judah, or Christ, who was of Judah. The emerald is also one of the foundation stones of the heavenly city (21:19-20). It seems significant that emerald, a brilliant color of green, would be used to symbolize the very wellspring of life.

4:4 [in the midst of] the throne were four and twenty seats. The twenty-four seats, or thrones, are for the twenty-four elders.

four and twenty elders. D&C 77:5 reads: "Q. What are we to understand by the four and twenty elders, spoken of by John? A. We are to understand that these elders whom John saw, were elders who had been faithful in the work of the ministry and were dead; who belonged to the seven churches, and were then in the paradise of God."

Each of the elders is "clothed in white raiment," and each possesses his own crown, throne, harp, and golden bowl of incense (4:4; 5:8). The harp and incense are used during their worship of God. The incense represents "the prayers of saints" (5:8), and the harps are perhaps played by the elders themselves as they sing the new song (5:9-10). The elders praise the Lord: "Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour and power" (4:11), "We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come" (11:17), and "Amen; Alleluia" (19:4). The new song they sing to the Lamb includes the words "thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood" (5:9). Four times John witnesses the elders "fall down" to worship God, who "sat on the throne" (4:10; 5:14; 11:16; 19:4), and once he observes them as they "fell down before the Lamb" (5:8). Each of the elders is a king and priest, who will "reign on the earth" (5:10; see 1:6). One of the elders speaks to John two times, helping him to understand his vision (5:5; 7:13).

The number twenty-four may represent the 24,000 Levite priests who were assigned to temple work (1 Chr. 23:3-4; 24:1) or the number may represent the twelve patriarchs of the house of Israel and the Twelve Apostles, both of which are identified in Revelation (5:6; 21:12, 14). Although these elders were actual men who lived upon the earth during mortality, here they represent all of the redeemed who will receive thrones and crowns in heaven.

clothed in white raiment. The white raiment represents the light, glory, and purity of the exalted soul who wears it. Also, among the Greeks and Romans, white symbolized victory—those "clothed in white raiment" are those who have overcome the world (3:5).

on their heads crowns of gold. The crowns symbolize kingship, dominion, authority, and power. The twenty-four elders are God's kings and priests, who will "reign on the earth" (5:10) after the judgment and resurrection.

4:5 out of the throne proceeded lightnings and thunderings and voices. The lightnings and thunderings portray the power and brilliance associated with God's presence (Ex. 19:16-18; Ps. 77:18) and demonstrate that he has supreme control over the elements of heaven and earth. The voices "out of the throne" may be those of God and the Lamb (see Ps. 18:12-15; Job 37:2-5). The terms lightnings, thunderings, and voices are found four times in Revelation and are often accompanied with descriptions of earthquakes and hail (4:5; 8:5; 11:19; 16:18). Some translations of this verse omit voices and instead associate the sounds with the thunder (NEB, JB, NIV).

seven lamps of fire burning before the throne. The seven lamps are the seven servants of God, previously identified in Revelation ("which are before his throne," 1:4). The burning fires speak of their exalted nature; like God, they dwell in "everlasting burnings in immortal glory." [^11]

4:6 before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto crystal. The throne overlooks a sea of glass, which "is the earth, in its sanctified, immortal, and eternal state" (D&C 77:1). Joseph Smith explained that "when the earth was sanctified and became like a sea of glass, it would be one great urim and thummim, and the Saints could look in it and see as they are seen." [^12] D&C 130:6-9 adds further insight: "The angels do not reside on a planet like this earth; but they reside in the presence of God, on a globe like a sea of glass and fire, where all things for their glory are manifest, past, present, and future, and are continually before the Lord. The place where God resides is a great Urim and Thummim. This earth, in its sanctified and immortal state, will be made like unto crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants who dwell thereon, whereby all things pertaining to an inferior kingdom, or all kingdoms of a lower order, will be manifest to those who dwell on it." Regarding this great Urim and Thummim, Brigham Young explained, "When you wish to know anything, you can look in this earth, and see all the eternities of God." [^13]

The sea of glass is also described as "a sea of glass mingled with fire" (15:2), where exalted beings stand with their harps and sing unto God: "Great and marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy: for all nations shall come and worship before thee; for thy judgments are made manifest" (15:3-4).

round about the throne, were four beasts. Some biblical commentators place one of the four beasts at each of the four sides of the throne, where they serve as guardians of the throne. This role is similar to that played by the biblical cherubim (see, for example, Gen. 3:24; Ex. 25:18-22). [^14]

In this verse and elsewhere, John speaks of two types of beasts in Revelation: he envisions actual living creatures (Greek zoon) that exist in heaven (4:6-9; 5:6-14; 6:1-7; 7:11; 14:3; 15:7; 19:4), and he speaks of other beasts (Greek therion), referring both to earthly beasts as well as to symbolic or fantastic beasts (6:8; 11:7; 13:1-18; 14:9, 11; 15:2; 16:2, 10, 13; 17:1-18; 19:19-20; 20:4, 10). The word beast used in this passage could more accurately be translated "living creature." In fact, the choice of the King James Version translators to use the word beast is particularly unfortunate, since these creatures are living, dynamic beings filled with intelligence and glory.

Joseph Smith suggested that the four beasts "lived on another planet than ours." [^15] The four beasts in this passage in Revelation are actual beasts that exist in heaven. "John saw the actual beast in heaven, showing to John that beasts did actually exist there. . . .

"John saw curious looking beasts in heaven; he saw every creature that was in heaven,—all the beasts, fowls and fish in heaven,—actually there, giving glory to God. . . .

"I suppose John saw beings there of a thousand forms, that had been saved from ten thousand times ten thousand earths like this,—strange beasts of which we have no conception: all might be seen in heaven. The grand secret was to show John what there was in heaven. John learned that God glorified Himself by saving all that His hands had made, whether beasts, fowls, fishes or men; and He will glorify Himself with them.

"Says one, `I cannot believe in the salvation of beasts.' Any man who would tell you that this could not be, would tell you that the revelations are not true. John heard the words of the beasts giving glory to God, and understood them. God who made the beasts could understand every language spoken by them. The four beasts were four of the most noble animals that had filled the measure of their creation, and had been saved from other worlds, because they were perfect: they were like angels in their sphere. We are not told where they came from, and I do not know; but they were seen and heard by John praising and glorifying God." [^16]

John informs us that the four beasts are capable of worshipping God (4:8; 5:8-10): they invite John to "come and see" the events pertaining to the first four seals (6:1-7), and one of the beasts delivers the "seven golden vials full of the wrath of God" to the seven angels (15:7). The four beasts may be akin to those spoken of in Isa. 6:2-3 and Ezek. 1:5-14.

A modern revelation adds additional light concerning the four beasts: "They are figurative expressions, used by the Revelator, John, in describing heaven, the paradise of God, the happiness of man, and of beasts, and of creeping things, and of the fowls of the air; that which is spiritual being in the likeness of that which is temporal; and that which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual; the spirit of man in the likeness of his person, as also the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God has created" (D&C 77:2).

D&C 77:3 reads: "Q. Are the four beasts limited to individual beasts, or do they represent classes or orders? A. They are limited to four individual beasts, which were shown to John, to represent the glory of the classes of beings in their destined order or sphere of creation, in the enjoyment of their eternal felicity."

full of eyes before and behind. The eyes of the beasts "are a representation of light and knowledge, that is, they are full of knowledge" (D&C 77:4).

4:7 like a lion/calf/man/flying eagle. Ezekiel describes a similar vision (Ezek. 1:10). One commentator suggests: "The living creatures are symbolic of creation and the divine immanence. They are what is noblest (lion), strongest (ox), wisest (man), and swiftest (eagle)." [^17] Another suggests that the four faces of the beasts correspond to the banners of the "four chief tribes of Israel," as does still another: "The description of the camp of Israel in Numbers locates the four chief tribes in the following positions: Judah on the east (2:3), Reuben on the south (2:10), Ephraim on the west (2:18), and Dan on the north (2:25). The insignias for these tribes were: Judah, lion; Reuben, man; Ephraim, ox; and Dan, eagle." [^18]

4:8 four beasts had each of them six wings. The beasts' wings "are a representation of power, to move, to act, etc." (D&C 77:4).

they were full of eyes within. The beasts' eyes "are a representation of light and knowledge, that is, they are full of knowledge" (D&C 77:4). In the previous verse, John explained that the beasts had eyes both "before and behind." Now we learn that they have eyes inside as well. Other translations make this clear: "eyes all over, inside and out" (NEB), and "eyes all the way around as well as inside" (JB). The symbolism of "light and knowledge" is reinforced by the presence of eyes inside as well as outside, back as well as front.

they rest not day and night. It is the unceasing disposition of the four living creatures to worship God at all times.

Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty. Similarly, when Isaiah envisions the heavenly temple, he witnesses the seraphim honoring God with the threefold repetition "Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts" (Isa. 6:3). The threefold repetition emphasizes the superlative degree: God is the holiest of all creatures in the universe. Holy speaks concerning the wonderful separateness of God, his distinctiveness in perfection and power.

which was, and is, and is to come. See commentary on 1:4.

4:9 beasts give glory and honour and thanks. The living creatures worship alongside the twenty-four elders by rendering "both vocal (4:8-9; 5:9-10) and instrumental adoration (5:8)" of God. [^19]

to him that [sits] on the throne. See commentary on 4:2.

who liveth for ever and ever. Elsewhere in scripture, it is written, "Behold, I am the Lord God Almighty, and Endless is my name, for I am without beginning of days or end of years; and is not this endless?" (Moses 1:3; 7:35).

4:10 four and twenty elders fall down before him that [sits] on the throne. The elders prostrate themselves before God in an act of worship and as a posture of exceptional reverence.

cast their crowns before the throne. The crowns are gifts from God to the twenty-four elders (2:10; 4:4). By casting their crowns before the throne, perhaps as a gesture or symbol of humility, the elders submit themselves to God and give homage and honor to him who is the King of kings.

4:11 Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour and power. The elders' worship is different from that of the creatures, for the elders address God directly and speak of his creative work rather than his attributes. Worthy here means fully qualified.

thou hast created all things. Both God and his son Jesus Christ are called Creator. Joseph Smith wrote: "Everlasting covenant was made between three personages before the organization of this earth, and relates to their dispensation of things to men on the earth; these personages, according to Abraham's record, are called God the first, the Creator; God the second, the Redeemer; and God the third, the witness or Testator." [^20]

The Lord explained to Moses: "And by the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth. And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten" (Moses 1:32-33).

for thy pleasure they are and were created. Many versions read "by thy will" in place of "for thy pleasure"; the Jerusalem Bible, for example, reads, "It was only by your will that everything was made and exists." A revelation in the Doctrine and Covenants explains why the earth was created: "For after it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father; that bodies who are of the celestial kingdom may possess it forever and ever; for, for this intent was it made and created, and for this intent are they sanctified" (D&C 88:19-20).

1 JST 4:1 replaces in with into.

2 JST 4:1 replaces the archaic shew with show.

3 JST 4:4 replaces the phrase round about with in the midst of."

4 JST 4:5 replaces Spirits with servants.

5 JST 4:6 add the phrase were the four and twenty elders.

6 JST 4:9 changes past tense sat to present tense sits.

7 JST 4:10 replaces sat with sits.

8 On Mount Sinai as a temple, see Parry, "Sinai as Sanctuary and Mountain of God," in By Study and Also by Faith, ed. Lundquist and Ricks, 1:482-500.

9 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.

10 Mounce, Book of Revelation, 120.

11 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 347.

12 History of the Church, 5:279.

13 Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, 8:200.

14 Davis, Heavenly Court, 4-5, 126-31.

15 Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 171.

16 History of the Church, 5:343-44.

17 Ford, Revelation, 75.

18 Davis, Heavenly Court, 133.

19 Davis, Heavenly Court, 130.

20 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 190.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Many authors have taught that Peter, James, and John composed the First Presidency of their day (see, for example, Taylor, Gospel Kingdom, 138). Joseph Fielding Smith, in Doctrines of Salvation, 3:152, wrote that "Peter, James, and John, acted as the First Presidency of the Church in their day."
[^2] 2 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 150-51; emphasis added.
[^3] 3 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^4] 4 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 52.
[^5] 5 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^6] 6 McConkie, "Understanding the Book of Revelation," 87.
[^7] 7 JST 1:3 replaces the relative pronoun that with the relative pronoun who. The JST also adds the word understand, which clarifies the meaning of the text.
[^8] 8 JST 1:3 replaces the expression the time is at hand with the phrase the time of the coming of the Lord draweth nigh to clarify the meaning of the text.
[^9] 9 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^10] 10 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^11] 11 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 51-52.
[^12] 12 JST 1:4 adds, omits, and alters many words of this verse.
[^13] 13 JST 1:5 adds a long note of clarification and identifies John as the faithful witness of Jesus Christ.
[^14] 14 JST 1:6 adds these important words.
[^15] 15 JST 1:6 omits the conjunction and.
[^16] 16 JST 1:7 adds the preposition For and clarifies that Jesus will come "in the clouds with ten thousands of his saints in the kingdom, clothed with the glory of his Father."
[^17] 17 JST 1:8 adds this phrase.
[^18] 18 JST 1:8 omits the word saith.
[^19] 19 JST 1:8 changes the relative pronoun which to who.
[^20] 20 On the other churches of the period, see Charles, Critical and Exegetical Commentary, 1:8.
