Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation ( 1998)

Rev. 5

THE LAMB TAKES THE SEALED BOOK (5:1-14)

Rev. 5 continues the record of John's vision of the heavenly temple, in which he sees God the Father sitting upon his throne surrounded by living creatures and twenty-four elders, all of whom are worshipping him. In chapter 5 John sees God the Father sitting on his throne with a sealed book in his right hand. John sees and hears an angel ask, "Who is worthy to open the book?" When no one can be found who is able or worthy to open the book or even "to look thereon," John weeps "much." One of the twenty-four elders, introduced in the previous chapter, comforts John and commands him to "weep not," because there is one worthy to open the book, and he is called "the Lion of the tribe of Juda." John looks, perhaps expecting to see this worthy Lion, but instead he sees a Lamb with the marks of a slaughtered creature but who now stands victorious over death. The Lamb steps forward and takes the book from the right hand of the Father.

This chapter presents a "new song" that is sung to honor and glorify God and Christ. The first stanza is sung by the twenty-four elders, who focus upon two signal topics: first, Christ suffered death and brought redemption by his blood; and second, Christ has made worthy individuals to be kings and priests, who will eventually reign upon the earth. The second stanza is sung by the elders, the beasts, and by numerous angels with a "loud voice," perhaps because of their great number. They focus on the worthiness of the slain Lamb and his great power, strength, and glory. The third stanza, sung by creatures who belong to heaven, earth, and the sea, pertains to the exalted Lamb, who sits upon the throne, having blessing, glory, and power. At the conclusion of the new song the four beasts say "amen" and the twenty-four elders fall down and worship the Lord. The new song repeats the following terms two times, perhaps for emphasis: God, Lamb, worthy, slain [Lamb], power, honor, glory, blessing, and ever (that is, "for ever and ever").

Rev. 5:1-14

1 And I saw in the right hand of him that [sits] [^1] on the throne a book written within and on the backside, sealed with seven seals.

2 And I saw a strong angel [and heard him] [^2] proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof?

3 And no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the earth, was able to open the book, neither to look thereon.

4 And I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open and to read the book, neither to look thereon.

5 And one of the elders saith unto me, Weep not: behold, the Lion of the tribe of Juda, the Root of David, hath prevailed to open the book, and to loose the seven seals thereof.

6 And I beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the throne and of the four beasts, and in the midst of the elders, stood a Lamb as it had been slain, having [twelve] [^3] horns and [twelve] [^4] eyes, which are the [twelve servants] [^5] of God sent forth into all the earth.

7 And he came and took the book out of the right hand of him that sat upon the throne.

8 And when he had taken the book, the four beasts and four and twenty elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them harps, and golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers of saints.

9 And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation; 10 And hast made us unto our God kings and priests: and we shall reign on the earth.

11 And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels round about the throne and the beasts and the elders: and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands;

12 Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing.

13 And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

14 And the four beasts said, Amen. And the four and twenty elders fell down and worshipped him that liveth for ever and ever.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

5:1 I saw in the right hand. The book with seven seals is in Heavenly Father's right hand, which is the hand "associated with righteousness (Ps. 48:10; Isa. 41:10), power (Ex. 15:6, 12; Ps. 89:13), and covenant making (Isa. 62:8). With his right hand, the Lord executes justice (3 Ne. 29:4, 9), dispenses the law (Deut. 33:2), and saves his people (Ps. 17:7; 20:6) with his right hand he created the heavens and the earth (Isa. 48:13)." [^6]

him that [sits] on the throne. God the Father. See commentary on 4:2.

book. This book "contains the revealed will, mysteries, and the works of God; the hidden things of his economy concerning this earth during the seven thousand years of its continuance, or its temporal existence" (D&C 77:6). Orson F. Whitney explained: "The book which John saw represented the real history of the world—what the eye of God has seen, what the recording angel has written; and the seven thousand years, corresponding to the seven seals of the Apocalyptic volume, are as seven great days during which Mother Earth will fulfill her mortal mission, laboring six days and resting upon the seventh, her period of sanctification. These seven days do not include the period of our planet's creation and preparation as a dwelling place for man. They are limited to Earth's `temporal existence,' that is, to Time, considered as distinct from Eternity." [^7]

written within and on the backside. The technical term for this book is an opistographi, which is a scroll that has writing on both sides. Ezekiel's scroll is similarly described: "I looked, . . . and [the scroll] was written within and without: and there was written therein lamentations, and mourning, and woe" (Ezek. 2:9-10). The book in God's right hand overflows with his "revealed will, mysteries, and . . . works" (D&C 77:6).

sealed with seven seals. Each of the seven seals corresponds with one of the seven millennia of the earth's temporal existence. The Lord revealed that "the first seal contains the things of the first thousand years, and the second also of the second thousand years, and so on until the seventh" (D&C 77:7).

A seal is an impression of a signet (a finger ring or similar object with an engraved design) in wax that is designed to fasten and seal a scroll or document. Gottfried Fitzer, a biblical scholar, explains the significance of the seal and how it was used in the ancient Near East. First, kings possessed seals that were unique and not easily duplicated, lest someone attempt to counterfeit the seal and imitate the authority of the king. God's seal was unique, and no one in heaven or on earth, save Christ himself, was permitted to open the seals (5:2-3). Second, "the seal served as a legal protection and guarantee in many ways, especially in relation to property. All objects suitable for sealing could be marked as the property of the owner in this way." [^8] God owned the book and the seals that sealed it. No other individual, save the Lamb of God, was empowered to open it. Third, the seal proved the identity of its owner. The seal of God, with which the book was sealed, indicated to onlookers and observers the identity of the true King. Fourth, "the holder of the seal is the holder of power and has his place in a duly constituted order. Might and right come together in the seal." [^9] Christ, by virtue of his worthiness to open the seals, held great power in the cosmos. That is indicated in the statement that Christ "hath prevailed to open the book." Fifth, "the seal was also meant to protect a document against inappropriate or premature disclosure." [^10] God's sealed book was closed until he revealed its contents through Christ, who opened the seals one at a time (6:1, 3, 5, 7, 9; 8:1), according to the foreordained time schedule of God. And finally, "the seal makes a document legally valid." [^11] God's sealed book was opened in a legal and official manner: the King, who sat on his throne in the heavenly temple, delivered the sealed book in his right hand to his chief administrator, and hosts of beings stood as witnesses.

5:2 I saw a strong angel . . . proclaiming with a loud voice. The identity of the "strong angel" is not revealed. It may be Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, or any other mighty angel. John later witnesses "a mighty angel" performing sacred work (10:1; 18:1). The angel proclaims with a loud voice so that all the millions in heaven who are witnessing these events will hear him. The expression "loud voice" is used twelve times in Revelation (5:12; 6:10; 7:2, 10; 8:13; 10:3; 12:10; 14:7, 9, 15; 19:17).

Who is worthy to open the book? The strong angel asks the hosts of heaven this question. We learn in Rev. 5:3 and 5 that Jesus Christ is the only one in heaven or on earth who is worthy to open the book. Why? Perhaps because Jesus Christ is the only one qualified to bring about the eternal and infinite atonement for the inhabitants of this world, the history of which is contained in the book to be opened.

5:3 no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the earth. No individual (angels, or exalted Saints) in heaven, no flesh (mortals) upon the earth, and no disembodied spirit (either righteous or evil) under the earth was permitted to "open the book" or even to "look thereon." See also Philip. 2:10.

5:4 I wept much. John sorrows that no one can open the book.

5:5 one of the elders saith unto me. One of the twenty-four elders interprets for John here and again in 7:13.

Weep not. John is told to "weep not" because there is an individual who is able to open the book.

Lion of the tribe of Juda, the Root of David, hath prevailed to open the book. In 5:6 Christ is called "Lamb," but here he is called "Lion," a creature hostile and adverse to the Lamb. Christ as the Lamb portrays one who is submissive, as a sacrificial victim who is "brought as a lamb to the slaughter" (Isa. 53:7), or one who condescended to descend below all things. Christ as the Lion depicts one who has power over all creatures and is a majestic, fearless king (as a lion is "king of the beasts") who possesses great strength. In this context the title is especially appropriate, because just as a lion prevails over other creatures, so Christ "prevailed to open the book" with seven seals (or, according to RSV, Christ "has conquered, so that he can open the scroll and its seven seals").

Jesus is a member "of the tribe of Juda," whose emblem is the lion (Gen. 49:9). Paul stated that Jesus "sprang out of Juda" (Heb. 7:14), and Christ himself declared, "I am the root and the offspring of David" (22:16). Christ as the "Root" provides spiritual water, nourishment, and life to his people (Isa. 11:1, 10; 53:2; John 15:1-7).

5:6 in the midst of the throne . . . stood a Lamb as it had been slain. The elder instructs John to "weep not" and to "behold the Lion," but unexpectedly John sees a Lamb that possesses the marks of one who was slain. He sees Christ who, though slain for the sins of the world, now stands in great majesty as a lion stands as the king of all creatures. Christ stands now in the inner circle of the multitudes in heaven. He is standing near his Father's throne, which is surrounded by the four beasts and the twenty-four elders.

Christ is called Lamb twenty-seven times in Revelation. Elsewhere the prophets write of the Lamb: "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world" (John 1:29) "Christ our passover is sacrificed for us" (1 Cor. 5:7) and "ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold . . . but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot" (1 Pet. 1:18-19).

The expression "as it had been slain" indicates that the Lamb, although risen from the dead and possessing eternal life, in this vision to John carried the marks of his sacrifice in his hands, feet, and side. The Book of Mormon testifies that the Nephite Saints at the temple in Bountiful "went forth, and thrust their hands into his side, and did feel the prints of the nails in his hands and in his feet; and this they did do, going forth one by one until they had all gone forth, and did see with their eyes and did feel with their hands, and did know of a surety and did bear record, that it was he, of whom it was written by the prophets, that should come" (3 Ne. 11:15; see also John 20:25, 27).

having [twelve] horns and [twelve] eyes, which are the [twelve servants] of God. The Lamb's twelve horns and twelve eyes are figurative, representing the Twelve Apostles, who are empowered by the Lamb to administer his gospel throughout the earth. The horns represent power (1 Sam. 2:10; Jer. 48:25; Ps. 75:10) the "eyes" may refer to the powers of seership held by apostles.

sent forth into all the earth. The expression "sent forth" defines the meaning of the word apostle, which means "one sent forth." [^12]

5:7 he came and took the book. God remains seated on the throne as Jesus Christ comes and takes the book from his right hand. For more about "right hand," see commentary on 5:1.

5:8 when he had taken the book. The moment that Christ takes the book from God, the beasts and elders, with their harps and golden bowls, fall down to worship Christ.

four beasts and four and twenty elders fell down before the Lamb. Previously the beasts and elders had fallen down to worship God the Father (4:10); now they prostrate themselves before Jesus Christ. Three more times they will fall down before the Father (5:14; 11:16; 19:4).

having every one of them harps. Biblical scholars Bratcher and Hatton explain: "This seems to say that every one of the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders had a harp and golden bowls filled with incense, although some would restrict it to the twenty-four elders." [^13] Worship in heaven evidently includes music from harps. In this verse there are twenty-eight harps; in Rev. 14:1-3 it appears that each of the 144,000 high priests has a harp; and in Rev. 15:2 all exalted Saints possess "harps of God."

golden vials full of odours. A better translation is "golden bowls full of incense." [^14] These bowls of incense recall those used during the ancient Israelite temple service by priestly officiants (1 Kgs. 7:50).

John informs us that the incense represents "the prayers of the saints" (see also Ps. 141:2). As the priestly ministrants offered incense upon the altar in the earthly temple twice daily, the Saints prayed in the courtyard of the temple (Luke 1:10) the twenty-four elders present the prayers, represented by incense, to God. Later in Revelation we read: "And another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer; and there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar which was before the throne. And the smoke of the incense, which came with the prayers of the saints, ascended up before God out of the angel's hand" (8:3-4). An apocryphal source adds, "I am Raphael, one of the seven holy angels, who present the prayers of the saints, and who go in and out before the glory of the Holy One" (Tobit 12:15; see also 3 Baruch 11).

5:9 they sung a new song. The words of this "new song," sung by the twenty-four elders and the four beasts, are addressed to Jesus (note the second-person pronouns thou and thy). The song emphasizes Christ's atoning sacrifice ("thou wast slain," "by thy blood") and the resultant benefits for humankind ("hast redeemed us," "hast made us . . . kings and priests"). Compare also D&C 88:98-102, which contains the words to another "new song."

Thou art worthy to take the book. The verse explains why Jesus is worthy to take the book from God's right hand: he wrought the eternal and infinite atonement, a fact expressed as "thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood."

for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood. These words are the foundation of the song, because Christ's sacrifice made him worthy to take the book and will allow the Saints to become kings and priests and reign on the earth. Mormon taught that the redeemed will "dwell in the presence of God in his kingdom, to sing ceaseless praises with the choirs above, unto the Father, and unto the Son, and unto the Holy Ghost" (Morm. 7:7).

every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. John uses this phraseology in Revelation seven times to represent a great host of people from all lands and nations as well as every language and extended family. Five times the phrase refers to peoples upon the earth (10:11; 11:9; 13:7; 14:6; 17:15), and twice it refers to redeemed Saints who dwell in heaven (5:9; 7:9). It is clear that the exalted souls will include individuals from all lands, peoples, and languages. Truly, as Nephi taught, "there is one God and one Shepherd over all the earth" (1 Ne. 13:41).

5:10 made us unto our God kings and priests. Through his atonement Jesus Christ "made us . . . kings and priests"; individuals cannot become kings and priests on their own (see commentary on 1:6) but become such in God's temples. That God's kings and priests are from "every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation" suggests that the gospel will be preached to all peoples throughout the world and those who accept the gospel will worship in the temples of the Lord that are now being established throughout the earth.

we shall reign on the earth. Our earth will become a celestial kingdom, and exalted Saints who have become kings and queens unto God will reign there. A modern revelation states: "The poor and the meek of the earth shall inherit it. Therefore, it must needs be sanctified from all unrighteousness, that it may be prepared for the celestial glory; for after it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father" (D&C 88:17-19).

5:11 I beheld, and I heard. John sees and hears the angels, beasts, and elders praise the Lamb.

ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands. One hundred million (ten thousand times ten thousand equals one hundred million), and "thousands of thousands" of angels near God's throne revere the Lamb. The number may be taken literally, or it may signify a great, indefinite number. In any case, John witnesses a great number of angels praising the Lamb.

5:12 Saying with a loud voice. The unified sound of more than one hundred million beings produces a "loud voice."

Worthy is the Lamb that was slain. The phrase recalls 5:9, which explains why the Lamb was worthy to open the book.

to receive power/riches/wisdom/strength/honour/glory/blessing. "The angels repeat three of the elders' terms of praise: glory, honor, and power, and add wealth, wisdom, might, and blessing (5:13). The seven terms symbolize the fullness of the praise." [^15]

5:13 every creature which is in heaven/on the earth/under the earth/in the sea. After witnessing the sacred adulation of more than one hundred million angels, John listens to all creatures of the earth and sea praise the Lamb. They repeat four of the seven terms of praise voiced by the angels: blessing, honor, glory, and power. The section anticipates this modern revelation, which has similar themes.

"Let the mountains shout for joy, and all ye valleys cry aloud; and all ye seas and dry lands tell the wonders of your Eternal King! And ye rivers, and brooks, and rills, flow down with gladness. Let the woods and all the trees of the field praise the Lord; and ye solid rocks weep for joy! And let the sun, moon, and the morning stars sing together, and let all the sons of God shout for joy! And let the eternal creations declare his name forever and ever!" (D&C 128:23).

Joseph Smith said: "Revelation 5:13 proves that John saw beasts in heaven and heard them speak praise to God. [I] do not know what language they speak." [^16]

unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb. The sacred praise of every creature is directed to God the Father, who sits upon his throne, and to Jesus Christ.

5:14 four beasts said, Amen. After the elders sing a new song (5:9-10), the angels praise the Lamb (5:12), and every creature glorifies God and the Lamb. The four beasts then close these threefold praises by saying "Amen" (see commentary on 3:14).

four and twenty elders fell down and worshipped him that liveth for ever and ever. This is the third of five occasions in which the elders fall down and worship Deity (4:10; 5:8; 11:16; 19:4).

1 JST 5:1 replaces sat with sits.

2 JST 5:2 adds and heard him.

3 JST 5:6 changes seven to twelve.

4 JST 5:6 changes seven to twelve.

5 JST 5:6 changes the phrase seven spirits to twelve servants.

6 McConkie and Parry, Guide to Scriptural Symbols, 93.

7 Whitney, Saturday Night Thoughts, 11.

8 Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, 7:940, s.v. "seals, sealing."

9 Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, 7:942, s.v. "seals, sealing."

10 Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, 7:945, s.v. "seals, sealing."

11 Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, 7:945, s.v. "seals, sealing."

12 The LDS Bible Dictionary states that apostle means "one sent forth" (612, s.v. "apostle").

13 Bratcher and Hatton, Handbook on the Revelation of John, 102.

14 See, for example, NIV.

15 Metzger, Breaking the Code, 54.

16 Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 190.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Many authors have taught that Peter, James, and John composed the First Presidency of their day (see, for example, Taylor, Gospel Kingdom, 138). Joseph Fielding Smith, in Doctrines of Salvation, 3:152, wrote that "Peter, James, and John, acted as the First Presidency of the Church in their day."
[^2] 2 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 150-51; emphasis added.
[^3] 3 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^4] 4 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 52.
[^5] 5 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^6] 6 McConkie, "Understanding the Book of Revelation," 87.
[^7] 7 JST 1:3 replaces the relative pronoun that with the relative pronoun who. The JST also adds the word understand, which clarifies the meaning of the text.
[^8] 8 JST 1:3 replaces the expression the time is at hand with the phrase the time of the coming of the Lord draweth nigh to clarify the meaning of the text.
[^9] 9 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^10] 10 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^11] 11 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 51-52.
[^12] 12 JST 1:4 adds, omits, and alters many words of this verse.
[^13] 13 JST 1:5 adds a long note of clarification and identifies John as the faithful witness of Jesus Christ.
[^14] 14 JST 1:6 adds these important words.
[^15] 15 JST 1:6 omits the conjunction and.
[^16] 16 JST 1:7 adds the preposition For and clarifies that Jesus will come "in the clouds with ten thousands of his saints in the kingdom, clothed with the glory of his Father."
