Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation ( 1998)

Rev. 6

THE OPENING OF FOUR SEALS: TYPES OF THINGS TO COME (6:1-8)

John describes the Lamb's opening of the first four seals, which contain brief information about the first four thousand years of the earth's "temporal existence" (D&C 77:6). Comparatively little attention is given in Revelation to these and the fifth seal, for only eleven verses are dedicated to them. One commentator points out that John's entire revelation "from beginning to end takes 317 verses, and yet John spends only eleven verses (or about 3.5 percent) on the first five thousand years of history." [^1]

At the opening of each seal, one of the four beasts invites John to "come and see." John responds with "and I saw," "and I beheld," "and I looked," followed by a brief description of what he sees: four horses and their riders. Each horse is a different color (white, red, black, and pale), and each is interpreted symbolically. Three of the four horsemen possess objects: the first has a bow and a crown, the second a sword, and the third a pair of balances. The fourth horseman does not possess an object, but he is named "Death" (the first three horsemen are not named). Each of the four horses, horsemen, and the objects or name attached to them tells us something about the thousand years that each represents.

Beyond what is mentioned in Rev. 6:1-8, we know very little about the four horsemen, who travel in silence, and their horses. We do not know their origin or their direction of travel. Do they come from heaven or hell? [^2] Are they destroying angels from God executing his divine plan to destroy the wicked, or are they evil men from hell who are asserting their agency to kill and cause wars and famines upon the earth? Are the four horsemen related to the four destroying angels described in Revelation 7? Do they correspond in some manner with the four horses of Zech. 1:8-11; 6:2 Do the four horsemen and their horses pertain only to the first four thousand years, or are they also types of things to come?

Joseph Smith taught, "John saw beasts that had to do with things on the earth, but not in past ages. The beasts which John saw had to devour the inhabitants of the earth in days to come [quotes Rev. 6:1-4]." [^3] This statement suggests that the activities of the four horses and horsemen, representing the first four thousand years, also typify wars, famines, and tribulations yet to come upon the earth.

The number four has symbolic importance in Revelation, where we read about the four living creatures (4:6, 8; 5:6, 8, 14), the four horses, and the four horsemen who correspond with the first four seals (announced by the four beasts; 6:1-8), the "four angels standing on the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth" (7:1), and the "four quarters of the earth" (20:8).

The first seals are linked together into a unified group of four (four seals, four horses, four horsemen, four statements from four beasts), while the final three seals belong to a second group. This pattern of one group of four and one group of three parallels that pattern set forth for the seven trumpets (Rev. 8-9) and the seven vials (Rev. 16).

According to one scholar, the number four "has its origin in the orientation to four sides which, as before, behind and to right and left, are suggested by man's physical constitution. The four corners of heaven or the world embrace the whole of man's horizon." [^4] The following table sets forth the structure of Rev. 6:1-8.

Table 2

Four HorsesWhite (6:1-2)Red (6:3-4)Black (6:5-6)Pale (6:7-8)Lamb opens four sealsLamb opened one of the seals . . .when he had opened the second seal,when he had opened the third seal,when he had opened the fourth seal,Four beasts speaknoise of thunder, saying,I heard the second beast say,I heard the third beast say,I heard the voice of the fourth beast say,Words of the four beastsCome and see.Come and see. . . .Come and see.Come and see. John beholdsAnd I saw,And I beheld,And I looked,Objects or description of the four horsemenhe that sat on him had a bow; and a crown was given unto him: . . .there was given unto him a great sword.he that sat on him had a pair of balances in his hand. . . .his name that sat on him was Death,. . . . .Significance of the four horsemenhe went forth conquering, and to conquer.. . . power was given to him that sat thereon to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one another: . . .A measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny; and see thou hurt not the oil and the wine.Hell followed with him. And power was given unto them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger, and with death, and with the beasts of the earth.

Rev. 6:1-8

1 And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals, [one of the four beasts], [^5] and I heard, as it were, the noise of thunder, saying, Come and see.

2 And I saw, and behold a white horse: and he that sat on him had a bow; and a crown was given unto him: and he went forth conquering, and to conquer.

3 And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second beast say, Come and see.

4 And there went out another horse that was red: and power was given to him that sat thereon to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one another: and there was given unto him a great sword.

5 And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third beast say, Come and see. And I beheld, and lo a black horse; and he that sat on him had a pair of balances in his hand.

6 And I heard a voice in the midst of the four beasts say, A measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny; and see thou hurt not the oil and the wine.

7 And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth beast say, Come and see.

8 And I looked, and behold a pale horse: and his name that sat on him was Death, and Hell followed with him. And power was given unto them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger, and with death, and with the beasts of the earth.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

6:1 I saw . . . and I heard. As John witnesses the opening of the first seal, he hears something resembling the noise of thunder.

Lamb opened one of the seals. The Lamb, who now has the sealed book in his own hand, opens the first seal, which "contains the revealed will, mysteries, and the works of God" (D&C 77:6) for the first one thousand years of the earth's temporal existence. The time frame here, according to one estimate, is approximately 4000 to 3000 B.C. Elder Orson F. Whitney wrote, "According to received chronology—admittedly imperfect, yet approximately correct—four thousand years, or four of the seven great days given to this planet as the period of its `temporal existence,' had passed before Christ was crucified; while nearly two thousand years have gone by since." [^6]

By virtue of his supreme, divine, and infinite sacrifice, Jesus Christ is worthy to open the seals (see commentary on 5:9). Only he can open the view of the earth's temporal existence that is the history of humankind upon the earth.

noise of thunder. This sound probably denotes the powerful voice of the beast. Heavenly voices, including that of the Father (John 12:29), are often likened to thunder (10:3; 14:2; 19:6).

[one of the four beasts] . . . saying, Come and see. The beast guides John; this may be the first beast, which "was like a lion" (4:7). For "beast," see commentary on 4:6.

6:2 white horse . . . he that sat on him had a bow. Elder Bruce R. McConkie identifies the rider of the "white horse" as Enoch, who was "a general over the armies of the saints." [^7] Moses 7:13-16 supports this idea, explaining that Enoch "led the people of God, and their enemies came to battle against them; . . . and all nations feared greatly, so powerful was the word of Enoch, and so great was the power of the language which God had given him. There also came up a land out of the depth of the sea, and so great was the fear of the enemies of the people of God, that they fled and stood afar off and went upon the land which came up out of the depth of the sea. And the giants of the land, also, stood afar off; and there went forth a curse upon all people that fought against God; and from that time forth there were wars and bloodshed among them; but the Lord came and dwelt with his people, and they dwelt in righteousness."

went forth conquering, and to conquer. The white horse and crown speak symbolically of victory, and the bow represents war. Conceivably the white horse and its rider can symbolize any of the righteous men of this time period who fought and prevailed against evil, including Adam or his descendants.

6:3 when he had opened the second seal. John sees Christ open the second seal, which "contains the revealed will, mysteries, and the works of God" (D&C 77:6), for the second thousand years of the earth's temporal existence. The time frame here, according to one estimate, is approximately 3000 to 2000 B.C. [^8]

I heard the second beast say, Come and see. The beast, which may be the second beast identified earlier that was "like a calf" (4:7), guides the Revelator. For "beast," see commentary on 4:6.

6:4 there went out another horse that was red. The time represented by the second seal was an era of war and bloodshed. The color red signifies bloodshed; the horse, according to prophetic symbolism, represents a means of transport in war (Job 39:19-24). The rider of the horse carries a large, or "great sword," a symbol of war (3 Ne. 2:19; D&C 45:33) and a weapon designed expressly to take human lives. In addition, the rider is empowered to "take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one another" (6:4). John does not identify the rider; it is possible that the rider symbolizes all wicked and bloodthirsty men who murder and make war.

Moses identifies this era as a time when "the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. . . . The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence. And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth. And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence through them; and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth. Make thee an ark" (Gen. 6:5, 11-14). So great was the violence and wickedness during the period of this seal that God destroyed all flesh, except the eight souls who were aboard the ark.

to take peace from the earth. A similar phrase is used in a modern revelation: "The day speedily cometh; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion" (D&C 1:35; emphasis added).

6:5 when he had opened the third seal. John witnesses Christ open the third seal, which "contains the revealed will, mysteries, and the works of God" (D&C 77:6), for the third thousand years of the earth's temporal existence. The time frame here, according to one estimate, is approximately 2000 to 1000 B.C. [^9]

I heard the third beast say, Come and see. The beast, which may be the third beast identified earlier who "had a face as a man" (4:7), guides John. For "beast," see commentary on 4:6.

black horse. The time represented by the third seal was an era of great famine. John sees a black horse, black being the color of extreme hunger and famine (Lam. 4:8-9). In the hand of the rider he sees a pair of balances, which are used to measure the food during the famine, a practice known from earlier times (Lev. 26:26). For instance, on one occasion the Lord prophesied through Ezekiel that he would cause a famine by["break[ing] the staff of bread in Jerusalem"; the Jerusalemites, he explained, would "eat bread by weight, and with care; and they shall drink water by measure" (Ezek. 4:16).

During this thousand-year time span, Abraham records, "a famine prevailed throughout all the land of Chaldea, and my father was sorely tormented because of the famine. . . . Now the Lord God caused the famine to wax sore in the land of Ur, insomuch that Haran, my brother, died" (Abr. 1:30; 2:1). As Abraham and Sarai traveled through the land, he stopped and "built an altar in the land of Jershon, and made an offering unto the Lord, and prayed that the famine might be turned away from my father's house, that they might not perish. . . . And I, Abraham, concluded to go down into Egypt, to sojourn there, for the famine became very grievous" (Abr. 2:17, 21).

We recall that Joseph, the great-grandson of Abraham, interpreted Pharaoh's dream of a famine that would last seven years and would "consume the land" (Gen. 41:30). The famine existed in Egypt as well as other lands. Gen. 41 relates: "And the famine was over all the face of the face of the earth . . . and the famine waxed sore in the land of Egypt. And all countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn; because that the famine was so sore in all lands" (Gen. 41:56-57). Jacob, Joseph's father, also experienced the famine while dwelling in Canaan, and he sent ten of his sons to Egypt to buy corn (Gen. 42:1-5).

6:6 I heard a voice in the midst of the four beasts. Again, one of the "beasts" interprets for John.

measure of wheat for a penny/three measures of barley for a penny. A measure (approximately one quart) represents the daily food ration of one adult, and a penny (Matt. 20:2) was one day's pay. Barley, the food of the destitute, cost a third as much as wheat. The measurement of small quantities of food speaks of a time of famine.

hurt not the oil and the wine. "The warning against hurting the oil and wine sets limits to the destruction about to be carried out by the horseman. Since the roots of the olive and vine go deeper [than the roots of barley and wheat], they would not be affected by a limited drought that would all but destroy the grain." [^10]

6:7 when he had opened the fourth seal. John sees Christ open the fourth seal, which "contains the revealed will, mysteries, and the works of God" (D&C 77:6) for the fourth thousand years of the earth's temporal existence. The time frame here, according to one estimate, is approximately 1000 B.C. to A.D 1. [^11]

I heard the voice of the fourth beast say, Come and see. The beast, perhaps the fourth beast identified earlier that "was like a flying eagle" (4:7), guides John. For "beast," see commentary on 4:6.

6:8 pale horse. The color described here reminds us of a corpse and of death. The rider's name is Death, and one named Hell follows after him to receive the dead. We are not told how Hell travels, whether by horse or on foot. John informs us that Death will kill one-fourth of earth's inhabitants by sword, famine, plague, and wild beasts. Ezekiel calls these four ways to die (sword, famine, plague, and wild beasts) the "four sore judgments" (Ezek. 14:21) that God sends upon the wicked.

Certainly the millennium of the fourth seal was an era of numerous wars. In the biblical world alone we are aware of wars between the Northern Kingdom of Israel and the Southern Kingdom of Judah; there were also wars among other Near Eastern groups, including the Assyrians, Persians, Babylonians, Syrians, and Egyptians.

Hell followed with him. The horseman named Death and his companion Hell (signifying spirit prison) are given power over a quarter of the people of earth. The verse in Revelation recalls a prophecy of Isaiah: "Hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth without measure: and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoiceth, shall descend into it" (Isa. 5:14).

power was given unto them over the fourth part of the earth. During the time period of the fourth seal Death (followed by Hell) destroys one quarter of the earth's inhabitants.

to kill with sword/hunger/death/beasts. See "pale horse," above.

THE OPENING OF THE FIFTH SEAL: THE MARTYRS' CRIES (6:9-11)

At the opening of the fifth seal, John sees individuals who were slain because of their testimonies of Christ. After listening to their prayers offered unto God "with a loud voice," he then witnesses that each of the martyrs is given the white robes of salvation.

Rev. 6:9-11

9 And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held:

10 And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?

11 And white robes were given unto every one of them; and it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until their fellowservants also and their brethren, that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

6:9 when he had opened the fifth seal. The Lamb opens the fifth seal, which "contains the revealed will, mysteries, and the works of God" (D&C 77:6), for the fifth thousand years of the earth's temporal existence. The time frame here, according to one estimate, is approximately A.D. 1 to 1000. [^12]

under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony. The Revelator sees those who have suffered or would suffer martyrdom for the sake of Christ and his gospel, such as Antipas of Pergamos (2:13). Such martyrs and their spilled blood are likened to sacrificial animals, whose blood was poured out at the foot of the altar by the priests (Lev. 4:7). John may have seen the martyrs Joseph Smith and Hyrum Smith under the altar. John Taylor wrote that the "innocent blood" of Joseph and Hyrum, "with the innocent blood of all the martyrs under the altar that John saw, will cry unto the Lord of Hosts till he avenges that blood on the earth" (D&C 135:7).

The martyrs were slain for two reasons: for preaching the word of God and for their testimonies of Christ. John was exiled to the Isle of Patmos for identical reasons (1:9).

6:10 they cried with a loud voice. The prayer of the martyrs is loud because of their great number and their anguish (5:12).

how long . . . dost thou not judge and avenge our blood. From the martyrdom of Abel, whose "blood crieth unto [God] from the ground" (Gen. 4:10; Luke 11:50-51), to the deaths of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, whose "innocent blood" spilled "on the floor of Carthage jail" (D&C 135:7), martyrs for Jesus Christ cry out to God, "How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?" Similarly, the psalmist prayed, "Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph?" (Ps. 94:3), and Habakkuk cried, "O Lord, how long shall I cry, and thou wilt not hear!" (Hab. 1:2). But Jesus assures us, "Shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with men?" (JST Luke 18:7). The martyrs will not stop petitioning the Lord "till he avenges that blood on the earth" (D&C 135:7).

When will God "judge and avenge" the innocent blood of the martyrs? That judgment and avenging may begin when he sends the judgments of the seven trumpets and seven bowls, as set forth in Revelation.

6:11 white robes were given unto every one of them. A white robe is the dress of the glorified Christ (3 Ne. 11:8; see also "robe of righteousness," 2 Ne. 4:33), heavenly messengers (1 Ne. 8:5; 14:19; JS 1:32), and exalted Saints (3:4-5; 7:9; 2 Ne. 9:14; D&C 109:76). Here the martyrs are given white robes, signifying that they have made the Atonement effective in their lives and have "washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb" (7:14). Jesus taught how one should wash his robes: "And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end" (3 Ne. 27:19; 1 Ne. 12:10).

Garments and robes are images often used to symbolize the inner state of the persons wearing them (Morm. 9:35; Ether 13:10). For example, the wearing of white robes represents an individual becoming an immortal, celestial person with a celestial body. Hence, the white robes identified in this passage refer to the celestial bodies of glory and light possessed by the martyrs.

rest yet for a little season. The martyrs are instructed to wait until after the martyrdom of other Saints. The Prophet Joseph Smith, his brother Hyrum, and the two prophets of Rev. 11 may be included in this group of individuals who would "be killed as they were." The martyrs were to rest until the allotted number of those who were to join them in martyrdom was complete (see RSV, NEB, JB, NIV, and GNB).

THE OPENING OF THE SIXTH SEAL: WARNING VOICES (6:12-17)

This section sets forth seven signs of the times that will occur after the opening of the sixth seal but before the second coming of the Lord. The seven signs are the earthquake, the darkened sun, the blood-red moon, falling stars, the heavens opening as a scroll, the movement of mountains and islands, and fear coming upon humanity. Many passages of scripture parallel this section.

These signs of the times warn the earth's inhabitants that the end of the earth is near. They are designed, in part, to encourage the wicked to repent of their sins. In fact, many will misinterpret these signs, believing that the time of the Second Coming has actually arrived. They will say, "The great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?" (6:17). But the scriptures inform us that Jesus will not make his great appearance until sometime after the opening of the seventh seal (D&C 77:12-13).

These signs are imminent. On 27 December 1832, the Lord revealed, "Not many days hence and the earth shall tremble and reel to and fro as a drunken man; and the sun shall hide his face, and shall refuse to give light; and the moon shall be bathed in blood; and the stars shall become exceedingly angry, and shall cast themselves down as a fig that falleth from off a fig-tree" (D&C 88:87).

Rev. 6:12-17

12 And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and, lo, there was a great earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon became as blood;

13 And the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind.

14 And the[heaven[s opened] [^13] as a scroll [is opened] [^14] when it is rolled together; and every mountain and island [was] [^15] moved out of [its place]. [^16]

15 And the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every free man, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains;

16 And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb.

17 For the great day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand?

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

6:12 he . . . opened the sixth seal. Christ opens the sixth seal, which "contains the revealed will, mysteries, and the works of God" (D&C 77:6), for the sixth thousand years of the earth's temporal existence. The time frame here, according to one estimate, is approximately A.D. 1000 to 2000. [^17]

there was a great earthquake. Earthquakes, along with other catastrophic events, signify "great and terrible judgments of the Lord" (1 Ne. 12:4-5; Isa. 29:6; Ezek. 38:19-20). Before the Second Coming, God sends earthquakes to those who do not believe in Jesus Christ, for "they that believe not in him [the Messiah] shall be destroyed, both by fire, and by tempest, and by earthquakes, and by bloodsheds, and by pestilence, and by famine" (2 Ne. 6:15).

Earthquakes also serve as warning voices to earth's wicked inhabitants: "The Lord shall utter his voice out of heaven, saying: Hearken, O ye nations of the earth. . . . How oft have I called upon you by the mouth of my servants, and by the ministering of angels, and by mine own voice, and by the voice of thunderings, and by the voice of lightnings, and by the voice of tempests, and by the voice of earthquakes, and great hailstorms, and by the voice of famines and pestilences of every kind, and by the great sound of a trump, and by the voice of judgment" (D&C 43:23-25).

D&C 87 teaches: "With famine, and plague, and earthquake, and the thunder of heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also, shall the inhabitants of the earth be made to feel the wrath, and indignation, and chastening hand of an Almighty God, until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations" (v. 6).

And again, the Lord has revealed that "after your [the Lord's servants] testimony cometh wrath and indignation upon the people. For after your testimony cometh the testimony of earthquakes, that shall cause groanings in the midst of her, and men shall fall upon the ground and shall not be able to stand. And also cometh the testimony of the voice of thunderings, and the voice of lightnings, and the voice of tempests" (D&C 88:88-90).

The great earthquake identified in Rev. 6:12 will serve as a testimony and a warning voice to earth's people that the Lord is God. It may cause the sun to become black and the moon to look like blood. Other earthquakes are identified in 11:13; 16:17-20.

sun became black as sackcloth. The sun will look as if it is covered with black sackcloth, which is made from the hair of black goats. Sackcloth symbolizes mourning and its connection with darkening the sun implies that all God's creations are in mourning over the wickedness of the world. As seen by the inhabitants of the earth, the sun may appear to be darkened on account of volcanic ash, dust, smoke, or other such things. This darkening may be a result of the "great earthquake," or some other cause. We must remember that "the events of that day shall be so unprecedented and so beyond human experience, that the prophets are and have been at an almost total loss for words to describe those realities pressed in upon them by the spirit of revelation." [^18]

Many prophecies have testified of this great event: "the sun shall be turned into darkness" (Joel 2:31) "shall the sun be darkened" (Matt. 24:29; JS 1:33); "the sun shall be darkened" (D&C 29:14; 34:9; 45:41) "the sun shall hide his face, and shall refuse to give light" (D&C 88:87).

moon became as blood. The moon does not become actual blood but becomes "as blood," probably meaning that it will look red to the inhabitants of the earth. This change in the appearance of the moon may be the result of the earthquake spoken of in this same verse, which would send a great amount of dust and debris into the atmosphere, which could make the moon appear red "as blood." Many prophets have foretold this event, using such phrases as "the moon into blood" (Joel 2:31; Acts 2:20), "the moon shall be turned into blood" (D&C 29:14), "and the moon be turned into blood" (D&C 34:9; 45:42), and "the moon shall be bathed in blood" (D&C 88:87).

6:13 stars of heaven fell unto the earth. Many of the stars that we see in the sky are much larger than our sun, and their size alone, not to mention their extreme heat, would pulverize and melt the earth. Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "Such an earthquake has never before been known (16:17-21), and it shall appear to man on earth as though the stars in the sidereal heavens are falling. And in addition, as here recorded, some heavenly meteors or other objects, appearing as stars, will fall `unto the earth.' " [^19]

Other prophets besides John have foreseen this event. They write: "the stars shall fall from heaven" (Matt. 24:29; JS 1:33; D&C 29:14) and "the stars shall refuse their shining, and some shall fall" (D&C 34:9) "the stars fall from heaven" (D&C 45:42) "and the stars shall become exceedingly angry, and shall cast themselves down as a fig that falleth from off a fig-tree" (D&C 88:87).

as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs. "Untimely figs" should read "unripe figs," referring to winter figs that frequently fall off the tree during a great storm or a great gust of wind. Isaiah's words are similar: "And the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll: and all their host shall fall down, as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig from the fig tree" (Isa. 34:4).

6:14 [eaven[s opened] as a scroll. This difficult expression parallels a similar one in Isa. 34:4; there however, the heavens are "rolled together as a scroll," whereas here they are "opened as a scroll."

The expression "heavens opened as a scroll" may correspond with an experience described by Wilford Woodruff. "When the five men entered the camp there was not a cloud to be seen in the whole heavens, but as the men left the camp there was a small cloud like a black spot appeared in the north west, and it began to unroll itself like a scroll, and in a few minutes the whole heavens were covered with a pall as black as ink. This indicated a sudden storm which soon broke upon us." [^20]

every mountain and island [was] moved out of [its place]. This movement may be the result of the "great earthquake" spoken of in 6:12. In the following verse we learn that fearful individuals also hide in the "rocks of the mountains."

6:15 kings of the earth . . . and every free man, hid themselves. John lists seven categories of individuals here, the number seven denoting completeness. [^21] The list includes individuals belonging to the upper social class (kings; great, rich, and mighty men; and chief captains), middle class (free men), and lower class (bondmen)—all of whom will be affected by these cataclysmic events. Children are not included in this list, perhaps because of their innocence before God.

Why will people attempt to hide themselves from God? Three times Isaiah states that they will do so because of their "fear of the Lord" (Isa. 2:10, 19, 21), which fear is due to their wickedness and its consequences. Similarly, after their transgression, Adam and Eve also "hid themselves" from God (Gen. 3:8-10).

According to D&C 29:15, these signs of the times will cause "weeping and wailing among the hosts of men." Meanwhile the righteous, or those who worship the Lord in his sacred temples, will receive deliverance. The prophet Joel stated, "Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered: for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance" (Joel 2:32). A modern revelation, speaking of the same events, commands us to "be not troubled" (D&C 45:35).

6:16 said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us. Jesus Christ prophesied of these events to "a great company of people" who followed him as he walked to Calvary: "Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us" (Luke 23:27-30; Hosea 10:8).

face of him that sitteth on the throne. This expression is a reference to God the Father (see commentary on 4:2).

wrath of the Lamb. This phrase speaks of Jesus' righteous indignation.

6:17 great day of his wrath is come. It is the wicked who, as they hide themselves in the rocks, make this statement because of their fear. Because of the extraordinary events described in verses 12 through 14, the wicked will believe it is the end of the world. Though these events are certainly signs of the times, they do not occur at the Second Coming, for the revelations state explicitly that Christ will not come until after the opening of the seventh seal (see, for example, D&C 77:12-13). In John's book of Revelation, Christ does not make his great appearance until Rev. 19.

Further, the same prophetic writers who prophesied of the darkening of the sun, the moon becoming as blood, and stars falling from heaven (see commentary on 6:12-14) record that those events would occur before the Second Coming, not at the Second Coming: "The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of the Lord come" (Joel 2:31; emphasis added; see also Acts 2:20) "but behold, I say unto you that before this great day shall come the sun shall be darkened" (D&C 29:14; emphasis added); "but before that great day shall come, the sun shall be darkened (D&C 34:9; emphasis added); "and before the day of the Lord shall come, the sun shall be darkened" (D&C 45:42; emphasis added). D&C 88:87 notes that these events will occur "not many days hence."

who shall be able to stand? The psalmist asked, "Thou, even thou, art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry?" (Ps. 76:7).

1 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 51.

2 The phrase and there went out (4:1) is used often of angels who go out of the temple in heaven, suggesting that the four horsemen also went out from heaven (14:15, 17). In 15:6, the "seven angels came out of the temple, having the seven plagues."

3 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.

4 Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, 8:128, s.v. "four"; see also Bullinger, Number in Scripture, 123-34.

5 JST 6:1 moves the phrase one of the four beasts from one place in the verse to another.

6 Whitney, Saturday Night Thoughts, 12; see also McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:476; "Book of Revelation Overview," 50-53.

7 McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:477.

8 Whitney, Saturday Night Thoughts, 12; McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:478.

9 Whitney, Saturday Night Thoughts, 12; McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:479.

10 Mounce, Book of Revelation, 144.

11 Whitney, Saturday Night Thoughts, 12; McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:481.

12 Whitney, Saturday Night Thoughts, 12; McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:482.

13 JST 6:14 changes the phrase heaven departed to heavens opened.

14 JST 6:14 adds the phrase is opened.

15 JST 6:14 replaces were with was.

16 JST 6:14 replaces the phrase their places with its place.

17 Whitney, Saturday Night Thoughts, 12; McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:485-86.

18 McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:486.

19 McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:486.

20 History of the Church, 2:104.

21 These verses also depict seven consequences of man's wickedness: the earthquake, the darkened sun, the moon turned red, the falling stars, the opening of the heavens, the mountains and islands moving from their places, and the fear of all mankind.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Many authors have taught that Peter, James, and John composed the First Presidency of their day (see, for example, Taylor, Gospel Kingdom, 138). Joseph Fielding Smith, in Doctrines of Salvation, 3:152, wrote that "Peter, James, and John, acted as the First Presidency of the Church in their day."
[^2] 2 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 150-51; emphasis added.
[^3] 3 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^4] 4 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 52.
[^5] 5 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^6] 6 McConkie, "Understanding the Book of Revelation," 87.
[^7] 7 JST 1:3 replaces the relative pronoun that with the relative pronoun who. The JST also adds the word understand, which clarifies the meaning of the text.
[^8] 8 JST 1:3 replaces the expression the time is at hand with the phrase the time of the coming of the Lord draweth nigh to clarify the meaning of the text.
[^9] 9 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^10] 10 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^11] 11 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 51-52.
[^12] 12 JST 1:4 adds, omits, and alters many words of this verse.
[^13] 13 JST 1:5 adds a long note of clarification and identifies John as the faithful witness of Jesus Christ.
[^14] 14 JST 1:6 adds these important words.
[^15] 15 JST 1:6 omits the conjunction and.
[^16] 16 JST 1:7 adds the preposition For and clarifies that Jesus will come "in the clouds with ten thousands of his saints in the kingdom, clothed with the glory of his Father."
[^17] 17 JST 1:8 adds this phrase.
[^18] 18 JST 1:8 omits the word saith.
[^19] 19 JST 1:8 changes the relative pronoun which to who.
[^20] 20 On the other churches of the period, see Charles, Critical and Exegetical Commentary, 1:8.
[^21] 21 Ford, Revelation, 376.
