Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation ( 1998)

Rev. 7

SEALING OF THE 144,000 DURING THE SIXTH SEAL (7:1-8)

The question posed at the end of Revelation 6: "Who shall be able to stand?" when the Lord sends his great judgments upon the earth is answered in Revelation 7: Those who possess the seal of the living God. This sealing secures and protects the righteous from the great destructions that will be poured out upon the earth's inhabitants, including the desolations that accompany the blowing of the seven trumpets and the pouring out of the seven vials (bowls) in Rev. 8, 9, and 16. Joseph Smith taught that the sealing mentioned here "signifies sealing the blessing upon their heads, meaning the everlasting covenant, thereby making their calling and election sure." [^1] The number of those sealed are 144,000; they are all high priests.

The events portrayed in this section will occur during our dispensation; they continue the events surrounding the opening of the sixth seal, which is discussed in Rev. 6:12 and in Doctrine and Covenants 77: "Q. What time are the things spoken of in this chapter [Rev. 7] to be accomplished? A. They are to be accomplished in the sixth thousand years, or the opening of the sixth seal" (v. 10).

Rev. 7:1-8

1 And after these things I saw four angels standing on the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that the wind should not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree.

2 And I saw another angel ascending from the east, having the seal of the living God: and [I heard him cry] [^2] with a loud voice to the four angels, to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea,

3 Saying, Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads.

4 And . . . [^3] the number of them [who] were sealed: . . . an hundred and forty and four thousand of all the tribes of the children of Israel.

5 Of the tribe of Juda were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Reuben were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Gad were sealed twelve thousand.

6 Of the tribe of Aser were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Nepthalim were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Manasses were sealed twelve thousand.

7 Of the tribe of Simeon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Levi were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Issachar were sealed twelve thousand.

8 Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Joseph were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Benjamin were sealed twelve thousand.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

7:1 after these things. After the events recorded in Rev. 6.

I saw four angels. In his vision, John sees "four destroying angels holding power over the four quarters of the earth," [^4] who are "sent forth from God, to whom is given power over the four parts of the earth, to save life and to destroy; these are they who have the everlasting gospel to commit to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people; having power to shut up the heavens, to seal up unto life, or to cast down to the regions of darkness" (D&C 77:8).

These angels are those who in 1831 were "waiting the great command to reap down the earth, to gather the tares that they may be burned" (D&C 38:12). Joseph Fielding Smith wrote that these four angels "seem to fit the description of the angels spoken of in the parable of the wheat and the tares (Matt. 13:24-43; and D&C 86:1-7) who plead with the Lord that they might go forth to reap down the field. They were told to let the wheat and the tares grow together to the time of the end of the harvest, which is the end of the world (Matt. 13:38-39). . . . These are now at work in the earth on their sacred mission." [^5]

Wilford Woodruff confirmed that the four angels are now at work: "Those angels have left the portals of heaven, and they stand over this people and this nation now, and are hovering over the earth waiting to pour out the judgments. And from this very day they shall be poured out." [^6]

standing on the four corners of the earth. This phrase seems to indicate that the four angels have power and authority ("standing" shows ascendancy or control; 10:2, 5) over the entire earth ("four corners of the earth" means the whole earth).

holding the four winds of the earth. The four winds originate from God, who uses them to scatter and destroy people and nations (Jer. 49:35-36; Zech. 2:6; Dan. 7:2; 11:4). The four winds are also sometimes connected with gathering peoples from all parts of the world (Matt. 24:31; D&C 133:7; JS 1:37). Here and in the following two verses the four winds are equated with damaging the earth, sea, and trees. God empowers the four angels to hold back the four winds, which appear to be metaphors of destruction, until his mortal servants are protected and sealed against the coming tribulations (Ezek. 9:4-6; see commentary on 7:2). Elsewhere, the book of Revelation makes it evident that angels are given control of the elements: in 14:18 and 16:5 we read of the angel "which had power over fire" and "the angel of the waters."

wind should not blow on the earth/sea/tree. It is unclear whether this expression refers to the actual destruction of land and waters (through natural disasters) or to the destruction of a portion of humankind (also through natural disasters), with the earth, sea, and trees being symbols of humanity. [^7]

7:2 another angel ascending from the east. "The angel ascending from the east is he to whom is given the seal of the living God over the twelve tribes of Israel; wherefore, he crieth unto the four angels having the ever-lasting gospel, saying: Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads. And, if you will receive it, this is Elias which was to come to gather together the tribes of Israel and restore all things. . . .

[[John's little book] was a mission . . . for him to gather the tribes of Israel; behold, this is Elias, who . . . must come and restore all things" (D&C 77:9, 14).

Who is the angel who ascends from the east? Sidney B. Sperry reasoned that "from the teaching in verses 9 and 14 [of D&C 77] one cannot help concluding (1) that John the Revelator has a commission to gather together the tribes of Israel and (2) that he is the Elias who, as it is written, must come and restore all things. If these conclusions are correct . . . then we are driven to a third conclusion, namely, that John the Revelator is the angel ascending from the east as related in Rev. 7:2." [^8]

east. This is the source of Christ's coming and light. Christ will come from the east, as will the light that will accompany his second coming.

seal of the living God. This seal pertains to the Abrahamic covenant and making one's calling and election sure, as Joseph Smith explained: "Four destroying angels holding power over the four quarters of the earth until the servants of God are sealed in their foreheads, which signifies sealing the blessing upon their heads, meaning the everlasting covenant, thereby making their calling and election sure. When a seal is put upon the father and mother, it secures their posterity, so that they cannot be lost, but will be saved by virtue of the covenant of their father and mother." [^9]

"A measure of this sealing is to confirm upon their head in common with Elijah the doctrine of election or the covenant with Abraham—which when a father and mother of a family have entered into, their children who have not transgressed are secured by the seal wherewith the parents have been sealed. And this is the oath of God unto our father Abraham, and this doctrine shall stand forever." [^10]

In another setting, Ezekiel envisioned the sealing, or marking, on the foreheads of the righteous and the subsequent destruction of the wicked as prefiguring the events recorded in Rev. 7:1-8: "And the Lord said unto him, Go through the midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the man that sigh and that cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst thereof. And to the others he said in mine hearing, Go ye after him through the city, and smite: let not your eye spare, neither have ye pity: Slay utterly old and young, both maids, and little children, and women: but come not near any man upon whom is the mark" (Ezek. 9:4-6).

The seal of the righteous recalls the mark of blood at Passover (Ex. 12:13). At that time those who possessed the mark of lamb's blood—that is, those who desired to make Christ's atonement effective in their lives—were spared the plague of God (Isa. 44:5; Gal. 6:17).

In short, God marks and seals the righteous with his seal, making them his and placing them under his protection. In the last days, those who possess God's seal on their foreheads will not be destroyed by the "four winds of the earth" (7:1-3). Joseph Smith explained: "Then, having this promise [of one's calling and election made sure] sealed unto them, it was an anchor to the soul, sure and steadfast. Though the thunders might roll and lightnings flash, and earthquakes bellow, and war gather thick around, yet this hope and knowledge would support the soul in every hour of trial, trouble and tribulation." [^11]

As a counterfeit to the true and sacred things of God, Satan places a mark on the forehead or the right hand of his followers (13:16; 14:9). These followers, however, will not be protected from God's "four winds," and they eventually will be destroyed by God (see commentary on 13:16; see also 16:2; 19:20).

[I heard him cry] . . . to the four angels. The "angel ascending from the east," who holds authority over the four angels, gives them direction (see also 7:3).

7:3 Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees. See commentary on 7:1.

sealed the servants of our God. See commentary on 7:2.

7:4 number . . . sealed . . . an hundred and forty and four thousand. A heavenly messenger informs John that the number of them who are sealed is 144,000. These sealed individuals "are high priests, ordained unto the holy order of God, to administer the everlasting gospel; for they are they who are ordained out of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, by the angels to whom is given power over the nations of the earth, to bring as many as will come to the church of the Firstborn" (D&C 77:11).

On 4 February 1844, Joseph Smith commented regarding the 144,000: "I attended prayer-meeting with the quorum in the assembly room, and made some remarks respecting the hundred and forty-four thousand mentioned by John the Revelator, showing that the selection of persons to form that number had already commenced." [^12] He explained: "There will be 144,000 saviors on Mount Zion, and with them an innumerable host that no man can number. Oh! I beseech you to go forward, go forward and make your calling and your election sure." [^13]

Rev. 14:3-5 explains that the 144,000 are "redeemed from the earth," are "virgins," "follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth," are "the firstfruits unto God," and are "without fault before . . . God" (see commentary on 14:3-5). Many commentators believe that the number 144,000 is not to be taken literally but that it signifies all the redeemed of the Lord. [^14]

tribes of the children of Israel. John is told that twelve thousand individuals from each of the tribes of Judah, Reuben, Gad, Asher, Nepthalim, Manasseh, Simeon, Levi, Issachar, Zabulon, Joseph, and Benjamin will be sealed—a total of 144,000 people. Judah heads the list instead of Reuben, probably because Christ belongs to the tribe of Judah (Heb. 7:14), and because Reuben lost the birthright. The tribe of Joseph is mentioned, as is that of his son Manasseh. But Joseph's other son, Ephraim, is not mentioned, nor is Dan. John provides no clue why the names on the list differ from those of the original twelve tribes.

A GREAT MULTITUDE OF EXALTED SOULS PRAISE GOD (7:9-17)

In an interlude between the events associated with the sixth (6:12-7:8) and the seventh seals (8:1) are portrayed events reserved for the righteous that will occur in the celestial kingdom (compare Joseph Smith's vision of the celestial kingdom, D&C 137). This vision continues the heavenly scene described in Rev. 4 and 5, in which the four living creatures, twenty-four elders, and a host of angels gathered and worshipped around God's throne. Rev. 7:9-17 provides hope for all who experience the plagues and tribulations that are set forth in Revelation (see especially chapters 8-9, 16). Those who persevere and endure to the end will reap great eternal blessings: they will possess white robes of light and glory and have in their hands the palms of victory and joy; they will serve God eternally in his temple and never again experience the hunger, thirst, and heat associated with mortality, for Jesus Christ himself will feed them and give them fresh and pure water from his "living fountains"; in this wonderful and glorious setting God himself will "wipe away all tears from [their] eyes."

This portion of Revelation contains two hymn-like sayings. The first, recorded in 7:10 and spoken by innumerable exalted souls who stand before God and Jesus Christ, pertains to the salvation that comes from God and Christ. The second, recorded in 7:12, is uttered by angels, the four living creatures, and the twenty-four elders, all of whom open and close the hymn with "Amen." The focus of this hymn is reverence and thanksgiving to God.

One of the elders serves as a guide to John by teaching him of the great blessings reserved for those who inherit the celestial kingdom. The teaching takes place in a question and answer format, similar to that of Nephi's great vision recorded in 1 Ne. 11.

Rev. 7:9-17

9 After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands;

10 And cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.

11 And all the angels stood round about the throne, and about the elders and the four beasts, and fell before the throne on their faces, and worshipped God,

12 Saying, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen.

13 And one of the elders answered, saying unto me, What are these which are arrayed in white robes? and whence came they?

14 And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said to me, These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.

15 Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them.

16 They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat.

17 For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

7:9 great multitude, which no man could number. In Rev. 5:11 John saw that there were one hundred million, plus "thousands of thousands," of angels around God's throne. Here John witnesses innumerable exalted Saints from all nations, extended families, and languages standing before God and Jesus Christ in heaven.

clothed with white robes. Exalted Saints wear white robes, signifying that they have overcome Satan and made the atonement of Christ effective in their lives (7:14). See commentary on 6:11.

palms in their hands. "Palms," or palm branches, symbolize victory and joy (D&C 109:76; 1 13:51; 2 Maccabees Maccabees 10:7). The "palms in their hands," meaning the hands of the exalted Saints, recalls Jesus' triumphal entry into Jerusalem before his sacrifice, when his disciples "took branches of palm trees, and went forth to meet him, and cried, Hosanna: Blessed is the King of Israel that cometh in the name of the Lord" (John 12:13). The symbolic "robes of righteousness," "palms in [the] hands," and "crowns of glory" are the attire of the exalted Saint in heaven (D&C 109:76).

7:10 cried with a loud voice. The hymn is sung by exalted souls, and they will sing again when Babylon falls (19:1). The voice is loud here because of the sheer numbers who are crying with the loud voice, "a great multitude, which no man could number" (7:9).

Salvation to our God . . . and unto the Lamb. The multitude directs their words to both the Father and the Son. Joseph Smith defined salvation as "nothing more nor less than to triumph over all our enemies and put them under our feet." [^15] Certainly this definition fits nicely into this context of victory and exaltation. The term salvation is used on two other occasions when the multitude sings a hymn (12:10; 19:1). Other versions clarify the confusing phrase "salvation to our God." For instance, the Revised Standard Version says, "Salvation belongs to our God," and the Good News Bible reads, "Our salvation comes from our God."

7:11 all the angels stood round about the throne . . . and worshipped God. In an earlier scene (5:11-14) the angels directed their devotion to Christ, but here they bow down before God the Father.

7:12 Amen: Blessing/glory/wisdom/thanksgiving/honour/power/might. . . . Amen. The seven attributes of God uttered by the angels represent the totality of his perfections, for the number seven represents completion. The angels begin and close their statement of worship with "Amen," one of the titles of Christ (3:14). "The word amen connotes the idea of that which has been unalterably confirmed (Num. 5:22), that which is sure, trustworthy, and faithful." [^16]

7:13-14 arrayed in white robes. One of the twenty-four elders, acting as a guide and an interpreter for John, asks him, "What are these which are arrayed in white robes" and "Whence came they?" John's response to his heavenly guide is simply, "Sir, thou knowest." The elder then explains that these exalted Saints are those who have experienced tribulation during mortality and have made the Atonement effective in their lives by washing their robes in Christ's blood (through repentance, obedience, and endurance). See commentary on 6:11.

great tribulation. Tribulation has always been part of the lives of those who accept and follow Christ (John 16:33; 2 Tim. 3:12; D&C 138:13), and eternal blessings and glory come after great tribulation (D&C 58:3-4). The tribulation mentioned here "is referring primarily to that final series of woes which will immediately precede the end. It is the hour of trial that is to come upon the whole world (3:10)." [^17]

washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. This statement is a common one in the Book of Mormon. It is clear that one's robes become pure and white through that individual's faith, faithfulness, and belief in Christ and his atoning sacrifice (1 Ne. 12:10-11; Alma 5:21; Morm. 9:6). See commentary on 6:11.

7:15 Therefore are they before the throne of God. The adverb therefore has a conjunctive force between verses 14 and 15: it is because the Saints have "washed their robes" in Christ's blood that they are able to stand before God in heaven (D&C 121:45).

serve him day and night in his temple. The exalted Saints serve God "forever in his kingdom, where, in the literal sense, there is neither night nor a temple. See Rev. 21:22-23." [^18]

One way that we may gain the privilege of serving God day and night in the heavenly temple is to serve God regularly and often in the earthly temple. President Spencer W. Kimball interpreted this verse in this way: "I can envision not only many more temples, as the Lord directs us when and where to build them, but I foresee the day when we will make around the clock use of all these sacred, holy edifices. I repeat a statement made at the dedication of the great temple in Washington . . .: `The day is coming and not too far ahead of us when all temples on this earth will be going day and night.' " [^19]

he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them. A better translation for the phrase "shall dwell among them" may be found in the Jerusalem Bible, which reads "will spread his tent over them." This expression recalls the tabernacle of Moses, which was a tent. Similar to the way the earthly temple renders spiritual protection for those who worship therein, here God himself will serve as a temple and provide eternal shelter for the righteous.

7:16 They shall hunger no more, neither thirst . . . neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. The language of 7:16 recalls Isa. 49:10: "They shall not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat nor sun smite them: for he that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them." It also recalls Ps. 121:6: "The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night." This symbolic language indicates that exalted souls will not suffer the tribulations associated with mortality, such as fatigue, hunger, and thirst.

In the literal sense, it will not be necessary for the sun to shine on those who inherit the celestial kingdom because "the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof" (21:23; 22:5; Isa. 60:19).

7:17 Lamb . . . shall feed them. Many translations say the "Lamb . . . will be their shepherd" (RSV, NEB, JB, NIV, GNB; see also Isa. 40:11; Ezek. 34:23; John 10:11-16).

lead them unto living fountains of waters. Metaphorically, Christ is the "fountain of living waters" (Jer. 17:13) and the "fountain of all righteousness" (Ether 12:28). He says to those who are spiritually thirsty, "I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life freely" (21:6; 22:17). A parallel is found in 22:1, which speaks of a "pure river of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb."

God shall wipe away all tears. The language of this passage recalls Isaiah's prophecy that "the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces" (Isa. 25:8). Later in Revelation we read, "God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying" (21:4). Tears come from the pain and sorrow associated with mortality: affliction, pain, death, and personal sin. When he dwells with us after his coming, Jesus Christ, who is well acquainted with grief (Isa. 53:3), will remove the pains of our mortality.

1 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 321.

2 JST 7:2 replaces he cried with I heard him cry.

3 JST 7:4 omits I heard and and there . . . sealed and changes the pronoun which to who.

4 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 321.

5 Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 2:70.

6 Woodruff, "Temple Worker's Excursion," 512.

7 "The trees, especially vulnerable to gusts of wind, represent all the living." D'aragon, "Apocalypse," in Jerome Biblical Commentary, ed. Brown, 477.

8 Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium, 367.

9 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 321.

10 Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 241.

11 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 298.

12 History of the Church, 6:196.

13 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 366.

14 Draper, Opening the Seven Seals, 83; Metzger, Breaking the Code, 61.

15 Dahl and Cannon, Teachings of Joseph Smith, 600.

16 McConkie and Parry, Guide to Scriptural Symbols, 115.

17 Mounce, Book of Revelation, 164.

18 McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:496.

19 Kimball, "Temples—Now and in the Future," 4-5.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Many authors have taught that Peter, James, and John composed the First Presidency of their day (see, for example, Taylor, Gospel Kingdom, 138). Joseph Fielding Smith, in Doctrines of Salvation, 3:152, wrote that "Peter, James, and John, acted as the First Presidency of the Church in their day."
[^2] 2 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 150-51; emphasis added.
[^3] 3 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^4] 4 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 52.
[^5] 5 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^6] 6 McConkie, "Understanding the Book of Revelation," 87.
[^7] 7 JST 1:3 replaces the relative pronoun that with the relative pronoun who. The JST also adds the word understand, which clarifies the meaning of the text.
[^8] 8 JST 1:3 replaces the expression the time is at hand with the phrase the time of the coming of the Lord draweth nigh to clarify the meaning of the text.
[^9] 9 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^10] 10 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^11] 11 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 51-52.
[^12] 12 JST 1:4 adds, omits, and alters many words of this verse.
[^13] 13 JST 1:5 adds a long note of clarification and identifies John as the faithful witness of Jesus Christ.
[^14] 14 JST 1:6 adds these important words.
[^15] 15 JST 1:6 omits the conjunction and.
[^16] 16 JST 1:7 adds the preposition For and clarifies that Jesus will come "in the clouds with ten thousands of his saints in the kingdom, clothed with the glory of his Father."
[^17] 17 JST 1:8 adds this phrase.
[^18] 18 JST 1:8 omits the word saith.
[^19] 19 JST 1:8 changes the relative pronoun which to who.
