Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation ( 1998)

Rev. 8

SILENCE IN HEAVEN; ANGELS PREPARE TO SOUND THEIR TRUMPETS (8:1-5)

Several events occur in the temple in heaven when Christ opens the seventh and final seal and silence reigns in heaven for "about . . . half an hour." The seven angels are each given a trumpet, and they prepare themselves to sound them. An eighth angel performs duties similar to those of a priestly functionary of the earthly temple: while standing at the altar he offers the incense offering unto God as the Saints are praying. Afterwards he takes the censer, fills it with the coals from the altar of sacrifice, and casts the coals downward from heaven unto the earth, symbolizing the judgments of God that are cast down on earth's inhabitants. All of this presumably occurs during the silence in heaven, which lasts for "about the space of half an hour" (8:1).

Rev. 8:1-5

1 And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven about the space of half an hour.

2 And I saw the seven angels which stood before God; and to them were given seven trumpets.

3 And another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer; and there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar which was before the throne.

4 And the smoke of the incense, which came with the prayers of the saints, ascended up before God out of the angel's hand.

5 And the angel took the censer, and filled it with fire of the altar, and cast it into the earth: and there were voices, and thunderings, and lightnings, and an earthquake.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

8:1 when he had opened the seventh seal. Christ opens the seventh seal, which "contains the revealed will, mysteries, and the works of God" (D&C 77:6), for the seventh thousand years of the earth's temporal existence.

The number seven signifies completion. During the seventh seal we anticipate the completion of God's work, as indicated by D&C 77:12: "In the beginning of the seventh thousand years will the Lord God sanctify the earth, and complete the salvation of man. . . . The sounding of the trumpets of the seven angels are the preparing and finishing of his work, in the beginning of the seventh thousand years."

silence in heaven. (See also D&C 88:95). This silence seems to last through the activities of the angel at the altar described in 8:2-5, after which "voices and thunderings" followed by the sounding of the first trumpet break the stillness of heaven. The meaning of silence here is obscure, although it may have one or more meanings.

Several scriptural passages equate silence with God's withholding his judgments upon the wicked. When there is silence in heaven, no judgments are sent upon the earth. God breaks the silence by sending his judgments. The psalmist prophesied: "Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him. He shall call to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that he may judge his people" (Ps. 50:3-4). Also, "Keep not thou silence, O God: hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God. For, lo, thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thee have lifted up the head. . . . O my God, make them like a wheel; as the stubble before the wind. As the fire burneth a wood, and as the flame setteth the mountains on fire; so persecute them with thy tempest" (Ps. 83:1-2, 13-14; 35:22; Hab. 2:20-3:2 After listing many evils of the people, the Lord then promises through Isaiah, "I will not keep silence, but will recompense, even recompense into their bosom" (Isa. 65:6). A latter-day revelation reveals, "For all flesh is corrupted before me; and the powers of darkness prevail upon the earth, among the children of men, in the presence of all the hosts of heaven—which causeth silence to reign, and all eternity is pained, and the angels are waiting the great command to reap down the earth, to gather the tares that they may be burned" (D&C 38:11-12). In Revelation silence is interrupted and followed with God's judgments.

Silence in heaven may take place while the Saints pray. The phrase "prayers of the saints" is mentioned in these verses twice, and the offering of incense (symbolizing the prayers, Luke 1:10) by an angel of God takes a central place in this scene. All of the creatures and exalted Saints in heaven are silent as the mortal Saints' prayers are offered to God (8:3). "Is it too fanciful to suppose, as some have suggested, that everything in heaven halts so that the prayers of the saints may be heard?" [^1]

about the space of half an hour. It is uncertain if this time is to be taken literally. "The half hour, it has been speculated, may actually approach twenty-one years, based on the Lord's time being 1,000 years to the day (see Abr. 3:4; 2 Pet. 3:8). If such is correct, it will be a period when all will seem to be at rest, a return to the normal after the pounding taken during the sixth seal. The earth will cease to shake, the stars to fall, and the cosmos will return to a definite pattern. However, no matter what the duration, wickedness will not cease." [^2]

8:2 I saw the seven angels which stood before God. Probably during the "half hour" of silence, John notices the seven angels receive seven trumpets. In 8:6 he will see them prepare to blow their trumpets, and in the next verse the first angel blows his trumpet. The chief goal of these angels is to prepare for the second coming of Christ: "The sounding of the trumpets of the seven angels are the preparing and finishing of [God's] work . . . the preparing of the way before the time of [Christ's] coming" (D&C 77:12). This will occur "in the beginning of the seventh thousand years" (D&C 77:12).

These seven angels are men who belong or have belonged to our earth (D&C 130:5). They may be the same seven angels who pour out the seven plagues upon the earth's inhabitants, as identified in Rev. 15:1, 6-8; 16:1. The seven priests who blew the seven trumpets and walked with the Lord's ark of the covenant in ancient Israel (Josh. 6:13) were shadows and types of these seven angels from heaven.

Apocryphal sources name the seven angels as Uriel, Raphael, Raguel, Michael, Saraqael, Gabriel, and Remiel (1 Enoch 20:1-8). All of these names end in the particle el, which means "God." One source states, "I am Raphael, one of the seven holy angels which present the prayers of the saints, and which go in and out before the Holy One" (Tobit 12:15). Luke 1:19 records, "I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God," and we know of Michael, Gabriel, and Raphael from modern-day revelation (D&C 128:21).

seven trumpets. The seven trumpets will be blown after the opening of the seventh seal, or "in the beginning of the seventh thousand years"; their purpose is to prepare the way for the Second Coming (D&C 77:12). At the sounding of each trump, great destructions occur upon the earth. For instance, as the first angel sounds his trump, "there followed hail and fire mingled with blood, and they were cast upon the earth: and the third part of trees was burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up" (8:7; see commentary on 8:6-13).

Trumpets were used in war in ancient Israel, which is in keeping with the context of their use here. Trumpets also played a prominent role in the Israelite temple and may have served as types of the trumpets that sound from the temple in heaven. Neh. 12:41 and 1 Chr. 15:24, for example, indicate that "there were seven trumpets in the temple orchestra." [^3] Trumpets were blown during times of peace and burnt offerings (Num. 10:10; 2 29:27-28), at certain feasts and at a Chr. new moon (Lev. 23:24; Num. 29:1), during solemn assemblies and fasting (Joel 2:15), on the Day of Atonement (Lev. 25:8-9), and at the dedication of the temple (2 Chr. 5:12-14).

The scriptures inform us that the day of the Lord will be announced by the sounding of a trumpet (Joel 2:1; Zeph. 1:14-16; Isa. 27:13; Zech. 9:14).

8:3 another angel. This angel is not one of the seven identified in the previous verse.

stood at the altar, having a golden censer; and there was given unto him much incense. A censer is a utensil, perhaps similar to a large spoon or very small shovel, which was used for the incense rite. It was employed by the priestly officiant for carrying a few of the burning coals. The action of the angel recalls the activities of the priests in the Israelite temple system, in which the high priest took a "censer full of burning coals of fire from off the altar" (Lev. 16:12) and poured a handful of incense into the burning coals, creating a cloud of incense that ascended into the sky (Num. 16:17-19). The burning incense symbolizes the prayers of the righteous, which ascend from the earth unto the throne of God (see commentary on 5:8).

that he should offer it with the prayers of all saints. In the Mosaic temple system the priest offered up the incense inside the temple at the same time that the multitude outside offered their prayers (Luke 1:10). Similarly, in the temple in heaven the angelic minister offers incense simultaneous "with the prayers of all saints" (see commentary on 5:8). Thus, as Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained, "The saints on both sides of the veil join in worshipping the Lord." [^4]

golden altar which was before the throne. The golden altar is the altar of incense, located before God's throne in the temple in heaven. Similarly, the incense alter of the earthly temple was covered with gold and was situated before the mercy seat, or Jehovah's throne (Ex. 30:1-6; 39:38). This altar may or may not be the same as that mentioned earlier in the verse; it is impossible to tell.

8:4 smoke of the incense . . . ascended up before God. See commentary on 8:3.

8:5 filled it with fire . . . and cast it into the earth. This rite copies, on a grander scale, a practice in ancient Israel in which the burning coals were cast near the sacrificial altar (Num. 16:36-40). Once they were scattered throughout the city (Ezek. 10:2-7). The same angel who offered incense upon the golden altar now fills the censer with "fire of the altar" and casts it down to the earth. This action symbolizes the pouring out of God's judgments upon earth and her inhabitants soon after the opening of the seventh seal. The burning coals recall the brimstone and fire that were cast down upon the wicked inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah. It is interesting to note that the first three trumpet blasts bring fire upon the earth (8:7-10).

there were voices/thunderings/lightnings/earthquake. See commentary on 4:5. The sound of the voices and thunderings shatter the silence in heaven that endured for half an hour (see 8:1).

FIRST FOUR TRUMPETS BRING JUDGMENTS (8:6-13)

The following instructs us concerning the blasts of the trumpets:

The seven angels will blow their trumpets at the beginning of the seventh thousand-year period to prepare the earth's inhabitants for the Second Coming (D&C 77:12).

The trumpets' blasts bring calamities upon the earth, which warn its inhabitants of greater destructions that will accompany the pouring out of the seven bowls identified in Rev. 16.

The calamities that accompany the blowing of the trumpets also encourage the earth's inhabitants to repent (9:20-21; 16:9, 11).

There is a progression of the degree of destruction in the groups of the seven seals, trumpets, and bowls: the fourth horseman affected a fourth part of the earth (6:8), the first four angels' trumpets are directed to one-third of the earth ("third part" is used twelve times in this section), and "the bowls complete the wrath of God (16:17)." [^5] The multiple mention of "third part" may have a historical precedent. Just as one-third of heaven's hosts were cast out for rebellion, so will one-third of the earth be smitten for the wickedness of her inhabitants.

The judgments of the first four trumpets are directed to nature and the elements (land, trees, grass, sea, fresh waters) and to heavenly bodies (sun, moon, stars), although humanity will be affected indirectly. The final three trumpets, represented by a threefold woe, are aimed directly at humanity.

The events that accompany the seven trumpets correspond to and recall the plagues of Egypt during the time of Moses: the hail, blood, and fire of the first trumpet parallel the seventh plague, in which God plagued Egypt with "hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous, such as there was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation" (Ex. 9:24) the sea becoming blood at the sound of the second trumpet recalls the first plague of Egypt, in which God turned the river into blood (Ex. 7:14-25) the waters becoming bitter at the sound of the third trumpet recalls the first plague, during which the Egyptians["lothe[d] to drink of the water of the river" (Ex. 7:18) the sound of the fourth trumpet will bring darkness, which parallels the ninth plague, during which God brought three days of darkness over Egypt, "even darkness which may be felt" (Ex. 10:21) and the locusts connected with the fifth trumpet (9:1-11) recall the locusts that plagued Egypt, destroying all vegetation "through all the land of Egypt" (Ex. 10:15).

These parallels suggest that Egypt is a type of the world and wickedness, and the plagues are shadows of what will come upon our world in the last days. Also, just as God punished those who were hostile to the prophet Moses and his people, he will again plague those who do not hearken to his voice. God said to Pharaoh, "For I will at this time send all my plagues upon thine heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people; that thou mayest know that there is none like me in all the earth" (Ex. 9:14).

We recall that before the sounding of the seven trumpets, an angel filled his censer with burning coals from the altar in the temple in heaven and then cast them to the earth (8:5). This fire became, symbolically, the fire that accompanied the first three trumpets: "the first angel sounded, and there followed hail and fire mingled with blood"; "the second angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain burning with fire"; and "the third angel sounded, and there fell a great star from heaven, burning as it were a lamp." The seven angels identified in Revelation may be the same angels mentioned in D&C 88:94-110 who will blast their trumpets.

Table 3 outlines the judgments that will accompany the blowing of the seven trumpets.

Table 3

Seven Angels Blow TrumpetsJudgment(s)Things Harmed or DestroyedPercentage/Amount of DamageAgent of Destructionfirst angel sounds trumpet (8:7)hail and fire mingled with blood are cast upon the earthtrees and green grassthird part of trees and all green grassburningsecond angel sounds trumpet (8:8-9)as it were a great mountain burning with fire was cast into the seasea, sea creatures, shipsone-third of sea becomes blood; one-third of living creatures of the sea die; one-third of ships are destroyedblood in the sea third angel sounds trumpet (8:10-11)there fell a great star from heaven, burning as it were a lamprivers, fountains of waters, many menthird part of rivers and waters, many men diewaters are made bitterfourth angel sounds trumpet (8:12)none listedsun, moon, stars, day and nightthird part of the sun, moon, and stars smitten and darkenedfifth angel sounds trumpet (9:1-12)star falls from heaven, is given the key of the bottomless pit, and he opens the bottomless pitsun, air, those without the seal of Godthose who do not have the sealsmoke, locustssixth angel sounds trumpet (9:13-21)four angels are loosed which were prepared to slay one-third of menmenthird part of men killedhorsemen and horsesseventh angel sounds trumpet (11:15-19)uncertainnone mentionednone mentionednone mentioned

Rev. 8:6-13

6 And the seven angels which had the seven trumpets prepared themselves to sound.

7 The first angel sounded, and there followed hail and fire mingled with blood, and they were cast upon the earth: and the third part of trees was burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up.

8 And the second angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea: and the third part of the sea became blood;

9 And the third part of the creatures which were in the sea, and had life, died; and the third part of the ships were destroyed.

10 And the third angel sounded, and there fell a great star from heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters;

11 And the name of the star is called Wormwood: and the third part of the waters became wormwood; and many men died of the waters, because they were made bitter.

12 And the fourth angel sounded, and the third part of the sun was smitten, and the third part of the moon, and the third part of the stars; so [that] [^6] the third part of them was darkened, and the day shone not for a third part of it, and the night likewise.

13 And I beheld, and heard an angel flying through the midst of heaven, saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters of the earth by reason of the other voices of the trumpet of the three angels, which are yet to sound!

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

8:6 seven angels . . . prepared themselves to sound [trumpets]. The seven angels lift their trumpets to their mouths, ready to sound them.

8:7 first angel sounded. See commentary on 8:2.

hail and fire mingled with blood. The hail and fire parallel the seventh plague of Egypt: "So there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous, such as there was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation" (Ex. 9:24). The plague that follows the sounding of the first trumpet, however, is more severe, for the hail and fire are "mingled with blood" (see also Joel 2:30). The Lord has not revealed what will cause this plague, nor have Bible scholars been able to offer reasonable explanations of what will actually happen during this plague.

the third part. A "third" means that these judgments were partial and incomplete—that, for now, God's mercy is greater than his punishment. [^7]

third part of trees was burnt up. The four destroying angels had commanded to "hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads" (7:3). Now, at the sounding of the first trumpet, hail and fire destroy one-third of the earth's "trees," which may be actual trees, for "green grass" is mentioned in the same context. The loss of one-third of the earth's trees, which produce fruit, nuts, lumber, and oxygen, would be disastrous. It is also possible that the trees here symbolize people (Ps. 1:3)—thus, this prophecy may indicate that people will be burned. The ordinal number third is used elsewhere in Revelation (8:7-10, 12; 9:15, 18; 12:4).

all green grass was burnt up. New Testament scholar Mounce believes "green grass" may mean "vegetation" in general. [^8] The fire and hail that accompanies the blast of the first trumpet destroy grass and vegetation; such a catastrophe would cause a worldwide famine and millions of deaths.

8:8 second angel sounded. See commentary on 8:2.

as it were a great mountain burning with fire. John seems to be speaking symbolically, for he uses the expression "as it were," although the meaning of this passage has not been revealed (Jer. 51:25). Or perhaps John is describing a great volcano.

third part of the sea became blood. If the "great mountain burning with fire" were a volcano, its lava would look like blood flowing into the sea around it. [^9]

This plague parallels the first plague of Egypt, when fresh waters became blood at the world of the Lord. This plague was so severe that "there was blood throughout all the land of Egypt" (Ex. 7:21). Ancient Egypt is a type of the present-day world and its wickedness, and Egypt's first plague is a type of the destruction that will fall upon the world in the days to come (see commentary on 16:3).

8:9 third part of the [sea] creatures . . . died. As did the freshwater fish during the first plague of Egypt (Ex. 7:21), one-third of all sea creatures will die because of the great burning mountain, identified in 8:8.

third part of the ships were destroyed. The great burning mountain destroys the ships on earth.

8:10 third angel sounded. See commentary on 8:2.

fell a great star from heaven. Whether this expression refers to a meteorite, nuclear bomb, or another catastrophic event is unknown. We do know that the purpose of this destruction—"a symbol of divine visitation" [^10]—is to encourage humanity to repent and turn to God (see commentary on 9:20-21).

fell upon the third part of the rivers/fountains. The great star will fall upon and make bitter one-third of the earth's fresh inland waters. Such a catastrophe will certainly alter drastically the earth's ecological system, and many will die (8:11).

8:11 name of the star is called Wormwood. The star is named after a plant that has a bitter taste. In the Old Testament God sends wormwood upon the wicked as a judgment: to an immoral woman whose "end is bitter as wormwood" (Prov. 5:4), to wicked people whom God will cause to eat wormwood (Jer. 9:15; Deut. 29:17-18; Lam. 3:15). Thus the star called Wormwood will bring great bitterness upon earth's inhabitants.

Because stars represent people in other passages of scripture (12:4; Job 38:7; D&C 128:23), the star called Wormwood may represent an angel who is sent from God with bitter judgments upon the people. [^11]

third part of the waters became wormwood. Approximately one-third of the earth's fresh waters will become bitter, causing "many men" to die. Elder McConkie asks, "Could this be atomic fallout which shall poison a third of the drinking water of the earth?" [^12]

8:12 fourth angel sounded. See commentary on 8:2.

third part of the sun/moon/stars . . . was darkened. The blast of the trumpet of the fourth angel brings total darkness for one-third of the day and night. John's prophecy accords with other prophets who have testified that "the day of the Lord is darkness, and not light" (Amos 5:18; Joel 2:2). Isaiah also speaks of the darkening of the sun, moon, and stars, placing this darkening in the context of God's punishment of the world for their evil (Isa. 13:10-11). The events recall the ninth plague, or three days of "thick darkness," in Egypt as well as the darkness at Christ's crucifixion, recorded in 3 Ne. 8:20-23.

8:13 I beheld, and heard an angel flying through the midst of heaven. Many versions read eagle rather than angel. The first four trumps warn the earth's inhabitants to repent; now one of God's messengers warns the earth's inhabitants that greater calamities are about to fall upon them. This verse parallels D&C 88:92, which reads, "And angels shall fly through the midst of heaven, crying with a loud voice, sounding the trump of God, saying: Prepare ye, prepare ye, O inhabitants of the earth; for the judgment of our God is come."

with a loud voice. All of the earth's inhabitants must hear. The voice here is probably not literal; instead, it may pertain to God's judgments that accompany the sounding of the seven trumps. All of humanity will hear of these great calamities.

Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters of the earth. These words clearly show God's deep displeasure in the inhabitants of the earth, specifically those who choose sin and worldliness and will not repent. God's pronouncement of a woe results in a condition of woe on the earth.

Woe denotes great trouble and anguish; three woes magnify the trouble and anguish. The first woe occurs when the fifth angel sounds his trumpet (9:1-12), and the second woe accompanies the sixth angel's trumpet blast (9:13-21) and is fulfilled in Rev. 11:14, although there is an interlude in chapter 10. John does not identify the fulfillment of the third woe, although it may be connected with the bowl of judgments in Rev. 16, for we observe that as the opening of the seventh seal encompasses both the seven trumps and the seven bowls, so might the seventh trump encompass the seven bowls.

God uses three woes to encourage the wicked to repent, for he says, "Woe shall come unto the inhabitants of the earth if they will not hearken unto my words" (D&C 5:5).

1 Metzger, Breaking the Code, 62.

2 Draper, Opening the Seven Seals, 91.

3 Ford, Revelation, 136.

4 McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:498.

5 Mounce, Book of Revelation, 169.

6 JST 8:12 replaces as with that.

7 Mounce, Book of Revelation, 178; Dummelow, One-Volume Bible Dictionary, 1080.

8 Mounce, Book of Revelation, 179.

9 Mounce, Book of Revelation, 179.

10 Mounce, Book of Revelation, 180.

11 Davidson, New Bible Commentary, 1180.

12 McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:499.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Many authors have taught that Peter, James, and John composed the First Presidency of their day (see, for example, Taylor, Gospel Kingdom, 138). Joseph Fielding Smith, in Doctrines of Salvation, 3:152, wrote that "Peter, James, and John, acted as the First Presidency of the Church in their day."
[^2] 2 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 150-51; emphasis added.
[^3] 3 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^4] 4 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 52.
[^5] 5 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^6] 6 McConkie, "Understanding the Book of Revelation," 87.
[^7] 7 JST 1:3 replaces the relative pronoun that with the relative pronoun who. The JST also adds the word understand, which clarifies the meaning of the text.
[^8] 8 JST 1:3 replaces the expression the time is at hand with the phrase the time of the coming of the Lord draweth nigh to clarify the meaning of the text.
[^9] 9 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^10] 10 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^11] 11 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 51-52.
[^12] 12 JST 1:4 adds, omits, and alters many words of this verse.
