Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation ( 1998)

Rev. 9

FIRST WOE: THE FIFTH ANGEL BLOWS HIS TRUMPET AND BRINGS JUDGMENTS (9:1-12)

The events described in this chapter will "be accomplished after the opening of the seventh seal, before the coming of Christ" (D&C 77:13). When the fifth angel blows his trumpet, John sees the complete unleashing of hell upon the earth, as the great abyss is opened and smoke billows forth onto the earth, darkening the world with great evil. This may be the time "when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion" (D&C 1:35).

Armies, many perhaps unknowingly, will be influenced and led by the devil into battle. As locusts ravage green plants and trees, the armies will scourge the men and women of the earth, save those who are citizens of Zion and who possess the seal of the living God on their foreheads (9:4; 7:3-4). The Saints, we are told in a modern-day revelation, will dwell safely in Zion (D&C 45:66-70). The series of events that accompanies the fifth and sixth trumpets is to encourage people to repent of their sins and to acknowledge God as their Lord and King (see 9:20-21).

Rev. 9:1-12

1 And the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star fall from heaven unto the earth: and to [the angel] [^1] was given the key of the bottomless pit.

2 And he opened the bottomless pit; and there arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace; and the sun and the air were darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit.

3 And there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth: and unto them was given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power.

4 And it was commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, neither any green thing, neither any tree; but only those men which have not the seal of God in their foreheads.

5 And to them it was given that they should not kill them, but that they should be tormented five months: and their torment was as the torment of a scorpion, when he striketh a man.

6 And in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them.

7 And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto battle; and on their heads were as it were crowns like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men.

8 And they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as the teeth of lions.

9 And they had breastplates, as it were breastplates of iron; and the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of many horses running to battle.

10 And they had tails like unto scorpions, and there were stings in their tails: and their power was to hurt men five months.

11 And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue hath his name Apollyon.

12 One woe is past; and, behold, there come two woes more hereafter.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

9:1 fifth angel sounded. See commentary on 8:2.

star fall from heaven. This metaphor refers to Lucifer, who is "fallen from heaven" (Isa. 14:12). Jesus said, "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven" (Luke 10:18; Rev. 12:9).

to [the angel]. The fifth angel is given the key to the bottomless pit. This may be the same angel identified in Rev. 20:1, who John saw "come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit."

key of the bottomless pit. According to his divine schedule, God permits the inhabitants of hell to come forth with Satan as their king (9:11), and unleash their torment on earth's inhabitants. Later an angel will come out of heaven with a key and a chain which he will use to bind Satan for a thousand years (20:1-3).

bottomless pit. The pit is the abyss, or the "place of imprisonment for disobedient spirits." [^2] This is the pit identified in Joseph Smith's translation of Isa. 14:15, 19. The king of the abyss is Lucifer, who is also called Abaddon and Apollyon (9:11). God, of course, has complete control over this prison (20:1-3).

9:2 he opened the bottomless pit. The angel uses the key to open the pit so that wicked spirits will unleash, perhaps as never before, their evil forces upon humanity. A prophecy delivered through Joseph Smith may allude to the opening of the pit: "For I [God] . . . will that all men shall know that the day speedily cometh; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion" (D&C 1:35). Joseph Smith taught: "Some may have cried peace, but the Saints and the world will have little peace from henceforth. . . . The time is soon coming, when no man will have any peace but in Zion and her stakes." [^3]

there arose a smoke out of the pit . . . the sun and the air were darkened. Hell is opened and evil arises "as the smoke of a great furnace," blackening the air and hiding the sun's light. John seems to be describing darkness that "pertains to Satan, his kingdom, his disciples, and their works. The devil is the perpetrator of dark and evil things (2 Ne. 9:9; Hel. 6:28-29)." [^4] The darkening of the air with evil is the result of Satan's work, for he is called "the prince of the power of the air" (Eph. 2:2). New Testament scholar Richard Draper writes: "As the pit is opened, smoke billows forth and obscures the light of the sun. Darkness reigns. Through this powerful symbol, John reveals the nature of the first thrust against mankind: a blow against the light." [^5] The smoke, like the "mists of darkness" in Lehi's dream, represents evil, darkness, and "the temptations of the devil, which blindeth the eyes, and hardeneth the hearts of the children of men, and leadeth them away into broad roads, that they perish and are lost" (1 Ne. 12:17).

9:3 there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth. These are not actual insects (grasshoppers; see Prov. 30:27), for they sting like scorpions, strike out at mankind, have a king, and are commanded not to eat vegetation (9:3-5, 11). These are actually wicked men and armies with power to torment all of humanity except those who have God's seal in their foreheads (9:4). John's imagery of locusts is similar to Joel's description of the locust-like armies that will "come up upon my land, strong, and without number. . . . He hath laid my vine waste, and barked my fig tree: he hath made it clean bare, and cast it away; the branches thereof are made white" (Joel 1:4-7; 2:25). The locusts that plagued ancient Egypt and "covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land was darkened" (Ex. 10:15) are types of this great army of wicked people.

unto them was given power. God gives agency to humankind, and he permits the wicked to destroy one another, but he sets boundaries for them. Compare Rev. 6:4, 8, in which power is given through the red and pale horses.

as the scorpions of the earth. Here and in 9:5 the locusts are likened to scorpions, which torment humans, often without killing them (see commentary on 9:5).

9:4 it was commanded them. God controls the destiny of this army of locusts and commands them to harm only those who do not have God's seal on their foreheads.

not hurt the grass/green thing/tree. These are the usual objects that locusts feed on in their developmental stages (cankerworm, palmerworm, caterpillar, locust; see Joel 1:4). The creatures of Rev. 9 are not like the locusts that plagued the Egyptians and "did eat every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left: and there remained not any green thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the field, through all the land of Egypt" (Ex. 10:15). These creatures are soldiers who seek to destroy humans. See commentary on 7:1-2.

men which have not the seal of God in their foreheads. Inhabitants of Zion (many of whom will have the seal of God) will be preserved during this time. They will dwell in the New Jerusalem, which is called "a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God. . . . There shall be gathered unto it out of every nation under heaven; and it shall be the only people that shall not be at war one with another. And it shall be said among the wicked: Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand" (D&C 45:66, 69-70). The righteous in the stakes of Zion will also have safety (D&C 115:5-6; 124:36). See commentary on 7:1-2.

9:5 to them it was given that they should not kill them. The armies of locusts will not kill humans; instead they will harm and torment them. Elder Bruce R. McConkie suggests that "perhaps John is seeing such things as the effects of poisonous gas, or bacteriological warfare, or atomic fallout, which disable but do not kill." [^6]

tormented five months. Five months is the life cycle of the locust. Here five months may represent a short period and not exactly five months.

torment of a scorpion. The scorpion's sting rarely results in death, but it causes great pain and discomfort. Torment in this context pertains to more than war and warfare. Torment is also associated with "guilt and abominations, which doth cause [the wicked] to shrink from the presence of the Lord into a state of misery and endless torment" (Mosiah 3:25). Alma spoke of both the abyss and torment when he declared: "My soul hath been redeemed from the gall of bitterness and bonds of iniquity. I was in the darkest abyss. . . . My soul was racked with eternal torment" (Mosiah 27:29).

9:6 shall men seek death. It seems that the torment brought about by the locusts will cause such pain that people will want to die to end their pain. In another context the Lord said, "And death shall be chosen rather than life by all the residue of them that remain of this evil family" (Jer. 8:3). Also, Job spoke of the wicked: "Which long for death, but it cometh not; and dig for it more than for hid treasures" (Job 3:21).

9:7-10 shapes of the locusts. John seems to be describing soldiers that are trained and equipped to fight on land, sea, or in the air, with their various types of uniforms and protective gear, including helmets, body armor, and protective masks; their war vehicles, including aircraft, helicopters, tanks, and dozens of other military machines; and their weaponry and artillery of many types and kinds, each designed to harm, maim, or kill humans. He may be describing that which belongs to military units of our era, or he may be seeing that which belongs to our own future.

Joseph Fielding Smith, citing Isa. 5:26-30, Nahum 2:2-5, and Rev. 9:6-10, opined that the ancient prophets saw "our automobiles, our railroad trains, . . . the airplanes flying in the midst of the heavens, because we can read in the prophecies of these ancient scriptures many things that indicate that these things were revealed unto those ancient prophets." [^7]

John describes the things that he envisions by using objects or creatures that were known to him in the first century after Christ: locusts, horses, crowns, hair, lions, breastplates, chariots, and scorpions. These objects and creatures create a fearsome picture of symbolic images for his audience.

shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto battle. This phrase recalls Joel 2:4, which reads: "The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses; and as horsemen, so shall they run." The image of locusts depicts an army of tens of thousands of warriors, an army so great that its soldiers darken the land and cannot be numbered. The phrase "horses prepared unto battle" portrays warriors wearing body armor similar to the protective body and headgear worn by warhorses of John's day. John's description here recalls Job's description of a warhorse (Job 39:19-24).

on their heads were as it were crowns like gold. This expression may refer to the soldier's helmet, in all of its shapes and varieties; or it may be symbolic of kings' headgear ("crowns of gold"). If the passage does pertain to kings' headgear, it may mean that governments are banding together for war.

their faces were as the faces of men. This expression seems to indicate that the locusts represent men.

9:8 they had hair as the hair of women. We don't know what this expression means, but there is precedent in scripture for long hair on men being seen as a sign of strength (Judg. 16:17).

their teeth were as the teeth of lions. This expression describes the warriors' ability to ravage and destroy. It also recalls Joel's description of warriors: "For a nation is come up upon my land, strong, and without number, whose teeth are the teeth of a lion, and he hath the cheek teeth of a great lion" (Joel 1:6-7). Satan himself has been called a "roaring lion, [who] walketh about, seeking whom he may devour" (1 Pet. 5:8).

9:9 they had breastplates. Modern soldiers' armor and protective gear covers vital organs. It may also refer to the armor of war vehicles.

sound of chariots of many horses. Natural locusts in flight make a fearful noise, and the reference here may be to the mingled sound of chariot wheels and the hooves of the horses (see Joel 2:5). Anciently the chariot and its horses were used for war, and in prophetic language they may be a metaphor for modern war vehicles (Ezek. 39:20; Dan. 11:40; Joel 2:5).

9:10 they had tails like unto scorpions. This expression could refer to any number of weapons.

power was to hurt men five months. This particular battle, or war, will have a limited duration. It may serve as a precursor to the great war that will accompany the blasting of the sixth trumpet, when two hundred million soldiers will fight and kill one-third of humanity (9:13-19).

9:11 they had a king over them. Actual locusts have no king; the locusts described in Rev. 9:6-10 are warriors, and they and their leaders hearken unto Satan, who is their king.

angel of the bottomless pit. Satan.

Abaddon/Apollyon. John gives a Hebrew name followed with the Greek equivalent, as was his custom (John 1:38, 42; 4:25; 9:7; 11:16), perhaps so that his audience will understand his words. The angel is named Abaddon, meaning "destruction" or "ruin"; he is also called Apollyon, meaning "destruction" or "destroyer." Such names relate to Satan's evil mission and goals.

9:12 one woe is past. The first woe occurs when the fifth angel sounds his trumpet (9:1-12); the second woe will begin with the blowing of the trumpet by the sixth angel (9:13-21). See commentary on 8:13.

SECOND WOE: THE SIXTH ANGEL SOUNDS AND BRINGS JUDGMENTS (9:13-21)

The events identified in this section will "be accomplished after the opening of the seventh seal, before the coming of Christ" (D&C 77:13). The second woe begins with the blowing of the sixth angel's trump (9:13) but is not completed until Rev. 11:14, in which John writes "the second woe is past."

The second woe brings great anguish upon humankind, for two hundred million warriors battle in war and destroy, ultimately causing the death of one-third of humanity. John uses descriptive and symbolic terms in describing this great conflagration, including fire (three times), brimstone (three times), smoke (twice), lions, and serpents. The sixth trump announces these events, but it is Satan and his angels who set them in motion through their evil influence and guidance. The events recall numerous other historical time periods when "Satan had great dominion among men, and raged in their hearts; and from thenceforth came wars and bloodshed" (JST Gen. 6:13).

The purpose of these events that accompany the blowing of this trump is to encourage humankind to repent of their many grievous sins, which John lists as idolatry, murders, sorceries, fornication, and thefts. Sadly, they do not repent of their wickedness.

Rev. 9:13-21

13 And the sixth angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the four horns of the golden altar which is before God,

14 Saying to the sixth angel which had the trumpet, Loose the four angels which are bound in the [bottomless pit]. [^8]

15 And the four angels were loosed, which were prepared for an hour, and a day, and a month, and a year, for to slay the third part of men.

16 And the number of the army of the horsemen were two hundred thousand thousand: and I [saw] [^9] the number of them.

17 And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and them that sat on them, having breastplates of fire, and of jacinth, and brimstone: and the heads of the horses were as the heads of lions; and out of their mouths issued fire and smoke and brimstone.

18 By these three was the third part of men killed, by the fire, and by the smoke, and by the brimstone, which issued out of their mouths.

19 For their power is in their mouth, and in their tails: for their tails were like unto serpents, and had heads, and with them they do hurt.

20 And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood: which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk:

21 Neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

9:13 sixth angel sounded. See commentary on 8:2.

voice from the four horns of the golden altar which is before God. The voice here could be that of the angel identified in Rev. 8:3-5, who was located near this altar.

9:14 Loose the four angels which are bound in the [bottomless pit]. The "bound" angels may belong to that group of "angels that sinned" and thus who God "cast . . . down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness" (2 Pet. 2:4; see also Jude 1:6). They will be set loose to prompt and persuade the wicked to kill one-third of humankind during the great war described in 9:15-19.

9:15 prepared for an hour/day/month/year. The time mentioned here does not indicate how long the four angels will be loosed, but it does say they will be loosed at a specific, divinely appointed time. Jerusalem Bible reads, "These four angels had been put there ready for this hour of this day of this month of this year."

slay the third part of men. The army of two hundred million individuals (see commentary on 9:16), with their modern weapons of destruction, will kill one-third of the earth's inhabitants. It is unclear whether the figure "one-third" is to be taken as literal or symbolic.

9:16 number of the army . . . were two hundred thousand. The number of fighting men that John "saw" was two hundred million, twice the number of the angels who were worshipping God in the celestial kingdom (5:11). The numerical figure is likely symbolic, intended to represent great hosts of warriors.

9:17 I saw the horses in the vision, and them that sat on them. John describes this scene of horses using various images and symbols; he makes threefold repetition of "fire" and "brimstone" (JB says "fire" and sulfur") and twofold repetition of "smoke" and "horses" in 9:17-18. Fire, smoke (see commentary on 9:2), and brimstone may describe the bombs and destructive devices associated with present-day or future warfare. Horses often represent war vehicles (see commentary on 9:9).

9:18 by these three was the third part of men killed. Fire, smoke, and brimstone are the weapons of this mighty army that will destroy one-third of humanity.

9:19 power is in their mouth, and in their tails. The fire-breathing capacity of these lion-headed horses symbolizes "the torment of hell and [underscores their] diabolical nature." [^10] Like the scorpions in 9:10, there is destructive power in the horses' tails. In fact, the tails are snakes with heads, another evidence that they are sent from the devil. [^11]

9:20 rest of the men . . . repented not. The "rest of the men" speaks of those who are not sealed (9:4) and who survive the warfare described above. The purpose for the blowing of the sixth trumpet is manifest here: to encourage the wicked to repent, for they are idolaters, devil worshippers, murderers, fornicators, thieves, and sorcerers (9:21). The great war, however, during which one-third of humankind is destroyed, does not succeed in bringing the wicked to repentance; they "repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and idols," writes John.

works of their hands. This expression seems to refer to idol worship (Ps. 115:4-7; Isa. 2:8; Jer. 1:16), which consists both of images and statues created by human hands and of all the evil deeds and actions of humanity that replace one's righteous desire to serve the true and living God.

that they should not worship devils. Humanity continues to worship devils, even after the great war that destroys so many. Devil worship has long been a gross evil conducted upon the earth (Deut. 32:17; Ps. 106:37; 1 Cor. 10:20-21).

idols of gold. Nephi warned, "Yea, wo unto those that worship idols, for the devil of all devils delighteth in them" (2 Ne. 9:37). In our dispensation we are told of those who "have strayed from [God's] ordinances, and have broken [God's] everlasting covenant; they seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god, whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great, which shall fall" (D&C 1:15-16).

9:21 neither repented they of their murders/sorceries/fornication/thefts. In the previous verse John identified idolatry as a chief sin belonging to humanity in the last days; now he lists other iniquities—murder, sorcery, fornication, and thievery—that represent all of the wickedness that will prevail upon the earth during this time.

1 JST 9:1 replaces the word him with the angel.

2 Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, 1:9, s.v. "abyss."

3 History of the Church, 3:390-91.

4 McConkie and Parry, Guide to Scriptural Symbols, 36.

5 Draper, Opening the Seven Seals, 101.

6 McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:502.

7 Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 1:146.

8 JST 9:14 replaces great river Euphrates with bottomless pit.

9 JST 9:16 replaces heard with saw.

10 Draper, Opening the Seven Seals, 108.

11 Mounce, Book of Revelation, 197.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Many authors have taught that Peter, James, and John composed the First Presidency of their day (see, for example, Taylor, Gospel Kingdom, 138). Joseph Fielding Smith, in Doctrines of Salvation, 3:152, wrote that "Peter, James, and John, acted as the First Presidency of the Church in their day."
[^2] 2 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 150-51; emphasis added.
[^3] 3 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^4] 4 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 52.
[^5] 5 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^6] 6 McConkie, "Understanding the Book of Revelation," 87.
[^7] 7 JST 1:3 replaces the relative pronoun that with the relative pronoun who. The JST also adds the word understand, which clarifies the meaning of the text.
[^8] 8 JST 1:3 replaces the expression the time is at hand with the phrase the time of the coming of the Lord draweth nigh to clarify the meaning of the text.
[^9] 9 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^10] 10 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^11] 11 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 51-52.
