Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation ( 1998)

Rev. 10

THE MIGHTY ANGEL AND JOHN'S LATTER-DAY MISSION (10:1-11)

This chapter is an interlude, or break, between the events listed in Rev. 9 and those listed in Rev. 11. After enumerating plagues and judgments in Rev. 8 and 9, John envisions an angel, who has a small, open book in his hand, "come down from heaven" (10:1-2). John describes the angel's brilliant light and glory with four symbolic expressions: cloud, rainbow, sun, and fire. His greatness is emphasized with the expressions "mighty," "loud voice," and "as when a lion roareth" (10:1, 3). Although he is not identified by name, the angel is likely Michael, the seventh angel, who is second only to Jehovah himself in authority (see commentary on 10:1).

Emphasis is placed upon a "little book" that John is instructed to consume (it is mentioned four times: 10:2, 8, 9, 10). The book pertains to John's future work upon the earth, for he would yet prophesy to many of the earth's inhabitants.

Rev. 10:1-11

1 And I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven, clothed with a cloud: and a rainbow was upon his head, and his face was as it were the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire:

2 And he had in his [right] [^1] hand a little book open: and he set his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot on the earth,

3 And cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roareth: and when he had cried, seven thunders uttered their voices.

4 And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write: and I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, [Those things are sealed up] [^2] which the seven thunders uttered, and write them not.

5 And the angel which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth lifted up his hand to heaven,

6 And sware by him that liveth for ever and ever, who created heaven, and the things that therein are, and the earth, and the things that therein are, and the sea, and the things which are therein, that there should be time no longer:

7 But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he hath declared to his servants the prophets.

8 And the voice which I heard from heaven spake unto me again, and said, Go and take the little book which is open in the hand of the angel which standeth upon the sea and upon the earth.

9 And I went unto the angel, and said unto him, Give me the little book. And he said unto me, Take it, and eat it up; and it shall make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as honey.

10 And I took the little book out of the angel's hand, and ate it up; and it was in my mouth sweet as honey: and as soon as I had eaten it, my belly was bitter.

11 And he said unto me, Thou must prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

10:1 another mighty angel come down from heaven. Three times in Revelation the angels are called "mighty" or "strong" (5:2; 10:1; 18:21). The "mighty angel" identified in this verse may be Michael, who is the chief angel, or archangel, and who stands next in authority to Jesus Christ himself. [^3] D&C 88:110-12 (see Dan. 12:7), which identifies Michael as the seventh angel, has some notable similarities with this section of Revelation (see Table 4).

Table 4

Rev. 10:1-7 D&C 88:110-112 1 And I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven . . .110 And so on, until the seventh angel shall sound his trump;2 And he had in his hand a little book open: and he set his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot on the earth . . .and he shall stand forth upon the land and upon the sea,6 And sware by him that liveth for ever and ever, who created heaven, and the things that therein are, and the earth, and the things that therein are, and the sea, and the things which are therein, that there should be time no longer.and swear in the name of him who sitteth upon the throne, that there shall be time no longer; and Satan shall be bound, that old serpent, who is called the devil, and shall not be loosed for the space of a thousand years.7 But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he hath declared to his servants the prophets.112 And Michael, the seventh angel, even the archangel, shall gather together his armies, even the hosts of heaven.

The similarities are striking, though we must note that D&C 88:110-12 has a context different from Rev. 10:1-7.

clothed with a cloud. The mighty angel is wrapped in celestial glory (see D&C 84:5) he is clothed with glory as one wears a garment. Similarly, when Christ returns at his second coming, he will be "clothed with power and great glory" (D&C 45:44; 34:7).

rainbow was upon his head. The rainbow may refer to a glorious crown of light found upon the mighty angel's head, indicating his exalted station (4:3; Ezek. 1:28). It also suggests the Lord's covenant with Noah, signified by a rainbow, that He would again bring Zion to the earth (JST Gen. 9:21-23.)

face was as it were the sun. Like the face of Christ, whose "countenance shone above the brightness of the sun" (D&C 110:3), the mighty angel's face beams with celestial glory and brilliance.

feet as pillars of fire. The mighty angel's feet, like his body, head, and face, are likened to burning light and glory (see Dan. 10:6; Rev. 2:18).

10:2 in his [right] hand a little book open. This "book," or scroll, is not the same as that identified in Rev. 5:1-5, which is sealed with seven seals, for this book is described as "little" and "open" (the other book was sealed), and the angel (possibly Michael) has the book in his hand (no one but Jesus was permitted to touch the other book). The little book would be eaten by John, representing "a mission, and an ordinance, for him to gather the tribes of Israel; behold, this is Elias, who, as it is written, must come and restore all things" (D&C 77:14). See commentary on 10:8-11.

he set his right foot upon the sea/left foot on the earth. John speaks three times of the angel standing on sea and land (10:2, 5, 8). A similar expression is found in D&C 88:110, where the order of "land" and "sea" is reversed. "Earth" and "sea" appear to indicate the total existence of the telestial world (Ex. 20:4, 11; Ps. 69:34). That the mighty angel has established one foot on the sea and a second on the earth may demonstrate that the telestial world is under his power and authority. It is not clear why the angel sets his right foot on the sea and his left on the earth and not the other way around.

10:3 cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roareth. The "loud voice" may be required so that a very large audience will hear the angel, as was the case in Rev. 7:9-10 and 8:13; or it may refer to the great authority of the angel, whose voice resembles the mighty voice of God himself, which is sometimes likened to a lion's roar (Hosea 11:10; Joel 3:16; Amos 1:2; 3:8).

seven thunders uttered their voices. The thunders are voices in heaven (6:1; 14:2; Mosiah 27:18) that respond to the loud voice of the angel. Compare the sevenfold "voice of the Lord" in Ps. 29:3. Elder Bruce R. McConkie suggests that "the seven thunders which here utter their voices are the seven angels reciting in some detail that which is to be in each of the thousand year periods of the earth's temporal continuance." [^4]

Elder McConkie also provides another possible interpretation of the seven thunders: "It also appears that John's vision prefigured what is to be when the events occur and that the promised proclamations shall yet be made when the hour for Millennial peace actually arrives." Doctrine and Covenants 88:108-10 speaks of the seven angels, who each sound their trumps and "reveal the secret acts of men, and the thoughts and intents of their hearts, and the mighty works of God" (D&C 88:109) in each of the six thousand years of the earth's temporal existence.

10:4 I was about to write. John, who had previously been commanded to "write" the things of his vision (1:11, 19; 14:13; 19:9; 21:5), prepares to write the words uttered by the seven thunders. A voice from heaven stops him from writing these things and instead commands him to "seal up" the seven thunders' words and to "write them not." On other occasions, too, God has directed his prophets to "shut up the words, and seal the book" (Dan. 12:4; 2 Ne. 27:22; Ether 3:22-23, 27-28).

10:5 the angel which I saw. See commentary on 10:2.

stand upon the sea. See commentary on 7:1.

lifted up his hand to heaven. The mighty angel lifts his right hand (many translations read "right hand") to heaven, making the standard oath-taking gesture (Gen. 14:22; Deut. 32:40; Dan. 12:7). With one foot on the sea, the other on the land, and the right arm raised to the sky, the angel "touches the three parts of the universe because he is going to swear by him who created them." [^5]

10:6 sware by him that liveth for ever. The language and the setting recall Dan. 12:4-7, in which Daniel sealed the book "even to the time of the end" (v. 4); he saw a "man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the river, when he held up his right hand and his left hand unto heaven, and sware by him that liveth for ever that it shall be for a time, times, and an half" (v. 7). In John's vision, however, the individual who stands on earth and sea swears that "there should be time no longer."

"Him that liveth for ever" is a name, or title, of God the Father (see commentary on 4:9; see also 5:14). The angel swears by using God's name, for there is no greater power and more exalted name. When God himself makes oaths with his people, he swears "by himself" because "he could swear by no greater" (Heb. 6:13). To emphasize that God is the most exalted of all, John writes that "him that liveth for ever and ever" is the same being who created heaven, earth, the sea, and all things that are found within them.

there should be time no longer. The context of this phrase is the sounding of the seventh angel's trump, as recorded in the next verse, which reads, "When he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished" (10:7; see also D&C 88:106). This passage coincides with Rev. 11:15, when the seventh angel actually sounds his trumpet, signaling the end of the earth in its present state, or the time when the earthly kingdoms "become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever."

In this setting, "time no longer" may refer to the beginning of the Millennium, when time as we understand it with our calendar, seasons, hours, minutes, and seconds no longer exists. This seems to be the manner in which two revelations use the phrase "time no longer": "The Lord hath redeemed his people; and Satan is bound and time is no longer. The Lord hath gathered all things in one. The Lord hath brought down Zion from above. The Lord hath brought up Zion from beneath" (D&C 84:100) and "The seventh angel shall sound his trump; and he shall stand forth upon the land and upon the sea, and swear in the name of him who sitteth upon the throne, that there shall be time no longer; and Satan shall be bound, that old serpent, who is called the devil, and shall not be loosed for the space of a thousand years" (D&C 88:110).

The phrase could also mean "there should be no more delay," meaning that there will be no more delay before the final signs of the times are fulfilled and God sends his final judgments upon the wicked. This phrase answers the martyrs' question, "How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?" (6:10).

10:7 days of the voice of the seventh angel. Michael, the seventh angel, sounds his trump at least twice and possibly on three different occasions (11:15; D&C 88:106, 110). This constitutes the "days of the voice of the seventh angel."

mystery of God should be finished. The "mystery of God" may pertain to the book with seven seals that "contains the revealed will, mysteries, and the works of God; the hidden things of his economy concerning this earth during the seven thousand years of its continuance, or its temporal existence" (D&C 77:6). This mystery will be finished "in the days of the voice of the seventh angel." Elsewhere the seventh angel is associated with completion, for the number seven signifies completion: when he pours out his vial, a voice from heaven says, "It is done" (16:17); and when he sounds his trump, he declares, "It is finished; it is finished!" (D&C 88:106; see also Rev. 11:15; D&C 88:110).

declared to his servants the prophets. The Lord has revealed the completion of God's mystery to many of his prophets, who are called the Lord's "servants" (2 Kgs. 17:23; Jer. 25:4; Dan. 9:10).

10:8 voice which I heard from heaven spake unto me again. This voice is the same that commanded John not to write the "things which the seven thunders uttered" (10:4). Here the voice commands John to take the little book from the hand of the mighty angel.

take the little book. Ezekiel and Lehi also received books from heavenly messengers (Ezek. 2:9; 1 Ne. 1:11). The command to John to eat the little book identified in Rev. 10:8-11 "was a mission, and an ordinance, for him to gather the tribes of Israel; behold, this is Elias, who, as it is written, must come and restore all things" (D&C 77:14). John's work among the tribes of Israel was confirmed with Joseph Smith's statement in June 1831 that "John the Revelator was then among the Ten Tribes of Israel who had been led away by Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion, to again possess the land of their fathers." [^6] In addition, John is an Elias; [^7] he is identified in the revelations as one who, accompanying Peter and John, restored keys and powers to the earth through the Prophet Joseph Smith (D&C 27:12-13; 128:20).

angel which standeth upon the sea and upon the earth. See commentary on 10:2.

10:9 I went unto the angel. John approaches the angel to obtain the book.

eat it up. The angel commands John to eat the little book. This symbolic action has historical precedents, for Jeremiah declared unto the Lord, "Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart" (Jer. 15:16). Ezekiel also received a book from a messenger who commanded him to "eat this [scroll], and go speak unto the house of Israel. So I opened my mouth, and he caused me to eat that [scroll]. . . . Then did I eat it; and it was in my mouth as honey for sweetness" (Ezek. 3:1-3).

John partakes of God's word as contained in the little book, making it part of his soul, and he now fully understands his mission to gather the tribes of Israel.

10:9-10 mouth sweet as honey/belly bitter. The book is sweet when John eats it because feasting upon the word of God is always sweet, and John's mission to gather the tribes of Israel would bring joy and satisfaction to his soul. But the book is bitter in his belly because the message within the book described the woes and judgments that would come against the wicked world. Similarly, though Ezekiel's book was "as honey for sweetness," in it were "written lamentations, and mourning, and woe" (Ezek. 3:3; 2:10).

10:11 Thou must prophesy again. The angel who gave the book to John now promises John that he will "prophesy again before many people, and nations, and tongues, and kings." During His mortal ministry the Lord prophesied to John that he would "tarry until I come in my glory, and shalt prophesy before nations, kindreds, tongues and people" (D&C 7:3; see John 21:22-23). John thus became a translated being, "as flaming fire and a ministering angel," who would "minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation who dwell on the earth" (D&C 7:6). He "is yet alive in the flesh," explained Elder Parley P. Pratt, "and is held in reserve, to `prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings,' as it is written." [^8]

before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings. John's work among the tribes of Israel (D&C 77:14) and among "those who shall be heirs of salvation" (D&C 7:6) may constitute, in part, the promise that he will "prophesy again before many peoples."

1 The Greek reads right hand rather than hand.

2 JST 10:4 changes the order of the words.

3 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 157-58.

4 McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:505.

5 Harrington, Revelation, 115.

6 History of the Church, 1:176.

7 The prophets spoke of Elias, who "must come and restore all things" (JST Matt. 11:15; 17:10; D&C 27:6-7). Joseph Fielding Smith explained that "the Elias who was to restore all things is a composite Elias. In other words, the restoration was not made by one personage, but many, and in speaking of Elias coming to restore all things, the Lord was using that title in a plural meaning, having in mind all the prophets who came to restore the fulness of the gospel. This would include John the Baptist, Peter, James and John, and every ancient prophet who restored keys from the days of Adam down." Doctrines of Salvation, 1:174.

8 Pratt, Key to the Science of Theology, 32.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Many authors have taught that Peter, James, and John composed the First Presidency of their day (see, for example, Taylor, Gospel Kingdom, 138). Joseph Fielding Smith, in Doctrines of Salvation, 3:152, wrote that "Peter, James, and John, acted as the First Presidency of the Church in their day."
[^2] 2 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 150-51; emphasis added.
[^3] 3 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^4] 4 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 52.
[^5] 5 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^6] 6 McConkie, "Understanding the Book of Revelation," 87.
[^7] 7 JST 1:3 replaces the relative pronoun that with the relative pronoun who. The JST also adds the word understand, which clarifies the meaning of the text.
[^8] 8 JST 1:3 replaces the expression the time is at hand with the phrase the time of the coming of the Lord draweth nigh to clarify the meaning of the text.
