Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation ( 1998)

Rev. 11

TWO PROPHETS PROPHESY, WORK MIRACLES, AND ARE KILLED (11:1-14)

Again the Lord provides the righteous with hope, peace of mind, and security during the trials and tribulations of the last days. In Rev. 7:1-8 we learn of the sealing of individuals to protect them from future judgments and plagues; here we read that John measures the Saints with a measuring rod, thus protecting them from some future trials. The actions preceding the sounding of the seventh trumpet (which sounds in 11:15) are similar to the actions preceding the opening of the seventh seal (7:1-8): both serve to secure the Saints.

The principal theme of Rev. 11 is the work and ministry of two prophets who will minister in the last days in Jerusalem. Elder Parley P. Pratt summarized these events:["[John] informs us that, after the city and temple are rebuilt by the Jews, the Gentiles will tread it under foot forty and two months, during which time there will be two Prophets continually prophesying and working mighty miracles. And it seems that the Gentile army shall be hindered from utterly destroying and overthrowing the city, while these two Prophets continue. But, after a struggle of three years and a half, they at length succeed in destroying these two Prophets, and then overrunning much of the city, they send gifts to each other because of the death of the two Prophets, and in the meantime will not allow their dead bodies to be put in the graves, but suffer them to lie in the streets of Jerusalem three days and a half." [^1]

The two prophets will prophesy "at the time of the restoration" (D&C 77:15), after the Jews "are gathered and have built the city of Jerusalem" (D&C 77:15), after the opening of the seventh seal but before the Second Coming (D&C 77:12-13), and during the events of the second woe (11:3-14). They will prophesy for 1,260 days, or three and one-half years.

Their mission will have several purposes: to "prophesy to the Jews" (D&C 77:15), to serve as "witnesses" of God and his judgments, to symbolically provide oil unto those who are preparing for Christ's coming, to work many great miracles, and to bear testimony.

They will receive power from God to prophesy, and they will be clothed in sackcloth, which symbolizes the great power possessed by the Old Testament prophets. They will have power to devour "their enemies" with fire; to "shut heaven, that it rain not"; to turn waters to blood; and to smite the earth with plagues according to their will.

The two prophets will minister in Jerusalem (D&C 77:15), where they will be killed, for "Satan shall slay them, by the hands of those in his employ, even as he slew their Lord and the prophets who were before them." [^2]

There will be two prophets in order to establish God's word with more than one testimony: "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established" (2 Cor. 13:1).

Many of the events connected to the sacred work of the two prophets recall events of the mortal ministry of Jesus Christ: the duration of their three-and-one-half year ministry, their prophesying, their working great miracles, and their control over the elements. In addition, the two prophets, like Jesus, will be anointed with oil and will be slain in Jerusalem by evil men—acts which will be followed by an ascension into heaven.

Rev. 11:1-14

1 And there was given me a reed like unto a rod: and the angel stood, saying, Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship therein.

2 But the court which is without the temple leave out, and measure it not; for it is given unto the Gentiles: and the holy city shall they tread under foot forty and two months.

3 And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth.

4 These are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing before the God of the earth.

5 And if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed.

6 These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy: and have power over waters to turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will.

7 And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them.

8 And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which [allegorically] [^3] is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.

9 And they of the people and kindreds and tongues and nations shall see their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves.

10 And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another; because these two prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth.

11 And after three days and an half the Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell upon them which saw them.

12 And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them, Come up hither.

And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud; and their enemies beheld them.

13 And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand: and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven.

14 The second woe is past; and, behold, the third woe cometh quickly.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

11:1 reed like unto a rod. A heavenly being hands John a long reed, or stick, to use as a measuring tool, and tells him to measure the temple, its altar, and the worshippers. Similarly, a "golden reed" is used to measure the wall and gates of the celestial temple (21:15), and the future temple of Jerusalem is measured with a "measuring reed" (Ezek. 40:3, 5-8; 41:8; 42:16) that is six cubits (about ten feet) in length.

the angel stood. Some Greek texts omit this phrase. [^4]

Rise, and measure. John is told to go and measure, just as a carpenter measures before constructing or repairing. The things that John measures (the temple, the altar, and the worshippers) are established by God, or protected from his judgments; they are not slated for destruction; the outer court and beyond, which have not been measured, will be affected by his judgments. John is commanded to perform a symbolic action that anticipates our own day: the temple and altar and worshippers represent the faithful, or Zion; the outer court represents the unfaithful and unbelieving, or the world. "What is thus measured is under God's special protection, as in Ezekiel and in Zechariah" [^5] (see also Ezek. 40-42; Zech. 2:1-2).

Perhaps the measuring of the temple, the altar, and worshippers symbolizes "taking the measure" of worthiness to partake of blessings of the Atonement. Kenneth Strand, a New Testament scholar, points out parallels between Rev. 11:1 and Lev. 16:6, 11, 16-18 (Lev. 16 speaks about the Day of Atonement [^6]): "It is striking . . . that the three other exact entities to be atoned for in Lev. 16 [temple, altar, and worshippers] are precisely those three elements to be `measured' in Rev. 11:1." [^7]

The term measure also has another application in the scriptures. In contrast to the measuring of God's righteous people, the scriptures speak of the destruction of the wicked "without measure," meaning to the fullest extent. "When the wrath of God shall be poured out upon the wicked without measure" (D&C 1:9) "mine indignation is soon to be poured out without measure upon all nations; and this will I do when the cup of their iniquity is full" (D&C 101:11; see also 109:45).

temple of God. The Greek word used here for temple is naos, which refers to the sanctuary itself, namely the Holy Place and the Most Holy Place, not the outer courts. This temple was not Herod's temple, which had been destroyed in A.D. 70, more than twenty years before John is instructed to "measure" the temple. This temple may be the temple that will yet be built in Jerusalem in the last days, as the prophets have declared. Ezekiel, for instance, saw and described in some detail this temple in Ezek. 40 through 46. Joseph Smith also spoke of the future temple: "Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the temple, and water come out from under the temple, and the waters of the Dead Sea be healed. It will take some time to rebuild the walls of the city and the temple." [^8]

The phrase "temple of God" also has a symbolic meaning. Paul likened the Saints to a temple when he asked, "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God?" (1 Cor. 3:16). Later Paul wrote, "Ye are the temple of the living God" (2 Cor. 6:16). On another occasion he likened Christ to the chief cornerstone and the apostles and prophets to the building's foundation. The Saints, together with the apostles and prophets, are "an holy temple in the Lord" (Eph. 2:19-21). That is to say, the community of Saints, speaking of those who attend the temple and worship within its walls, constitute a temple of God. These are "measured" by John and receive protection from the coming judgments.

altar. This altar may refer to the altar of incense or to the great altar of sacrifice. In our day this altar refers to the sacred altars of our temples and those who surround them or kneel at them for sacred ordinances. The ordinances and the keeping of covenants associated with them protect the Saints from God's judgments.

them that worship therein. John measures temple worshippers, speaking of the Saints who worship in our temples today, to ensure their protection from God's wrath and judgments.

11:2 court . . . without the temple . . . measure it not. The temple in John's day had many courts; the court mentioned here may have been the court of the Gentiles. In reference to our temples today, "court" probably refers to those who do not enter and worship in God's temples, for John is commanded to "measure it not," leaving this court and its inhabitants unprotected and unsanctified (JST Ezek. 44:19; 46:20).

it is given unto the Gentiles: and the holy city shall they tread under foot. The Gentiles will trample the holy city for forty-two months. Both the old Jerusalem (Neh. 11:1; Isa. 52:1; 2 Ne. 8:24; Ether 13:5) and the New Jerusalem (21:10; D&C 133:56; Moses 7:62) are called "holy city," but here the context seems to refer only to Jerusalem.

According to Luke 21:24, "Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled" [^9] (see also Isa. 63:18; Dan. 8:13). To trample or tread upon includes showing contempt for sacred things and to persecute, even destroy, others. The phrase "it is given" suggests that God will allow this oppression but only for a set period of time.

forty and two months. The number forty-two often signifies the period when righteousness is cut short and the wicked dominate the righteous. There will be a period in the last days when evil will reign. Even the powerful prophets of God (the two witnesses in the next verse) will be destroyed. Evil will win for the moment—but only until God's full power is unleashed.

The number forty-two is manifest scripturally in several ways, each of which equals three and one-half:

Dan. 7:25 speaks of "a time and times and the dividing of time." A "time" equals one year, "times" equal two years, and a "half" equals half a year, based on the Hebrew calendar of thirty days per month. [^10] The total time is three and one-half years. A wicked king will blaspheme God and persecute the Saints for this time period (see Dan. 7:25).

Dan. 9:27 speaks of the "midst [middle] of the week." Half a week, or three and a half days, may perhaps signify years (Ezek. 4:6; Num. 14:34). Daniel prophesies that temple sacrifices will cease for this period of time (see Dan. 9:27).

Dan. 12:7, which speaks of "time, times, and an half," indicates that during this period the wicked will "scatter the power of the holy people."

Rev. 11:2 records that "forty and two months," or three and one-half years, is the length of time the Gentiles will tread the holy city.

Rev. 11:3 speaks of "a thousand two hundred and threescore days," which is another way of saying three and one-half years, or forty-two months. That is the same length of time as that spoken of in 11:2; it is also the period of time that the two prophets will prophesy before they are killed. Moreover, if we use that number with years rather than days, as in the Joseph Smith Translation rendering of Rev. 12:5, "a thousand two hundred and threescore years," we have the period of the Great Apostasy (see commentary on 12:5).

Rev. 12:14 uses the expression "a time, and times, and half a time" as another way of describing the period of the Great Apostasy.

Rev. 11:11 gives "three days and an half" as the period during which the bodies of the two prophets will lie in the streets.

Rev. 13:5 records "forty and two months," or three and one-half years, as the duration of the beast's evil activity.

Forty-two months, or three and one-half, or 1,260, belong to the wicked and apparently signify their work; the number three and one-half may mean that the work of righteousness is cut short. That number is one-half of seven, the number of perfection and completion, which belongs to God and his Saints. We recall that the number seven is used symbolically many times in Revelation with regard to God and his work: "seven churches" (1:4), "seven servants" (JST 1:4), "seven golden candlesticks" (1:12), "seven stars" (1:20), "seven lamps of fire" (4:5), "seven seals" (5:5), "seven angels" with their "seven trumpets" (8:6), "seven thunders" (10:3), "seven last plagues" (15:1), and "seven vials" (17:1). [^11]

Further, "the root of the Hebrew word for seven (sheva) is identical to the Hebrew verb that means `to take an oath,' thus connecting the word seven to covenants and covenant making." [^12] One-half of seven, or three and one-half, represents an incomplete covenant (religious systems that appear to be spiritual and to possess power but do not) or the broken covenant (apostate conditions).

11:3 I will give power. The Greek text omits the word power, [^13] but it is clear from the context of this verse that the two witnesses will have great power indeed.

my two witnesses. The two witnesses are "two prophets that are to be raised up to the Jewish nation in the last days, at the time of the restoration, and to prophesy to the Jews after they are gathered and have built the city of Jerusalem in the land of their fathers" (D&C 77:15). Why two? Ancient Israelite law required two witnesses for testimony to be valid (Deut. 17:6; 19:15). The law of witnesses remains in effect today (D&C 6:28; 42:80).

They are called witnesses because they will bear testimony of Jesus Christ and his latter-day work. Rev. 11:10 calls the two witnesses "two prophets," indicating that they will have the powers and authority of prophets; Joseph Smith's translation of Isa. 51:19 refers to them as "two sons," perhaps suggesting that they are sons of Abraham, whether literally or by covenant; Zech. 4:3 calls them "two olive trees," indicating that they possess oil and light (see commentary on 11:4); and Zech. 4:14 calls them "two anointed ones."

prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days. The two prophets will prophesy for three and one-half years, the same length of time that the Gentiles will tread under foot the holy city. Perhaps these two events—the prophesying of the two prophets and the treading of the Gentiles—will occur at the same time. The Jerusalem Bible says that the Gentiles "will trample on the holy city for forty-two months. But I shall send my two witnesses to prophesy for those twelve hundred and sixty days" (11:2-3). It must be noted, however, that since this is a symbolic number, the time frame may not be exact.

clothed in sackcloth. The two prophets will likely not actually wear sackcloth, but sackcloth signifies that they will possess the same prophetic powers and authority to teach, warn, prophesy, and perform mighty miracles as did such ancient prophets as Moses, Elijah, and Isaiah (1 Kgs. 17; Isa. 20:2-4).

11:4 two olive trees, and . . . two candlesticks. The imagery of olive trees recalls the book of Zechariah, in which he asks an angel, "What are these two olive trees upon the right side of the candlestick and upon the left side thereof?" The angel's response indicates that the two prophets have been anointed with holy oil in the Lord's temple: "These are the two anointed ones, that stand by the Lord of the whole earth" (Zech. 4:11, 14).

Zechariah's images of a bowl, golden pipes, oil, olive branches, and seven lamps (Zech. 4:2-14) seem to say that the two prophets, as olive trees, will help "provide oil for the lamps of those who go forth to meet the Bridegroom." [^14]

The two prophets will be like candlesticks holding up the light of Christ to shine in the darkness. Some will see the light, recognize their "good works," and "glorify [their] Father which is in heaven" (Matt. 5:16). Some will recognize Jesus through the prophets' testimony: "Therefore, hold up your light that it may shine unto the world. Behold I am the light which ye shall hold up—that which ye have seen me do" (3 Ne. 18:24).

standing before the God of the earth. This phrase recalls Zech. 4:14: "two anointed ones, that stand by the Lord of the whole earth." The expression "standing before God" seems to place the two witnesses in a temple setting, as does Zech. 4. Menahem Haran wrote: "In general, any [religious] activity to which the biblical text applies the formula `before the Lord' can be considered an indication of the existence of a temple . . . this expression . . . actually belongs to the temple's technical terminology." [^15]

11:5 if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth. The two prophets will possess great power, similar to that of Moses (Num. 16:23-35) and Elijah (2 Kgs. 1:10-14), to call upon heaven and cause fire to consume those who attempt to hurt them or to hinder their work. The two will call upon God with their mouth, and God will respond by sending the consuming fire. Although there are two witnesses, the singular "mouth" is used ("their mouth"), perhaps indicating that their message will be united. [^16]

11:6 power to shut heaven, that it rain not. The two prophets will possess the sealing power whereby they perform great miracles among the people, including closing of the skies so that it does not rain and thus causing famine in the land. When such occurs, the land does not "yield . . . her fruit," and the people begin to "perish quickly from off the good land" (Deut. 11:17). The prophet Elijah from Gilead also "prayed earnestly" (James 5:17) and shut heaven, causing a great famine in the land. He promised King Ahab, "As the Lord God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word" (1 Kgs. 17:1). Elijah's prophecy was fulfilled, and "heaven was shut up three years and six months, when great famine was throughout all the land" (Luke 4:25).

Many during mortality have held power over earth's waters, including Enoch (Moses 7:13; JST Gen. 14:30), Moses (Moses 1:25; Hel. 8:11), Jesus Christ (Mark 4:39), and others (D&C 61:27). God, of course, is the power behind these miracles (Ether 4:9).

to smite the earth with all plagues. D&C 84:97 promises, "And plagues shall go forth, and they shall not be taken from the earth until I have completed my work, which shall be cut short in righteousness" (see also D&C 43:25). The plagues that will occur at the command of the two prophets are similar to those spoken of in Exodus when Moses, through the power of God, smote the land of Egypt with numerous plagues (Ex. 7-10). The two prophets' plagues may be the same as the seven plagues of the seven angels (Rev. 15:1, 6, 8) at least, the prophets' plagues anticipate and perhaps foreshadow the great plagues that will be poured out of the bowls (vials) identified in Rev. 16.

as often as they will. This phrase suggests that the prophets will conduct miracles as necessity demands, which may be frequently during their three-and-one-half-year ministry.

11:7 finished their testimony. God will protect the two prophets until they complete their mission; then he will permit them to be killed. Their testimony will focus on Jesus Christ (19:10). [^17]

beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit. The bottomless pit was discussed in Rev. 9:1-2. The beast identified here may be the same as the beast identified in Rev. 13:1-8.

shall make war against them . . . and kill them. Satan and his followers have always made war with the righteous (see, for example, 12:17). The beast will war against the two prophets (possibly with the aid of "kings of the earth, and their armies," 19:19) and succeed in killing them. That the beast is making war against only two individuals underscores the tremendous power the two will hold—power greater than that of the armies of the earth. The beast and his followers will also "make war" against others (13:7), including Jesus Christ, but Jesus will "overcome them: for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings" (17:14; see also 19:11, 19).

11:8 their dead bodies shall lie in the street. The two prophets' bodies will lie in the street for three and one half days while the people of the earth rejoice and send gifts to one another (11:9-10). Allowing the dead to lie in view of their enemies was considered extremely disrespectful in ancient times (see Ps. 79:3-4; 2 5:10). Joseph Macc. Smith taught, "It has always been considered a great calamity not to obtain an honorable burial: and one of the greatest curses the ancient prophets could put on any man, was that he should go without a burial." [^18]

great city, which [allegorically] is called Sodom and Egypt. Jerusalem is called the "great city" (see D&C 77:15), "where also our Lord was crucified." Jerusalem is allegorically called "Sodom" (Isa. 1:10; 3:9) and "Egypt" because of the wickedness of her inhabitants. Sodom, we recall, was destroyed for her abominations and gross wickedness (Ezek. 16:49-50; Jude 1:7), and Egypt, called "the basest of the kingdoms" (Ezek. 29:15), symbolizes worldliness and oppression of the Lord's people.

Babylon is also called the "great city" (14:8; 18:21), implying that "great city" symbolizes all of earth's cities that contain iniquitous and godless people who war against the Lamb and his witnesses. One commentator writes that the "great city" is "every city that embodies self-sufficiency in place of dependence on the creator, achievement in place of repentance, oppression in place of faith, the beast in place of the Lamb, and murder in place of witness to God." [^19]

11:9 they of the people and kindreds and tongues and nations. This expression signifies totality of people and indicates that the worldwide community will be involved, at least emotionally, in the slaying of the two prophets. See commentary on 5:9.

see their dead bodies three days and an half. The two prophets' bodies will lie in a highly visible place for all to see. The time of three and one-half days corresponds to the time that Jesus' body rested in the tomb ("after three days rise again," Mark 8:31; 9:31; 10:34). Perhaps more importantly, this period also parallels the number that belongs to the wicked, the cutting short of righteousness. See commentary on 11:2.

not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves. See commentary on 11:8.

11:10 they that dwell upon the earth. This expression denotes was the "people and kindreds and tongues and nations" spoken of in 11:9.

shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another. Earth's inhabitants celebrate and gloat over the death of the two prophets, who had "tormented them" by bringing forth famine and plagues and who had testified of Jesus Christ (see 11:5-7). This celebration indicates the gross darkness that belongs to the wicked during this period; not satisfied with the spilling of the blood of God's witnesses and leaving their bodies in the streets for all to see, they will also party, revel over their deaths, and exchange gifts. The wicked will feel they have won the victory.

11:11 after three days and an half. See commentary on 11:9.

Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet. These phrases recall the promise of the resurrection to the house of Israel in Ezek. 37:10: "And the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet."

great fear fell upon them which saw them. Zophar taught that "the triumphing of the wicked is short" (Job 20:5), and indeed, the revelers have only three-and-one-half days to celebrate the prophets' death before they experience great terror as they witness them come back to life (Matt. 28:4).

11:12 they heard a great voice from heaven. The voice of a heavenly being instructs the two witnesses to "come up hither." This is the dramatic moment when God bares his arm before the nation and begins to bring an end to the rule of evil. Death is the ultimate tool of evil—what happens when even that power is removed? All others will be destroyed as well, leaving the wicked completely powerless.

they ascended up to heaven in a cloud. The prophets' ascension into heaven in a cloud parallels the ascension into heaven of both Elijah and the Lord (2 Kgs. 2:11; Acts 1:9).

11:13 same hour was there a great earthquake. A "great earthquake" coincides with the opening of the sixth seal (6:12), and another "great earthquake" occurs after the seventh angel pours out his bowl (16:17-18). The earthquake identified here accompanies the prophets' ascension into heaven and serves as another testimony, subsequent to the testimony of the two prophets, that God lives (see D&C 88:87-89; see also commentary on 6:12).

tenth part of the city fell. The earthquake causes great destruction to the city's buildings, roads, and other structures.

were slain of men seven thousand. The earthquake destroys a great number of individuals, represented here as "seven thousand."

the remnant . . . gave glory to the God of heaven. To give glory to God, at the very least, is to acknowledge his hand in the resurrection and ascension of the two witnesses and in the earthquake (16:9; 3 Ne. 20:9; D&C 88:104; 133:38).

11:14 second woe is past. See commentary on 8:13.

THE SEVENTH TRUMPET SOUNDS AND TWENTY-FOUR ELDERS WORSHIP GOD (11:15-19)

Three major events occur when Michael, the archangel, blows the seventh trumpet: heavenly voices declare the eternal kingship and reign of God and Jesus, the twenty-four elders fall on their faces and worship God, and the heavenly temple is opened for all of God's Saints to enter.

As the seventh seal includes the events connected to the seven trumpets, so the seventh trumpet seems to include the events connected with the seven vials (bowls, or seven last plagues). "The seventh trumpet . . . embraces the whole of the seven vials, or last seven plagues, which make up the `third woe.' " [^20]

Rev. 11:15-19

15 And the seventh angel sounded; and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the [kingdom] [^21] of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever.

16 And the four and twenty elders, which sat before God on their seats, fell upon their faces, and worshipped God,

17 Saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come; because thou hast taken to thee thy great power, and hast reigned.

18 And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou shouldest give reward unto thy servants the prophets, and to the saints, and them that fear thy name, small and great; and shouldest destroy them which destroy the earth.

19 And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his temple the ark of his testament: and there were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

11:15 seventh angel sounded. "Michael, the seventh angel, even the archangel" (D&C 88:112), blows his trump.

there were great voices in heaven. The voices are not identified, but they may belong to the twenty-four elders, the four living creatures, or the great multitude of exalted souls in heaven. See commentary on 4:5.

kingdoms of this world. The world's kingdoms are like wild beasts, who have no owner or master and are untamed, uncivilized, and often bloodthirsty. Joseph Smith explained: "You there see that the beasts [in Dan. 7:16] are spoken of to represent the kingdoms of the world, the inhabitants whereof were beastly and abominable characters; they were murderers, corrupt, carnivorous, and brutal in their dispositions. The lion, the bear, the leopard, and the ten-horned beast represented the kingdoms of the world, says Daniel." [^22]

When Christ, the Lamb of God, comes in great power and glory, he will destroy these beasts, or earthly kingdoms, and establish his perfect kingdom, for he has promised, "I will be your ruler when I come" (D&C 41:4). At that time "the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and his name one" (Zech. 14:9), and he will make "a full end of all nations" (D&C 87:6).

Daniel envisioned these things: "I beheld till the thrones were cast down . . . and there was given [the Son of Man] dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed" (Dan. 7:9, 14).

he shall reign for ever. The tenth Article of Faith states that "Christ will reign personally upon the earth." Also, "the Lord, even the Savior, shall stand in the midst of his people, and shall reign over all flesh" (D&C 133:25).

11:16 four and twenty elders . . . fell upon their faces, and worshipped God. Four times John sees the elders "fall down" to worship God, who "sat on the throne" (4:10; 5:14; 11:16; 19:4), and once he observes them as they "fell down before the Lamb" (5:8).

11:17 We give thee thanks. In Rev. 4:9 the four living creatures who are located near God's throne give thanks to God; in Rev. 7:12 the angels who stand before God say "thanksgiving" to God; and here the twenty-four elders state, "We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty."

Lord God Almighty. This title of God, also used by Jacob (2 1 Ne. 9:46), describes God's supreme power to reign upon the earth, "because thou hast taken to thee thy great power, and hast reigned." That power was made manifest by God's triumph in raising the two prophets from the dead. Evil had appeared to triumph, but God turned seeming defeat into glorious victory. Do what they will, the powers of evil cannot frustrate the purposes of God—he alone is almighty.

which art, and wast, and art to come. See commentary on 1:4.

11:18 the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come. Ps. 2 helps us understand this section of Revelation. The psalmist wrote: "Why do the heathen rage? The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed" (Ps. 2:1-2; 46:6). That is to say, the nations are angry and they and their leaders continually war against God and Jesus Christ. The psalmist prophesies that the Lord will become the earth's king and ruler and receive as a possession "the uttermost parts of the earth" (Ps. 2:8).

The Lord's wrath ("thy wrath is come") is also mentioned in Ps. 2, where the psalmist writes that the Lord shall "speak unto them [the heathen] in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure" (Ps. 2:5). Modern revelations also speak of the Lord's wrath: "Hearken, O ye people who profess my name, saith the Lord your God; for behold, mine anger is kindled against the rebellious, and they shall know mine arm and mine indignation, in the day of visitation and of wrath upon the nations" (D&C 56:1) and "with the sword and by bloodshed the inhabitants of the earth shall mourn; and with famine, and plague, and earthquake, and the thunder of heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also, shall the inhabitants of the earth be made to feel the wrath, and indignation, and chastening hand of an Almighty God, until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations" (D&C 87:6).

time of the dead, that they should be judged. The first resurrection pertains to the prophets and Saints of God (20:4-5): "For the day cometh that the Lord shall utter his voice out of heaven; the heavens shall shake and the earth shall tremble, and the trump of God shall sound both long and loud, and shall say to the sleeping nations: Ye saints arise and live; ye sinners stay and sleep until I shall call again" (D&C 43:18; 29:12). Later, John will witness the "dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened . . . and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works" (20:12-13).

give reward unto thy servants the prophets, and to the saints. God's reward to his prophets and Saints is thus described: "And thus we saw the glory of the celestial, which excels in all things—where God, even the Father, reigns upon his throne forever and ever; before whose throne all things bow in humble reverence, and give him glory forever and ever. They who dwell in his presence are the church of the Firstborn; and they see as they are seen, and know as they are known, having received of his fulness and of his grace; and he makes them equal in power, and in might, and in dominion" (D&C 76:92-95).

small and great. Individuals from all walks of life, both prophets and Saints, who "fear," or reverence, God's name will receive an eternal reward (D&C 138:14-15).

destroy them which destroy the earth. Those who belong to Babylon, whose citizens worship the beast and have received his mark in their foreheads or hands (20:4), have sought to destroy the earth's inhabitants. Jesus Christ will destroy these destroyers and "every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beasts of the field, or of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea" (D&C 101:24). Note that Jesus comes to save the earth from those who would destroy it. Even the Second Coming is an act of salvation.

11:19 temple of God was opened in heaven. The celestial kingdom, called the "temple of heaven" (16:17; 14:17), is opened to receive the Saints who are resurrected, judged (11:18), and found worthy to enter. See commentary on 21:22.

ark of his testament. This expression refers to the ark of the testimony (also called ark of the covenant), which rested in the Israelite temple's holy of holies, into which only the high priest was permitted to enter "once every year" (Heb. 9:7). The ark was a box that held three sacred items symbolically connected to Jesus Christ's power and atonement—Aaron's rod, the pot of manna, and the tablets of the law (Heb. 9:4). [^23] The lid, or covering, of the ark served as Jehovah's "seat of atonement," [^24] or "mercy seat"; it was situated between two large, gold cherubim. John's statement that "there was seen in his temple the ark of his testimony" indicates that all exalted Saints, not just the high priest of the earthly temple, will be privileged to gain access to Jesus Christ and his sacred, heavenly dwelling.

lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail. See commentary on 4:5.

1 Pratt, Voice of Warning, 41-42.

2 McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:510.

3 According to the reading provided by Harrington, Revelation, 122. The Greek word is pneumatikos.

4 See note b to 11:1 in the LDS edition of the KJV.

5 Harrington, Revelation, 119.

6 See LDS Bible Dictionary, 671, s.v. "fasts."

7 Strand, "Overlooked Old Testament Background," 322.

8 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 286.

9 The "times of the Gentiles" refers to that era when the Gentiles, rather than the Jews, are the primary recipients of the gospel. See Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, 132; Smith, Restoration of All Things, 164; McConkie, Mortal Messiah, 1:97n.

10 Durham, "Revelation," 26.

11 Satan often attempts to counterfeit the things of God. For an illustration of Satan's use of the number seven in this way, see 12:3.

12 McConkie and Parry, Guide to Scriptural Symbols, 99.

13 Note a to 11:3 in the LDS edition of the KJV.

14 McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:510.

15 Haran, Temples and Temple Service, 26.

16 So suggests Ford, Revelation, 171.

17 History of the Church, 5:215-16; 3:389.

18 History of the Church, 5:361.

19 Krodel, Revelation, 226.

20 Bullinger, Commentary, 369.

21 JST 11:15 changes the plural kingdoms to the singular kingdom.

22 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.

23 For details on these items, and their connection with Christ and his atonement, see McConkie and Parry, Guide to Scriptural Symbols, 76-77, 81, 94.

24 McConkie and Parry, Guide to Scriptural Symbols, 82-83.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Many authors have taught that Peter, James, and John composed the First Presidency of their day (see, for example, Taylor, Gospel Kingdom, 138). Joseph Fielding Smith, in Doctrines of Salvation, 3:152, wrote that "Peter, James, and John, acted as the First Presidency of the Church in their day."
[^2] 2 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 150-51; emphasis added.
[^3] 3 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^4] 4 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 52.
[^5] 5 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^6] 6 McConkie, "Understanding the Book of Revelation," 87.
[^7] 7 JST 1:3 replaces the relative pronoun that with the relative pronoun who. The JST also adds the word understand, which clarifies the meaning of the text.
[^8] 8 JST 1:3 replaces the expression the time is at hand with the phrase the time of the coming of the Lord draweth nigh to clarify the meaning of the text.
[^9] 9 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289.
[^10] 10 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 290.
[^11] 11 Lund, "Seeing the Book of Revelation," 51-52.
[^12] 12 JST 1:4 adds, omits, and alters many words of this verse.
[^13] 13 JST 1:5 adds a long note of clarification and identifies John as the faithful witness of Jesus Christ.
[^14] 14 JST 1:6 adds these important words.
[^15] 15 JST 1:6 omits the conjunction and.
[^16] 16 JST 1:7 adds the preposition For and clarifies that Jesus will come "in the clouds with ten thousands of his saints in the kingdom, clothed with the glory of his Father."
[^17] 17 JST 1:8 adds this phrase.
[^18] 18 JST 1:8 omits the word saith.
[^19] 19 JST 1:8 changes the relative pronoun which to who.
[^20] 20 On the other churches of the period, see Charles, Critical and Exegetical Commentary, 1:8.
[^21] 21 Ford, Revelation, 376.
[^22] 22 For a discussion of the temple in heaven, see Parry and Parry, "Temple in Heaven," in Temples of the Ancient World, ed. Parry, 515-32. See also the commentary on 21:22.
[^23] 23 Taylor, Mediation and Atonement, 136-37.
[^24] 24 History of the Church, 5:555.
