Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation ( 1998)

Rev. 12

THE WOMAN AND THE DRAGON (12:1-17)

The kingdom of God (the child) is born through the instrumentality of the Church (the woman). Once the kingdom is born, Satan (the dragon) and his followers make war against it, seeking to destroy it. To protect them from the attacks of Satan, the Lord removes both the Church and the kingdom of God from the earth.

This great battle was begun in premortality and was continued in the Garden of Eden: There the woman faced the serpent, learned that she would bring forth in anguish, and was told that her child would be attacked by Satan (Gen. 3:1, 15-16). The battle was renewed in the time of Christ and his apostles, when Satan attacked the Church with great vigor (1 Ne. 11:32-35). The battle continues to this day as our adversary, in his wrath, makes war with all those who "keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ" (12:17).

Rev. 12 may be divided into three parts. First, verses 1 through 5 appear to depict the establishment of the Church in the meridian of time and the beginning of the Great Apostasy. Second, verses 6 through 11 show us the war in heaven between Satan and his followers and the Lord and his followers. This war gives heightened understanding of the war between Satan and the righteous on the earth—and the outcome of the heavenly war gives us confidence that the Saints will prevail. Third, verses 12 through 17 return to the theme of the persecution of the meridian Church and the Great Apostasy that followed.

In Rev. 12 through 14, the Lord seems to be setting the stage for the great tribulations and final triumph described in the final chapters of the book. He introduces the primary players in those last events—the Church and kingdom of God, Satan, the wicked earthly kingdoms, the powerful followers of Satan, and the Lord and his angels. And he introduces the theme that will be portrayed: Satan, having been cast down from heaven to earth, will rule in terror; Satan's kingdom will eventually fail; and the Lord and his kingdom will triumph.

One commentator has written perceptively that Rev. 12 reveals "to the believing community the ultimate cause for the increased opposition and hostility they will meet in the last days. Beyond that the visions in chapter 12 form the theological heart of the entire book. In Christ, God engaged Satan in the ultimate battle of the Holy War. The redemptive triumph of Christ in his death and resurrection was the crucial defeat of Satan and the forces of evil. Yet for a time the dragon vigorously pursues the people of God. Hence there is great suffering in the final days (which extend from Pentecost to the return of Christ)." [^1]

Rev. 12:1-17

1 And there appeared a great [sign in heaven, in the likeness of things on the earth]; [^2] a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars.

2 And [the woman] [^3] being with child, [^4] cried, travailing in birth, and painted to be delivered.

3 And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule all nations with a rod of iron; and her child was caught up unto God and . . . [^5] his throne. [^6]

4 And there appeared another [sign] [^7] in heaven; and behold, a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads. And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth. And the dragon stood before the woman which was . . . delivered, [ready] to devour her child [after] it was born. [^8]

5 And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she [had] a place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore [years]. [^9]

6 And there was war in heaven; Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon . . . and his angels [fought against Michael;] [^10]

7 And [the dragon] prevailed not [against Michael, neither the child, nor the woman which was the church of God, who had been delivered of her pains, and brought forth the kingdom of our God and his Christ.] [^11]

8 [Neither was there place found . . . in heaven for the great dragon, who] was cast out, that old serpent called the Devil, and [also called] [^12] Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth; and his angels were cast out with him.

9 And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ;

10 For the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night.

11 [For they have overcome] [^13] him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; [for] [^14] they loved not their [own lives, but kept the testimony even unto death.] [^15] Therefore, rejoice, [O] [^16] heavens, and ye that dwell in them.

12 [And after these things I heard another voice saying,] Woe to the inhabiters of the earth, [yea,] and [they who dwell upon the islands] of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time. [^17]

13 [For] [^18] when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the woman which brought forth the man child.

14 [Therefore,] [^19] to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might [flee] [^20] into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent.

15 And the serpent [casteth] [^21] out of his mouth water as a flood after the woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood.

16 And the earth [helpeth] the woman, and the earth [openeth] her mouth, and [swalloweth] up the flood which the dragon [casteth] out of his mouth. [^22]

17 [Therefore,] [^23] the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

12:1 there appeared a great [sign in heaven, in the likeness of things on the earth]. The sign here is a portent, or omen, of a coming event (12:3; 15:1). It appears in heaven because that is where John sees his vision—in the temple in heaven. The sign is "in the likeness of things on the earth" in that it portrays a pregnant woman who is experiencing labor, something commonly seen on the earth.

a woman clothed with the sun. Joseph Smith's translation of 12:7 makes clear that the woman represents the true Church of God, which is not just an organization but many righteous individuals joined together by covenant. In being clothed with the sun, the woman represents the destiny of those who join themselves to her and follow the Lord with pure hearts: they will be privileged to enter the celestial kingdom, "whose glory is [like] that of the sun" (D&C 76:70). In being clothed with the sun, the true Church becomes like unto God himself, who is clothed "with light as with a garment" (Ps. 104:2).

the moon under her feet. The moon represents a lesser glory than that of the sun (1 Cor. 15:40-41). The glory of the moon, which is terrestrial, is lesser than, or inferior to, the glory enjoyed by the Church and its faithful adherents. This expression could also mean that the woman has power or dominance over the moon; in other words, it may suggest that those of the Church who attain a celestial glory will have stewardship and ascendancy over those who attain a lesser glory.

a crown of twelve stars. The head of the Church is the Twelve Apostles of the Lord, who direct the Church in righteousness, under Christ (1 Ne. 1:10). This system of Church government continues to our day—the presiding officer of the Church is the senior apostle. The crown signifies the preeminent position of the apostles; stars often symbolize individual human beings (Gen. 37:9; Job 38:7; see commentary on 1:16, 20). The crown of twelve stars may also represent the twelve tribes of Israel, through whom we are able to partake of the Abrahamic covenant.

12:2 [the woman] being with child. The woman, representing the true Church, bears within her the seed of the kingdom of God (JST 12:7). The Church is the ecclesiastical arm of the Lord's work; the kingdom of God on earth, which will come to full fruition in the Millennium, will also have political power (see commentary on 12:3).

travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered. According to this symbolism, it was not an easy thing for the Church to bring forth the kingdom of God but required both sacrifice and pain. Similarly, Old Testament prophets depicted ancient Israel as a travailing woman seeking to give birth to Zion (Isa. 66:7-8; Jer. 4:31; Micah 4:10). It is uncertain what the travail and pain represent in actual history—perhaps they are related to persecution from without and apathy and apostasy from within the Church.

12:3 she brought forth a man child. After her travail and pain, the Church did indeed bring forth the kingdom of God. The birth occurred in the time of the original Twelve Apostles, but because of Satan's oppressions, that kingdom (which stems from the establishment of Zion) was driven from the earth before it could grow.

Elder Joseph Fielding Smith explained the difference between the Church and the kingdom of God: "After Christ comes, all the peoples of the earth will be subject to him, but there will be multitudes of people on the face of the earth who will not be members of the Church; yet all will have to be obedient to the laws of the kingdom of God, for it will have dominion upon the whole face of the earth. These people will be subject to the political government, even though they are not members of the ecclesiastical kingdom which is the Church.

"This government which embraces all the peoples of the earth, both in and out of the Church, is also sometimes spoken of as the kingdom of God, because the people are subject to the kingdom of God which Christ will set up." [^24]

rule all nations with a rod of iron. It was the destiny of the kingdom of God to rule all nations, but, as John saw, because of Satan's opposition, the kingdom was not able to assume that role at the time of its birth. The rod of iron is "the word of God," as seen by Lehi and Nephi (1 1 Ne. 11:25). To rule by the word of God is to rule by the principles of divine truth, under the direction of the Spirit. Such rule implies priesthood direction; it is part of the oath and covenant of the priesthood to "live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God" (D&C 84:44). Those who so live shall also so rule (Ps. 2:9; Rev. 2:27; 19:15).

her child was caught up unto God. Because of Satan's threat, the infant political kingdom of God was not allowed to remain on the earth. When all who held the keys and authorities of the kingdom were killed, those keys were returned to God by being lost to those on the earth.

his throne. The Eternal Father rules from a throne in the heavens (3:21; 4:2-6).

12:4 another [sign] in heaven. This sign is a portent of things to come in the vision.

a great red dragon. The dragon represents the devil, or Satan (12:8). The red here is the color of fire, symbolizing the indiscriminate destruction of the dragon—like fire, the dragon destroys all in its path. Red is also the color of sin, murder, and bloodshed (6:4; Isa. 1:18).

seven heads and ten horns/seven crowns upon his heads. Satan is found in many places, and he rules over many nations, represented by the seven crowns on seven heads (see also Dan. 7:7). Horns are a symbol of power. [^25] The number ten suggests that Satan has great power, but it is neither perfect nor complete; such complete power, represented by twelve horns, resides in the Lamb (JST Rev. 5:6). Yet the seven crowns indicate that Satan has perfect and complete power on earth, at least for a time. This description of the dragon is repeated in relation to one of his followers, a beast from the sea (see commentary on 13:1).

Some scholars believe that these symbols represent the earthly powers that opposed the meridian Church—which may coincide with the view of the Church members in that era. As J. R. Dummelow explained,["[Satan's] seven heads and ten horns . . . represent the Roman emperors through whom he exercised his power. The seven crowned heads perhaps signify the seven emperors, from Augustus to Titus, who had really reigned. The ten horns may stand for the same emperors with the addition of Galba, Otho, and Vitellius." [^26] (These last three were pretenders to the Roman throne in A.D. 68 and 69. Some historians, however, include them in the count of the Roman emperors.) This argument is basically flawed, however: The dragon's power began long before the Roman empire and has continued long since.

his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth. This passage refers to the third of the hosts of heaven who were cast out with Satan after the war in heaven. Job also refers to the premortal spirit children of God as "stars" (Job 38:4-7). This idea is repeated in 12:8 (Dan. 8:10; 2 Pet. 2:4; Jude 1:6).

the dragon stood before the woman . . . [ready] to devour her child. This passage reminds us of the serpent's presenting himself, face to face, to the first woman of our earth, Eve, in the Garden of Eden (Gen. 3:1-6). Satan traditionally places himself in the best position to do us harm (1 Pet. 5:8). Here, he stands before the Church, ready to prevent her from bearing the fruit that is the kingdom of God. Should that kingdom be born, Satan's plan will be defeated as the Lord's influence on earth spreads.

12:5 the woman fled into the wilderness. The Lord's people, when persecuted, have often fled into the wilderness (Ex. 2:15; 1 Kgs. 17:2-3; 19:3; 1 Ne. 2:2), meaning the uninhabited desert. While the child (kingdom of God) was returned to the presence of God (12:3); the woman (the Church) is also taken away from the inhabited earth. During the time of the Great Apostasy, which followed the death of Christ and his apostles, the Church was removed from the earth. See commentary on 12:14.

she [had] a place prepared of God. The Lord had foreseen that Satan would persecute the Church and was prepared to withdraw the keys and authority from the earth, to keep them with himself until the Restoration.

they should feed her there. In place of feed, other versions use taken care of (GNB, NIV, LB), nourished (RSV), or sustained (NEB). The sense of the passage is that the Lord will not allow the Church to die but will keep it in his care until it is time to restore the gospel to the earth.

a thousand two hundred and threescore [years]. The clarification of years in the Joseph Smith Translation rather than the King James Version days is an important one, for the number suggests the length of time the Church will be gone from the earth during the Great Apostasy—1,260 years. If we consider that the Apostasy ended in 1820 (when the silence of the heavens was broken during Joseph Smith's First Vision) or in 1830 (when the Church was formally organized), then the 1,260 year period began in A.D. 570 or 560. But we know that the world had plunged deep into apostasy centuries before that time.

Perhaps John saw the Renaissance and the later Reformation as part of the restoration of the gospel; latter-day prophets have taught that events of these periods did indeed pave the way for the Restoration. [^27] The Renaissance began to bring light to the Dark Ages in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. A key date in the Renaissance was Gutenberg's invention of the printing press in about 1451. Less than a century later, in 1517, Martin Luther nailed his ninety-five theses to the door of the Castle Church in Wittenberg, Germany, sparking the beginning of the Reformation.

If we count 1,260 years before Luther's protest, we get a date of A.D. 257. If we count backwards from Gutenberg, the resulting date is A.D. 191. We could likely find other dates from which to measure the end of John's 1,260 years, but all such efforts are no more than speculative. The important point is that John saw an extended period of widespread apostasy, followed by the immeasurable blessing of the restoration of the gospel (14:6). That is probably the basic and most important understanding we can come to here: the Apostasy would last a very long time.

In 12:14, the 1,260 years is given differently, as "a time, and times, and half a time"—which may mean "one year [time], plus two years [times], plus half a year [half a time]," which equals three and one-half years, or, again, 1,260 days. Perhaps in "prophet's time" (D&C 130:4), a prophetic day sometimes equals a mortal year. Compare the similar time period—"forty and two months" (11:2), or "a thousand two hundred and threescore days" (11:3), or three and one-half years—during which Jerusalem would be besieged and the two prophets would testify in power. In the latter instances those time periods seem to be literal, rather than symbolic, months and days.

The ancient prophet Daniel dealt with similar time periods. After seeing a vision of the last days, Daniel asked, "How long shall it be to the end of these wonders?" And the answer: "It shall be for a time, times, and an half." Daniel did not understand, asked again, and was told, "From the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination that maketh desolate set up, there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days. Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days" (Dan. 12:6-12). Daniel's time periods are slightly different, but the application may be similar.

The specific meaning of these time periods has not been revealed, though some may come to a private understanding through personal revelation. As an angel told Daniel, "None of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand" (Dan. 12:10). For further discussion of the symbolism of the numbers involved here, see commentary on 11:2.

12:6 war in heaven. "What kind of war? The same kind that prevails on earth; the only kind Satan and spirit beings can wage—a war of words, a tumult of opinions, a conflict of ideologies; a war between truth and error, between light and darkness, between the gospel of Jesus Christ, with all its saving power, and the false religions of the world, which have a form of godliness but are devoid of saving grace. And the battle lines are still drawn. It is now on earth as it was then in heaven; every man must choose which general he will follow." [^28]

Latter-day Saints traditionally speak of the war in heaven that occurred before Satan was cast out (see 12:8), but in verses 6 and 7, John may be seeing a renewal of that war in the days of the meridian church—and beyond. Two clues support this idea: first, the Church and kingdom of God are both present during the war (12:7), and second, some of the righteous who fight in the war are killed (12:11), which cannot happen with premortal spirits.

Michael and his angels fought against the dragon. Michael, leading the hosts of the Lord, fought Satan and his followers (Dan. 10:13, 21; 12:1; Jude 1:9). The battle begun in premortality continued when Michael came to earth as Adam, the first man, and it continues to this day among Adam's descendants. The great battle between Michael and Satan, with their angels, will be fought anew at the end of the world (D&C 88:112-15).

12:7 [the dragon] prevailed not [against Michael, neither the child, nor the woman]. Powerful as he is, Satan is not as powerful as God. Though he may gain temporary victories, ultimately Satan fails in his evil plans against Michael and his righteous descendants, against the child (the kingdom of God), and against the woman (the true Church of God).

[brought forth the kingdom of our God and his Christ]. Through her pains, the Church brought forth the kingdom, which is ruled over by both God the Father and his Son, Jesus Christ. This phrase is an important addition to the King James Version found in the Joseph Smith Translation.

12:8 [Neither was there place found . . . in heaven for the great dragon, who] was cast out. This passage seems to flash back to the time in premortality when Satan was cast out of heaven. "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven," the mortal Jesus said (Luke 10:18).

Devil/Satan. Not used in the Old Testament, devil is a word found in the New Testament, which was translated from Greek rather than Hebrew. The word means "false accuser" or "slanderer," which is one of Satan's primary tactics against God the Father, the Lord Jesus Christ, and the followers of Christ. We learn from modern revelation that Satan was "a liar from the beginning" (D&C 93:25). The word satan means "adversary"—he stands in opposition to God, to good, and to all who embrace the Lord and his goodness.

deceiveth the whole world. The adversary's work of deception on earth is well documented in the scriptures (John 8:44; JST 2 Thes. 2:7-9; Rev. 16:14; 20:7; Mosiah 16:3; Moro. 7:17; D&C 84:49).

cast out into the earth. As a result of the war in heaven, the devil was cast from the presence of God down to the earth. As Isaiah exclaimed, "How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning!" (Isa. 14:12).

his angels were cast out with him. Through his deceptions, Satan drew a full third of the Lord's premortal children after him—and they suffered the same consequences he did: they were cast from heaven to earth (D&C 29:37).

12:9 I heard a loud voice saying in heaven. John here seems to be differentiating between the voice in the vision and the normal voice of the Spirit. The voice in the vision is not a still small voice but a loud voice proclaiming to all the goodness of God. The loud voice may be the voice of an angel (8:13; 14:6-7; 19:17; D&C 88:92).

Now is come salvation/strength. With Satan cast from heaven, the Lord's plan can now begin to be effected among his children. Satan opposed the salvation that God would send through his Only Begotten Son. Now Satan is banished from heaven, and the plan can move forward, bringing redemption and spiritual blessing to all who will receive them. Other versions clarify the meaning of strength here. The New English Bible says, "This is the hour of victory for our God, the hour of his sovereignty and power" (Ex. 15:2; Ps. 27:1; 37:39; 118:14; Isa. 12:2; 1 Ne. 15:15).

the kingdom of our God/the power of his Christ. With the great opponent of God's kingdom cast down, that kingdom is now ready to be established. Christ will now go forth with power to perform the Atonement and bless all mankind (Omni 1:26; Moro. 7:41).

12:10 the accuser of our brethren. Satan calls good evil and evil good (2 Ne. 15:20). He accuses those who are righteous ("our brethren") of being evil. Often his accusations will be made through the mouths of his followers on earth (Dan. 6:24; Matt. 27:12; D&C 122:6). Interestingly, the Hebrew word for Satan means "to accuse."

accused them before our God day and night. Satan never ceases from his evil work. He seeks constantly, both day and night, to undermine the righteous. And, as in the story of Job, he makes false accusation directly to the face of God (Job 1:6-12; 2:1).

12:11 [they have overcome] him by the blood of the Lamb. Ultimately, we conquer Satan not by our own righteousness nor by the valiant efforts of Michael, who leads the heavenly armies. We overcome as we partake of the blessings of the atonement of Christ, which atonement was wrought by the shedding of his blood (7:14; 1 Pet. 1:18-19; 1 Ne. 12:10-11; 2 Ne. 9:6-26; Alma 34:36).

by the word of their testimony. We also conquer Satan in our own lives by standing firm in our testimonies and being willing to proclaim them even in the face of opposition.

they loved not their [own lives, but kept the testimony even unto death]. Those who overcome the enticements and powers of Satan include the martyrs for truth, who love the Lord and their testimony of his word more than they love their own lives (6:9; 20:4-6).

Therefore, rejoice, [O] heavens. Those in heaven have cause to rejoice (Ps. 96:11; Isa. 49:13): Satan has been cast out; the plan can go forward; salvation has come. The rejoicing in heaven contrasts with the state of those on earth, who must deal with Satan and his deceptions. "Woe to the inhabiters of the earth" (12:12).

12:12 [after these things]. This phrase is an addition found in the Joseph Smith Translation. Its inclusion does more than suggest a sequence in the vision, which is implied anyway. The words seem to create a separation between rejoicing in heaven in 12:11 and the woe on earth in 12:12.

I heard another voice. Apparently the voice that proclaims rejoicing in heaven is different from the voice that proclaims the woe on earth. This is another addition found in the Joseph Smith Translation.

Woe to the inhabiters of the earth. The book of Revelation has other woes pronounced on the inhabitants of the earth—plagues and judgments that will cause much loss of life and destruction. But this woe is the greatest—that Satan will dwell unseen among the Father's children on earth and will use his lies and deceptions to bring spiritual death to many (3 Ne. 9:2; Moses 7:25-26). This judgment will result in the fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy: "The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left" (Isa. 24:5-6; D&C 5:5). The woe seems to have begun when Satan first entered the Garden of Eden and tempted Eve; it will not end until Satan has been bound with chains and cast into the bottomless pit (20:1-3).

[they who dwell upon the islands] of the sea. Even those in the farflung areas of the earth will be subject to the evil work of the devil (Ezek. 26:17).

the devil is come down unto you. Satan dwells on the same planet on which we dwell. [^29]

having great wrath. The devil is angry by nature, and he is further incensed by the fate he suffered in being cast out of heaven. In his wrath he seeks to bring us to a misery like unto his own (2 Ne. 2:27; see also Rev. 14:8).

he knoweth that he hath but a short time. Satan is fully aware that he will be able to tempt us for only a brief moment of the eternities, and then he will be cast out forever (Matt. 8:29).

12:13 he persecuted the woman. Persecution of the Church (the woman), meaning the righteous members as well as the organization itself, has always been Satan's first order of business. He seeks to deceive the whole world, but he seems to save his persecutions for those who resist his deceptions. Jesus taught us that we should expect persecutions—and yet remain steadfast to the end (Matt. 5:11-12; John 15:21).

12:14 to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle. The eagle's wings symbolize deliverance from on high, which deliverance comes with swiftness and power. The Church after the days of Christ will be delivered by the same divine power that delivered the children of Israel from Egypt; as we read in Exodus, "Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on eagles' wings, and brought you unto myself" (Ex. 19:4; see also Deut. 32:11-12; Isa. 40:31).

[flee] into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished. As the children of Israel found deliverance from Egypt, symbolizing the wicked world, by fleeing into the wilderness, so will the Lord's true Church be protected "in the wilderness" when Satan attacks in the meridian of time. [^30] In this case, the wilderness is a place of safety prepared for it and isolated from mortals, namely, a place in the care of God (12:5). During the period that the Church is gone from the earth, she will be "nourished" by God, which probably means he will make certain that all is in readiness when the time comes for the restoration, which began in the days of Joseph Smith.

a time, and times, and half a time. See commentary on 12:5; 13:5.

from the face of the serpent. The woman (meaning the Church) will be taken to a place where the serpent (meaning the devil) will no longer be able to harm her—that is, the protective presence of God.

12:15 the serpent [casteth] out of his mouth water as a flood after the woman. Before the woman (or the Church) actually departed into the wilderness (meaning the safety of heaven), the serpent (the devil) tried to destroy her with a flood. The flood from Satan's mouth could have been a torrent of lies against the Church; the flow of evil that he sent forth, seeking to overwhelm the Church; ceaseless persecution and tribulation; or the attacks of a wicked nation (Rome)—or each of these in turn. (For scriptural examples of such applications of flood waters, see Ps. 18:4, 14-15; Isa. 17:12-14; 43:2; Jer. 46:7-8; 51:55.) The real point, of course, is that Satan made great efforts to destroy the Church, and that the true power and authority of the Church survived in God's care.

12:16 the earth [helpeth] the[woman/[swalloweth] up the flood. John's meaning here seems unclear, but nature often seems to cooperate with the God of nature to protect the Church long enough for God's purposes to be fulfilled (compare Num. 16:30; 26:10; Deut. 11:6). As Mormon testified, even the dust of the earth is obedient to the command of God (Hel. 12:7-19). And as we learn from Enoch, the earth itself has a spirit that loves righteousness and is pained by wickedness (Moses 7:48). Satan's river of destruction (12:15) stands in contrast to the river of life that flows from God (22:1).

12:17 the dragon was wroth with the woman. Satan's anger against the Church as an institution, as well as the righteous members of the Church, continues.

make war with the remnant of her seed. Satan particularly attacks those who "keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ." And his efforts are neither feeble nor sporadic. The war in heaven continues as Satan constantly brings the battle to the righteous on the earth. This verse applies not only to the gradually dwindling numbers of the righteous in Christ's Church in the meridian of time but also to the increasing numbers of righteous in the restored Church of Jesus Christ in our day.

1 Mounce, Book of Revelation, 230.

2 JST 12:1 changes this from the KJV wonder in heaven.

3 JST 12:2 changes this from the KJV she.

4 This chapter of the JST makes a number of punctuation changes that have not been noted in brackets.

5 KJV says and to; the change is from JST 12:3.

6 The JST puts this verse here; the KJV puts it as verse 5.

7 JST 12:4 changes this from the KJV wonder.

8 This change is from the JST. Verse 4 in the KJV reads, ". . . the woman which was ready to be delivered, for to devour her child as soon as it was born."

9 Changes in this verse are from JST 12:5.

10 The KJV reads, ". . . and the dragon fought and his angels." The change is from JST 12:6.

11 The KJV reads, "And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven." The change is from JST 12:7.

12 This change is from JST 12:7. The KJV reads, "And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world."

13 This change is from JST 12:11. KJV reads, "And they overcame."

14 This change is from JST 12:11. KJV uses and.

15 This change is from JST 12:11. KJV reads "and they loved not their lives unto the death."

16 This change is from JST 12:11. KJV has ye.

17 Additions are from JST 12:12.

18 This change is from JST 12:13. The KJV uses and.

19 This change is from JST 12:14. KJV uses and.

20 This change is from JST 12:14. KJV uses fly.

21 This change is from JST 12:15. KJV uses cast.

22 These changes are from JST 12:16. KJV has helped, opened, swallowed, and cast.

23 This change is from JST 12:17. KJV uses and.

24 Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 1:229.

25 McConkie and Parry, Guide to Scriptural Symbols, 66.

26 Dummelow, Commentary on the Holy Bible, 1082.

27 See, for example, Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 31; Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 1:176-77; McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 90, 92-93.

28 McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:518.

29 Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, 13:163.

30 McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:519.

---
Notas:
[^1] The beast has political power—from it stem many kings (13:1; 17:12). The beast is a servant of Satan and receives power from him.
[^2] It stands in blatant opposition to God, representing blasphemy with no shame (13:1). The beast has power politically, a power that reaches to all nations.
[^3] It receives its power and authority from Satan himself (13:2). It speaks blasphemies, fights and overcomes the Saints, and supports Babylon. The wicked throughout the world worship it.
[^4] One of its heads receives a deadly wound by a sword and is healed (13:3, 14). It seems to have existed in some form before the time of Christ, and it will continue to exist as a force in the world until the Lord returns in glory.
[^5] The whole world knows about the healing and is amazed (13:3).
[^6] The people of the world worship the beast (13:4, 8).
[^7] The world marvels at the power of the beast (13:4).
[^8] The beast is able to speak great things, including blasphemies (13:5, 6).
[^9] It has power for forty-two months (13:5).
[^10] It has power to make war with and overcome the Saints (13:7).
[^11] It has power over all nations (13:7).
[^12] A second beast has power to give life to an image of the first beast, enabling it even to speak (13:15).
[^13] The second beast causes all who do not worship the first beast to be put to death (13:15).
[^14] The first beast will make war against the two witnesses in Jerusalem and will kill them (11:7).
[^15] The first beast supports Babylon, the mother of harlots (17:7).
[^16] It comes from the bottomless pit and is destined to go to perdition (17:8).
[^17] The beast "was, and is not, and yet is" (17:8).
[^18] The seven heads of the beast are seven mountains (17:9).
[^19] The beast is eighth in a line of kings, five of which have come and gone by the time of John's vision (17:10-11).
[^20] It is yet to come in John's future—but it existed in some form before John's vision (17:11, 8).
[^21] Many kings will lend their power and strength to the beast (17:13).
[^22] The beast is not limited in time to the period of the Great Apostasy but will still be in power when the Lord returns in power (19:19).
[^23] The beast and the false prophet, who is the second beast, will both be captured at the time of the Second Coming and will be thrown into the lake of fire (19:20).
[^24] 24 History of the Church, 5:555.
[^25] 25 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 369, 370; see the entire text of this sermon, 369-76.
[^26] 26 Lectures on Faith, 7:9; emphasis added.
[^27] 27 Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary, s.v. "dominion," "glory."
[^28] 28 Scott, Exposition of the Revelation of Jesus Christ, 30.
[^29] 29 For additional aspects of John's vision of the temple in heaven, see Parry and Parry, "Temple in Heaven," Temples of the Ancient World, ed. Parry, 515-32.
[^30] 30 JST 1:12 replaces seeing the voice with from whence . . . came.
