Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation ( 1998)

Rev. 16

THE SEVEN ANGELS WITH THE BOWLS OF GOD'S WRATH (16:1-21)

The day of God's judgment is a day of God's wrath—and that day is fast approaching. "Vengeance cometh speedily," the Lord says, "as a whirlwind it shall come upon all the face of the earth" (D&C 112:24).

The righteous will be blessed with a degree of protection: "Zion shall escape if she observe to do all things whatsoever I have commanded her" (D&C 97:25). But those among the Saints who are hypocrites have no such promise; indeed, they will be the first to be judged: "Upon my house shall it [the day of vengeance] begin, and from my house shall it go forth, saith the Lord; first among those among you, saith the Lord, who have professed to know my name and have not known me, and have blasphemed against me in the midst of my house, saith the Lord" (D&C 112:25-26).

This chapter of Revelation details the scourges and plagues that will afflict mankind in the day of the final judgments—plagues that will smite the land, the sea, the rivers, the sun, and the kingdoms of spiritual darkness. Through the power of God, the very foundations of the earth are shaken, and Babylon is prepared to be totally destroyed. These plagues may well fit the description the Lord gave us elsewhere in modern revelation: "For behold, and lo, vengeance cometh speedily upon the ungodly as the whirlwind; and who shall escape it? The Lord's scourge shall pass over by night and by day, and the report thereof shall vex all people; yea, it shall not be stayed until the Lord come; for the indignation of the Lord is kindled against their abominations and all their wicked works" (D&C 97:22-24).

And again: "Their testimony [the elders] shall also go forth unto the condemnation of this generation if they harden their hearts against them; for a desolating scourge shall go forth among the inhabitants of the earth, and shall continue to be poured out from time to time, if they repent not, until the earth is empty, and the inhabitants thereof are consumed away and utterly destroyed by the brightness of my coming" (D&C 5:18-19).

Some commentators believe that the judgments in this chapter are a repetition of the plagues seen in Rev. 8, 9, and 11. [^1] That is one possible reading; there are remarkable parallels between the two sections. But it seems more likely that Rev. 16 represents a later and more severe occurrence of plagues. In Rev. 8, for instance, a third of the sea becomes blood and a third of the creatures in the sea die (8:8-9). But in Rev. 16, all of the sea becomes blood and all creatures therein die (16:3). A comparison of the plagues in both sections shows a similar progression—as God continues to plead with and to punish the earth through his judgments, those judgments become more severe.

Rev. 16:1-21

1 And I heard a great voice out of the temple saying to the seven angels, Go your ways, and pour out the [bowls] [^2] of the wrath of God upon the earth.

2 And the first went, and poured out his [bowl] upon the earth; and there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the beast, and upon them which worshipped his image.

3 And the second angel poured out his [bowl] upon the sea; and it became as the blood of a dead man: and every living soul died in the sea.

4 And the third angel poured out his [bowl] upon the rivers and fountains of waters; and they became blood.

5 And I heard the angel of the waters say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be, because thou hast judged thus.

6 For they have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou hast given them blood to drink; for they are [deserving]. [^3]

7 And I heard another [angel who came out from the altar saying], [^4] Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments.

8 And the fourth angel poured out his [bowl] upon the sun; and power was given unto him to scorch men with fire.

9 And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God, which hath power over these plagues: and they repented not to give him glory.

10 And the fifth angel poured out his [bowl] upon the seat of the beast; and his kingdom was full of darkness; and they gnawed their tongues for pain,

11 And blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores, and repented not of their deeds.

12 And the sixth angel poured out his [bowl] upon the great river Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings of the east might be prepared.

13 And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet.

14 For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of [the] [^5] great day of God Almighty.

15 Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked and they see his shame.

16 And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon.

17 And the seventh angel poured out his [bowl] into the air; and there came a great voice out of the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, It is done.

18 And there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings; and there was a great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so great.

19 And the great city was divided into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell: and great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath.

20 And every island fled away, and the mountains were not found.

21 And there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone about the weight of a talent: and men blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail; for the plague thereof was exceeding great.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

16:1 I heard a great voice out of the temple. In 15:8 we learned that no one could enter the temple until the next seven plagues were completed. This voice might be the voice of God himself, commanding the seven angels to act.

Go your ways. The voice tells the angels to move ahead with their commission to administer plagues to the earth.

pour out the [bowls] of the wrath of God. Under the law of Moses, the priests used a sacred bowl to capture the blood of the sacrifice. As part of the ritual, the priest then sprinkled the blood around the altar (Lev. 1:5; 3:8). Perhaps in this part of the vision John is seeing a reversal of this ritual—rather than blood coming from the bowls to save the people, John sees something come from the bowls that sheds blood and punishes the people. That which is poured from the bowls represents different manifestations of God's wrath.

16:2 the first . . . poured out his [bowl] upon the earth; and there fell a noisome and grievous sore. The first plague, which is directed at the wicked, is of "disgusting and virulent sores" (JB). This plague parallels the sixth plague that fell on the Egyptians in the time of Moses (Ex. 9:8-12). The contents of this bowl are poured out on the earth itself; and the affliction falls on those who dwell on the earth. The wicked have earlier worn the mark of the beast; now they will wear the mark of the wrath of God. [^6]

Zechariah prophesies a plague that may be similar: "This shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite all the people that have fought against Jerusalem; their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongue shall consume away in their mouth" (Zech. 14:12). And we read in latter-day revelation: "Their tongues shall be stayed that they shall not utter against me; and their flesh shall fall from off their bones, and their eyes from their sockets" (D&C 29:19). These descriptions sound very much like some of the effects of nuclear war. [^7]

16:3 the second angel poured out his [bowl] upon the sea; and it became as . . . blood/every living soul died in the sea. This plague and that which follows parallel the first plague that the Lord brought on the ancient Egyptians—the waters turned to blood (Ex. 7:19-21). In 8:8-9, a third of the waters were afflicted; here, the polluted water kills every creature. This may have connection with words of the Lord given in our dispensation: "Behold, there are many dangers upon the waters, and more especially hereafter; for I, the Lord, have decreed in mine anger many destructions upon the waters" (D&C 61:4-5). We can only speculate on the cause of this destruction; it may be related to the fallout from nuclear war.

There may be another meaning to sea in this passage. In 17:15, the waters symbolize "peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues." Perhaps here, as well, the sea represents the wicked people of the world, all of whom are eventually destroyed.

as the blood of a dead man. A person's blood gives life to the body, as water gives life to the world and the creatures thereof. But a dead man's blood is corrupted and coagulated, no longer able to help sustain life. So shall it be with the waters of the seas as a result of this plague.

16:4 the third angel poured out his [bowl] upon the rivers . . . they became blood. This plague (like that of 16:3) parallels the one found in Ex. 7:19-21 (see also Ps. 78:44). In 8:10-11, a burning star turned a third of the rivers and fountains of waters bitter. Here, all the rivers and fountains are polluted, though the result is not given.

16:5 the angel of the waters. Anciently, the Jews believed that different angels had charge of different elements of nature. The vision of John seems to support this belief. In 7:1 we see four angels who have power over "the four winds of the earth." In 14:18 we read of an angel who has "power over fire." Here we have one or more angels who seem to have power over the fate of the waters. Or, if we read this verse more simply, we might understand that it refers only to the angel who, in 16:4, poured his bowl out upon the rivers.

Thou art righteous, O Lord, . . . because thou hast judged thus. Even though the judgments on the earth are terrible, the angel proclaims that the Lord is righteous and correct to have so judged (see Ps. 119:137). Why? The answer is given in the next verse. Not only have the people chosen lives of sin, but they have slain those who desired to follow the Lord. For such great sin, the Lord rightly punishes them with devastating judgments.

which art, and wast, and shalt be. See commentary on 1:4 (see also 1:8; 4:8; 11:17).

16:6 For they have shed the blood of saints and prophets/given them blood to drink. The motif of blood continues as we are reminded that the wicked have slain many of the righteous (13:7, 15; 17:6; 18:24)—and learn that, in a punishment that fits the crime, the wicked will themselves be forced to drink blood (Isa. 49:26). "To be drunk with blood . . . signifies slaughter by the sword." [^8] The King James Version says the wicked are "worthy" of this punishment; a more accurate translation may be "deserving." [^9]

The scriptures tell of many specific instances of martyrdom (1 Kgs. 18:13; 2 24:20-21; Mark 6:25-28; Chr. Acts 7:57-60; 12:1-2; Rev. 2:13; 11:7; Mosiah 17:20; Alma 25:7). They also record many general statements documenting the rejection and killing of the Lord's prophets (1 Thes. 2:15; Heb. 11:37; Rev. 6:9; 12:11; 16:6; Hel. 13:24; 3 Ne. 10:15). The mortal Jesus prophesied that martyrdom was precisely what many of his followers would suffer (Matt. 23:29-38; 24:9).

16:7 I heard another [angel who came out from the altar]. Almost without exception, the altar in Revelation is connected with the judgments of God (8:3-5; 9:13-14; 14:18; the one exception is 11:1). The angel declares that God's judgments are indeed "true and righteous" (see also 15:3-5; Ps. 19:9)—as is the case with all his works.

16:8 the fourth angel poured out his [bowl] upon the sun/scorch men with fire. The righteous are promised in 7:16 that "neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat," meaning that they will not suffer from the heat of the sun. But here the wicked suffer from intense heat, perhaps from the sun. This may result from a breakdown of the ozone layer of the atmosphere, which could result from a nuclear blast and which would remove much of our protection from the sun's potentially deadly rays, or it may have a cause that we cannot yet imagine. [^10] The scriptures often connect fire with judgment (Deut. 28:22; 1 Cor. 3:13; 2 Pet. 3:7) this fire prefigures the scorching fire of the last judgment (Mal. 4:1). The fourth angel acts under the direction of God and by "power" that "was given unto him."

16:9 men were scorched with great heat/blasphemed the name of God/repented not to give him glory. The heat of this plague is here described as "great," and the idea of "scorching" is repeated, perhaps for emphasis. But rather than acknowledge their guilt, the wicked appear to blame God for their troubles, speaking evil of him and his righteousness. Blasphemy is a recurring accusation against the wicked in Revelation (2:9; 16:11, 21). Even at this late hour in the world's history, men have an opportunity to repent—but still they refuse (9:20-21; 16:11; see the contrast in 11:13). An angel in 14:7 admonished the world to "fear God, and give glory to him," but the great body of people on earth choose their sin instead.

16:10 the fifth angel poured out his [bowl] upon the seat of the beast/his kingdom was full of darkness. In the ninth plague that Moses proclaimed in Egypt, the whole kingdom was stricken with thick darkness (Ex. 10:21-23). Here, darkness fills the kingdom of the beast (Isa. 60:2; D&C 82:5; 84:49; 112:23). The darkness may be literal or spiritual—or both. Most likely, because the darkness results from an action of an angel of God, who would not be the source of spiritual darkness, it is probably a literal darkness that reflects the spiritual darkness in the beast's kingdom. The "seat of the beast" may more accurately be translated the "throne of the beast" (RSV, NEB, JB, NIV). The idea is that the Lord will attack the beast at his very headquarters, striking at his power and authority.

This plague may be a fulfillment of a curse that the Lord pronounced on the wicked in the times of Moses: "The Lord shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart: and thou shalt grope at noonday, as the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways: and thou shalt be only oppressed and spoiled evermore, and no man shall save thee" (Deut. 28:28-29).

16:10-11 they gnawed their tongues for pain/blasphemed the God of heaven/repented not of their deeds. The terrible pain that men suffer may be a result of the sores in 16:2, combined with the lack of clean water in 16:4 and the scorching heat of the sun in 16:9. The darkness into which they are plunged can only exacerbate their plight. Again they follow their leader, the beast, in blaspheming God (13:1, 5-6; 17:3), blaming him for their pains and sores. And still they will not repent. It seems incredible that people would not turn to God with humble spirits after suffering so much, but they follow the pattern of a scriptural type of long ago: despite all that he and his people suffered, the Egyptian pharaoh in the time of Moses only hardened his heart (JST Ex. 7-10). The plagues of this angel may also be connected with nuclear war.

16:12 the sixth angel poured out his [bowl] upon the great river Euphrates/the water thereof was dried up. In the days of Moses and Joshua, the Lord divided and dried up a passage through two different bodies of water to enable his people to be delivered from bondage and then to inherit their land of promise (Ex. 14:21; Josh. 3:13-17). But in John's vision, the Lord through his angel will dry up the water of a river to clear the way for destruction and war. The Euphrates formed the eastern and northeastern boundary of the land the Lord gave to Abraham and his descendants (Gen. 15:18; Deut. 1:7-8; Josh. 1:3-4) and served as a natural barrier to the enemies of Israel. When that barrier is removed, the enemies of Israel can begin their march. The Old Testament speaks often of the Lord drying up waters to accomplish his purposes (Ex. 14:21; Josh. 3:13-17; Isa. 11:15-16; 44:27; Jer. 51:36; Zech. 10:11).

that the way of the kings of the east might be prepared. It is uncertain who the kings of the east are. One commentator notes that there have been more than fifty different interpretations of this expression. [^11] What most agree on is that the kings are enemies of the Lord's people and of the Lord himself and that they are prepared to go forth to war.

16:13 I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon/beast/ false prophet. The "satanic trinity" [^12] of the dragon, the beast, and the false prophet send forth evil spirits, or devils, to do their work. Their emergence from the mouths of the devil and his helpers suggests that these evil spirits are symbolic of false communications, lies, and propaganda designed to deceive the people of the world. Similarly, in 12:15, a river that may represent lies comes from the mouth of the dragon; in 13:5, blasphemies come from the mouth of the beast; and in 13:14, the false prophet, or second beast, seems to speak threats and ungodly commands.

Frogs, to which the spirits are compared, are unclean animals under the law of Moses (Lev. 11:10). One of the plagues that Moses and Aaron brought on Egypt was a plague of frogs (Ex. 8:2-6). Interestingly, Pharaoh's magicians, using Satan's power, duplicated this plague (Ex. 8:7). In nearby Persia, which was east of the Euphrates (16:12), frogs were "considered to be the instrument of Ahriman, the god of darkness." [^13] Further, Ahriman had power to change his shape—and the animal form that fit him most naturally was that of a frog. [^14]

The fact that three unclean spirits come forth from three different evil beings suggests that each of those beings (the dragon, the beast, and the false prophet) may send forth one of the spirits. These evil spirits are the agents and representatives of those who send them forth. As righteous men on earth can stand for God by virtue of the priesthood they hold, so can these unclean spirits stand for Satan through the evil power he bestows on them.

16:14 For they are the spirits of devils. Here we learn definitively who the three unclean spirits of 16:13 are—spirits of devils. Devils, of course, are not body and spirit combined but are only spirits. Perhaps a better translation would be "spirits that are devils."

The Lord has told us: "Hearken, O ye elders of my church, and give ear to the voice of the living God; and attend to the words of wisdom which shall be given unto you, according as ye have asked and are agreed as touching the church, and the spirits which have gone abroad in the earth. Behold, verily I say unto you, that there are many spirits which are false spirits, which have gone forth in the earth, deceiving the world. And also Satan hath sought to deceive you, that he might overthrow you" (D&C 50:1-3).

working miracles. Jesus Christ prophesied that "there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect" (Matt. 24:24; see also commentary on 13:14). These evil spirits are part of the fulfillment of that prophecy. The miracles of Satan and the miracles of God may often be indistinguishable from one another to the outward senses. Only through the discernment given by the Spirit of God can we know the difference.

Elder Orson Pratt wrote, "The reason the Lord will suffer the devil to work miracles to deceive `the kings of the earth and of the whole world,' is because they will previously have rejected `the everlasting gospel;' therefore the devil will deceive them, and lead them on to destruction, as he did the Egyptians." [^15]

go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world. The deceiving spirits sent forth by Satan will have worldwide influence, including with the rulers of the nations of the earth. The spirits will cause the gathering of the kings and their armies together to battle.

to gather them to the battle. This battle is the great final battle at Armageddon, which will be fought by the armies of the earth (16:16). That battle, perhaps when it reaches its crisis point, will be interrupted by the coming of the Lord (Zech. 14:1-4), "the great day of God Almighty."

great day of God Almighty. See commentary on 6:17.

16:15 Behold, I come as a thief. See commentary on 3:3.

Blessed is he that watcheth. We have often been commanded to be alert and to watch the signs of the times as the day of Christ's return draws closer (Matt. 24:42-51; 25:1; D&C 45:44; 133:10). Watching also implies being obedient and prepared (Matt. 24:45-46, 48-51; 25:3, 8-9). Specifically, latter-day revelation tells us we need to be prepared by having the Holy Spirit for our guide (D&C 45:56-57).

keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked and they see his shame. To keep one's garments is to be ready for any eventuality (specifically, here, the coming of the Lord). If a soldier does not know when the battle will begin, he needs to keep the proper clothing (armor) at hand for any eventuality. If he does not, he might be caught unawares and have to go forth naked. [^16]

But there is a deeper meaning, suggested by a similar statement in 3:3-5. There we read the warning that the Lord will come as a thief and the promise that those who have "not defiled their garments . . . shall walk with me in white" (3:4). To keep one's garments in this sense is to keep them pure, to avoid and resist sin. It is to keep the covenants and promises one made in the temple. As Alma said, "And may the Lord bless you, and keep your garments spotless, that ye may at last be brought to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the holy prophets who have been ever since the world began, having your garments spotless even as their garments are spotless, in the kingdom of heaven to go no more out" (Alma 7:25).

This verse is an interjection, a parenthetical warning and word of comfort to the Saints: The terrors of the last days will continue and worsen. Those who yield themselves to sin will be exposed, but those who remain prepared and pure will be blessed.

16:16 he gathered them together/Armageddon. Armageddon is the site of the last great battle before the coming of the Lord. The person gathering the armies together is not identified, but it is likely Satan, working through the evil spirits he sends to the earth (16:14). Armageddon is the New Testament name for Megiddo, an ancient city some sixty miles north of Jerusalem. Megiddo lay "on the north side of the Carmel ridge and[command[ed] the strategic pass between the coastal plain and the valley of Esdraelon." The area "is one of history's famous battlefields, having witnessed major conflicts all the way `from one fought by Tuthmosis III in 1468 B.C. to that of Lord Allenby of Megiddo in 1917.' `By the waters of Megiddo' Barak and Deborah defeated the chariots of Sisera (Judg. 4-5; cf. 5:19)." [^17] In that same area, Gideon and his three hundred soldiers defeated the Midianites (Judg. 7), and Saul and Jonathan were killed in battle (1 Sam. 31:1-6), as was King Josiah (2 Kgs. 23:29-30). "The kings of the whole world will be destroyed in final conflict outside the city of Jerusalem. . . . Armageddon is symbolic of the final overthrow of all the forces of evil by the might and power of God." [^18]

The great battle of Armageddon will not be a localized conflict but the center of a worldwide war. Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained, "The center of the battle will be on the mount and in the valley of Megiddo and on the plains of Esdraelon, though, since all nations are involved, it cannot be other than a worldwide conflict." [^19]

The battle of Armageddon was seen and prophesied anciently by Joel and Zechariah (see also Luke 21:20-23):

"Prepare war, . . . Beat your plowshares into swords, and your pruninghooks into spears: let the weak say, I am strong. Assemble yourselves, and . . . come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat: for there will I sit to judge all the heathen round about. Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe: come, get you down; for the press is full, the fats overflow; for their wickedness is great. Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision: for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision" (Joel 3:9-14).

"For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity. . . . Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle. And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east, and the mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west. . . . And ye shall flee to the valley of the mountains; . . . and the Lord my God shall come, and all the saints with thee" (Zech. 14:2-5).

Ultimately, the objective of Satan and his armies is not the conquest of northern Israel nor of Jerusalem but the destruction of the Lord's temple and the Lord's work. [^20]

16:17 the seventh angel poured out his [bowl] into the air. Other angels poured their bowls out upon the earth, the sea, the rivers, the sun, the seat of the beast, and the Euphrates. By pouring his bowl out into the air, the angel seems to be affecting all of earth through its all-encompassing atmosphere. The sounding of the last trumpet and the pouring forth of the last bowl are quite similar in their results, both signifying the end of earth's history.

Table 5

TrumpetBowlthe Lord's kingdom is established (11:15)God's purpose is accomplished (16:17)the time of judgment is announced (11:18)judgment falls on the earth (16:19-20)the temple in heaven is opened (11:19)a great voice comes from the temple in heaven (16:17)there are lightnings, voices, thunderings, a great earthquake, and a hailstorm (11:19)there are voices, thunders, lightnings, a great earthquake, and hail (16:18, 21)

Though there are parallels between the events following the sounding of the trumpet and the pouring forth of God's wrath from the bowl, these two events may well be different, occurring at different times. The first series seems to prefigure the second.

great voice out of the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, It is done. Because this voice comes from the throne in the temple of heaven, it must belong to God the Father, who is seated on that throne and rules over all. By saying "It is done," he announces that all things have been accomplished and the time has come for the final destruction of Babylon and of the earth.

16:18 there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings. The thunders and lightnings may indicate that all nature is in an uproar as a result of the judgments poured forth from the last bowl. The voices may be God's proclamations of judgment and command as we see in the Doctrine and Covenants, where he prepares the earth to return to its paradisiacal glory: "And he shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem, and his voice shall be heard among all people; and it shall be a voice as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder, which shall break down the mountains, and the valleys shall not be found. He shall command the great deep, and it shall be driven back into the north countries, and the islands shall become one land; and the land of Jerusalem and the land of Zion shall be turned back into their own place, and the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it was divided. And the Lord, even the Savior, shall stand in the midst of his people, and shall reign over all flesh" (D&C 133:21-25). See commentary on 4:5; see also 8:5; 11:19.

there was a great earthquake. This earthquake is different from the ones mentioned in 6:12 and 11:13-14. The earthquake in 6:12 was so great that the mountains and islands are "moved out of their places" (6:14), but that earthquake occurred in the period of the sixth thousand years (D&C 77:6-7). The earthquake in 11:13-14 was the first in the seventh thousand-year period; it is of indeterminate size and intensity. The earthquake in 16:18 is described as the greatest in the history of the world. It is so great, as we read in 16:20, that it appears to be connected with the flattening of the mountains and the unifying of the continents.

"One of the plainest and most-oft-repeated statements about the ushering in of the Millennium is the promise of a great shaking of the earth, of earthquakes that are everywhere at one and the same time, and of mountains and valleys and seas and landmasses that move. `Yet once, it is a little while,' saith the Lord, `and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land; and I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come.' (Hag. 2:6-7.) Christ, the Desire of all nations, shall come amid the greatest shaking of the earth and of all things that there has ever been or ever will be in the entire history of this planet. Everything on earth—the historical events then in progress, the beasts and all forms of life, and the inanimate objects that do not act for themselves—everything on earth will be affected by the great shaking." [^21] (See also Ezek. 38:19-20; Joel 3:16; D&C 133:31.)

16:19 the great city was divided into three parts. The great city seems to be Babylon, which at the end times is not a literal city but a figurative city, representative of all the wicked societies of the earth. The division into three parts suggests that the city is fully weakened and prepared for the final destructive blow.

the cities of the nations fell. The cities of the nations fall in the earth-quake, but this passage also seems to refer to the destruction of governments. The events in these verses bring about the fulfillment of the latter-day prophecy made by Joseph Smith: "With the sword and by bloodshed the inhabitants of the earth shall mourn; and with famine, and plague, and earthquake, and the thunder of heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also, shall the inhabitants of the earth be made to feel the wrath, and indignation, and chastening hand of an Almighty God, until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations" (D&C 87:6).

great Babylon came in remembrance before God. See commentary on 14:8.

the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath. See commentary on 14:10.

16:20 every island fled away/the mountains were not found. This passage describes the great leveling of the earth as the Lord prepares it for the millennial era. This leveling will occur as a result of the tremendous earthquake in 16:18. As we read in the Doctrine and Covenants, "Continue in steadfastness, looking forth for the heavens to be shaken, and the earth to tremble and to reel to and fro as a drunken man, and for the valleys to be exalted, and for the mountains to be made low, and for the rough places to become smooth—and all this when the angel shall sound his trumpet" (D&C 49:23; 109:74; 133:21).

Elder Parley P. Pratt wrote of this event: "From these verses [Isa. 40:1-5] we learn, first, that the voice of one shall be heard in the wilderness, to prepare the way of the Lord, just at the time when Jerusalem has been trodden down of the Gentiles long enough to have received, at the Lord's hands, double for all her sins, yea, when the warfare of Jerusalem is accomplished, and her iniquities pardoned. Then shall this proclamation be made as it was before by John [the Baptist], yea, a second proclamation, to prepare the way of the Lord, for his second coming; and about that time every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low, and the crooked shall be made straight, and rough places plain, and then the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. . . .

"Having restored the earth to the same glorious state in which it first existed—leveling the mountains, exalting the valleys, smoothing the rough places, making the deserts fruitful, and bringing all the continents and islands together, causing the curse to be taken off, that noxious weeds, and thorns, and thistles shall no longer be produced; the next thing is to regulate and restore the brute creation to their former state of peace and glory, causing enmity to cease from off the earth. But this will never be done until there is a general destruction poured out upon man, which will entirely cleanse the earth, and sweep all wickedness from its face." [^22]

16:21 there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven. Deadly hailstones are one of the elements of nature God periodically uses to assist the righteous in their battles and to punish the wicked (Josh. 10:11; Mosiah 12:6), and hailstorms are often prophesied among the troubles to come (Ezek. 13:13; 38:22; Rev. 11:19; D&C 29:16). A "very grievous hail" was one of the plagues sent upon Egypt in the days of Moses (Ex. 9:18).

every stone about the weight of a talent. Each of these hailstones weighs between forty-five and ninety pounds (the exact weight of a talent is uncertain). [^23] The point is that these hailstones are tremendous in size and catastrophic in their effect.

men blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail. Not only do the people of the world fail to repent but they speak evil of God for that which he does in perfect justice.

1 See, for example, Draper, Opening the Seven Seals, 251.

2 The KJV vials may be more appropriately translated bowls. See, for example, RSV, GNB, NIV, and JB.

3 From the Greek; see note c to 16:6 in the LDS edition of the KJV.

4 JST 16:7 amends this from the KJV, which reads, "And I heard another out of the altar say, . . ."

5 JST 16:14 changes the KJV that.

6 Mounce, Book of Revelation, 293.

7 The horrific results of atomic warfare can be read in Hersey, Hiroshima. For a description of the effects on the skin and eyes, see pages 59 and 67.

8 Davidson, New Bible Commentary, 1187.

9 See note c to 16:6 in the LDS edition of the KJV.

10 For a discussion of the effects of nuclear war on the ozone layer, see Schell, Fate of the Earth, 20-21, 79-92.

11 Walvoord, Revelation of Jesus Christ, 236.

12 Harrington, Revelation, 166.

13 Schick, Revelation of St. John, 2:51.

14 Interpreter's Bible, 12:485.

15 Pratt, Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon, no. 5 (1851): 66.

16 Mounce, Book of Revelation, 300.

17 Mounce, Book of Revelation, 301.

18 Mounce, Book of Revelation, 302

19 McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 397.

20 McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 476-94.

21 McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 620-21.

22 Pratt, Voice of Warning, 159-60, 162.

23 Douglas, ed., New Bible Dictionary, 1324.

---
Notas:
[^1] The beast has political power—from it stem many kings (13:1; 17:12). The beast is a servant of Satan and receives power from him.
[^2] It stands in blatant opposition to God, representing blasphemy with no shame (13:1). The beast has power politically, a power that reaches to all nations.
[^3] It receives its power and authority from Satan himself (13:2). It speaks blasphemies, fights and overcomes the Saints, and supports Babylon. The wicked throughout the world worship it.
[^4] One of its heads receives a deadly wound by a sword and is healed (13:3, 14). It seems to have existed in some form before the time of Christ, and it will continue to exist as a force in the world until the Lord returns in glory.
[^5] The whole world knows about the healing and is amazed (13:3).
[^6] The people of the world worship the beast (13:4, 8).
[^7] The world marvels at the power of the beast (13:4).
[^8] The beast is able to speak great things, including blasphemies (13:5, 6).
[^9] It has power for forty-two months (13:5).
[^10] It has power to make war with and overcome the Saints (13:7).
[^11] It has power over all nations (13:7).
[^12] A second beast has power to give life to an image of the first beast, enabling it even to speak (13:15).
[^13] The second beast causes all who do not worship the first beast to be put to death (13:15).
[^14] The first beast will make war against the two witnesses in Jerusalem and will kill them (11:7).
[^15] The first beast supports Babylon, the mother of harlots (17:7).
[^16] It comes from the bottomless pit and is destined to go to perdition (17:8).
[^17] The beast "was, and is not, and yet is" (17:8).
[^18] The seven heads of the beast are seven mountains (17:9).
[^19] The beast is eighth in a line of kings, five of which have come and gone by the time of John's vision (17:10-11).
[^20] It is yet to come in John's future—but it existed in some form before John's vision (17:11, 8).
[^21] Many kings will lend their power and strength to the beast (17:13).
[^22] The beast is not limited in time to the period of the Great Apostasy but will still be in power when the Lord returns in power (19:19).
[^23] The beast and the false prophet, who is the second beast, will both be captured at the time of the Second Coming and will be thrown into the lake of fire (19:20).
