Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation ( 1998)

Rev. 18

THE FALL OF BABYLON (18:1-24)

The Babylonian captivity was perhaps the lowest point of Israel's history. Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "Both Isaiah and Jeremiah spoke at length of the devastations of that day and of the cursings and destruction that would come upon Babylon as a result. (Isa. 13 and 21; Jer. 50 and 51.) Babylon was truly the great enemy of the Lord's people anciently, and her overthrow and the destruction of her worldliness and wickedness was one of the things of greatest interest and concern to them. What was more natural, then, than for John and all the prophets to use Babylon as the symbol of sin, and her destruction as the overthrow of wickedness on earth." [^1]

The fall of Babylon was foreseen in 14:8: "And there followed another angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great city, because she made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication." In 16:17 and 19, divine action was taken to destroy the wickedness of Babylon: "And the seventh angel poured out his vial into the air; . . . and great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath." The angel in 17:1 promised to show John the fulfillment of that prophecy and that divine action. But we do not actually begin to see that destruction until chapter 18, which is an extended lament, or a funeral dirge, over the loss of the great city of Babylon.

Babylon was convinced that in her strength she would never fall: "I sit a queen," she said, "and shall see no sorrow." But she will fall indeed and become a "habitation of devils." Her destruction shall be complete: "She shall be utterly burned with fire," the prophecy says. Because the world has given herself over to Babylon's enticements, the world will lament her demise. Joining in the lament are earth's kings, merchants, and shippers. But the righteous will have cause to rejoice over her downfall.

In latter-day revelation we read, "And the great and abominable church, which is the whore of all the earth, shall be cast down by devouring fire, according as it is spoken by the mouth of Ezekiel the prophet, who spoke of these things, which have not come to pass but surely must, as I live, for abominations shall not reign" (D&C 29:21; see also Ezek. 39:6).

"For the time speedily shall come that all churches which are built up to get gain, and all those who are built up to get power over the flesh, and those who are built up to become popular in the eyes of the world, and those who seek the lusts of the flesh and the things of the world, and to do all manner of iniquity; yea, in fine, all those who belong to the kingdom of the devil are they who need fear, and tremble, and quake; they are those who must be brought low in the dust; they are those who must be consumed as stubble; and this is according to the words of the prophet" (1 Ne. 22:23).

Elder Orson Pratt adds this testimony: "John predicts another great event to take place immediately after the proclamation of the everlasting gospel, namely, the downfall of great Babylon. . . . [S]he must fall, after she has been warned with the sound of `the everlasting gospel.' Her overthrow will be by a series of the most terrible judgments which will quickly succeed each other, and sweep over the nations where she has her dominion, and at last she will be utterly burned by fire, for thus hath the Lord spoken. Great, and fearful, and most terrible judgments are decreed upon these corrupt powers—the nations of modern Christendom; for strong is the Lord God who shall execute His fierce wrath upon them, and he will not cease until he has made a full end, and until their names be blotted out from under heaven." [^2]

Rev. 18:1-24

1 And after these things I saw another angel come down from heaven, having great power; and the earth was lightened with his glory.

2 And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.

3 For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies.

4 And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

5 For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities.

6 Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her works: in the cup which she hath filled fill to her double.

7 How much she hath glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her: for she saith in her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow.

8 Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be utterly burned with fire: for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her.

9 And the kings of the earth, who have committed fornication and lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning,

10 Standing afar off for the fear of her torment, saying, Alas, alas, that great city Babylon, that mighty city! for in one hour is thy judgment come.

11 And the merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her; for no man buyeth their merchandise any more;

12 The merchandise of gold, and silver, and precious stones, and of pearls, and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all thyine wood, and all manner [of] vessels of ivory, and all manner [of] [^3] vessels of most precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble,

13 And cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and chariots, and slaves, and souls of men.

14 And the fruits that thy soul lusted after are departed from thee, and all things which were dainty and goodly are departed from thee, and thou shalt find them no more at all.

15 The merchants of these things, which were made rich by her, shall stand afar off for the fear of her torment, weeping and wailing,

16 And saying, Alas, alas, that great city, that was clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls!

17 For in one hour so great riches is come to nought. And every shipmaster, and all the company in ships, and sailors, and as many as trade by sea, stood afar off,

18 And cried when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, What city is like unto this great city!

19 And they cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas, that great city, wherein were made rich all that had ships in the sea by reason of her costliness! for in one hour is she made desolate.

20 Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God hath avenged you on her.

21 And a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all.

22 And the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee; and no craftsman, of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in thee; and the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee;

23 And the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee; and the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at all in thee: for thy merchants were the great men of the earth; for by thy sorceries were all nations deceived.

24 And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

18:1 And after these things I saw another angel come down from heaven, having great power. John now beholds a powerful angel, different from the angel that guided him through the vision of chapter 17.

the earth was lightened with his glory. This angel is so brilliant that the very earth is illuminated by his presence. In fact, this angel's glory is like that of Christ, who will yet return: "And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the east: and his voice was like a noise of many waters: and the earth shined with his glory" (Ezek. 43:2). "For as the[light[e]ning [of the sun] cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be" (Matt. 24:27).

18:2 And he cried mightily with a strong voice. The power of the angel's proclamation equals the power of his appearance—his cry is mighty, and his voice is strong.

Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen. The angel's words are almost a direct quotation from a passage in Isaiah: "Babylon is fallen, is fallen; and all the graven images of her gods he hath broken unto the ground" (Isa. 21:9; Jer. 51:8). This same expression is found in latter-day scripture: "And again, another angel shall sound his trump, which is the sixth angel, saying: She is fallen who made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication; she is fallen, is fallen!" (D&C 88:105).

the habitation of devils/foul spirit/hateful bird. Where once Babylon boasted of being the great and powerful city that controlled kings (17:18) and was the site of opulence and wealth (17:4), it now is not fit for human habitation. Rather than being a city or kingdom with a desired place in the world, it now is the home for devils, foul spirits, and unclean birds. This symbolic description emphasizes that the mighty Babylon will be brought to the lowest possible point.

Old Testament prophets saw the fallen city of Babylon as a wasteland, good only for foul and unclean creatures: "From generation to generation it shall lie waste; none shall pass through it for ever and ever. But the cormorant and the bittern shall possess it; the owl also and the raven shall dwell in it: and he shall stretch out upon it the line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness. They shall call the nobles thereof to the kingdom, but none shall be there, and all her princes shall be nothing. And thorns shall come up in her palaces, nettles and brambles in the fortresses thereof: and it shall be an habitation of dragons, and a court for owls. The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild beasts of the island, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; the screech owl also shall rest there, and find for herself a place of rest. There shall the great owl make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather under her shadow: there shall the vultures also be gathered, every one with her mate" (Isa. 34:10-16; see also Isa. 13:19-22; Jer. 50:35-36, 40; Zeph. 2:13-15).

As it was with the literal, ancient city of Babylon, so shall it be with the spiritual Babylon that spreads itself across the world in our time.

18:3 For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication. See commentary on 14:8; 17:1-2.

the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies. The New English Bible gives a helpful alternative reading: "Merchants the world over have grown rich on her bloated wealth." The world's merchants have partaken of the wealth and luxury of Babylon, and they thereby have become part of her. This verse points out the worldwide power of Babylon (the wicked world, the church of the devil), as well as her involvement and influence in economic affairs.

18:4 And I heard another voice from heaven. This voice could be that of God, who directly addresses the Saints as "my people." More likely it is an angel speaking for God: in verses 5 and 8 the Lord is referred to in third person. The words of this angel seem to be those recorded in verses 4 through 20.

Come out of her, my people. This is the recurring cry of the prophets: Leave the world and its wickedness, and bind yourself to God. Down through the ages we hear their voices:

"Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord" (Isa. 52:11).

"Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul: be not cut off in her iniquity; for this is the time of the Lord's vengeance; he will render unto her a recompence" (Jer. 51:6).

"Go ye out of Babylon; gather ye out from among the nations, from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other. . . . Go ye out from among the nations, even from Babylon, from the midst of wickedness, which is spiritual Babylon" (D&C 133:7, 14).

This counsel has particular application to the Saints in our day. There is much in our world that partakes of the pride, the lust, the materialism, and the sins of Babylon. There is much that seeks to replace God in our hearts—the endless quest for wealth, the near-worship of sports and entertainment "stars," the deep desire of most people to seek and reach their own goals rather than God's. Babylon is alive and well in our times—but, as prophesied, Babylon will fall.

that ye be not partakers of her sins. The Saints are called to leave Babylon so that they can be fortified against the temptation to partake of her sins. What are those sins? Certainly the people of Babylon are guilty of all the typical sins of mankind at their worst—murder, adultery, abortion, theft, pornography, lying, and on and on. But in addition, as Revelation records, Babylon is also guilty of persecuting and killing the Saints (17:6), leading the nations of the world into idolatry and gross wickedness (17:2-4), and fostering all manner of abominations (17:5).

that ye receive not of her plagues. This phrase is connected with the previous one. By leaving Babylon and refusing to partake of her sins, the righteous are also protected from her plagues, enumerated elsewhere in Revelation (chapters 8, 9, and 16).

18:5 For her sins have reached unto heaven/God hath remembered her iniquities. God is fully aware of the grossness and the extent of the sins of Babylon; not one escapes his notice. And even if he does not act immediately to judge and to punish in a given instance, he will ever remember until the time of retribution.

18:6 Reward her even as she rewarded you. Babylon will receive according to the law of the harvest: that which she has sown, so shall she reap. As she has given out, so shall it come back to her in punishment (Job 4:8; D&C 6:33).

"Wherefore, fear and tremble, O ye people, for what I the Lord have decreed . . . shall be fulfilled. And verily I say unto you, that they who go forth, bearing these tidings unto the inhabitants of the earth, to them is power given to seal both on earth and in heaven, the unbelieving and rebellious; yea, verily, to seal them up unto the day when the wrath of God shall be poured out upon the wicked without measure—unto the day when the Lord shall come to recompense unto every man according to his work, and measure to every man according to the measure which he has measured to his fellow man" (D&C 1:7-10; see also Jer. 50:15, 29).

double unto her double according to her works. Babylon will receive not only a full portion of punishment for her iniquities but a double portion. Under the law of Moses, a thief was to pay double for that which he had taken (Ex. 22:4, 7). A double punishment is a common consequence in the scriptures (Isa. 40:2; Jer. 16:18). The double use of double is a peculiarity of the King James Version (contrast, for example, RSV, NEB, JB, and NIV).

the cup which she hath filled. Babylon has filled a cup of iniquity and caused the nations of the world to drink of it (14:8). That same cup will now be filled with the wrath of God for Babylon to drink—in double portions.

18:7 How much she hath glorified herself/lived deliciously. Babylon, which is the wicked world, has exalted herself and lived in great pride and luxury. Deliciously can also be rendered wantonly or riotously. [^4]

so much torment and sorrow give her. The Lord says that as Babylon has exalted herself in pride and given herself to riotous living, to that same degree Babylon will suffer torment and sorrow. This punishment will come just before the second coming of Christ.

I sit a queen, and am no widow. Babylon gives herself so thoroughly to pride and sin that she sees herself as invincible. She rules over the people of the world, a great queen over many kings. She fears nothing, not even death.

This arrogant claim repeats a prophecy found in Isaiah: "And thou saidst, I shall be a lady for ever: so that thou didst not lay these things to thy heart, neither didst remember the latter end of it. Therefore hear now this, thou that art given to pleasures, that dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me; I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the loss of children" (Isa. 47:7-8).

The prophecy in Isaiah continues, foreseeing that which John also saw next: "But these two things shall come to thee in a moment in one day, the loss of children, and widowhood: they shall come upon thee in their perfection for the multitude of thy sorceries, and for the great abundance of thine enchantments. For thou hast trusted in thy wickedness: thou hast said, None seeth me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath perverted thee; and thou hast said in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me. Therefore . . . desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou shalt not know" (Isa. 47:9-11).

18:8 Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine. Some translations replace the word death with disease or pestilence. [^5] In one day indicates that these things will come suddenly on the wicked.

In Deuteronomy Moses prophesied the horror of plagues and calamities to come upon the wicked: "The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in all that thou settest thine hand unto for to do, until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly; because of the wickedness of thy doings, whereby thou hast forsaken me. . . . Then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, and of long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance. Moreover he will bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt, which thou wast afraid of; and they shall cleave unto thee. Also every sickness, and every plague, which is not written in the book of this law, them will the Lord bring upon thee, until thou be destroyed" (Deut. 28:20, 59-61; see also 28:16-61; 2 Ne. 6:15; 10:6).

she shall be utterly burned with fire: for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her. After the plagues comes the burning. When the Lord returns, the wicked will be destroyed by burning, and the earth itself will be cleansed by fire. "For after today cometh the burning—this is speaking after the manner of the Lord—for verily I say, tomorrow all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, for I am the Lord of Hosts; and I will not spare any that remain in Babylon" (D&C 64:24; 3 Ne. 26:3). Certainly a god who has power to bring such a judgment is a strong and powerful god.

This scene is also depicted in latter-day scripture: "And another angel shall sound his trump, saying: That great church, the mother of abominations, that made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, that persecuteth the saints of God, that shed their blood—she who sitteth upon many waters, and upon the islands of the sea—behold, she is the tares of the earth; she is bound in bundles; her bands are made strong, no man can loose them; therefore, she is ready to be burned" (D&C 88:94).

18:9 the kings of the earth, who have committed fornication and lived deliciously with her. These kings are probably the kings of the earth in general, mentioned in 17:2. The kings represent the people of the earth, who also have joined in the "fornication" (see commentary on 14:8; 17:1-2). The kings and the people have joined together in celebrating the idolatry, immorality, and lust of the world. They have "lived deliciously" in luxury, excess, and wantonness, loving the pleasures of the world more than the treasures of God.

bewail her, and lament for her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning. When the kings of the earth see the utter destruction of Babylon, meaning the lifestyle and lust and wealth to which they had given themselves, they will weep and mourn for her loss (Jer. 51:8).

18:10 Standing afar off for the fear of her torment. Though they regret her loss, kings try to separate themselves from Babylon for fear that they will share in her fate.

Alas, alas, that great city Babylon, that mighty city! This cry of lament for the destruction of wicked Babylon is repeated three times in this chapter—once by the kings, once by the merchants, and once by the sea traders. "The city is Babylon; she is the similitude. The city is Rome; but she too is only a type and a figure. The city is all the cities of the world—San Francisco, Chicago, and New York City; London, Paris, and Berlin; Moscow, Tokyo, and Sao Paulo—all of which are subject to the rule and dominion of evil and carnality." [^6]

for in one hour is thy judgment come. This expression suggests that the punishments and disasters that will overtake Babylon (symbolizing the wicked world) will come suddenly. Variations of this expression are repeated in 18:17, 19. It is worth noting that the "one hour" of persecution revealed in 17:12-14 is balanced by the "one hour" of judgment in this verse.

18:11-13 And the merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her. The merchants, symbolizing all those who seek to increase their wealth by association and dealings with a godless culture, will mourn for the loss of that culture, that society, that way of life. Their mourning will be particularly poignant because of their personal loss—they will grieve for themselves more than for Babylon.

The long list of items bought and sold in Babylon is impressive in the broad variety of that which is available there. Most of the items listed fall into the category of luxuries—in Babylon, it is not enough to wear simple clothing; one must wear "fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet." It is not enough to eat bread; one must have "wine, and oil, and fine flour."

Ezekiel received a vision similar to that depicted in this chapter: "The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying, Now, thou son of man, . . . say unto Tyrus, . . . [Many merchants] traded in thy fairs . . . with horses and horsemen and mules . . . ivory and ebony . . . emeralds, purple, and broidered work, and fine linen, and coral, and agate . . . and honey, and oil, and balm . . . [and] wine . . . and white wool . . . lambs, and rams, and goats . . . [and] all spices, and with all precious stones, and gold . . . [and] blue clothes, and broidered work, and in chests of rich apparel. . . . [T]hy merchandise, thy mariners, . . . and all thy men of war, that are in thee . . . shall fall into the midst of the seas in the day of thy ruin. . . . [They] shall come down from their ships, they shall stand upon the land; and shall cause their voice to be heard against thee, and shall cry bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon their heads, they shall wallow themselves in the ashes. . . . And in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and lament over thee, saying, What city is like Tyrus, like the destroyed in the midst of the sea? . . . The merchants among the people shall hiss at thee; thou shalt be a terror, and never shalt be any more" (Ezek. 27:1-3, 12-24, 27, 29-32, 35-36).

18:13 slaves, and souls of men. This passage represents the worst of the merchandising that takes place in Babylon: the merchants are trading in the souls and bodies of human beings. Throughout history, millions upon millions of men, women, and children have been kidnapped from their homes, during war or otherwise, and taken to distant places where they have been forced to labor for another. [^7] In return for their labors, which were often excessive and accompanied by force and violence, the slave received only subsistence food, some clothing, shelter, and the opportunity to continue to live. Certainly such traffic in human beings is reprehensible to God.

Another form of trading and merchandising that occurs in Babylon is in what John calls the "souls of men." This expression may refer to false religious that buy and sell men's souls, as Moroni recorded: "There shall be churches built up that shall say: Come unto me, and for your money you shall be forgiven of your sins" (Morm. 8:32). Or John's vision may refer to what Hugh Nibley called the "Mahan Principle." Here is Nibley's description of how Babylon trades in the souls of men:

"The story begins . . . with Satan seeking to promote himself even in the premortal existence, and being cast out of heaven in his pride, and dedicating himself upon his fall to the destruction of this earth, `for he knew not the mind of God' (Moses 4:6). [On earth] he . . . will control the world economy by claiming possession of the earth's resources; and by manipulation of its currency—gold and silver—he will buy up the political, military, and ecclesiastical complex and run everything his way. . . . He not only offers employment but a course of instruction in how the whole thing works, teaching the ultimate secret: `That great secret' (Moses 5:49-50) of converting life into property. Cain got the degree of Master Mahan, tried the system out on his brother, and gloried in its brilliant success, declaring that at last he could be free, as only property makes free, and that Abel had been a loser in a free competition.

"The discipline was handed down through Lamech and finally became the pattern of the world's economy (Moses 5:55-56). . . . One may see Mahan at work all around, from the Mafia, whose adherence to the principle needs no argument, down to the drug pusher, the arms dealer, the manufacturer and seller of defective products, or those who poison the air and water as a shortcut to gain and thus shorten and sicken the lives of all their fellow creatures." [^8]

18:14 the fruits that thy soul lusted after/all things . . . dainty and goodly/thou shalt find them no more at all. The sweet and exotic foods that the world has enjoyed will be destroyed with Babylon itself. These foods may symbolize the excesses and extravagances of the world.

18:15 The merchants of these things/stand afar off/weeping and wailing. Greed and luxury are powerful motivators. Those who have become rich by trafficking in the things of the world feel great grief at the loss of their source of wealth. But even in their mourning they remove themselves from Babylon at the end, standing "afar off" for fear of partaking of her torment.

18:16 Alas, alas, that great city. The cry of the merchants, the sea traders, and the kings in mourning the loss of Babylon (which is the wicked world, personified by the greatest, richest, and most powerful city in the world) is one of self-interest: they feel deeply the loss of her wealth, symbolized by the linen, the royal clothing made of purple and scarlet, and the precious metals and gems.

18:17 For in one hour so great riches is come to nought. See commentary on 18:10.

as many as trade by sea, stood afar off. See commentary on 18:10.

18:18 What city is like unto this great city! When the sea traders see the destruction of Babylon, they are amazed. Babylon was so powerful and so rich—how could it be destroyed? In the same way, those who embrace the philosophies and lifestyle of a world without the true God, which world seems uniquely powerful and important, will be amazed at its destruction.

18:19 And they cast dust on their heads. In Middle Eastern culture, this gesture is traditionally a sign of humiliation and deep mourning (Ezek. 27:30).

Alas, alas, that great city. See commentary on 18:10, 16.

for in one hour is she made desolate. See commentary on 18:10.

18:20 Rejoice over her, thou heaven/holy apostles and prophets. While the wicked kings, merchants, and sea traders mourn the loss of Babylon, heaven and the righteous have cause to rejoice. Their great nemesis, the unholy antagonist of all that is good and right, has been destroyed.

God hath avenged you on her. Babylon orchestrated war against the righteous and has become "drunken with the blood of the saints" (17:6). But God will come down in vengeance and bring judgments upon her according to all her wickedness. This vengeance fulfills the promise made in 6:9-11.

18:21 a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea. Of those who abuse or offend the Lord's "little ones," the Lord said, "It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea" (Matt. 18:6). This is the very fate destined for Babylon, the wicked culture, philosophy, governments, religion, and lifestyle of the world. As an object lesson, "a mighty angel" will lift up a huge stone and throw it into the sea; and "thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all." This passage may also depict some otherwise undefined natural disaster.

The destruction of Babylon was foreseen by Jeremiah (Jer. 51:37), Nephi (1 1 Ne. 14:15-16; 22:14), and Joseph Smith (D&C 1:16), among others.

We read in Jeremiah of this impressive prophecy: "So Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that should come upon Babylon. . . . And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When . . . thou hast made an end of reading this book, . . . thou shalt bind a stone to it, and cast it into the midst of Euphrates: And thou shalt say, Thus shall Babylon sink, and shall not rise from the evil that I will bring upon her" (Jer. 51:60-64).

Just as a weighty stone has no power to rise again from the depths of the sea, in the same way Babylon will have no power to rise again from the destruction a just God brings on her.

18:22 harpers/musicians/pipers/trumpeters/heard no more at all in thee. The sounds of people seeking worldly pleasure and entertainment will be lost when Babylon is destroyed (Isa. 24:8; Ezek. 26:13). Contrast that with the promise in 15:2, which says that those who resist the beast, gaining a personal victory over him, will have "the harps of God," making music of true joy and praise.

no craftsman . . . shall be found any more in thee. Daily labor for pay in the city will cease. The economy of Babylon will be destroyed along with the city.

the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee. The grinding of wheat and other such daily tasks will no longer be heard in Babylon, because Babylon will be no more. This prophecy has an ominous undertone—when the millstone ceases to grind, food soon ceases to be available.

18:23 And the light of a candle/shine no more at all in thee. The city will be plunged into darkness. It will no longer have any light at all.

the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at all in thee. Of an earlier and parallel event the Lord said, "Then will I cause to cease from the cities of Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride: for the land shall be desolate" (Jer. 7:34). The loss of such sounds indicates that normal life has stopped, or that all life in that place has ceased to be.

This verse (18:23) is reminiscent of Jer. 25:9-12, a description of the long exile of Israel. In that passage, the Lord says he will allow Babylon to conquer his people but that Babylon would be destroyed in the end. During the exile, the Lord says, "I will take from them the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the sound of the millstones, and the light of the candle" (Jer. 25:10).

thy merchants were the great men of the earth. Those who traded in and with Babylon were great, rich, and powerful, but they do not have power to save her.

by thy sorceries were all nations deceived. The Lord abhors sorcery, the use of witchcraft and evil powers to deceive others. We read in Rev. 13 of the miracles of the beast, which deceived the people of the earth and caused them to worship the beast rather than God (13:12-15). Though the sorceries of Babylon enabled her to deceive the nations and thus to rule the world, those dark, satanic powers are unable to save her in the end: "Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth; if so be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail. . . . Let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee. Behold, they shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn them; they shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame: there shall not be a coal to warm at, nor fire to sit before it" (Isa. 47:12-14).

18:24 in her was found the blood of prophets/saints/all that were slain upon the earth. Ultimately, Babylon, or the wicked world, is responsible for the martyrdom of all the prophets and Saints who have ever been killed for their faith, as well as all who have been killed by murder and war. This persecution of the righteous is probably Babylon's greatest sin. That these things were "found" in Babylon at the end suggests that all her wickedness will be uncovered.

1 McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:559.

2 Pratt, Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon, no. 6 (1851): 84-85.

3 JST 18:12 adds of in two places in this verse.

4 See note a to 18:7 in the LDS edition of the KJV.

5 See RSV, GNB, JB, and NEB.

6 McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 445.

7 "It is estimated that there were as many as 60,000,000 slaves in the Roman Empire" alone (Mounce, Book of Revelation, 334).

8 Nibley, Approaching Zion, 165-67.

---
Notas:
[^1] The beast has political power—from it stem many kings (13:1; 17:12). The beast is a servant of Satan and receives power from him.
[^2] It stands in blatant opposition to God, representing blasphemy with no shame (13:1). The beast has power politically, a power that reaches to all nations.
[^3] It receives its power and authority from Satan himself (13:2). It speaks blasphemies, fights and overcomes the Saints, and supports Babylon. The wicked throughout the world worship it.
[^4] One of its heads receives a deadly wound by a sword and is healed (13:3, 14). It seems to have existed in some form before the time of Christ, and it will continue to exist as a force in the world until the Lord returns in glory.
[^5] The whole world knows about the healing and is amazed (13:3).
[^6] The people of the world worship the beast (13:4, 8).
[^7] The world marvels at the power of the beast (13:4).
[^8] The beast is able to speak great things, including blasphemies (13:5, 6).
