Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation ( 1998)

Rev. 20

THE LORD'S THOUSAND-YEAR REIGN (20:1-6)

Having seen the defeat and destruction of the beast, the false prophet, and the armies of the wicked, John now sees the defeat and imprisonment of their master, Satan. An angel comes from heaven, captures the devil, and throws him into a bottomless pit, where he must remain for a thousand years. The martyrs for Christ, who stood firm in the face of all the persecution and trouble brought by the beast and his followers, will be called forth in the first resurrection and given power to reign with Christ on earth. But those who joined the beast will have to wait the thousand years for the blessing of resurrection.

Rev. 20:1-6

1 And I saw an angel come down [out of] [^1] heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand.

2 And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years,

3 And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years should be fulfilled: and after that he must be loosed a little season.

4 And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them: and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

5 But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished. This is the first resurrection.

6 Blessed and holy [are they who have] [^2] part in the first resurrection: on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

20:1 an angel come down [out of] heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit. In 9:1 an angel is given the key to the bottomless pit. (This follows the reading given by the Joseph Smith Translation; the king James Version incorrectly has Satan receiving the key.) Here that angel returns to capture the devil. We do not know the identity of this angel, but obviously it is a being of great power. Perhaps it is Michael, who has a special commission to fight and defeat Satan (D&C 88:112-15). [^3] We do know that Michael is the seventh angel, who is given the privilege of proclaiming the victory of the Lamb (D&C 88:106-7, 112). Ultimately, of course, it is Christ who holds the key of hell and who gives the key to whomever he chooses to accomplish his work. See commentary on 9:1.

a great chain in his hand. Not only will the devil be cast into prison but he will be bound there by a chain, suggesting shackles and reemphasizing that there is no hope of his escape.

20:2 he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him. This verse gives us in one place the four names or titles John calls the adversary, making certain that we know the identity of our enemy throughout the revelation: the dragon, the serpent, the devil, and Satan. It is important to note that it is the angel who captures and binds the devil, not the inhabitants of earth, but he remains bound because the people refuse to hearken to him. As Nephi taught, "Because of the righteousness of his people, Satan has no power; wherefore, he cannot be loosed for the space of many years; for he hath no power over the hearts of the people, for they dwell in righteousness, and the Holy One of Israel reigneth" (1 Ne. 22:26).

a thousand years. During the Millennium, which will last a thousand years, "Satan shall not have power to tempt any man" (D&C 101:28).

Elder Eldred G. Smith said: "Many other scriptures refer to the thousand years of wonderful, glorious conditions on the earth, because Lucifer, Satan, the devil, will be bound. The scriptures say he will be `bound with a chain' and `put into a bottomless pit.' To me, these are symbolical terms. I cannot quite conceive of steel chains or pits that could hold Satan. The only power I know of that will bind Satan, or render him powerless, is righteous living.

"The war that started in heaven has not ended yet and shall not end until everyone has proved the extent of his ability to resist Satan. Even Jesus Christ had to bind Satan when he was tempted in the wilderness. Satan had no power over him, because Jesus resisted his temptations. Then the record says, `. . . he departed from him for a season.' (Luke 4:13.) When you have resisted a temptation until it no longer becomes a temptation, then to that extent, Satan has lost his power over you, and as long as you do not yield to him, to that degree he is bound." [^4]

20:3 cast him into the bottomless pit. The bottomless pit is another name for outer darkness. [^5] See commentary on 9:1.

set a seal upon him. Other versions of the Bible agree that it was the pit that was sealed, rather than the devil himself (see LB, RSV, GNB, NIV, JB, NEB). To ensure that the devil could not escape, the pit that is his prison will be sealed shut by the power of God.

that he should deceive the nations no more. We see in 12:9 that Satan's mission on the earth is to deceive the people and the nations of the world. But when he is captured, bound with chains, and cast into the pit, he will no longer be able to deceive the people of the earth.

till the thousand years should be fulfilled: and after that he must be loosed a little season. After the thousand-year period has expired, Satan will be loosed to turn again to his work of deception and destruction—but only for a "little season." How long will the little season last?

President Joseph Fielding Smith reasoned that it might last a full one thousand years: "Our Savior came in the meridian of time. That dispensation is called the dispensation of the meridian of time. This means that it was about half way from the beginning of `time' to the end of `time.' Anyone who desires can figure it for himself that our Lord came about 4,000 years from the time of the fall. The millennium is to come some time following the 2,000 years after his coming. Then there is to be the millennium for 1,000 years, and following that a `little season,' the length of which is not revealed, but which may bring `time' to its end about 8,000 years from the beginning." [^6]

Latter-day revelation gives additional details about what will transpire during that "little season": "Satan shall be bound, that old serpent, who is called the devil, and shall not be loosed for the space of a thousand years. And then he shall be loosed for a little season, that he may gather together his armies. And Michael, the seventh angel, even the archangel, shall gather together his armies, even the hosts of heaven. And the devil shall gather together his armies; even the hosts of hell, and shall come up to battle against Michael and his armies. And then cometh the battle of the great God; and the devil and his armies shall be cast away into their own place, that they shall not have power over the saints any more at all. For Michael shall fight their battles, and shall overcome him who seeketh the throne of him who sitteth upon the throne, even the Lamb" (D&C 88:110-15).

20:4 thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them. The kings of the earth, who once occupied the world's thrones, joined with the beast to fight against the kingdom of Christ. By the power of Christ they will be defeated and slain (19:21). Then those who stood firm in righteousness will be blessed to become kings themselves, granted thrones to reign with Christ throughout the Millennium.

There apparently is a hierarchy of judgment in the time of the Millennium. First is Christ himself, who rules over all and judges all (John 5:22; Acts 10:42; Morm. 3:20). Serving under him, the Twelve Apostles from the meridian dispensation will judge the house of Israel (Matt. 19:28). The house of Israel in this context apparently means those who are true Israel, those who are true to their covenants, as Joseph Smith learned by revelation: "Mine apostles, the Twelve which were with me in my ministry at Jerusalem, shall stand at my right hand at the day of my coming in a pillar of fire, being clothed with robes of righteousness, with crowns upon their heads, in glory even as I am, to judge the whole house of Israel, even as many as have loved me and kept my commandments, and none else" (D&C 29:12). John the Revelator, of course, is one of the Twelve who will so judge.

In addition, the Nephite twelve are given the charge to judge the seed of Lehi (1 Ne. 12:9-10; 3 Ne. 27:27; Morm. 3:19). The principle would suggest that there are other divinely appointed leaders of other peoples who also will judge those they serve. Missionaries will be given the responsibility to stand in judgment on those who reject them (D&C 75:20-22). And finally, all Saints shall "judge the world" (1 Cor. 6:2).

Daniel had a similar vision of the judgment: "I beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days [Adam] did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire. A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him: the judgment was set, and the books were opened. . . . I beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints, and prevailed against them; until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the saints of the most High; and the time came that the saints possessed the kingdom" (Dan. 7:9-10, 21-22).

the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God. The martyrs for Christ will reign with Christ: "And whoso layeth down his life in my cause, for my name's sake, shall find it again, even life eternal" (D&C 98:13). See commentary on 6:9.

which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image. See commentary on 13:15.

neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands. See commentary on 13:16.

they lived. As we see in 13:15, the righteous are slain for refusing to worship the beast or to receive his mark. The beast gained a temporary victory. But here they rise in the resurrection to live forevermore and to reign victorious with their King.

and reigned with Christ a thousand years. During the thousand years of the Millennium, Christ "will reign personally upon the earth" (Article of Faith 10). With him will reign the martyrs and other righteous people who resisted the great pressure to worship the beast and who were raised up in the first resurrection. "In mine own due time will I come upon the earth in judgment, and my people shall be redeemed and shall reign with me on earth. For the great Millennium, of which I have spoken by the mouth of my servants, shall come" (D&C 43:29-30).

20:5 the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished. The righteous are resurrected at the coming of the Lord—they were dead but now live again, like their Master (2:8). But the wicked must wait until after the Millennium. Their resurrection, with their judgment, is described in 20:12-13.

This is the first resurrection. The first and second resurrections are described in some detail in the Doctrine and Covenants: "The curtain of heaven [shall] be unfolded, as a scroll is unfolded after it is rolled up, and the face of the Lord shall be unveiled;

"And the saints that are upon the earth, who are alive, shall be quickened and be caught up to meet him.

"And they who have slept in their graves shall come forth, for their graves shall be opened; and they also shall be caught up to meet him in the midst of the pillar of heaven—

"They are Christ's, the first fruits, they who shall descend with him first, and they who are on the earth and in their graves, who are first caught up to meet him; and all this by the voice of the sounding of the trump of the angel of God.

"And after this another angel shall sound, which is the second trump; and then cometh the redemption of those who are Christ's at his coming; who have received their part in that prison which is prepared for them, that they might receive the gospel, and be judged according to men in the flesh.

"And again, another trump shall sound, which is the third trump; and then come the spirits of men who are to be judged, and are found under condemnation;

"And these are the rest of the dead; and they live not again until the thousand years are ended, neither again, until the end of the earth.

"And another trump shall sound, which is the fourth trump, saying: There are found among those who are to remain until that great and last day, even the end, who shall remain filthy still" (D&C 88:95-102).

20:6 Blessed and holy [are they who have] part in the first resurrection. This passage is another of the beatitudes found in Revelation (see Appendix 5). Those who are blessed to rise first are blessed indeed, for spirits look upon "the long absence of their spirits from their bodies as a bondage" (D&C 138:50). They are further blessed because they are victors over the second death; they are made "priests of God and of Christ," and they are chosen to "reign with him a thousand years." They are holy because they are righteous and because they are made holy by the glorified bodies they are given in the resurrection (D&C 88:28-29).

on such the second death hath no power. The second death has no power over those of the first resurrection. See commentary on 2:11.

priests of God and of Christ. See commentary on 1:6; 5:10.

reign with him a thousand years. See commentary on 5:10; 20:4.

SATAN IS LOOSED (20:7-10)

Satan will be sealed up in the bottomless pit for a thousand years—but not forever. "When the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed" to once again do his work of deception and destruction on the earth. He will gather followers from all nations to a battle in which the warriors are as many "as the sand of the sea." Satan's mortal hosts will surround the Saints and their "beloved city," but the Lord will act in great glory and power to devour his enemy. Then the devil will be cast away forever, to be punished for his great sins for all eternity.

The account in 4 Ne. 1 gives us a sobering preview of how the bright millennial era can be brought to a close. After the Savior's visit to the descendants of Lehi in the Americas, the people entered into a condition that was millennial in some important respects: "There was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people. And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God. . . . [T]hey were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God. And how blessed were they! For the Lord did bless them in all their doings" (vv. 15-18).

The breakdown in this near-perfect society had tiny beginnings: "a small part of the people . . . revolted from the church and [had] taken upon them the name of Lamanites" (vv. 20). Many years later, "in this two hundred and first year there began to be among them those who were lifted up in pride, such as the wearing of costly apparel, and all manner of fine pearls, and of the fine things of the world. And from that time forth they did have their goods and their substance no more common among them. And they began to be divided into classes; and they began to build up churches unto themselves to get gain, and began to deny the true church of Christ" (vv. 24-26).

From that point, the society disintegrated rapidly. Within the next decade, "there were many churches in the land; yea, there were many churches which professed to know the Christ, and yet they did deny the more parts of his gospel, insomuch that they did receive all manner of wickedness, and did administer that which was sacred unto him to whom it had been forbidden because of unworthiness. And this church did multiply exceedingly because of iniquity, and because of the power of Satan who did get hold upon their hearts" (vv. 27-28).

Thus it was that in only a few years, Satan, who had essentially been bound, was loosed again in the land. "And thus they did dwindle in unbelief and wickedness, from year to year. . . . [And] there was a great division among the people. . . . And the more wicked part of the people did was strong, and became exceedingly more numerous than were the people of God" (vv. 34-35, 40). By the time three hundred years had passed away, "the robbers of Gadianton did spread over all the face of the land; and there were none that were righteous save it were the disciples of Jesus" (v. 46).

The decline and fall of this blessed society makes for troubling reading, and the lessons for our day are clear. Satan ever lies in wait to deceive and destroy, and if he fails with one generation, he will try with redoubled efforts to harm the next.

We cannot say whether the picture we see in 4 Nephi will be experienced toward the end of the Millennium, but it is certainly possible that the pattern will be repeated.

Rev. 20:7-10

7 And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison,

8 And shall go out to deceive the nations which are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle: the number of whom is as the sand of the sea.

9 And they went up on the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp of the saints about, and the beloved city: and fire came down from God out of heaven, and devoured them.

10 And the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

20:7 when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison. Because Satan will be bound by the power of God, as well as by the choices and desires of the people, it is reasonable to suppose that both these elements will be present in his loosing. Satan will likely be loosed because the people turn to him again and because the Lord, suffering their agency, will allow it. As we read in D&C 29, "When the thousand years are ended, and men again begin to deny their God, then will I spare the earth but for a little season" (v. 22).

20:8 shall go out to deceive the nations. In 12:9 we read that "Satan . . . deceiveth the whole world." The tragedy is that though in the Millennium the whole world will turn to righteousness and peace and Satan will not have power to tempt and deceive (1 Ne. 22:26), at the end of the Millennium he will return to that power. And those who hearken to him will be not a few. He will deceive "nations" in every part of the globe, "the four quarters of the earth."

Gog and Magog. These names are symbolic names of the hosts that will follow Satan in his war against the Saints. We find these terms in the Old Testament in Ezekiel's description of the great wars that precede the second coming of Christ (Ezek. 38-39). Here they or others who are represented by the same symbolic names fight the kingdom of Christ and his followers.

to gather them together to battle. Latter-day revelation casts additional light on the last battle between Satan and God: "And then he shall be loosed for a little season, that he may gather together his armies. And Michael, the seventh angel, even the archangel, shall gather together his armies, even the hosts of heaven. And the devil shall gather together his armies; even the hosts of hell, and shall come up to battle against Michael and his armies. And then cometh the battle of the great God; and the devil and his armies shall be cast away into their own place, that they shall not have power over the saints any more at all. For Michael shall fight their battles, and shall overcome him who seeketh the throne of him who sitteth upon the throne, even the Lamb" (D&C 88:111-15).

the number of whom is as the sand of the sea. Those mortals who follow Satan in the last battle shall be so many that they cannot be numbered. In addition, "the hosts of hell" will join in the battle (D&C 88:113).

It is instructive to compare this prophecy with the promise given to Abraham: "I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies" (Gen. 22:17). Though Satan and his hosts will be innumerable, so also will be Michael and his armies, who are all of Abraham by covenant. And the ancient promise will then surely be fulfilled: Abraham's seed will prevail.

20:9 And they went up on the breadth of the earth. This expression suggests great hordes crossing the earth. The Good News Bible words this passage as "they spread out over the earth"; the Jerusalem Bible renders it as "they will come swarming over the entire country."

compassed the camp of the saints about, and the beloved city. "The two terms, `camp of the saints' (Palestine) and `beloved city' ([New] Jerusalem), stand together for the people of God. `Camp' is the word used in Exodus for Israel's wilderness home. . . . The `beloved city' stands in contrast to `the great city' (11:8); it is the new Jerusalem." [^7]

fire came down from God out of heaven, and devoured them. This passage reminds us of an experience of Elijah, who when faced with enemies said, "If I be a man of God, let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty. And the fire of God came down from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty" (2 Kgs. 1:12). It also brings to mind an experience Jesus had with James and John in the New Testament, when the apostles wanted Jesus to call down fire from heaven to destroy a people who would not receive them (Luke 9:51-56).

It may be that the fire is symbolic of heavenly power—latter-day revelation tells us that Michael and his heavenly hosts will fight these battles at the end (D&C 88:111-15).

20:10 And the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are. We read in 19:20 that the beast and the false prophet are cast into the lake of fire and brimstone (see commentary there). Here the devil is cast into the lake of fire as well.

shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever. Torment is the essence of dwelling in the lake of fire and brimstone; in fact, torment and punishment are probably the purpose of the lake. In contrast to this torment of the damned is the everlasting joy of those who are saved in the kingdom of God. As we read in the Doctrine and Covenants, "The graves of the saints shall be opened; and they shall come forth and stand on the right hand of the Lamb, . . . and they shall sing the song of the Lamb, day and night forever and ever" (D&C 133:56).

Nephi taught that in the resurrection "they who are righteous shall be righteous still, and they who are filthy shall be filthy still; wherefore, they who are filthy are the devil and his angels; and they shall go away into everlasting fire, prepared for them; and their torment is as a lake of fire and brimstone, whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever and has no end" (2 Ne. 9:16).

THE LAST JUDGMENT (20:11-15)

In his vision of the Last Judgment, John sees God sitting on his throne as the great Judge of all. He sees the dead resurrected and brought to stand before God, to be judged "according to their works," as those works were recorded in both earthly and heavenly books (see also D&C 128:6-8). He also sees another book, "the book of life." Those whose names are not recorded in the book of life are "cast into the lake of fire." In addition, death and hell themselves are "cast into the lake of fire."

Rev. 20:11-15

11 And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away; and there was found no place for them.

12 And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened; and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works.

13 And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man according to their works.

14 And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death.

15 And whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

20:11 a great white throne. This throne, which we first see in 4:2, symbolizes God's kingship and power. It is called "great" to suggest that this is no ordinary throne but one fit for the king of all creation. White may symbolize victory or purity and righteousness—or a combination of these attributes of God. In addition, the word white (Greek leukos) may mean "bright" or "gleaming." [^8] God dwells in "everlasting burnings," [^9] and his throne would therefore be white, bright, and gleaming. For other references to the throne, see 4:2-3, 9; 5:1, 7, 13; 6:16; 7:10, 15; 19:4; 21:5.

him that sat on it. The Being on the throne is God, the Eternal Father.

from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away. "When the thousand years are ended, and men again begin to deny their God, then will I spare the earth but for a little season; And the end shall come, and the heaven and the earth shall be consumed and pass away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth. For all old things shall pass away, and all things shall become new, even the heaven and the earth, and all the fulness thereof" (D&C 29:22-24). These things will come by the power of God.

there was found no place for them. The old heaven and earth must give way so that the new may come (21:1). Just as Satan and his followers were cast out of the presence of God—"neither was their place found any more in heaven" (12:8)—so will the old heaven and the old earth themselves have no place before God. The earth will be changed to a celestial order after the Millennium (see 21:1).

20:12 the dead, small and great, stand before God. These individuals are "the rest of the dead" who were not resurrected earlier (20:5). The righteous dead have already been raised upon unto glory (20:4). All who remain—whether they were weak or strong, rich or poor, famous or insignificant in the eyes of the world—will be raised from the dead to stand before God the Judge to determine what their eternal reward or punishment will be.

the books were opened. Joseph Smith explained: "You will discover in this quotation [Rev. 20:12] that the books were opened; and another book was opened, which was the book of life; but the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works; consequently, the books spoken of must be the books which contained the record of their works, and refer to the records which are kept on the earth [which probably includes Church records of ordinances and Church histories]. And the book which was the book of life is the record which is kept in heaven; the principle agreeing precisely with the doctrine which is commanded you in the revelation contained in the letter which I wrote to you previous to my leaving my place [D&C 127]—that in all your recordings it may be recorded in heaven" (D&C 128:7; see also Dan. 7:10).

another book was opened, which is the book of life. Those whose names are recorded in the book of life are saved from being cast into the lake of fire, which is the second death. As Jesus said to the apostles, "Rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven" (Luke 10:20). See commentary on 3:5.

the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works. The things we do here on earth are entered into the record books of both heaven and earth, and our works form the basis of our judgment. Jacob wrote: "When all men shall have passed from this first death unto life, insomuch as they have become immortal, they must appear before the judgment-seat of the Holy One of Israel; and then cometh the judgment, and then must they be judged according to the holy judgment of God" (2 Ne. 9:15). And Paul later testified, "Every one of us shall give account of himself to God" (Rom. 14:12).

As mentioned earlier, the dead here are those who were not worthy to come forth in the first resurrection but were reserved until after the Millennium was completed. The righteous will also likely stand before the judgment bar at this time but only to have their earlier judgment—and blessing of glory—confirmed. [^10] For examples of individuals and groups that received an earlier judgment, see 20:4; Mosiah 15:21-25; D&C 101:30-31; 132:37.

Joseph Smith gave a valuable and comforting lesson on the judgment: "The Great Parent of the universe looks upon the whole of the human family with a fatherly care and paternal regard; He views them as His offspring, and without any of those contracted feelings that influence the children of men. . . . [He] will judge all men, not according to the narrow, contracted notions of men, but, `according to the deeds done in the body whether they be good or evil,' or whether these deeds were done in England, America, Spain, Turkey, or India. He will judge them, `not according to what they have not, but according to what they have,' those who have lived without law, will be judged without law, and those who have a law, will be judged by that law. . . . He will award judgment or mercy to all nations according to their several deserts, their means of obtaining intelligence, the laws by which they are governed, the facilities afforded them of obtaining correct information, and His inscrutable designs in relation to the human family; and when the designs of God shall be made manifest, and the curtain of futurity be withdrawn, we shall all of us eventually have to confess that the Judge of all the earth has done right." [^11]

President Joseph Fielding Smith added this insight: "Every man will be judged according to his works, his opportunities for receiving the truth, and the intent of his heart." [^12]

20:13 the sea gave up the dead which were in it. The sea may represent those whose bodies are most lost of all, even more than those who were buried in the earth. The bodies were carried away, and no one knows their final resting place. Even these will be resurrected. In addition, "It was widely believed that those lost at sea had no access to Sheol (Hades); in specifically naming the sea John emphasizes that he is describing the general resurrection." [^13]

death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them. According to Jacob, brother of Nephi, death is the state in which body and spirit are separated, and hell is the state of spiritual death. All those in both states will be brought forth in the great, universal resurrection. Jacob said: "O how great the goodness of our God, who prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and also the death of the spirit. And because of the way of deliverance of our God, the Holy One of Israel, this death, of which I have spoken, which is the temporal, shall deliver up its dead; which death is the grave. And this death of which I have spoken, which is the spiritual death, shall deliver up its dead; which spiritual death is hell; wherefore, death and hell must deliver up their dead, and hell must deliver up its captive spirits, and the grave must deliver up its captive bodies, and the bodies and the spirits of men will be restored one to the other; and it is by the power of the resurrection of the Holy One of Israel" (2 Ne. 9:10-12).

they were judged every man according to their works. See commentary on 20:12.

20:14 death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. This expression seems to be a symbolic way of saying that the great consequences of sin—physical and spiritual death—will suffer the same fate as the master instigator of sin, Satan. "Jesus Christ . . . hath abolished death," Paul wrote (2 Tim. 1:10), and he likewise abolishes hell for all who attain to a state of glory. The lake of fire itself is a hell for those who are cast into it (Satan, his angels, and the sons of perdition), and that hell will continue through the eternities (D&C 29:38; 76:44; 2 Pet. 2:4). For a discussion of the lake of fire, see commentary on 19:20.

But for those who are "heirs of salvation" (D&C 76:88), meaning all who attain to a kingdom of glory, death and hell will forever cease to exist.

This is the second death. The torture of the second death is typified by the lake of fire. See commentary on 2:11.

20:15 whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire. In close proximity we have seen the following cast into the lake of fire: the beast and the false prophet (19:20), the devil (20:10), death and hell (20:14), and all those who are not found in the book of life (20:15). For discussion of the book of life, see commentary on 3:5; for discussion of the lake of fire, see commentary on 19:20.

1 JST 20:1 replaces the KJV from.

2 JST 20:6 replaces the KJV is he that hath.

3 This was the view of George Q. Cannon, as recorded in his Life of Joseph Smith the Prophet, 198.

4 Smith, Improvement Era, June 1970, 104.

5 Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, 158.

6 Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 1:81.

7 Harrington, Revelation, 198.

8 Mounce, Book of Revelation, 375.

9 History of the Church, 6:317.

10 McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:576-77.

11 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 218.

12 Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:21.

13 Harrington, Revelation, 203.

---
Notas:
[^1] The beast has political power—from it stem many kings (13:1; 17:12). The beast is a servant of Satan and receives power from him.
[^2] It stands in blatant opposition to God, representing blasphemy with no shame (13:1). The beast has power politically, a power that reaches to all nations.
[^3] It receives its power and authority from Satan himself (13:2). It speaks blasphemies, fights and overcomes the Saints, and supports Babylon. The wicked throughout the world worship it.
[^4] One of its heads receives a deadly wound by a sword and is healed (13:3, 14). It seems to have existed in some form before the time of Christ, and it will continue to exist as a force in the world until the Lord returns in glory.
[^5] The whole world knows about the healing and is amazed (13:3).
[^6] The people of the world worship the beast (13:4, 8).
[^7] The world marvels at the power of the beast (13:4).
[^8] The beast is able to speak great things, including blasphemies (13:5, 6).
[^9] It has power for forty-two months (13:5).
[^10] It has power to make war with and overcome the Saints (13:7).
[^11] It has power over all nations (13:7).
[^12] A second beast has power to give life to an image of the first beast, enabling it even to speak (13:15).
[^13] The second beast causes all who do not worship the first beast to be put to death (13:15).
