Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation ( 1998)

Rev. 22:6-21

"SURELY I COME QUICKLY" (22:6-21)

As his vision concludes, John hears a repeated testimony of its truthfulness: "These sayings are faithful and true," the angel says. Speaking in Jesus' name, the angel says, "I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things"; "he which testifieth these things saith, Surely I come quickly." And John adds his own testimony: "I John saw these things, and heard them."

The angel pronounces two blessings and a curse. "Blessed is he that keepeth the sayings of the prophecy of this book," he proclaims. "Blessed are they that do his commandments," for they will "have right to the tree of life" and will be able to "enter in through the gates into the city." Cursed is any man who will "add unto" these things or "take away" from them.

These concluding verses also give us insight to some of the names and titles of Christ: "Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last"; "the root and the offspring of David"; and "the bright and morning star."

Finally, speaking for the Lord, the angel repeats three times, "I come quickly" and adds, "the time is at hand." Though we may not see the immediate signs of Christ's coming, yet we must always be ready to receive him in righteousness. Then we can join with John in his deep-felt desires in saying, "Even so, come, Lord Jesus."

Rev. 22:6-21

6 And he said unto me, These sayings are faithful and true; and the Lord God of the holy prophets sent his angel to shew unto his servants the things which must shortly be done.

7 Behold, I come quickly: blessed is he that keepeth the sayings of the prophecy of this book.

8 And I John saw these things, and heard them. And when I had heard and seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel which shewed me these things.

9 Then saith he unto me, See [that] [^1] thou do it not: for I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book: worship God.

10 And he saith unto me, Seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this book: for the time is at hand.

11 He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still.

12 And, behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be.

13 I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last.

14 Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city.

15 For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie.

16 I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things in the churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, and the bright and morning star.

17 And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.

18 For I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the prophecy of this book, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book:

19 And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the [tree] [^2] of life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written in this book.

20 He which testifieth these things saith, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus.

21 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

NOTES AND COMMENTARY

22:6 And he said unto me. The speaker here might be the last angel guide given to John (21:9, 15; 22:1). Or the angel who here concludes the vision may be the same angel who began it (1:1).

These sayings are faithful and true. See commentary on 21:5.

the Lord God of the holy prophets. Jesus is the God of the Old Testament. He is Jehovah, who spoke plainly to Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Isaiah, and all the other prophets of the Old Testament, as well as the God of the prophets in the Book of Mormon and in other sacred scripture yet to come forth. The angel bears testimony that this Lord of truth and power has sent the angel to communicate the great truths of the vision to John.

sent his angel to shew unto his servants the things which must shortly be done. See commentary on 1:1.

22:7 Behold, I come quickly. See commentary on 2:5.

blessed is he that keepeth the sayings of the prophecy of this book. See commentary on 1:3.

22:8 And I John saw these things, and heard them. John repeats his testimony that he himself saw and heard the things of the vision (1:1, 9). The vision truly was from God; it is not a figment of John's imagination, nor is it a work of fiction.

I fell down to worship. See commentary on 19:10.

22:9 See [that] thou do it not/I am thy fellowservant. See commentary on 19:10.

of thy brethren the prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book. John himself is a prophet, and the other prophets of all ages are his peers. The angel tells John that he (the angel) is one of the fellowship of the prophets and that he does not consider himself better than the prophets or the other Saints who keep the Lord's commandments.

worship God. See commentary on 19:10.

22:10 Seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this book. Daniel was given a vision and told to seal it up "to the time of the end" (Dan. 8:26; 12:4, 9)—it was not the Lord's purpose for the world to know the things Daniel received. Earlier in John's vision, he is told to "seal up those things which the seven thunders uttered, and write them not" (10:4). Perhaps the time has not yet come for these specific things to be revealed. But the rest of the prophecy was intended for the world and the Saints, and John was commanded not to seal it up but to let it go forth for others to read and to seek to understand.

for the time is at hand. See commentary on 1:3.

22:11 He that is unjust, let him be unjust still/he that is holy, let him be holy still. What is true of a person's spirit as it moves from this life to the next is also true of the person as he or she faces the time of the second coming of Christ. If we procrastinate the day of our repentance until the Lord's coming, we will continue in our filthiness after he arrives—and, likewise, the righteous and holy will continue in their holiness. Jacob taught the same principle, using some of the same words, in reference to our state at the final judgment: "They who are righteous shall be righteous still, and they who are filthy shall be filthy still" (2 Ne. 9:16; Alma 7:21; 41:10; D&C 88:35).

22:12 behold, I come quickly. See commentary on 2:5.

my reward is with me. When the Lord returns in glory, he will bring with him a judgment on every person on earth—a reward for the righteous, and a punishment for the wicked. "Behold, the Lord God will come with strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him: behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him" (Isa. 40:10; Rev. 11:18).

to give every man according as his work shall be. We will be judged according to the works we have performed on the earth. See commentary on 20:12; 2:23.

22:13 I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last. These are the words of the angel, speaking in behalf of Christ (1:1-6, 12-20; 22:6-16). See commentary on 1:8. [^3]

22:14 Blessed are they that do his commandments. This passage is another of the beatitudes found in Revelation. Those who do as the Lord commands them to do are blessed indeed. As the verse explains, they are privileged to partake of the fruit of the tree of life and to enter into the heavenly city. In other words, those who obey the Lord's commands are blessed with a celestial glory.

have right to the tree of life. See commentary on 2:7.

may enter in through the gates into the city. See commentary on 21:12.

22:15 For without are dogs. " `Dogs' is a traditional Jewish designation of heathen Gentiles." [^4] The dogs, or the unbelievers, must stay outside ("without") the city—they are not blessed with celestial glory.

sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie. In 21:8, we learn that the sinners in this list will be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone and will suffer the second death. Here we see that such sinners will also be barred from entering into the celestial city of New Jerusalem. This list echoes that of the earlier one—but "whosoever loveth and maketh a lie" is much more emphatic and descriptive than "all liars." These people will be not only outside ("without") the city but outside the entire kingdom, having been assigned to a lesser kingdom, called telestial (D&C 76:98, 103).

22:16 I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things in the churches. See commentary on 1:1, 4.

I am the root . . . of David. See commentary on 5:5.

offspring of David. Jesus Christ was a direct and literal descendant of king David (Matt. 1:1-17). In addition, the Messiah was seen as the fulfillment of Israel's expectation to be saved by a king like their beloved and powerful David. In his second coming, Christ, the offspring of David, will indeed deliver his people, as did the first David (Isa. 16:5; Jer. 23:5; 30:9; Ezek. 34:23-24; 37:24), and will be their King.

the bright and morning star. In scriptural symbolism, stars typically refer to individuals (Gen. 37:9; Num. 24:17; Job 38:7; Jude 1:13). Jesus is "the bright and morning star," the one that shines first and longer than all his brothers and sisters, even into the daytime, greater, brighter, more constant than all the others (2 Pet. 1:19). See commentary on 1:16; 2:28; 12:1.

22:17 the Spirit and the bride. The Spirit is the Holy Ghost, which speaks to prophets and righteous members alike. The bride is the New Jerusalem, or, in a broader sense, the righteous members of the Church. For more on the identity of the bride, see commentary on 19:7.

Come. This word seems to be an invitation to Christ to return in triumph and glory to the earth (22:20). Those making the invitation include the Holy Spirit, the bride of Christ (the Church), and all those who hear the words of John's vision.

him that heareth. Here John speaks to all those who hear (or read) the words of his book, but he speaks particularly to those who truly hear with their hearts and not with their ears alone (D&C 136:32). John invites them to join the Spirit and the bride in seeking the coming of Christ.

let him that is athirst come. As John invites those who hear his words to seek the second coming of Christ, he also invites those who are spiritually thirsty to come as well, to partake freely of the water of life that they may be ready to welcome their Savior and rejoice with all those who have received admittance into the celestial city. The living water of which we partake, of course, is Christ himself, who gives us spiritual life with his love, his truth, and his atoning power.

"And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst" (John 6:35).

"If any man thirst," he said, "let him come unto me, and drink. He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water" (John 7:37-38).

whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. See commentary on 21:6.

22:18 For I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the prophecy of this book. John here is not bearing testimony to the words of the book but is pronouncing a curse under the direction of the Spirit. The curse is that if any man adds to or takes away from what John has recorded, seeking to alter the scripture itself, that man will receive great punishment from God.

If any man shall add unto these things. "Of course a careful reading of this text shows very clearly that John the Revelator was speaking only of the book of Revelation and not of any collection of other sacred writings. Moses used a similar expression in speaking to ancient Israel when he said: `Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it, . . .' This is found in the fourth chapter of the book of Deuteronomy (verse 2). In the 12th chapter of the same book Moses said this: `What thing soever I command you, observe to do it: thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from it.' (Verse 32.)

"Can anyone suppose that in these words Moses laid down a prohibition against all subsequent revelations and against all books which might be called scripture in years to come? Did he have the power to silence all future prophets and forbid them to speak or write as God intended that they should? Of course not, or we would be without most of the Old Testament and would have none of the New Testament at all.

"It was the same with John the Revelator. In warning against additions to the book of Revelation he spoke of that book only, insisting that no one attempt to change or corrupt what he had said. The Bible was not compiled when John wrote the book of Revelation, so he could not possibly have referred to it. Furthermore, scholars tell us that the Gospel of John was written after the book of Revelation, and if this be true it becomes another indication that John had no thought of precluding other writings but only of protecting this particular book of Revelation from change or corruption." [^5]

God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book. John's curse, spoken by the Spirit, is that if anyone tries to add to this book of scripture, the book of Revelation, that person will suffer from the plagues recorded in the book.

22:19 if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy. "God alone can add to or diminish from holy writ. What he has spoken, he has spoken, and none but he can alter. When a prophet speaks by the power of the Holy Ghost, it is the voice of God; and none can change it without suffering the penalty prescribed for perverting the pronouncements of Deity." [^6]

God shall take away his part out of the [tree] of life/out of the holy city/from the things which are written in this book. This passage describes dire punishments. If a person seeks, with malice, to change the words of God as God has given them to his children, that person will lose the blessings the scripture speaks of and will lose his opportunity to join the righteous in the celestial kingdom of God.

22:20 He which testifieth these things. "He" is Jesus Christ, as seen by the first-person reference in the next phrase; however, it very well could be John's angelic visitor speaking in the name of Christ (1:1-6, 12-20; 22:6-16).

Surely I come quickly. See commentary on 2:5.

Amen. See commentary on 1:6.

Even so, come, Lord Jesus. John joins his voice to those of the Spirit, the bride, and those who read and believe John's revelation, asking the Lord to come quickly, as he has promised. See commentary on 22:17.

22:21 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. This is a benedictory statement from John to his readers, a blessing offered on their heads. It matches, like a bookend, the introduction John made at the very beginning of the book (1:4). This benediction was common in New Testament writings; every one of Paul's epistles ends with this kind of statement (all but two, Romans and 1 Corinthians, have it in the last verse) and sometimes the language is identical. The statement underscores an important truth that John and Paul both desired to teach: that it is the grace, or gift, of Christ (when coupled with our faith, repentance, and obedience) that enables us to live and do and reach and grow and, in the end, to be exalted. [^7]

The grace of Christ is indeed offered to all. Therefore, "let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely" (22:17).

1 This is an addition from JST 22:9.

2 This change from the KJV book of life is found in virtually all other translations, including NIV, NEB, JB, RSV, and others.

3 For a discussion of divine investiture of authority, the principle whereby Christ can speak for the Father and an angel can speak for Christ, see the First Presidency epistle of 30 June 1916, in Talmage, Articles of Faith, appendix 2, 470-71.

4 Harrington, Revelation, 223.

5 Petersen, Conference Report, October 1964, 121.

6 McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:594.

7 See LDS Bible Dictionary, 697, s.v. "grace."

---
Notas:
[^1] The beast has political power—from it stem many kings (13:1; 17:12). The beast is a servant of Satan and receives power from him.
[^2] It stands in blatant opposition to God, representing blasphemy with no shame (13:1). The beast has power politically, a power that reaches to all nations.
[^3] It receives its power and authority from Satan himself (13:2). It speaks blasphemies, fights and overcomes the Saints, and supports Babylon. The wicked throughout the world worship it.
[^4] One of its heads receives a deadly wound by a sword and is healed (13:3, 14). It seems to have existed in some form before the time of Christ, and it will continue to exist as a force in the world until the Lord returns in glory.
[^5] The whole world knows about the healing and is amazed (13:3).
[^6] The people of the world worship the beast (13:4, 8).
[^7] The world marvels at the power of the beast (13:4).
