Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding the Book of Revelation ( 1998)

APPENDIX 4

THE SEVEN CHURCHES

The letters to the seven churches, recorded in Rev. 2 and 3, have a distinct pattern that is orderly, interesting, and instructive.

Each of the seven letters begins with an introduction, or commission, in which John is instructed to "write" to the servants of the seven churches.

The commission is followed by a description of Jesus Christ. Each of the seven descriptive statements ("he that hath the seven stars in his right hand," "the first and the last," "he which hath the sharp sword with two edges," and so on) recalls similar statements in Rev. 1, in which John describes the resurrected Lord. For example, the description of the "seven stars" in Christ's right hand in 2:1 harks back to the same phrase in 1:16.

The next part of the pattern speaks of Christ's knowledge of the churches' works. Seven times Christ states, "I know thy works," once to each of the seven churches. Christ then admonishes each of the seven churches, telling them to "remember," "be faithful," "repent," and so on.

The call to hear, the next aspect of the pattern, informs the reader that "he that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches" and is repeated to each of the seven churches.

The final part of the pattern is promises and blessings, which are extended to the righteous, specifically those who overcome the world. The promises and blessings are most wonderful. For example, to the Saints of Sardis, the Lord promises that "he that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white raiment; and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name before my father, and before his angels" (3:6).

Certainly this inspired pattern, given to John the Revelator, pertains to us as well as to the early Saints. Its admonitions, call to hear, and promises and blessings give us guidance, peace, hope, and comfort as we prepare to hear the additional truths revealed in the remaining chapters of Revelation, truths that pertain to the last days and the second coming of the Savior.

Names of churchesEphesus (2:1-7)Smyrna (2:8-11)Pergamos (2:12-17)CommissionUnto the angel of the church of Ephesus write; (v. 1)And unto the angel of the church in Smyrna write; (v. 8)And to the angel of the church in Pergamos write; (v. 12)Description of Jesus ChristThese things saith he that holdeth the seven stars in his right hand, who walketh in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks; (v. 1)These things saith the first and the last, which was dead, and is alive; (v. 8)These things saith he which hath the sharp sword with two edges; (v. 12)Christ and the churchesI know thy works . . . (v. 2)I know thy works . . . (v. 9)I know thy works . . . (v. 13)Christ admonishes the churchesRemember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works . . . (v. 5)be thou faithful unto death . . . (v. 10)Repent . . . (v. 16)Call to hearHe that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches; (v. 7)He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches; (v. 11)He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches; (v. 17)Promise and blessingTo him that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God. (v. 7)He that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second death. (v. 11)To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it. (v. 17)

Thyatira (2:18-29)Sardis (3:1-6)Philadelphia (3:7-13)Laodicea (3:14-22)And unto the angel of the church in Thyatira write; (v. 18)And unto the angel of the church in Sardis write; (v. 1)And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write; (v. 7)And unto the angel of the church of the Laodiceans write; (v. 14)These things saith the Son of God, who hath his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet are like fine brass; (v. 18)These things saith he that hath the seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars; (v. 1)These things saith he that is holy, he that is true, he that hath the key of David, he that openeth, and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no man openeth; (v. 7)These things saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of God; (v. 14)I know thy works . . . (v. 19)I know thy works . . . (v. 1)I know thy works . . . (v. 8)I know thy works . . . (v. 15)But that which ye have already hold fast till I come. (v. 25)Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard, and hold fast, and repent. (v. 3)hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy crown. (v. 11)be zealous therefore, and repent. (v. 19)He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches. (v. 29)He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches. (v. 6)He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches. (v. 13)He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches. (v. 22)And he that overcometh, and keepeth my works unto the end, to him will I give power over [many kingdoms]: And he shall rule them . . .: even as I received of my Father. And I will give him the morning star. (vv. 26-28)He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white raiment; and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name before my Father, and before his angels. (v. 5)Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem . . .: and I will write upon him my new name. (v. 12)To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne. (v. 21)
