The Operations of the Priesthood in the Heavens and upon the Earth,
  in Time and Eternity--The Heirs of the Celestial Kingdom--Those who
  Die without Law--The Judges of the Earth--Priests and Kings--Christ
  the King of Kings--Condition of Patriarch Joseph Smith, Apostle
  David Patten and Others--Moses and Elias--The Visits of Angels and
  their Testimonies--Peter, James and John--The Angel in the Book of
  Revelation.

There is something peculiarly interesting in the contemplation of events associated with the future destiny of mankind. Among other things it will be seen that there is a very close connection or affinity between the operations of the Priesthood in the heavens and the Priesthood upon earth. In examining this subject we find it written:

"The Lord redeemeth none such that rebel against him and die in their sins; yea, even all those that have perished in their sins ever since the world began, that have wilfully rebelled against God, that have known the commandments of God, and would not keep them; these are they that have no part in the first resurrection."--Mosiah, xv, 26.

But on the other hand it is promised that those who would have received the Gospel if they had had the opportunity shall yet have that privilege. The Prophet Joseph Smith records in his history: "Thus came the voice of the Lord unto me, saying, All those who have died without a knowledge of this Gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts."--Deseret News, Vol. II, No. 22.

With this agree the words of the Apostle Paul, that those who have died without law shall be judged without law; whilst the Lord further reveals to the Prophet Joseph that "that which is governed by law is also preserved by law, and perfected and sanctified by the same. That which breaketh a law, and abideth not by law, but seeketh to become a law unto itself, and willeth to abide in sin, and altogether abideth in sin, cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice, nor judgment. Therefore they must remain filthy still."

With this teaching is associated a grand principle connected with the everlasting Priesthood, which administers in time and in eternity. When we reflect upon the statement of creatures being judged without law, the question arises as to who are to be their judges. We may here state that Christ is called the judge of the quick and the dead, the judge of all the earth. We further read that the Twelve Apostles who ministered in Jerusalem "shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel." (Matt., xix, 28.) Also the following:

"And again, verily, verily, I say unto you, and it hath gone forth in a firm decree, by the will of the Father, that mine apostles, the Twelve who were with me in my ministry at Jerusalem, shall stand at my right hand at the day of my coming in a pillar of fire, being clothed with robes of righteousness, with crowns upon their heads, in glory even as I am, to judge the whole house of Israel, even as many as have loved me and kept my commandments, and none else."--Doc. and Cov., Sec. xxix, 12, p. 143.

And Nephi writes in the Book of Mormon:

"And the angel spake unto me, saying, Behold the twelve disciples of the Lamb, who are chosen to minister unto thy seed. And he said unto me, Thou rememberest the twelve apostles of the Lamb? Behold, they are they who shall judge the twelve tribes of Israel; wherefore, the twelve ministers of thy seed shall be judged of them; for ye are of the house of Israel. And these twelve ministers, whom thou beholdest, shall judge thy seed. And, behold they are righteous for ever; for because of their faith in the Lamb of God, their garments are made white in his blood."--1 Nephi, xii, 8-10.

This exhibits a principle of adjudication or judgment in the hands, firstly, of the Great High Priest and King, Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of God; secondly, in the hands of the Twelve Apostles on the continent of Asia, bestowed by Jesus Himself; thirdly, in the Twelve Disciples on this continent, to their peoples, who it appears are under the presidency of the Twelve Apostles who ministered at Jerusalem; which presidency is also exhibited by Peter, James and John, the acknowledged presidency of the Twelve Apostles; they, holding this Priesthood first on the earth, and then in the heavens, being the legitimate custodians of the keys of the Priesthood, came and bestowed it upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. It is also further stated that the Saints shall judge the world. Thus Christ is at the head, His Apostles and disciples seem to take the next prominent part; then comes the action of the Saints, or other branches of the Priesthood, who it is stated shall judge the world. This combined Priesthood, it would appear, will hold the destiny of the human family in their hands and adjudicate in all matters pertaining to their affairs; and it would seem to be quite reasonable, if the Twelve Apostles in Jerusalem are to be the judges of the Twelve Tribes, and the Twelve Disciples on this continent are to be the judges of the descendants of Nephi, then that the brother of Jared and Jared should be the judges of the Jaredites, their descendants; and, further, that the First Presidency and Twelve who have officiated in our age, should operate in regard to mankind in this dispensation, and also in regard to all matters connected with them, whether they relate to the past, present, or future, as the aforementioned have done in regard to their several peoples; and that the Patriarchs, the Presidents, the Twelve, the High Priests, the Seventies, the Elders, the Bishops, Priests, Teachers and Deacons should hold their several places behind the veil, and officiate according to their calling and standing in that Priesthood. In fact, the Priesthood is called an everlasting Priesthood; it ministers in time and in eternity. Moses speaks of the Levitical Priesthood as an everlasting Priesthood. (Ex., xl, 15.) Paul refers to the Melchizedek Priesthood as being "without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life." (Heb., vii, 3.) Whilst the Prophet Joseph Smith states that this "Priesthood continueth in the Church of God in all generations, and is without beginning of days or end of years." (Doc. and Cov., Sec. lxxxiv, 17, p. 290.)

This being the case, it necessarily follows that those holding the Priesthood on the earth continue in the exercise of that Priesthood in the heavens, their operations being changed from this to another state of existence; and when the dead, small and great, shall be judged, while God stands at the head, and Jesus is the great High Priest of our profession, all those who have ever lived who are worthy will stand in their proper positions, according to their callings, Priesthood, ordinations or quorums. It is written that they without us can not be made perfect, and that we without them can not be made perfect. We have commenced to build temples, and to administer in them according to the decrees, purposes and foreknowledge of God. When we have got through with our personal affairs connected with our individual families and interests, so far as we can legitimately trace them, then it becomes a question as to the position of those that are behind the veil of whom we have no personal knowledge. Does it not seem consistent that to the ancient as well as the modern Patriarchs, Prophets, Presidents, Apostles, Seventies, High Priests, Elders, Bishops and others would be committed the manipulation and judgment of those who are behind the veil; and with whom we, at present, have nothing to do? And if temples are to be built here and ordinances performed in them in the interest of those who have died without law, and in the adjudication of all these matters, that the Priesthood behind the veil, to whom is committed the judgment of these things, should communicate with the Priesthood upon the earth, that they may be administered for by proxy in the temples erected by us, and those who shall follow after us; that all things may be done according to equity, law, and justice, and that none but those worthy to receive those great blessings and high exaltations can participate in the same; being thus sanctioned by the Priesthood in heaven and the Priesthood upon the earth? Hence, while they are saviors, preach to the spirits in prison and judge the dead, we build temples and administer for them upon the earth, and thus become, as it is written, "saviors upon Mount Zion;" operating and cooperating with the Priesthood behind the veil, in the interest, happiness, salvation and exaltation of the human family. Thus shall we also become legitimately and by right, through the atonement and adoption, Kings and Priests--Priests to administer in the holy ordinances pertaining to the endowments and exaltations; and Kings, under Christ, who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, to rule and govern, according to the eternal laws of justice and equity, those who are thus redeemed and exalted.

In corroboration of these ideas is the statement, in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, that Father Joseph Smith, who was the first Patriarch to the Church in this dispensation, is now at the right hand of Abraham, who was also a presiding Patriarch. The passage reads:

"That I may receive him unto myself, even as I did * * * my aged servant, Joseph Smith, sen., who sitteth with Abraham at his right hand, and blessed and holy is he, for he is mine."--Doc. and Cov., cxxiv, 19, p. 431.

It is also stated of David Patten, one of the Twelve Apostles, who was slain by the mobbers in Missouri, that "David Patten I have taken unto myself; behold, his Priesthood no man taketh from him; but, verily I say unto you, another may be appointed unto the same calling."--Doc. and Cov., cxxiv, 130, p. 445.

The same is said of Seymour Brunson, one of the High Council, and of Edward Partridge, the first Bishop of the Church, both of whom were dead:

"Seymour Brunson I have taken unto myself, no man taketh his Priesthood, but another may be appointed unto the same Priesthood in his stead."--Doc. and Cov., Sec. cxxiv, 132, p. 445. "That when he shall finish his work, that I may receive him unto myself, even as I did my servant David Patten, who is with me at this time, and also my servant Edward Partridge."--Doc. and Cov., Sec. cxxiv, 19, p. 431.

We read that Moses and Elias came to administer to Jesus, on the Mount, while Peter, James and John were with him. Who were this Moses and this Elias? Moses was a great Prophet, appointed by the Lord to deliver Israel from Egyptian bondage, and lead them to the promised land; and he held the keys of the gathering dispensation, which keys he afterwards conferred upon Joseph Smith in the Kirtland Temple. Who was Elias? Elijah; which name in the old Scriptures is made synonymous with Elias; and who held, according to the testimony of Joseph Smith as elsewhere stated, the keys of the Priesthood. These men, who held those keys and officiated upon the earth, having left the earth, now come, associated with Jesus, to administer to Peter, James and John, and confer upon them the Priesthood which they hold; and these three ancient Apostles conferred the Priesthood upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in this dispensation. This principle is very clearly illustrated in the following quotation from the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, Sec. cxxviii, 20, 21, p., 457:

"And again, what do we hear? Glad tidings from Cumorah! Moroni, an angel from heaven, declaring the fulfilment of the prophets--the book to be revealed. A voice of the Lord in the wilderness of Fayette, Seneca County, declaring the three witnesses to bear record of the book. The voice of Michael on the banks of the Susquehanna, detecting the devil when he appeared as an angel of light. The voice of Peter, James and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville, Broome county, on the Susquehanna river, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times.

"And again, the voice of God in the chamber of old Father Whitmer, in Fayette, Seneca County, and at sundry times and in divers places through all the travels and tribulations of this Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. And the voice of Michael, the archangel; the voice of Gabriel, and of Raphael, and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam, down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their Priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little and there a little--giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope."

Hence their Priesthood was everlasting, it administered in time and in eternity. In consonance with the same idea is a remark made by a mighty angel, to be found in the Revelation received by St. John on the Isle of Patmos. After this angel had communicated to John many great and important events yet to transpire, the Apostle was so overawed by his presence that he fell at his feet to worship him; whereas the angel said, "See that thou do it not; I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren that have kept the testimony of Jesus: worship God; for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." (Rev., xix, 10.) In other words, he had held the holy Priesthood on the earth and had officiated therein; he had been subjected to all the obloquy, contumely and reproach which the Prophets of God generally suffered. But now the scene was changed; he was officiating in another sphere, and was revealing unto the Apostle John, who had a peculiar mission on the earth, some of the great and important truths or events that should be developed in the accomplishment of the purposes of God. All of these men, having held the everlasting Priesthood on earth, still retain the power and authority conferred upon them, and stand forth as prominent examples of the perpetuity of the everlasting Priesthood, administering on the earth or in the heavens, as the purposes of God and the fulfilment of their duties render necessary, or the circumstances require.
