Marjorie P. Hinckley, Gordon B. Hinckley, Wondrous Power of a Mother ( 1989)

The Wondrous Power of a Mother

BY PRESIDENT GORDON B. HINCKLEY

Nearly sixty years have gone since my mother passed away. At the time I was a university student. I have forgotten much of what I was studying then, but the memories of those last months of my mother's life remain ever green, as do the memories of earlier years. I hope she knew that I loved her. I did not say so very often. Like most boys, it was not easy for me to speak those words.

She died in the early harvest season of her life. Her youngest child was ten, old enough that Mother had come into a freedom she had not known for many years. She was on a journey in Europe when she felt the pain that frightened her. Six months later she was gone.

I recall the gray November day of her funeral. We put on a front of bravery and fought back the tears. But inside, the wounds were deep and painful. That experience, at a sensitive season of my life, has, I hope, given me a deeper understanding of all who lose a mother.

I was called on a mission shortly after that. It was in the depths of the Great Depression. Few missionaries were called at the time because of distressing financial circumstances all over the world. I had saved a few dollars, my brother worked and contributed generously, and my father carried the major burden. But something else made it all possible. We discovered that my mother, with prescient foresight, had nurtured a savings account with the small coins she received in change when buying groceries. This money provided the balance needed for my expenses in what was then the costliest mission in the world.

For me, the money I received was sacred. I felt it had been consecrated not so much for me as for the Lord. I hope I was careful in its expenditure.

I experienced times of discouragement on my mission, as does every missionary. On an occasion or two, when the clouds were particularly dark, I felt in a very real but indescribable way the protecting, guiding, encouraging influence of my mother. She seemed very close. I tried then, as I have tried since, to so conduct my life and perform my duty as to bring honor to her name. I am the first to concede that I may not always have done so, and the thought of living beneath my mother's expectations has been painful, and has afforded a discipline that otherwise might have been lacking.

Over many years of experience as a General Authority of the Church, I have met with thousands of missionaries in many lands. I have interviewed many hundreds of these on an individual basis. To some, I have asked, "Are you the kind of missionary your mother hopes you are?"

If the reply has been sincerely in the affirmative, I have felt that other questions were not really necessary, for if a person lives up to the hopes and expectations of his or her mother, there will be integrity in performance.

For most young men and women in the mission field, every day is Mothers' Day. Thoughts arise in the course of the day concerning home and mother. These become unspoken expressions of appreciation and love. Of all those who influence our lives, none is so effective as mother. She it was who bore us. She it was who nurtured us. She it was who, consciously or otherwise, shaped the direction of our lives. It is interesting to observe that when Joseph Smith returned home from the grove, it was to his mother that he first told of his experience. The history she wrote of his life bespeaks her unwavering faith in him and his love for her. Until the time of her death, she steadfastly supported him and was unflagging in her faith concerning his great mission. It was she who nurtured within him those qualities which made of him an acceptable instrument into whose heart and mind could come the revelations of the Almighty in opening this great and final dispensation of gospel truth.

Frequently quoted are the words of Abraham Lincoln: "All that I am or hope to be I owe to my angel mother." This was more than an idle tribute. It was a sincere expression of gratitude spoken by a great man concerning the one who had pointed the course of his life. Biographers have written much concerning Nancy Hanks Lincoln. They have written of a young mother, living in impoverished circumstances in a simple log house in the wilderness, reading the Bible and other books to her children. When he was nine years old, she is quoted as saying to him, "I am going away from you, Abraham, and shall not return. I know that you will be a good boy; that you will be kind to Sarah and your father. I want you to live as I have taught you, and to love your Heavenly Father and keep His commandments." [^1]

She died and was buried in the cold earth of that winter. The influence of that wilderness mother was felt forever after by the man who came to be known as "Honest Abe," the prairie lawyer who rose to the presidency of the United States and guided the nation through the dark and bitter years of Civil War. His appreciation for her, and for the stepmother who succeeded her in his childhood home, may well have touched his heart to give comfort to a mother who paid a terrible price during that tragic Civil War.

In a letter headed "Executive Mansion, Washington, November 21, 1864," Lincoln, in his own hand, wrote to "Mrs. Bixby, Boston, Mass."

Dear Madam, I have been shown in the files of the War Department a statement of the Adjutant- General of Massachusetts that you are the mother of five sons who have died gloriously on the field of battle. I feel how weak and fruitless must be any word of mine which should attempt to beguile you from the grief of a loss so overwhelming. But I cannot refrain from tendering to you the consolation that may be found in the thanks of the Republic they died to save. I pray that our heavenly Father may assuage the anguish of your bereavement, and leave you only the cherished memory of the loved and lost, and the solemn pride that must be yours to have laid so costly a sacrifice upon the altar of freedom. Yours very sincerely and respectfully, A. Lincoln [^2]

The practice of reading the scriptures and other literature of timeless quality is one that every mother might well observe. While sorting through some books in my library recently, I came across a little volume whose back was broken and whose leaves were loose, a condition that came from much use by careless but loving hands of small children who treasured that volume from which our mother read to us. The book is Mother Stories from the Book of Mormon by William Albert Morton. It was first published about 1911. As I thumbed through the pages, there came into my mind pictures of cold winter nights when we sat about the stove in our home, our mother reading to us about the great characters of the Nephite record.

That was my first introduction to the Book of Mormon. Reading from the Book of Mormon itself occurred when we were a little older and could understand the more difficult language and the more complex thread of the story. It was in those initial circumstances that there developed within us a love for this sacred volume and for other wonderful pieces of writing that she shared with us.

Today we read with appreciation the stories of the great men who led the Church and maintained it in the long strides of its history. The uniting in Kirtland, Ohio, of the little branches from New York; the long march to Missouri; the painful exodus to Illinois; and the movement of tens of thousands west from the Mississippi to the Missouri and on to the Valley of the Great Salt Lake—this is an epic without parallel. Heroic were the labors of these our forefathers. But greater still was the price paid by their wives and mothers in those tremendous undertakings. For instance, let it be remembered that Joseph Smith, Sr., went alone from Vermont to western New York seeking a better place for his family. But it was Lucy Mack Smith, his wife and the mother of their children, who moved the family with their goods in that long and difficult journey.

It was Mary Fielding Smith, the wife of the Prophet's brother Hyrum, who gave birth to their little son Joseph in Far West, Missouri, while the mob militia ruthlessly compelled the Saints to leave the state. It was this same Mary Fielding Smith who, on a June night, when her son was only five, heard a knock on her window, and a voice said that her husband had been killed in Carthage. It was that same Mary who, with that boy, then eleven years of age, drove an ox team from Nauvoo to Winter Quarters and from Winter Quarters to the Salt Lake Valley. It was she who set an example for the whole church in encouraging him to accept the call at the age of fifteen to go to Hawaii as a missionary. Her teachings, through all of those years, laid a foundation of faith in the character of Joseph F. Smith that shone through his long and wonderful rise from fatherless boy to president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

In the old cemetery at Winter Quarters is a beautiful bronze monument that depicts a pioneer father and mother laying a child in a grave they would never again visit. The father is stricken with grief. The mother fights back her sorrow. Hers was the greater loss, for the child who had died was of her very flesh and sinew.

The Church recently acquired the old pioneer cemetery in Nauvoo. For years it was covered with weeds and neglected. Now it will be restored in tribute to those who are buried there. I have read their names and the causes of their deaths. Many are children who died of diseases easily controlled in our time. In reading those names and ages, there have come into my mind pictures of grieving mothers, women who went to Nauvoo to find refuge from their enemies and to establish homes, but whose lives were soon threatened again. To the fear of those threats was added grief over children who died and whose remains had to be left behind as families fled Nauvoo in search of a place of peace.

Eliza R. Snow poignantly described the events in their snowbound camp at Sugar Creek, Iowa, after leaving Nauvoo: "On the first night of the encampment, nine children were born into the world, and from that time, as we journeyed onward, mothers gave birth to offspring under almost every variety of circumstances imaginable, except those to which they had been accustomed; some in tents, others in wagons—in rain-storms and in snow-storms." [^3]

The children of those difficult days became men and women of strength who pioneered the valleys of the West. The virtue of their lives, the nurturing of the refining influences of society, with strength for the task of building a commonwealth in the desert, came of the teachings of the mothers who bore them and gave them life and love and direction.

The separations of death so frequently experienced during those pioneer marches were difficult to bear. And there were other painful separations. Husbands and fathers were called on missions with long terms of service. Here are a few lines from the story of a little girl who grew up in Parowan, Utah. She writes:

I do not remember much in my life until September 12, 1860, when father was called to go on a mission to Europe. I remember how my mother, grandmother and Aunt Margaret wept and mourned, and of him lifting me in his arms and holding me so close to him and the tears falling on my face. He said, "Be good to your dear mother. . . ." My little mother had to work like a slave to keep her children while father was on his mission. I remember how every night she would spin and how, in the day time, I would split fine splinters off from the pitchy wood and at night I would sit with her and tend the baby and keep holding and lighting these pitchy sticks for her to see to spin by, and how I would cry when I went to bed to think my little sweet mother had to work so hard. I remember the Christmas of 1862. All of us children hung up our stockings. We jumped up early in the morning to see what Santa had brought but there was not a thing in them. Mother wept bitterly. She went to her box and got a little apple and cut it in little tiny pieces and that was our Christmas, but I have never forgotten to this day how I loved her dear little hands as she was cutting that apple. [^4]

Today, fathers are not called to leave wives and children, but the pangs of saying good-bye to missionary sons and daughters is keenly felt by mothers. How anxious are their concerns, how earnest are their prayers, in behalf of their missionaries. Again, the willingness and the desire of these men and women to serve in the work of the Lord comes for the most part from seeds of faith planted years earlier by mothers who love the Lord and his work and who are willing to sacrifice to move it forward.

War, with all its tragic consequences, exacts a terrible price not only of the young men and women who wage it, but of their mothers who stay behind, every day filled with anxiety and every night filled with fear.

More than fifty years ago, at the conclusion of our missions, my companions and I made a brief tour of Europe. In a major German city, at the monument marking the grave of the Unknown Soldier of the World War I, we saw a picture that brought together in an instant, as it were, the whole tragic burden carried by mothers. The year was 1935. Hitler had held a huge rally only days before. The whole city was electrified by his visit. As we sat to rest by the memorial of the earlier war, an elderly woman walked slowly to it. Poorly dressed, her face wrinkled with age and stress, she clutched in her hand a small bouquet of flowers. She placed the flowers at the feet of the figure of the Unknown Soldier and knelt in prayer. Then she arose and, with tear-filled eyes, slowly walked away, while from a nearby street we heard the drum beat of marching youths of another generation, many of whom would suffer in a coming war what her own loved one had suffered.

In the spring of 1961, the Church commenced organized missionary work in the Philippines. We had no building in which to hold our first meeting there, so we sought permission from the American Embassy to meet at the American Military Cemetery on the outskirts of Manila. There we assembled at 6:30 in the morning, a little handful of Saints, including a few from Clark Air Base and a few from the naval base at Subic Bay. Before us were row on row of crosses and the star of David, in perfect symmetry, marking graves of more than 17,000 victims of the war. Surrounding that sacred ground were beautiful stone colonnades with tablets on which were engraved the names of more than 35,000 who had perished in the battles of the Pacific. My eye caught a familiar name, the name of a young man whom my wife knew. He had grown up in a Latter-day Saint home in her neighborhood. Then came the war, and he had enlisted and gone off to his duty. The plane he flew as captain was last seen plunging seaward into the ocean.

We took a photograph of that plaque and brought it home and gave it to his mother. She wept again as she had wept before, this time in an expression of gratitude that his name was still remembered, even though the remembrance was on a far distant shore. The virtues and strengths of his life had come from the teachings of his mother.

How wondrous is the power of a mother, not only to create life as a partner with God in His eternal work, but also to mold and shape and temper her creation with that strength and integrity that become the fiber of the best of the generations. God bless our mothers, the women who rear their children in light and truth, with understanding and love for the Lord.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Quoted in John Wesley Hill, Abraham Lincoln, Man of God (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1927), p. 40.
[^2] 2. Quoted in John Bartlett, Familiar Quotations (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1968), p. 640.
[^3] 3. Edward W. Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom (New York, 1877), pp. 307-8.
[^4] 4. Hannah Daphine Smith Dalton, Pretty Is as Pretty Does (South African LDS Mission, 1933), pp. 6, 8, 9.
