My name is Joshua Kioko. My wife is Penina Mueni. We are the parents of three children: Joseph (16), Angel (7), and Mercy (5). My family and I had a wonderful experience which I will share with you.

First, when the prophet stood to speak, he was speaking in a small voice—like a whisper—yet it was clear in my ears and I could easily understand his words. I felt like the Nephites when Heavenly Father was introducing His Beloved Son to them in a small voice, which pierced into their bodies (see 3 Nephi 11:3). Brothers and sisters, I don’t need more witness to know that President Russell M. Nelson is the Lord’s prophet on earth and His spokesman—for he spoke like Him. In Doctrine and Covenants 1:38 we learn that whether it is Heavenly Father’s voice or the voice of His servants, it is the same.

The prophet talked about problems facing Kenya—and Africa as whole—and gave us solutions to solve them. I will share a few:

1.  We will get out of poverty if we pay tithing.

2.  Paying dowry or lobola is not the Lord’s way.

3.  The Lord’s way is to get married in the temple.

4.  We should not be beating our children or giving corporal punishment to them.

Since then my lovely wife Penina and I vowed never to beat our children and to look for other means of disciplining our children—and to afterwards show love toward them.

We also vowed that when our two daughters grow up, we will not ask for dowry from those blessed young men. We will give our daughters freely. The only sacrifice they have to pay in order to earn that blessing is to be temple worthy in order to marry our daughters in the Lord’s temple.

After we left the venue, I could see the love and joy my daughter, Angel, had towards President Nelson—and she asked me what the prophet had said to me. I told her, “The prophet loves you children. He said we, your parents, should love you and not give corporal punishment. But you also need to be obedient so we, your parents, will be able to obey the prophet!”
