Even as a young boy, I had a testimony of the Book of Mormon. I felt especially drawn to the story of the brother of Jared and his people in their journey to “a land of promise” (Ether 2:9).

When faced with the prospect of journeying in unlit barges, the brother of Jared asked, “Behold, O Lord, wilt thou suffer that we shall cross this great water in darkness?” Answering, the Lord said, “What will ye that I should do that ye may have light in your vessels?” (Ether 2:22, 23).

The brother of Jared knew that the Lord was all powerful. He knew that the Lord was the source of all light. He knew that the Lord had commanded his people to call upon Him in time of need. So, exercising faith in the Lord, the brother of Jared prepared 16 small stones. You remember that he then asked the Lord to touch the stones with His finger, “that they may shine forth in darkness” (Ether 3:4).

The image of the Lord touching those stones has been etched in my mind since I first read that story. I can see that scene as if it were happening before my eyes. Perhaps that’s because the image of darkness being dispelled by light is real to me.

When I don’t feel the Holy Ghost, when I’m a little out of tune with the Lord’s Spirit, I feel darkness. But when I read the Book of Mormon, the light returns. The Book of Mormon has been for me like a shining stone touched by the Lord. It has illuminated my journey through life.

Like those brought by the hand of the Lord to the ancient Americas, we all face storms and dark days during our journey to the promised land of exaltation. But the Lord will do for us what He did for the Jaredites and the Nephites. He will guide us and light our way—if we obey Him, exercise faith in Him, and plead for His help.

The Lord told Nephi, “I will also be your light in the wilderness; and I will prepare the way before you, if it so be that ye shall keep my commandments; wherefore, inasmuch as ye shall keep my commandments ye shall be led towards the promised land; and ye shall know that it is by me that ye are led” (1 Nephi 17:13).

The Lord told Nephi’s brother Jacob, “I will be a light unto them forever, that hear my words” (2 Nephi 10:14).

Of the Savior, the prophet Abinadi witnessed, “He is the light and the life of the world; yea, a light that is endless, that can never be darkened” (Mosiah 16:9).

Of Himself, the Savior testified, “I am the light and the life of the world.” He added, “Behold I am the light; I have set an example for you” (3 Nephi 9:18; 18:16).

I love our prophet, President Russell M. Nelson. I have the blessing of serving at his side. When he walks into a room, that room immediately feels brighter. He carries the Light of Christ with him.

The Light of Christ is real. It “is the divine energy, power, or influence that proceeds from God through Christ and gives life and light to all things.” It is a cherished spiritual gift that can lead God’s children to the Holy Ghost and the gospel of Jesus Christ. Reading the Book of Mormon strengthens that Light.

Sometimes we need to look back on our lives to remember how we have been helped on our journey. As we look back, we can feel the Savior’s influence again. When the scriptures say, “Remember, remember” (Helaman 5:12), I think they’re telling us, “Don’t just remember what you once knew or felt; rather, feel that light again.”

For some, feeling spiritual light comes easily. For others, spiritual light can be difficult to feel because of personal struggles or worldly distractions. But if we are faithful, light will come—at times in ways we do not expect.

President Nelson, who has counseled us to “prayerfully study the Book of Mormon every day,” has shared several ways the Book of Mormon can bring us closer to the Savior and help us feel gospel light, grasp gospel truths, and live gospel teachings.

As we read the Book of Mormon, President Nelson said, our understanding of, and appreciation for, the Atonement of Jesus Christ will grow.

We will feel a desire to be “born again” (Mosiah 27:25) as the book helps us experience a change of heart (see Mosiah 5:2).

As we read and study the Book of Mormon’s teachings about the gathering of Israel, we will feel an increased desire to seek after our dead and perform ordinances of salvation and exaltation for them in the temple.

We will feel light as we receive answers to our questions, guidance in making decisions, and strength to repent and withstand evil.

And as we read truths found in the Book of Mormon, we will feel healing, comfort, restoration, succor, strength, consolation, and cheering to our soul.

“O then, is not this real?” Alma asked concerning the swelling, sprouting seed of truth, knowledge, and testimony. “I say unto you, Yea, because it is light; and whatsoever is light, is good, because it is discernible, therefore ye must know that it is good” (Alma 32:35).

When my friend Kamryn was 10 years old, she contracted a rare but permanent eye disease that infected the cornea of her right eye. At times, when the associated pain became constant and unbearable, Kamryn could not endure any light. Her parents, worried she might go blind, would darken the windows of her bedroom to try to keep her comfortable. Kamryn’s mother, Janna, recalled:

“About four months after her diagnosis, I walked into her dark room. As my eyes adjusted, I could see Kamryn curled in the fetal position on her bed. She was in so much pain that she didn’t move or even cry when she heard me come in. She just lay there with both eyes swollen shut.

“I knelt by her bed, took her hand in mine, and squeezed it three times—our secret code for ‘I love you.’ Normally she would squeeze back four times for ‘I love you more,’ but she didn’t respond. She was in too much pain. With tears streaming down my cheeks, I looked at my once-vibrant 10-year-old crumpled in a ball. My heart broke.”

Janna said a silent, heartfelt prayer.

“I told Heavenly Father that I knew He knew best, but I prayed, ‘Please help her.’ As I sat there praying, a wave of warmth washed over me. I felt calm as a thought about the Savior Jesus Christ came to my mind: ‘He is the light. Find Him in the dark.’”

Janna lifted her head and whispered in Kamryn’s ear: “You have to find the Savior in the dark.”

Afterward, Kamryn fell asleep listening to hymns and scriptures on the Church library app.

Kamryn’s disease lies dormant most of the time, but when she suffers flare-ups, Janna and her husband, Darrin, comfort her and again put blankets over her bedroom windows. During those painful times, Kamryn says, “I’m just finding the Savior in the dark.”

When life seems like “a dark and dreary wilderness” (1 Nephi 8:4), we also may need to find the Savior in the dark. I testify that the Book of Mormon, with its witness “that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God,” will lead us to Him. I know that those who sincerely read the Book of Mormon, live by its precepts, and pray about its truthfulness will feel the Holy Ghost and increase their faith in, and testimony of, the Savior.

May we show gratitude for this “most correct” book by reading it, treasuring it, and using it to strengthen our faith and the faith of others in the Light of the World.
