One afternoon during my internship as an air traffic controller at the airport in Tijuana, Mexico, my instructor and I noticed that a fogbank from the ocean had covered the airport and a large part of the city. Visibility, however, was within the limits allowed for aircraft to land and take off.

Soon, we detected on radar a Cessna 172 coming from the south along the coast, flying via visual flight rules (VFR). Under VFR, pilots locate themselves visually with reference points on the ground to reach their destination.

Unfortunately, the pilot had gotten lost in the fog. Flying in circles around the coastal area, he tried to locate himself in relation to the airport, but the poor visibility restricted his vision. I asked my instructor what we could do to help him.

“He needs to tune in to the tower’s airband frequency and communicate with us,” he replied. “Otherwise, we can’t do anything for him.”

I didn’t understand why the lost pilot didn’t communicate with us. Did he have a problem with his radio? Did he feel that he could get out of danger by himself?

Minutes passed. Finally, the pilot tuned in to the tower frequency. With a worried tone, he asked for help. Immediately we gave him directions to lead him safely to the airport runway. He just had to trust our instructions and his flight instruments.

Seeing the plane emerge from the fog a few minutes later and then land safely gave us indescribable joy.

On the way home, I pondered what the pilot had experienced. Calling us on the right airband frequency made the difference between receiving help or flying in circles—or worse.

Like this pilot, I become lost at times in “a mist of darkness” (1 Nephi 8:23). When I need God’s guidance, He patiently waits to hear my voice.

Just as I could see the lost plane on radar, our Heavenly Father sees us and our challenges. I am grateful He gives us guidance. He provides help through prayer, scriptures, living prophets, and the gift of the Holy Ghost. He will lead us out of physical and spiritual danger if we tune in to the right frequency, request guidance, and listen to His voice.
