Stepping into young adulthood was so exciting to me. I was prepared to start building the life I always wanted. I served a mission in Brazil and then attended university when I got home. I finished my degree, found a good job, and strived to live as a disciple of Christ.

And I’m still in this stage of life. Just doing my best to follow Him.

I’m so grateful for the opportunities and blessings I’ve had so far. Yet as I look back and see that I’ve made all the covenants I can to this point (apart from marriage) and reached the big milestones I always planned for, sometimes I feel a bit stuck—unsure of how to progress, especially spiritually.

I’ve watched young adults around me struggle too. Some have even left the Church because they’re feeling aimless or facing unmet expectations. Their actions have often added to my list of questions for life.

However, right now, my biggest questions for Heavenly Father are these: How can I overcome this feeling of spiritual aimlessness? What do I do now?

As I’ve grappled with these questions, I’ve learned a few important truths that have helped me navigate this time of uncertainty.

During this time of not knowing where to turn next or what to expect, I’ve noticed how the distractions of the world can easily start to take precedence over spiritual things. Sister Rebecca L. Craven, Second Counselor in the Young Women General Presidency, said, “The world is laden with distractions that can deceive even the elect, causing them to be casual in living their covenants.”

I have seen other young adults struggle with their testimonies after returning from their missions. I’ve also seen how some reach milestones like graduating university or getting married and eventually get derailed from the things that matter most when they don’t allow room for the gospel of Jesus Christ in their new routine.

I have also gone through spiritual ups and downs. It’s been hard at times to have motivation and not be lazy when it comes to spiritual habits, especially when certain blessings aren’t coming as soon as I had hoped. I always want to progress and improve—I don’t want to be spiritually stagnant. But sometimes I feel like I am just going with the flow without a purpose.

However, when I set aside time for Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ each day, especially in the small and simple ways (see Alma 37:6), I feel the comfort and stability His gospel brings me, even when the world is so unstable.

President Russell M. Nelson said: “I plead with you to let God prevail in your life. Give Him a fair share of your time. As you do, notice what happens to your positive spiritual momentum.” When I consciously choose to have faith in Jesus Christ every day and make time for those spiritual habits that connect me with Him, I remember my spiritually defining moments and feel a renewed sense of purpose, hope for the future, and faith.

Another time when I was feeling aimless was during my final year of university. Life was tough. It was during the pandemic, so I was depressed while I was stuck at home finishing classes. There was such a lack of direction and connection in my life.

I even struggled with church at this time. I often had to make myself roll out of bed in my pajamas to listen to sacrament meeting online because that’s all the motivation I could muster.

During this dark period, I reached out to my family and friends and explained to them how aimless and depressed I felt. I didn’t feel like I had any hope for the future and didn’t know how things were going to work out. And that’s when they told me that they were praying for me and supporting me even though they were far away.

As I reached out to loved ones who have deep faith and as I prayed to Heavenly Father with just an inkling of spiritual motivation, I felt sustaining support and love.

I’ve noticed that when I am hyper-focused on my unfulfilled expectations, my doubts, or my struggles, my faith is thrown in disarray. I lose sight of the blessings in my life. But by actively surrounding myself with good by reading my patriarchal blessing, listening to general conference messages, and spending time with loved ones who influence me for the better, I refocus on the miraculous difference the gospel of Jesus Christ makes in my life.

Even if you don’t have a clear path ahead of you at times or things aren’t going as planned, there is still so much goodness in your life and so many opportunities available to you to help you progress on the covenant path. There is always more to learn and more room to grow, especially spiritually. Ask Heavenly Father for direction. He will help you seek and find the good influences and opportunities for growth and learning that are around you (see Articles of Faith 1:13).

Our personal spirituality can sometimes go in waves—up and down. At times we might feel firm in our faith and the joy of the gospel. But at other times, we might struggle to know where to turn next. We might struggle when challenges come, questions arise, or blessings are delayed, especially when we are doing our best to live the gospel. In these difficult times, I often see people take one of two paths: one where they reach for the Savior, and one where they do not.

I sometimes compare these moments to the story of Moses and the brass serpent (see Numbers 21:8–9). When the Israelites were desperate to be healed after being bitten by venomous serpents, Moses gave them an easy way to be saved: simply look at the brass serpent that represented Jehovah. That’s all they had to do. Just one glance and they would live. But so many chose not to and perished. (See 1 Nephi 17:41.)

This story makes me think about how we carry the venomous weight of disappointment and resentment from our unmet expectations at times, when the cure is right in front of us!

The key to feeling hope, peace, and faith for our future is simply to look to Jesus Christ (see Helaman 8:14–15; John 3:14–17).

I have always been a harsh critic of myself when I make mistakes. But because I have truly strived to learn about and believe in Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ, I know I can always count on Them for forgiveness, growth, and healing in difficult times. I know that when I am looking to Them through prayer, studying Come, Follow Me, spending time in the temple, and magnifying my calling, I feel a sense of gratitude and renewal.

As I seek Them, I see the gospel of Jesus Christ for what it is: a refuge that offers us comfort, safety, and healing from the serpents of the world.

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles lovingly testified: “‘A perfect brightness of hope,’ born of love of God and all men—that is what we want for you. … Accompanying that bright hope will be the undeniable whisper that God loves you, that Christ is your Advocate, that the gospel is true. Its brightness will remind you that in the gospel there is always—every day, every hour—a new chance, a new life, a new year. What a miracle! What a gift! And because of Christ’s gift, the best things in life are ours if we steadfastly keep believing and keep trying and keep hoping.”

Young adulthood brings a lot of changes, a lot of uncertainty, and, yes, even unmet expectations at times. But Jesus Christ’s gospel is always certain and always steady. And His and Heavenly Father’s promises are sure as we continually stay on the covenant path. The world can make it so hard at times to keep our focus on Him. But taking any step forward that brings us toward Him is progress. When we are moving toward Christ, we are never aimless—we are moving toward hope, peace, and joy.

The author lives in Manchester, England.
