In the spring of 1829, Mary and Peter Whitmer welcomed Joseph and Emma Smith and Oliver Cowdery into their home so the translation of the gold plates could be completed. The demands on Mary’s time were high. She cared for nine people in her own home and assisted her married children who lived nearby.

Mary’s five sons and both of her (eventual) sons-in-law became official witnesses of the gold plates in June 1829. That same month, Mary received a witness of her own.

Outside her home, a gray-haired man with a knapsack over his shoulder approached Mary and said, “My name is Moroni. You have become pretty tired with all the extra work you have to do.” Taking the knapsack off his shoulder, Moroni continued, “You have been very faithful and diligent in your labors. It is proper, therefore, that you should receive a witness that your faith may be strengthened.” He then revealed the contents of his knapsack—the gold plates.

Mary became a witness of the gold plates, like the Three Witnesses and Eight Witnesses, whose testimonies are in the introductory pages of the Book of Mormon. Mary’s humility and diligence prepared her to be a witness. Her testimony isn’t written in the introductory pages of the Book of Mormon, and her name isn’t on plaques, monuments, or the minds of many Saints who came after her. Although her daily contributions in her home and family likely went unnoticed by many, they were known by God.

Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles taught:

“The Lord judges so very differently from the way we do. He is pleased with the noble servant, not with the self-serving noble.

“Those who are humble in this life will wear crowns of glory in the next.”

Moroni’s record is now translated into the Book of Mormon, and we can receive a witness of its truthfulness according to the promise Moroni left in its final pages: “I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost” (Moroni 10:4).

Do you ever feel like your burdens are great but that your efforts go unacknowledged? Heavenly Father knows you, and He knows the good you do. As you go about doing good (see Acts 10:38), serving without fanfare, and searching the scriptures, the Holy Ghost can confirm the truth of the gospel to you.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="158259552" id="aside1_p1">Who has been a “Mary Whitmer” in your life? Who is someone whose contributions have been significant to you, even if they might have largely gone unnoticed by others? Consider acknowledging this meaningful service with a letter or other act of gratitude. </p> [/SIDEBAR]
