Statements from modern prophets and apostles about the blessings of reading the Book of Mormon are breathtaking.

The Prophet Joseph Smith said: “I told the brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book.”

President Ezra Taft Benson (1899–1994) taught: “The Book of Mormon is the instrument that God designed to ‘sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out [His] elect’ (Moses 7:62).”

More recently, President Russell M. Nelson testified: “This is the book that will help to prepare the world for the Second Coming of the Lord.”

Such powerful declarations remind us of the importance of sharing the Book of Mormon with those around us. As we do so, we can help others receive additional power in their lives through the truths taught therein, as testified of by President Nelson when he said:

“When I think of the Book of Mormon, I think of the word power. The truths of the Book of Mormon have the power to heal, comfort, restore, succor, strengthen, console, and cheer our souls.”

In our modern world, there are endless possibilities for sharing the Book of Mormon. As we consider how to share, we can begin by thinking about whom we can share the Book of Mormon with and what is going on in their lives. Then we can follow the Spirit to know how best the Book of Mormon can bless them. Here are five ideas (of many!) we can try:

1.  In our study of the Book of Mormon, we can look for verses that stand out to us. Does one of them make us think of someone we know? We can follow the prompting and lovingly share the words we read with that person in a text, email, phone call, or handwritten note.

2.  As we feel positively impacted by the Book of Mormon, we can pray and ask God who else might benefit from hearing our experiences. Then we can share our stories, trusting the Lord’s promise that “I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up” (Doctrine and Covenants 84:88).

3.  Have we been touched by a story portrayed in a video from the Book of Mormon Videos collection? Increasingly, people are finding these videos online and are being drawn to the truths of the gospel by the stories they portray. Again, if we feel inspired as we watch, we can consider who else might enjoy a similar experience and then share a video link with them.

4.  One of the easiest ways to share is through a simple touch of a button with the Book of Mormon app. You can share a link with someone or simply have them scan a code from the app on your phone. Even while sitting next to someone on a bus, you can share it and give them access to the Book of Mormon in any language. The app contains the full text of the Book of Mormon. It also includes the Book of Mormon Videos and many other resources that can lead people to learn more about Jesus Christ and His teachings.

5.  One of the most traditional ways we can share the Book of Mormon is simply to give someone a printed copy of it. Many people are looking for a good book to read. We can share with them the Book of Mormon and tell them why it means so much to us when we read it.

The Book of Mormon has answers to life’s challenges\! It sustains faith in Jesus Christ and points people to Him! It can lift people from sin and sadness, teach them how to feel the Savior’s peace, and expand their understanding of who they are every time they read it!

As President Nelson has said, the Book of Mormon is “God’s instrument to bring about th[e] gathering [of Israel].” The Lord has brought forth the Book of Mormon as part of His work, and it’s our opportunity to share its good news with others. No matter how we share the Book of Mormon, we can be certain that we are engaged in God’s work of salvation and exaltation to help gather His children.
