We live in a time described in the scriptures as perilous. Many false teachings and doctrines abound. So much confusion on how to navigate the challenges of life.

In 1 Timothy 4:1–2, Paul revealed what will happen in the latter days:

“Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils;

“Speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with a hot iron.”

It is increasingly difficult to stay connected with the truth now, especially with many false doctrines and interpretation of the scriptures.

The Book of Mormon serves as a beacon of hope and a source of profound spiritual insight. Studying the Book of Mormon and its doctrine leads to a strengthened faith in Jesus and has the power to illuminate our lives and to provide a solid foundation for navigating life’s challenges.

I joined the Church as a young single adult with my friend Stephen, and shortly after our baptism we decided to learn more about the scriptures. We scheduled time daily at his home to read the Book of Mormon. The Church was new in our area, but we were lucky to have copies of seminary and institute books that provided some insight and explanation. We were spending an average of four hours a day studying the Book of Mormon. This study was accompanied by much prayer and fasting.

Through this scripture study, I discovered that every weakness and strength of man has been portrayed, and rewards and punishment have been recorded. I found from the scripture study exercise, the rewards of righteousness and the penalties for sin.

As we studied deeper into the Book of Mormon, we encountered powerful teachings of Lehi and his vision, his testimony and faith, his family, and their courage to depart from a land where they had some degree of material comfort to a strange land, they knew nothing about. I wondered if I would have behaved like Laman and Lamuel.

The book points to the Saviour’s role in our lives and invites us to develop a personal relationship with Him. One of the fundamental doctrines of the Book of Mormon is the reality of Jesus Christ as the central figure of our salvation. From prophecies of His birth and mission to His profound teachings and Atonement, the Book of Mormon testifies of Jesus in a way that deepens our understanding of His infinite love and sacrifice.

Our dear prophet, President Russell M. Nelson testifies:

“My dear brothers and sisters, I testify that the Book of Mormon is truly the word of God. It contains the answers to life’s most compelling questions. It teaches the doctrine of Christ. It expands and clarifies many of the ‘plain and precious’ truths that were lost through centuries of time and numerous translations of the Bible.

“The Book of Mormon provides the fullest and most authoritative understanding of the Atonement of Jesus Christ to be found anywhere. It teaches what it really means to be born again. From the Book of Mormon we learn about the gathering of scattered Israel. We know why we are here on earth. These and other truths are more powerfully and persuasively taught in the Book of Mormon than in any other book. The full power of the gospel of Jesus Christ is contained in the Book of Mormon. Period.”

Additionally, President Nelson taught:

“When I think of the Book of Mormon, I think of the word power. The truths of the Book of Mormon have the power to heal, comfort, restore, succor, strengthen, console, and cheer our souls.”

In a revelation given through the Prophet Joseph Smith to his father, Joseph Smith Sr., at Harmony Pennsylvania in February 1829, The Lord talked about the marvelous work that is about to come forth among His children and revealed the tool that will be vital for the work. In verse 4 of D&C 4, the Lord said, “For behold the field is white already to harvest; and lo, he that thrusteth in his sickle with his might, the same layeth up in store that he perisheth not, but bringeth salvation to his soul;”

As a mission leader in the Nigeria Owerri Mission, our missionaries decided that we were going to feast upon the word of Christ. Our scripture study plan was to carefully study the Book of Mormon. With much pondering and praying, we witnessed that the sickle for the gathering of our Heavenly Father’s children in these last days is the Book of Mormon.

We came to understand more clearly why the Lord commanded Lehi to send his sons to return to Jerusalem to obtain the brass plates from Laban. There would be a spiritual and emotional void on his family and posterity if they did not have the scriptures with them. We came to understand why it was expedient to have another testament of Jesus Christ before the Restoration of the gospel.

The Book of Mormon is another testament of Jesus Christ. Its major writers—Nephi, Jacob, Mormon, Moroni—and its translator, Joseph Smith, were all eyewitnesses of the Lord.

It affirms the individual identity of Heavenly Father and His Beloved Son, Jesus Christ. The necessity of the Fall of Adam and the wisdom of Eve, that men might have joy.

We came to understand the Prophet Joseph Smith’s testimony more clearly concerning this record when he said: “I told the brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book.”

The primary purpose of the Book of Mormon is to convince all people that Jesus is the Christ. It teaches that we “must come unto him, or [we] cannot be saved” (1 Nephi 13:40). It contains examples of faithful disciples who had faith in Jesus Christ and received the blessings of His Atonement. Book of Mormon prophets bore powerful testimony of the Saviour, that we “may know to what source [we] may look for a remission of [our] sins” (2 Nephi 25:26).

The Book of Mormon was written for our day and for the days ahead. 

The first few chapters of 1 Nephi introduce us to the challenges faced by Nephi and his family as they embark on a journey of self-discovery and faith. Through their trials and triumphs, we witness the unwavering faith and reliance on God’s guidance that enabled them to overcome insurmountable obstacles. The phrase “I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded” (1 Nephi 3:7) reflects Nephi’s unshakable trust in divine guidance. This experience of Nephi taught me the principles of hard work and trust in the Lord regardless of the challenges and difficulties I was going through as a young man. I learned from Nephi and other leaders in the Book of Mormon how to use the blessing from my Heavenly Father to care for myself and my family and to find solutions for my problems.

There is nothing more important to share with another than faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. It brings understanding to the challenges of this life, happiness amid difficulty, and eternal life in the world to come. The Book of Mormon invites us and our families to embrace faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and it shares the principles that will help our families succeed.

The crowning event recorded in the Book of Mormon is the personal ministry of the Lord Jesus Christ among the Nephites soon after His Resurrection. It puts forth the doctrines of the gospel, outlines the plan of salvation, and tells men what they must do to gain peace in this life and eternal salvation in the life to come.

My beloved brothers and sisters, most of the difficulties and challenges in mortality can easily be overcome and peace enjoyed in this world full of commotion as we develop unwavering faith in our Saviour Jesus Christ. A prayerful and diligent study of the Book of Mormon and application of the principles therein is the answer to all life’s questions and challenges. I invite you to study the Book Mormon prayerfully and diligently, individually and as a family. You will see how merciful the Lord has been unto the children of men and you will derive power to overcome the world. You will make better decisions and you will receive answers to your prayers.

The year 2024 will present us with another glorious opportunity to study the Book of Mormon.

I testify that Jesus is The Christ, and that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God. Russell M. Nelson is the mouthpiece of God on earth today and the Church has been restored as part of God’s plan of happiness and the Book of Mormon is another testament of Jesus Christ.
