Mark E. Petersen, Great Prologue ( 1975)

1

THE LONG-RANGE VIEW

The restoration of the gospel should be viewed through a perspective of two thousand years.

It was not a sudden thing. Neither was it "done in a corner," as the apostle Paul would have said.

In its preparation it was a world movement requiring centuries of time. It involved the discovery of a new continent and its colonization by selected peoples.

It encompassed wars between world powers of two centuries ago. Even the renaissance of medieval Europe was a part of this mighty drama, for an awakening of mankind was stimulated in the Dark Ages.

The fundamental element of freedom in the world—the fight for both religious and political liberty—the firm establishment of human rights beginning with the Magna Charta—were all involved.

The heroic work of Luther, Calvin, and Knox in the Reformation period also was significant prelude to the great events in which the Prophet Joseph Smith was the primary figure.

The restoration of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ in these latter days, together with the advance preparation of conditions which made it possible, was indeed a divine drama which had many stages and many scenes, some of which were world shaking. It will yet have even greater impact upon all nations, kindreds, tongues, and peoples, as the Lord unfolds his work.

Shall we not step back from the humdrum of our daily lives and see it all in true perspective? But how may we best view the broad vista which it presents?

It is most advantageous to begin with the first Nephi who saw these events six hundred years before the birth of the Savior. Because of his faithfulness, the Lord allowed him to see the future of the world up to the second coming of Christ. He unfolded much of this great panorama for us and explained its significance.

Having come from the Old World to the New, and having been told that this New World was the Promised Land of the Lord, choice above all others, Nephi was shown its ultimate destiny.

Ours truly is a land with a divine mission, highly important to the Lord's latter-day work. It was not only prepared as the place where the gospel would be restored, but it was likewise selected as the site for the New Jerusalem, the Lord's latter-day Zion.

The Savior will visit his temple here. It is from this modern Zion in America that the law of the Lord will go forth to all mankind during the millennial reign. (See Isaiah 2.)

As Nephi looked into the future of this hemisphere, he saw that this land, then unknown to the rest of the world, was reserved for the descendants of Lehi until the Lord was ready to take the preliminary steps toward restoring the gospel.

He saw that many colonists would be brought here to accomplish the divine purpose. An angel stood by Nephi and said, "Look," and as he did so, he saw various kingdoms and nations of the world. (See 1 Nephi 13.) The angel identified them as the "nations and kingdoms of the Gentiles." They were separated from the Western Hemisphere where Lehi's descendants lived. Said the prophet: "I looked and beheld many waters; and they divided the Gentiles from the seed of my brethren."

These many waters were the Atlantic Ocean. The seed of his brethren were the American Indians, here in the Western Hemisphere.

The vision then became more specific. Says Nephi:

"And I looked and beheld a man among the Gentiles, who was separated from the seed of my brethren by the many waters; and I beheld the Spirit of God, that it came down and wrought upon the man; and he went forth upon the many waters; even unto the seed of my brethren who were in the promised land."

It was Christopher Columbus whom he saw, and he observed further that the discoverer was guided by divine power on his journey.

Nephi saw that following Columbus' voyage the Spirit of God also came upon other Gentiles beyond the seas, and that under its influence they, too, came here to prosper and become a great people and to fulfill the purposes the Lord had in mind for them.

He saw next that they became a powerful nation, and he viewed the steps by which this would be accomplished, all directed by the Almighty. He noted that as these Gentiles settled here they drove and scattered "the seed of my brethren," but that later these Gentiles cared for the Indians as nursing fathers and mothers and became their friends.

Nephi explained the meaning of it all. These events were preliminary steps leading up to the gospel being restored and taken to the entire house of Israel, that they might be gathered in fulfillment of the covenant that God had made with Abraham, their ancient progenitor.

Few people think of the discovery of America, the Revolutionary War, and the establishment of a constitutional form of government here as being steps toward the fulfillment of the Lord's ancient covenant with Abraham. But it is a fact that they were.

The covenant was to be fulfilled through the preaching of the gospel to, and the gathering of, the house of Israel, who were scattered worldwide. Through their acceptance of the gospel, they would receive its blessings and be gathered and would thus have fulfilled upon their heads the promises to Abraham made so long ago. His sheep would recognize the voice of the Good Shepherd and would follow him.

But the true gospel had been lost through centuries of apostasy. It could not be given to Israel of today until it was restored, and the restoration could come only under favorable conditions, in a free country, where men could worship God according to the dictates of their own conscience.

For centuries the world had been enthralled by political, religious, and intellectual darkness and cruel despotism. To bring about his purposes, the Lord himself would have to set his hand to the work. The way in which he did so was shown in the prophet's vision.

In explanation, Nephi said:

And it meaneth that the time cometh that after all the house of Israel have been scattered and confounded, that the Lord God will raise up a mighty nation among the Gentiles, yea, even upon the face of this land; and by them shall our seed be scattered. [The Lamanites in America.]

And after our seed is scattered the Lord God will proceed to do a marvelous work among the Gentiles, which shall be of great worth unto our seed; wherefore, it is likened unto their being nourished by the Gentiles and being carried in their arms and upon their shoulders.

And it shall also be of worth unto the Gentiles; and not only unto the Gentiles but unto all the house of Israel, unto the making known of the covenants of the Father of heaven unto Abraham, saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. (1 Nephi 22:7-9; italics added. See also 2 Nephi 10:7-14.)

The Savior spoke to the Nephites about this also when he visited them following his resurrection. Referring to these same Gentiles and speaking of the part they would play in the restoration of the gospel, he said that he would deliver the gospel to them in these latter days, and that believers among these Gentiles would then be chosen as messengers to carry it to the house of Israel. Note the Lord's words:

. . . these things . . . shall be made known unto the Gentiles that they may know concerning this people who are a remnant of the house of Jacob, and concerning this my people who shall be scattered by them;

Verily, verily, I say unto you, these things shall be made known unto them of the Father, and shall come forth of the Father, from them unto you;

For it is wisdom in the Father that they [these Gentiles] should be established in this land [America], and be set up as a free people by the power of the Father, that these things [the gospel truths] might come forth from them unto a remnant of your seed, that the covenant of the Father may be fulfilled which he hath covenanted with his people, O house of Israel. (3 Nephi 21:2-4. Italics added.)

These scriptures make it clear that this would be God's method of helping to fulfill his covenant with Abraham.

Since Israel was scattered among all nations, the gospel would have to be taken to all those nations in order to reach the house of Israel living among them. That is why we send our missionaries to all parts of the world.

And it is made clear that the gospel was destined to come to Israel from believing Gentiles in this land to whom the gospel would be revealed in latter days, and by them to be taken abroad. This is now being done. Note the clear statement that the gospel would be given first to the Gentiles in these latter days—and by act of the Father!

Note also that it would be the mission of these same Gentiles to become the ministers of God, seeking out the house of Israel, even "out of the holes of the rocks," as one prophet said, that they might believe the gospel and be gathered home. (Jeremiah 16:16.)

And who are these modern Gentiles? We are!

We are they to whom the gospel was restored, and we have the keys of gathering as brought back by Moses and committed to the Prophet Joseph Smith to be used for this very purpose. (See D&C 110.) And we are they who have been commanded to preach the gospel to all the world. (See D&C 68:8; 112:28; 133:37.)

We are also of Israel, however—mostly of Ephraim—but we are Gentiles too, inasmuch as Ephraim was widely scattered among the Gentiles in ancient times and intermarried with them.

Ephraim now is the first of the scattered tribes to be gathered, since Ephraim holds the birthright in Israel.

We are referred to in this prophecy as Gentiles, but we are the "believing Gentiles" because we have the "believing blood" of Ephraim in our veins as well as the blood of the Gentiles. Our pedigrees show that we come from many nationalities. In the revealed dedicatory prayer for the Kirtland Temple, the Prophet used this expression: ". . . concerning the revelations and commandments which thou hast given unto us, who are identified with the Gentiles." (D&C 109:60.)

It is inspiring indeed to realize that we who live now and have received this restored gospel are the very ones to whom Nephi and the Christ referred some two thousand years ago. We have lived in prophecy!

". . . these things . . . shall be made known unto the Gentiles . . . . these things shall be made known unto them of the Father, and shall come forth of the Father from them unto you."

When we consider that "these things shall be made known unto them of the Father," let us keep in mind that it was the Father who appeared to Joseph Smith in the first vision, together with the Savior, and it was He who directed Joseph to "Hear ye Him," referring to the Christ. The Father definitely was in charge, and truly enough the gospel came by his direction. Indeed it was made known "of the Father."

Anciently it was said that the Lord's word would go first to the Jews and then to the Gentiles, but that afterward, it would go first to the Gentiles and then to the Jews.

It is time now for the last to be first, and this is taking place in our own lives. We, the believing Gentiles, have been given the gospel; and eventually, in the Lord's own time, we shall take it to all the house of Israel. Obviously, then, in order to reach them, we must go to all nations and tongues, for thus has the Lord scattered his people. Hence our worldwide missionary effort.

Let us see now some detail as to the manner in which this great drama has unfolded.

To see it in its proper perspective, let us review first the manner in which the Lord personally took the gospel to the house of Israel when he was in mortality, afterward sending it to the Gentiles. And let us note too how, subsequently, the gospel was lost to both Jews and Gentiles through wickedness, through the invasion of false teachers and the promulgation of worldly philosophies.

Then we may see more clearly how the Lord prepared America as the site for the restoration of his truth in the latter days, laying a groundwork for it over a period of nearly two thousand years.
