Mark E. Petersen, Great Prologue ( 1975)

2

PROPHECY UNFOLDS

The Savior brought the gospel to an apostate world during his brief mortal ministry.

In his day the people still lived under the law of Moses, but they were splintered into at least five main religious factions. Each was led by men who had distorted the truth, belying their pious professions and their priestly titles in doing so. They were fully apostate. They were known as the Pharisees, the Sadducees, the Essenes, the Zealots, and the Hellenists.

Jesus rebuked them for not following the teachings of Moses, saying, "Did not Moses give you the law, and yet none of you keepeth the law? Why go ye about to kill me?"

And his enemies, filled with bitterness and blind to his true identity, replied, "Thou hast a devil." (John 7:19-20.)

Many humble ones believed and did follow him, however, and out of compassion he healed their sick and even raised some of their dead. When they were hungry he fed them, five thousand on one day and four thousand on another, both times miraculously.

But most of the people could not stand sound doctrine. They had been too deeply steeped in the false teachings of the cults that had misled them. When he taught them his truths—even in simple parables—many were offended and left him. As early as the events recorded in the sixth chapter of John, an apostasy took place. Says the scripture: "From that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him." (John 6:66.)

With the devil constantly working against the Savior, it seemed that the seeds of apostasy were among the early Saints from the very beginning.

Although thousands had followed him while he fed them loaves and fishes, yet only 120 came to that first meeting on the Day of Pentecost after the frightening events of the crucifixion period and the almost unbelievable fact of his resurrection.

Although missionary work began quickly and thousands of conversions came, apostasy was quick to follow. While they lived, the apostles fought it courageously. Most of their epistles in the New Testament were written to combat it.

The Savior himself had predicted that after he left, false Christs and false prophets would arise and would even perform such signs and wonders as to deceive the very elect, if that were possible. (See Matthew 24.)

The apostle Peter wrote that there were false teachers already among the people of his day and that still others would come—

who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.

And many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of.

And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you; whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not. (2 Peter 2:1-3.)

Peter then goes on in most vigorous terms and says:

But these, as natural brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things that they understand not; and shall utterly perish in their own corruption;

And shall receive the reward of unrighteousness as they that count it pleasure to riot in the day time. Spots they are and blemishes, sporting themselves with their own deceivings while they feast with you;

Having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin; beguiling unstable souls: an heart they have exercised with covetous practices; cursed children:

Which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray. . . .

These are wells without water, clouds that are carried with a tempest; to whom the mist of darkness is reserved forever.

Many of these false teachers were evidently former members of the Church, for he continued:

For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them.

But it is happened unto them according to the true proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again; and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in mire. (2 Peter 2:12-14, 17, 21-22.)

Are there any invectives more scathing than this in the apostolic writings?

Paul readily joined with Peter in his position, for he saw the apostasy coming within his own ministry. To the Corinthians he wrote appeals for unity as they broke into factions. (See 1 Corinthians 1:10-13.) He bore them a mighty testimony of Christ as they rejected both the Savior and the resurrection (1 Corinthians 15), and to the Galatians he wrote: "I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel: Which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ." (Galatians 1:6-7.)

To Titus he declared:

. . . there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, specially they of the circumcision. . . . They profess that they know God; but in works they deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate . . . who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake. (Titus 1:10, 16, 11.)

The frightening warning Paul gave to Timothy as recorded in the third chapter of 2 Timothy is most expressive of the apostate conditions then current.

The situation that developed in Corinth was typical of what happened in other branches of the Church. If the people wouldn't follow Paul and Peter while they lived, what would they—what did they—do after the apostles were gone?

History is plain in revealing that the splintering went on at an accelerated rate. Those who wanted sprinkling and infant baptism formed one group; those who insisted on immersion formed another. Those who wanted to merge Mosaic rites with the gospel of Christ formed still another.

Greek philosophy was a potent influence throughout the Roman world, and the Romans as well as peoples in the various satellite nations were hellenized. That is, they adopted Greek learning and culture. This included the infusion of Greek philosophical and religious ideas into Christianity, resulting in the establishment of the hellenist "party" within the Church, which eventually became the strongest of all the apostate Christian factions. It still exists today under a different but well-known name.

It is a serious mistake to suppose that there was only one united Christian church during the first few centuries of this era. It simply was not so. Christianity, in those early days, was proportionately as badly divided as it is today. What finally was endorsed by Constantine in the fourth century was merely one of scores of dissident versions of Christianity. It was the hellenist faction.

The reason Constantine chose this particular group was that the hellenist party absorbed and fostered Greek influence, which learning, culture, or influence in turn was encouraged and spread by the Roman government itself. It was only natural therefore that he, the Roman emperor who was trying to bring unity to his own divided nation, which was so sadly split by civil war, would choose this particular group and elevate it by government sanction.

Other cults resisted the hellenizing process and therefore were not acceptable to the Romans. One of the most persistent of the other sects of that day, and one of the few still remaining, is the Coptic Church, which centers largely in Egypt. But like the others, it too introduced worldly doctrines, such as infant baptism, and drifted away from the original gospel.

The fracturing of Christianity has never stopped and probably never will end until the Savior comes, when mankind at last may humble itself enough to set aside personal prejudices and accept the teachings of the lowly Nazarene who once walked the plains of Palestine, but who before that was the Creator, for "all things were made by him; and without him was not anything made that was made." (John 1:3.)

Free speech and freedom of religion are wonderful in many ways, but in the Christian era they actually fostered a vast departure from the truth. They permitted anyone with a pet philosophy of his own, who wished to set up a church in which to expound it, to gather people about him and organize them according to his own wishes.

This is directly contrary to the way of the Master. Mankind is not at liberty to write its own creeds and forms of worship according to the various and diverse desires of individuals. The Lord does not provide salvation in the numerous ways devised by men. His ways are not man's ways. He has but one gospel plan, one strait and narrow gate, and unless we choose his way and "go in thereat," we simply do not enter his kingdom, regardless of what we may think and regardless of all our claims to religious freedom.

We either walk the Lord's prescribed way, or we do not walk with him!

It is no wonder that the Savior told the people of his day that their worship was in vain if they followed the doctrines of men. (See Matthew 15:9.) And it is no wonder either that he told Joseph Smith in his first vision that all the existing creeds were an abomination in his sight and that their advocates were corrupt teachers, since they taught man-made doctrines.
