Mark E. Petersen, Great Prologue ( 1975)

3

THE GROWTH OF HELLENISM

Few people today realize the extent of the influence of ancient Greek culture, which even extends to our present time.

The golden age of Greece was indeed one of the brightest spots of secular history. It produced Socrates and Plato. It developed unexcelled art and literature and brought in distinctive athletics and games. We still call our greatest worldwide athletic events after the original Greek name of so long ago—the Olympics.

The word marathon is well-known to us today as an extended foot race. To the Greeks it was at first a foot race down the beach at Marathon to meet and defeat the invaders of their country. The enemy were so confused by the Greek army running toward them at full speed that they lost heart and gave up, although they were in numbers a superior force.

When Alexander the Great (323 B.C.), the mighty Macedonian, came to power, he extended Greek culture to his conquered nations, and for the most part the people liked it. It was superior to what they had themselves.

It wasn't long until Syrians, Phoenicians, some Jews, and even Egyptians began to boast of their prowess in Greek language and customs. Young people in these satellite nations studied Greek at home, and when they desired to go to a "finishing school," they went to Athens. There they were so thoroughly trained in the ways of the intellectual and athletic Greeks that many lost their taste for their former ties and never went back to their homelands.

Cities along the Palestinian coast, inland into Syria, and down into Egypt set up arenas where Greek plays were presented and Greek games were held. This continued also under the later Roman rule.

Some cities of the area changed their names to Greek designations. When the Romans took over, a similar pattern was followed. Barbarians at times changed their religions to suit the whims of their conquerors.

Greek customs and culture were well established in this entire area by the time the Romans came into power, so they also became hellenized to a considerable extent. They were supreme in war and government, but they liked Greek culture better than their own and adopted it, not only in Italy, but in their satellite countries as well.

During the period immediately following the conquests of Alexander the Great, Greek nationalist groups were established in Arabia, India, and even parts of China, becoming the commercial channels by which eastern luxuries were brought west. The Greek language as well as Greek customs was pressed upon the conquered lands, and this included Palestine. Although many Jews, such as the Maccabees, hotly resisted the entire process, it nevertheless had its effect.

When the Ptolemies took over Egypt and Egypt took over Palestine, the Old Testament was translated into Greek. This version is known as the Septuagint. It was brought about mostly by Ptolemy II Philadelphus, who took very kindly to the Jews. This was about 250 B.C.

Preparation of this version of the Old Testament is significant because it gave the entire Greek reading world access to the writings of the prophets. It no doubt made it possible for Paul later to preach Christ so successfully in these countries, for Old Testament scriptures then spoke of the Savior. This need to have the scriptures read in Greek led also to the New Testament appearing in that language.

Following the custom of renaming cities, Ptolemy II Philadelphus renamed the old biblical city of Rabbath Ammon, calling it after himself. It became Philadelphia about 250 B.C. As Amman of today, it is the center of life in modern Jordan. Archaeologists have found numerous evidences of Greek influence there. They have unearthed embellished Greek-style porticos, with some triumphal arches. They have discovered an ancient Greek-type open-air theater large enough to seat six thousand people.

The scriptures mention Decapolis, which, of course, is a Greek name. It was an area made up of ten cities, the territory including a section of northeastern Galilee. These cities were established or extended in the days of Alexander the Great and included Scythopolis, Pella, Hippos, and Damascus of Syria.

Roman names also were adopted in the Palestine area. Caesarea Philippi is mentioned in the New Testament as one of the places visited by the Savior. It was here that he asked his disciples, "Whom do men say that I the Son of Man am?" The disciples told him that some thought him to be John the Baptist or one of the other prophets. He then asked them, "But whom say ye that I am?"

It was Peter who then answered, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." And the Savior told him that this testimony came by revelation. (Matthew 16:13-17.)

Here it was, in a town named Caesarea Philippi—a Roman name completely foreign to Hebrew culture—that the Lord taught that his church would be built upon the rock of revelation.

But that city was not always Caesarea Philippi. Originally it was Paneas. The city of Caesarea itself, so often mentioned in the New Testament, was founded by Herod the Great on the site of the former coastal station called Strato's Tower. It was named by Herod in honor of Caesar Augustus, Herod's Roman ideal.

King Herod the Great was one of the most aggressive of all the local rulers of that day in fostering Greek and Roman influence. He also was one of the most vicious and was one of the greatest egotists who ever sat upon a throne. He was ruthless in his efforts to have his own way.

He felt, there in Palestine, that he could improve his image with his Roman overlords if he introduced both Roman and Greek influence among the Jews. And so, as Arnold Toynbee, prominent modern historian, points out in his remarkable book The Crucible of Christianity:

Herod took the initiative . . . to open the doors to foreign cultural influences and to mutual understanding. He pursued this policy in his grandiose Hellenistic way by spending fabulous sums of money on a number of Greek cities [in the Holy Land]. He equipped them munificently with huge public buildings: markets, theatres, aqueducts, promenades, and other public works of social consequence. He introduced Greek artists and men of letters into his dominions and founded musical festivals and public games, to which many foreign non-Jewish guests were invited, even in Jerusalem. . . . In a word: Herod tried, if only partially, to remove the fence with which, under the guidance of the Pharisees, the Jewish religion had surrounded the Jewish people. He tried to integrate the Jews into the Hellenistic-Roman [way of life]. . . . He advocated integration of the Jewish people in the Gentile world. (Abraham Shalit in Arnold Toynbee, ed., The Crucible of Christianity, World Publishing Co., 1969, pp. 72-73.)

Being a great admirer of the Romans, and especially intrigued by the fact that Roman emperors were regarded as being deity, Herod sought to be so recognized himself. Of this we read:

In the Jewish part of it, ruler worship was utterly unthinkable. . . . since the introduction of ruler-worship there was incompatible with the Jewish religion, Herod conceived the daring idea of having himself honoured in the Jewish region of his kingdom, if not as God, then as the King Messiah, whose coming, in due course, had been predicted by the ancient prophets of Israel. . . . To this end Herodian propaganda tried to suggest to the Jews of Judaea that Herod was of Davidic stock and that in his days all the prophecies of the prophets had been realized. . . . But the people of Judaea were not in the least deceived. (Ibid., p. 73.)

Historians brand Herod the Great as a monster. He put to death two sons and destroyed others of the royal family, including Mariamne, whom he had married with a view to legitimizing his usurpation of the Judean throne. It was he who had all of the infants in and near Bethlehem slain in the hope of wiping out Him who was born "King of kings." During his life he had ten wives. How many he may have murdered in his capriciousness is not known.

Herod was neither Jew nor Greek, but was an Idumaean. Idumaea was the name given by the Greeks and the Romans to Edom, so that actually he was an Edomite, to use the biblical expression. The Idumaeans had been conquered by the Hasmonaean prince John Hyrcanus (135-104 B.C.) and subsequently were forced to accept Judaism. Hence Herod actually was Jewish in his faith.

When Herod built spectacular public buildings resembling Roman and Greek architecture, he did so largely to impress his Roman overlords. While engaged in that undertaking, and being an unprincipled schemer, he also desired to gain more support from the Jews, which he needed. With that in mind he projected the rebuilding of the temple. This effort can hardly be said to have been an expression of faith in either God or temple worship. This monster sought only self-aggrandizement. There certainly is no evidence that he had any respect either for the Almighty or for the Mosaic law.

Herod died of a horrible disease at the age of sixty-nine after a reign of thirty-seven years.

Tarsus, where Paul lived, was strongly Greek and Roman. Half a dozen towns in Syria were given ptolemaic names after many Greek settlers were brought into the area by the conquerors. Antioch became one of the strongest of the Greek cities in that region and for a time was the capital city of the Emperor Seleucus, who had brought in many Greek emigrants to give him security there. Antioch was one of the two main Greek capitals of the time. Alexandria in Egypt was the other.

Laodicea, one of the cities referred to by the Revelator John, was a Greek-type city.

Both Tyre and Sidon were steeped in Greek customs.

The Greek influence continued even after the birth of Christ, and many of the converted Christian Gentiles carried on their religious activity in the Greek language. The New Testament was provided in Greek as a natural outgrowth of this widespread condition. Greeks are mentioned often in the New Testament.

It will be recalled that the Greek Christians in Jerusalem murmured against the Hebrew Christians because of Greek widows being neglected in the daily ministrations of the apostles. This led to the appointment of the seven disciples as aides to the Twelve. (See Acts 6:1-6.)

This is another evidence of the fact that a goodly part of the population of Jerusalem in those days consisted of Greek emigrants, many of whom were actually transplanted in the Middle East during the Grecian conquest of those regions to provide stability for their alien government. (See Acts 9:29 and 11:20.)

When Paul went to Ephesus, he found it to be controlled largely by the Greek influence. There he heard the cry, "Great is Diana of the Ephesians" (Acts 19), as the idolatrous worshipers of the Roman-Greek goddess resisted his efforts. Diana was the Roman name for the goddess who in Greek was known as Artemis, the daughter of Zeus in Greek mythology.

Since Greece was so great a factor in the years both before and after Christ, and since the Greek philosophers and educators infused all Near Eastern thought with their notions, it was inevitable that it should influence Christianity greatly.

As Greek thinkers joined the church, they could see parallels between certain Christian doctrines and Greek theology. In the Trinity of the Christians they could see their own trinity—Zeus, Neptune, and Hades. These three had divided the universe among themselves, with Zeus taking the heavens, Neptune the seas, and Hades the underworld.

Zeus himself was a multiple god, assuming one name and one function at one time, and reverting to other titles and positions at others. It was simple to transfer these ideas into the Christian sectarian dogma of the three-in-one God.

The Greek philosopher who probably had most effect on Christianity following the days of Christ was a Jew: Philo, an older contemporary of the apostle Paul. Philo used his Greek education to interpret the Jewish scriptures as he read them in the Septuagint and thus—

opened the path which Christian thinkers were to follow from the 2nd century AD onwards. The Christians were deeply influenced by his way of interpreting the Scriptures and reading Greek philosophy into them. He is the ancestor of Hellenized Christianity in both its Greek-speaking, Eastern, and its Latin-speaking, Western forms. Philo's influence was on Christianity and not on later Judaism; rabbinical Judaism is in strong reaction against the sort of Hellenization of which Philo is the greatest example.

Then we find this interesting observation:

The first Christian thinkers [2nd to 5th centuries A.D.], on the whole, found this Platonist philosophical theism the most congenial of the available philosophies. . . . It was Platonic theism, as taken over, adapted to the Christian faith, and developed by St Justin, the Alexandrians Clement and Origen, and the Fathers of the Church of the 4th and 5th centuries, which became the foundation of traditional Christian philosophy and theology in both East and West. (A. Hilary Armstrong, in The Crucible of Christianity, p. 211.)

When Constantine the Great decided to espouse Christianity, he chose the only kind he knew about, the only kind that really was available to him: the hellenized version. With the Roman sponsorship of Greek culture, and with the hellenized faction of Christianity now having achieved the dominant position over all other factions, it was only natural that the Emperor chose the hellenist party.

Discovering that there was great controversy among the Christians as to the nature of God, he turned quite instinctively to two Greek philosophers, Arius and Athanasius, for assistance (325 A.D.). They led the debate at the Council of Nicaea, and their views—both arising out of Greek schools of philosophy—formed the basis of the discussion.

The Greek philosophers had debated over the nature of God for eight hundred years prior to this time, and their views varied widely. Plato and Socrates had made deep impressions by their views, but great as these men were, they knew nothing about Bible theism and nothing about the divinely chosen prophets and the principle of revelation, and therefore they could not base their views on genuine spiritual insight. Their background was essentially pagan. They lived before the Septuagint was translated.

By the time Arius and Athanasius came on the scene three centuries after Christ, true spirituality had been lost to the Christians. The philosophical precepts of the Greek schools that had trained both Arius and Athanasius were naturally the source of the views they set forth, views that still form the basis of many modern creeds.

The fact that Arius and Athanasius did not agree was nothing new to Greek philosophy, nothing at all unusual, because, as Saint Augustine points out in his "City of God," there were some 288 different schools of Greek philosophy, and "each was the inventor of its own dogmas and opinions." They expected to disagree. They hoped to disagree. Men such as these were disappointed when there was no debate.

So when Arius and Athanasius disputed over the nature of God at Nicaea, they were merely following a pattern of eight hundred years of Greek philosophical practice. But both were ignorant of the divine truth. Neither followed the scripture.

It is not known exactly what prompted the wicked Constantine to espouse Christianity. Historians generally doubt the story of an inspired dream in which Constantine was alleged to have seen an emblazoned cross in the heavens with the message, "By this sign conquer."

The story is told that this dream was given to Constantine at the height of the Roman civil war and that immediately afterward victory came to him. It is a fact that his army carried banners with the sign of the cross, and that he placed such a sign also on the helmets of many of his soldiers or elsewhere on their armor. He also reminded them that their swords—hilt included—formed a sign of the cross.

Historians generally prefer the idea that the wicked schemer sought a religion that he could make universal to cement the many factions of his divided realm under one common interest. Since most Romans were adherents of one or another of their own many pagan religions, no one of these idolatrous faiths could be used for that purpose. Constantine did not dare to repudiate any of the Roman gods or to place one above the other.

He felt that an entirely new religion to which few if any had given their loyalty could accomplish his task. It would be but one more among the many religions of the Romans—without repudiating any of the old ones—and it could, with persuasion such as an emperor could give, soon become the most popular.

In any case, and no matter the reason, Constantine did espouse Christianity, and widely and forcefully advocated it throughout the empire. He gave each new "convert" a white robe and other gifts. Where resistance was strong, and particularly was this true among the conquered barbarians who had their own religions, the sword was used as a persuader, with the result that membership in the church grew at a rapid rate.

Gibbon, in his Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, says that to popularize the faith in Italy, the emperor gave gold pieces to new converts. In one year, Gibbon says, in the city of Rome alone, 12,000 men plus "a proportionate number of women and children" were brought into the faith under Constantine's "encouragement" and each one of them received a white robe and twenty gold pieces.

Constantine exempted the church and the clergy from all taxation and urged rich Romans to contribute large amounts to the church to finance its operations. With such patronage the church grew rapidly, reaching a point where, under Constantine's direction, 1,800 priests were appointed to carry its program, 1,000 of them in the areas under Greek influence and 800 in Latin-dominated regions, Gibbon reports.

All this Constantine did without accepting membership in the church himself. It was not until he knew that he was on his death bed that he finally was sprinkled in baptism.

Since baptism was for the remission of sins, many wicked and artful Romans looked upon it as a convenient escape from their guilt before God whether they were really converted to Christianity or not, and no matter how evil the individuals themselves were. The "broken heart and the contrite spirit" did not necessarily enter into the matter.

It is said that Constantine—always the vicious despot and guilty of many murders even of members of his own family—delayed his own baptism until the time of his death to be certain of absolution from all of the wicked deeds he had perpetrated or had planned to perpetrate before he entered the pearly gates.

The splintering of Christianity continued. By 1000 A.D. the Greek Orthodox Catholic Church broke away from the western or Roman faction. Before and after this division, governments made extensive inroads into the church, and in some cases actually controlled, directed, and managed it, spelled out its doctrines, and set up the boundaries of its influence.

In the West, particularly, for a lengthy period the church was but an arm of the government, a department of state, subject to and directed by emperors and kings, some of whom murdered their predecessors, but who made it their business to appoint the clergy and even to banish bishops who did not agree with the way things were run. For a considerable time it was a state church in every sense.

When the Reformation developed in Europe, of course, still further divisions came among the Christians. As copies of the Bible were at last made available to the people and they read it, new sects sprang up. Some were adopted as state religions by certain of the Protestant countries in Europe; others were separatist or independent cults, often frowned on by the state. But all seemed to accept the unfortunate theory that anyone could write a creed to suit his own private notions, and that anyone who wished and had the influence could organize a church of his own.

So through philosophy and the development of various sects, through severe persecutions, and through government interference, including the establishment of state religions, the true gospel was lost. Hence mankind must now await the glorious restoration predicted by Peter in the third chapter of Acts.

While these events transpired in the Old World, the Lord led a people to the New World, there to prepare a second witness to Christ. In prophecy and in history we will follow the further steps in this great drama.
