Mark E. Petersen, Great Prologue ( 1975)

4

NEPHI'S VISIONS

Nephi saw the restoration of the gospel six hundred years before the Savior's birth, and the events leading up to it were shown him in considerable detail.

Always the scriptures had declared that the restoration of the gospel would come to the modern Gentiles and not to the house of Israel, but that the "last shall be first." Hence the believing Gentiles would become instruments in the hands of the Lord for taking the gospel to Israel. The gospel had been given by the Lord personally to the Jews of his day, and from them—and by them—it was taken to the Gentiles. The reverse was predicted for latter days. The Lord would reveal his gospel to the Gentiles and from them it would go to Israel.

Certainly the Gentiles did not have the gospel over the many centuries of the so-called Christian era. The Europeans claimed to be Christians, of course, but the divine truth had long been lost to them. That period was indeed the Dark Ages.

Neither was the gospel anywhere else on earth. All mankind had lost it, Jews and Gentiles alike. Therefore, an act of heaven was required to restore it. Only a new revelation from God could fill the need. The prologue leading up to it was vast and important. The discovery of America by Columbus was a vital part of it. Let us view this important event as outlined by Nephi. He begins with a description of the Gentile nations that were "separated from the seed of my brethren by the many waters." (1 Nephi 13:12.) He said:

And it came to pass that the angel spake unto me, saying: Look! And I looked and beheld many nations and kingdoms.

And the angel said unto me: What beholdest thou? And I said: I behold many nations and kingdoms.

And he said unto me: These are the nations and kingdoms of the Gentiles.

Next Nephi was shown the extent to which the Gentiles had fallen away from the truth, this being a result of the departure of both Jews and Gentiles from the original gospel. Said he:

And it came to pass that I saw among the nations of the Gentiles the foundation of a great church.

And the angel said unto me: Behold the foundation of a church which is most abominable above all other churches, which slayeth the saints of God, yea, and tortureth them and bindeth them down, and yoketh them with a yoke of iron, and bringeth them down into captivity.

And it came to pass that I beheld this great and abominable church; and I saw the devil that he was the foundation of it.

And I also saw gold, and silver, and silks, and scarlets, and fine-twined linen, and all manner of precious clothing; and I saw many harlots.

And the angel spake unto me, saying: Behold the gold, and the silver, and the silks, and the scarlets, and the fine-twined linen, and the precious clothing, and the harlots, and the desires of this great and abominable church.

And also for the praise of the world do they destroy the saints of God, and bring them down into captivity.

After this vivid description of the falling away in the lands "across the many waters" from where the "seed of my brethren" lived, he was given the next step in the vision:

And it came to pass that I looked and beheld many waters; and they divided the Gentiles from the seed of my brethren.

And it came to pass that the angel said unto me: Behold the wrath of God is upon the seed of thy brethren.

And I looked and beheld a man among the Gentiles, who was separated from the seed of my brethren by the many waters; and I beheld the Spirit of God, that it came down and wrought upon the man; and he went forth upon the many waters, even unto the seed of my brethren, who were in the promised land.

Note that Nephi says that "the Spirit of God came down and wrought upon the man," thus causing him (Columbus) to sail across "the many waters, even unto the seed of my brethren who were in the promised land."

Is there any historical record to indicate that the Spirit of God influenced Christopher Columbus?

When Dr. David Saville Muzzey of Columbia University wrote his interesting American History, his first sentence, as he opened chapter one, read: "The discovery of America was an accident." (Boston: Ginn and Co., 1911, p. 3.)

Little did this learned scholar know that it was long projected and planned by the Almighty.

Muzzey then reviewed the exploits of seamen from Spain, Portugal, and England as they looked for a route to the Far East. The expression "the Indies" was a loose one referring to India, China, and Japan, as well as to other far eastern places. Europe had built up a great trade with these areas in oriental rugs, flowered silks, gems, spices, porcelains, damasks, dyes, drugs, perfumes, and precious woods. These commodities had been brought laboriously by overland caravans to the Persian Gulf and the Black Sea, or had crept along the burning sands of Arabia to the Red Sea. Subsequently they were distributed to many places in Europe, mostly by boat.

But in the fourteenth century the Osmanli Turks blocked the path of these caravans in an effort to drive the Christians out of Asia. The luxury-hungry upper class Europeans were therefore under the necessity of finding a new way to the Indies if they were to continue to enjoy the trade with those distant countries. Hence the explorations by sea, both around South Africa and westward over the Atlantic.

Columbus believed he could reach "the Indies" by sailing westward. Although there were some people who still thought the world was flat, Columbus did not, and he was anxious to make his journey. But it was more than an urge for adventure that impelled the discoverer to undertake what he called "his enterprise."

Go to any public library, read almost any detailed biography of the discoverer, and it becomes immediately clear that he felt himself an inspired man, sent of heaven to make the voyage. For example, Columbus, Don Quixote of the Seas, written in German by Jacob Wassermann and translated into English by Eric Sutton, tells the story very well:

From my first youth onward, I was a seaman and have so continued until this day. . . . Wherever on the earth a ship has been, I have been. I have spoken and treated with learned men, priests, and laymen, Latins and Greeks, Jews and Moors, and with many men of other faiths. The Lord was well disposed to my desire, and He bestowed upon me courage and understanding; knowledge of seafaring He gave me in abundance, of astrology as much as was needed, and of geometry and astronomy likewise. Further, He gave me joy and cunning in drawing maps and thereon cities, mountains, rivers, islands, and harbours, each one in its place. I have seen and truly I have studied all books—cosmographies, histories, chronicles, and philosophies, and other arts, for which our Lord unlocked my mind, sent me upon the sea, and gave me fire for the deed. Those who heard of my emprise called it foolish, mocked me, and laughed. But who can doubt but that the Holy Ghost inspired me? (Boston: Little, Brown, and Co., 1930, pp. 19-20. Italics added.)

Some have though that Columbus boasted unnecessarily as he spoke of his knowledge as a mariner, but he was in fact a mariner and geographer of top rank in his day. Muzzey explains that the study of geography and the science of navigation flourished in the fifteenth century. Hundreds of "portolani" or sailing charts were drawn by Italian and Portuguese mariners.

"Six new editions of the 'Geography' of Ptolemy were published between 1472 and 1492. The compass and the astrolobe (for measuring latitude) were perfected. Ships were designed to sail close to the wind and to stand the buffeting of the high ocean waves," he wrote. "Before the end of the 15th century Portuguese sailors had pushed nearly a thousand miles westward into the uncharted Atlantic, and were creeping mile by mile down the western coast of Africa."

Cristoforo Colombo, as he was known in Genoa, was well versed in the navigational progress of his day and had been convinced by his studies that he could reach the Indies by sailing westward across the Atlantic.

"Columbus was a student as well as a man of affairs," says Muzzey. "His son Ferdinand tells us in his 'Biography' that his father was influenced by the old Arabian and Greek astronomers. There are geographical works in existence today with notes in Columbus's handwriting in the margin. He shared with the best scholars of his day the long-established belief in the sphericity of the earth. As a guide for his voyage he had a chart made for the king of Portugal in 1474, by the Florentine astronomer Toscanelli, to demonstrate that the Indies could be reached by sailing westward."

So when Columbus appealed to the royalty of both Spain and Portugal, he went well equipped to argue his case. But he likewise went with enthusiasm born of what he frequently described as inspiration. He truly felt that he was guided by the Holy Ghost.

Columbus was a six-footer with red hair. He seemed like a giant in his day when so many of the men averaged only about five feet four inches in height. He and his brother ran a mapmaking firm, and this work gave him an unusual interest in the sea routes. When the Turks blocked off the route for spices and other oriental imports, he felt certain he could find an alternate way.

Alistair Cooke's America calls Columbus "a Christian of almost maniacal devoutness" and says that he had a sense of a mission something like Galileo, Don Quixote, and John the Baptist all combined. (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1973, p. 30.)

Columbus began to seek support for a westward voyage to the Indies in the 1470s, and traversed Europe from one royal court to another for ten years without success. He was turned down by the kings of both Portugal and Spain (three times in Spain) while his brother, also interested in the enterprise, received a flat rebuff in England.

The Spanish monarchs, Ferdinand and Isabella, were so pinched for money that at first they would not even consider his proposition, but when the Queen's confessor, Juan Perez, and the court treasurer told Isabella that the voyage would cost no more than two or three royal banquets, she relented, stopped the discouraged Columbus at Pinos, six miles north of Granada, brought him back to the royal court, and told him she would support his undertaking. Queen Isabella was very sparing in the extent to which she outfitted him. However, she did give him the Santa Maria and two smaller vessels, the Pinta and the Nina.

The Santa Maria was only seventy-five feet long, about the size of many river yachts of today, and it weighed a scant hundred tons, but it was a tough little boat, built to resist the high seas, and yet small enough to maneuver easily into river channels or other places of refuge as might seem needed. It carried a load of stones for ballast and was smeared underneath with pitch as a protection against barnacles.

There were forty men in the flotilla, all but two being Spaniards. One of these two was Portuguese and the other Italian. The queen insisted that they take a surgeon along to nurse the men when they got sick (usually of scurvy) and appointed also a "royal controller of accounts" who was to supervise the spending of Spanish money laid out for the journey.

On August 2, 1492, the entire crew went to prayers in a little church near the docks; the next morning they set out on their voyage over what was called "The Sea of Gloom." Many sailors still thought the world was flat and that there was a real possibility that if they kept going to the horizon they might fall off the edge. This superstition worried some of Columbus' crew.

After weeks of their sailing with no sight of land, mutiny raised its head. Finally Columbus promised the captains of the Pinta and the Nina, both of whom wanted to stop the expedition, that if no land was sighted in forty-eight hours, he would turn back. Then he went to his cabin and "prayed mightily to the Lord," as he himself expressed it. On October 12, the very next day, they sighted land. Such a prayer was completely in character for Columbus, for he believed his voyage was inspired.

In Wassermann's Don Quixote of the Seas, we read that in the year of his success, Columbus wrote to King Ferdinand of Spain and said, "I came to your Majesty as the Emissary of the Holy Trinity," upon which the author comments:

In the same way, before that pious assemblage in San Esteban [the clergy], he insisted that he must be regarded as one inspired. (Page 46.)

When Columbus represents himself as inspired by the Holy Ghost, he is convinced from the bottom of his heart that he is speaking the truth. . . . [It is] no attempt to ingratiate himself with the dignitaries of the Church; it is bitter, deep, earnest. (Page 61.)

His achievement did not seem to him something unimportant and fortuitous; it was in his eyes so tremendous, so inexpressibly great, that it could be achieved only by the direct assistance of God. (Page 62.)

Washington Irving, in his biography of Columbus, says that in the royal presence of Queen Isabella, Columbus "unfolded his plans with eloquence and zeal, for he felt himself, as he afterwards declared, kindled as with a fire from on high and considered himself the agent chosen of heaven to accomplish the grand design."

Columbus' own son, Ferdinand, in a biography of his father, quotes the discoverer as saying on one occasion, "God gave me the faith, and afterwards the courage so that I was quite willing to undertake the journey."

The last will and testament of Christopher Columbus includes this expression: "In the name of the most holy Trinity who inspired me with the idea and afterwards made it perfectly clear to me that I could navigate and go to the Indies from Spain by traversing the ocean westward."

Columbus is no longer regarded as the first explorer to find the Western Hemisphere. The landings of the Norsemen in "Vinland" are well known, and maps of Vinland have been published. R. A. Skelton, Thomas E. Marston, and George D. Painter made an exhaustive study, on behalf of the Yale University Library, of the travels of the Norse explorers. Their study, published by Yale University Press in 1965, tells of the Norse voyages from Iceland and Greenland to the North American mainland in the tenth to twelfth centuries, and provides detailed maps of the areas.

The navigation of the Norsemen in the Viking period ranged from the White Sea to southwestern Europe and from the Baltic to the coasts of North America. Before the end of the ninth century they were in Iceland; Greenland was settled by them soon after 980 A.D., and the Nova Scotia and Maine coasts were sighted a few years later. The first three decades of the eleventh century saw other westward voyages, although these seem to have stopped early in the twelfth century.

Although some meager efforts at colonization were made by the Norse, nothing permanent resulted. Only temporary huts were built along the coasts of Labrador and possibly in the area of the Maritime Provinces of Canada.

There are indications also of pre-Columbian voyages to America by Arabians, Japanese, Welshmen, Irishmen, and Frenchmen, according to Muzzey. None made lasting settlements.

Cyrus H. Gordon, in his book Before Columbus, speaks of transoceanic visits to America via both the Atlantic and Pacific oceans and provides pictures of archaeological artifacts to support his claim. He goes further and says that even Greek writings recently discovered in this hemisphere speak of repeated transatlantic contacts between the Mediterranean area and America in early times. He says that these same classical writings are important as a possible means of deciphering old records "for unlocking the mysteries of ancient America."

In his book, Dr. Gordon says:

It is no accident that Greek, Latin and Egyptian words are embedded in the languages of ancient Mesoamerica; that the feathered headdress on the Phaistos Disc warrior (worn also by the Philistines) is also common among the Indians of America; or that native Mesoamerican traditions attribute the impetus for their civilization to bearded white men who had sailed the Atlantic from the Old World. (Before Columbus, New York: Crown Publishers, 1971, p. 108.)

Of course the Book of Mormon has something to say about this, although Dr. Gordon had something else in mind. He also refers to the Metcalf stone as one bit of evidence in this direction. Found in the area of Ft. Benning, Georgia, it is believed to have Phoenician writing upon it.

But the point we make concerning these earlier voyages is this: none of them led to permanent colonization in America. Only the Columbian voyages did that. And why? Because the Lord had reserved America for his own purpose.

The prophet Lehi had said that "there shall none come into this land save they shall be brought by the hand of the Lord." He added, ". . . behold, it is wisdom that this land should be kept as yet from the knowledge of other nations; for behold, many nations would overrun the land, that there would be no place for an inheritance." (2 Nephi 1:6, 8.)

Thus we see that it was the Lord's will that only those settlers came to America to make permanent homes who were so permitted by the Lord himself, people who would fit into his program for the restoration of the gospel.
