Mark E. Petersen, Great Prologue ( 1975)

5

THE COLONISTS

Let us return now to Nephi's vision.

After viewing the discovery of America by Columbus, Nephi was shown the colonization of this land. Said he:

And it came to pass that I beheld the Spirit of God, that it wrought upon other Gentiles; and they went forth out of captivity, upon the many waters.

And it came to pass that I beheld many multitudes of the Gentiles upon the land of promise; and I beheld the wrath of God, that it was upon the seed of my brethren; and they were scattered before the Gentiles and were smitten.

And I beheld the Spirit of the Lord, that it was upon the Gentiles, and they did prosper and obtain the land for their inheritance; and I beheld that they were white, and exceeding fair and beautiful, like unto my people before they were slain. (1 Nephi 13:13-15.)

There are expressions in this part of the prophecy that on the surface seem to have little importance but that are of great significance. For example, Nephi says these colonists fled "out of captivity" as they came to the New World. Did they really "flee out of captivity"? How did Nephi know that?

When it is realized how despotic the European kings were at this period, it is easily understood that the colonists did indeed flee from captivity and oppression. Under such kings as James I of England, there was hardly a semblance of freedom. He was the supreme dictator in government, in economics, in education (what there was of it), and in the state religion. He controlled the detailed lives of his people.

France, Spain, England, and Portugal were the principal powers involved in the discovery and exploration of America, and this is significant, as we shall point out later. All were ruled by despots, and when immigrants finally were allowed to leave the "mother countries," they indeed fled from captivity. The history of the Pilgrims and Puritans gives ample evidence of this fact.

The Pilgrims consisted of about one hundred men, women, and children. They were without sponsorship and desired neither to explore the country nor to search for gold. They came to America entirely of their own free will and with but one purpose in mind: to worship God according to their own conscience, which they were not allowed to do in England.

They had broken away from the Church of England, which was the state church, and had set up a worshiping group of their own. They were sometimes called independents or separatists. They objected to the Church of England because it still retained in its worship some doctrines and rituals to which they had strong objection.

These separatists read in 2 Corinthians, "Come out from among them and be ye separate, saith the Lord" (6:17), and so they acted upon that instruction.

Since religion in Europe in that day was an affair of state and not of the individual mind, the rulers enforced uniformity of creed and worship in the belief that it was necessary for the preservation of their monarchical authority. To differ with the king in religious matters was little different from ignoring him in political affairs, and that was treason.

In the case of James I of England, he began his reign by declaring that he would make his subjects conform to his state religion, or he would "harry them out of the land." He literally "harried" the separatists out of the land and forced them to take ship for foreign shores. To escape him, the Pilgrims started out for Virginia, but they lost their way en route and landed on the cold shores of Cape Cod in New England a few days before Christmas, in 1620.

Before the Pilgrims disembarked from the Mayflower, they formulated among themselves a democratic type of government by which they would literally govern themselves, this in strong contrast to the despotism from which they had fled. It was the first known instance of complete self-government in modern American history.

In spite of all the difficulties that beset their colony, they felt the freedom they enjoyed was well worth it to them. Commenting on their hardships, William Bradford, their governor, wrote: "It pleased God to vissite us with death dayly, and with so general a disease that the living were scarcely able to burie the dead."

Yet they made their home in the new land, and when the time came for the ship to return to England, not one of them sailed away with it. They felt as did Patrick Henry a century and a half later: "Give me liberty or give me death!"

One small illustration is worthwhile. It is the story of the Reverend John Lathrop, fifth great-grandfather of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

The Reverend Lathrop was a Church of England minister. As he read the Bible carefully, he discovered that there was little harmony between the teachings of that denomination and the scriptures. Being a very conscientious man, he felt that he could not go contrary to the sacred word, so he resigned his position with the state church in 1623 and became the pastor of the First Independent Church of London. In doing so he rejected the state religion and flew in the face of both government and clergy by setting up a separatist group. But he had the courage of his convictions, and he proceeded, regardless of the risks involved.

By direction of the bishop of London, he was arrested and cast into prison. While he was thus incarcerated, his wife died. He was not so much as allowed to attend her funeral, and his children were left with no one to care for them. He made repeated appeals for clemency, but the bishop refused even to listen to him. Finally the orphaned children went to the bishop as a group and personally pleaded for mercy. So pitiful were they in their misery and dejection that the bishop was finally moved, and he released Lathrop on condition that he leave the country. This he did, and, with thirty-two members of his congregation, he went to America.

Nephi's prophecy also indicated that the seed of Nephi's brethren would be smitten, driven, and scattered by the Gentiles. The first such conflict took place between the Indians and some of Columbus' own men. The history of the Indian wars from then until our present disputes over Indian lands is vocal testimony to the truth of this prophecy.

It is especially significant that those who colonized America were spoken of by Nephi as being "white and exceeding fair and beautiful, like unto my people before they were slain." His reference to his people "before they were slain" relates, of course, to the eventual destruction of the Nephites at the Hill Cumorah, 420 years after Christ.

Since these new settlers were declared in prophecy to be "white and exceeding fair," this would preclude for the most part the olive-skinned southern Europeans and would seem to point instead directly to the north Europeans.

And yet the Spanish, the Italians, the French, and the Portuguese were the discoverers of the New World. It was they who laid the first claims to it. What a paradox indeed that they were not also the colonizers of that portion which became the United States. And yet history bears out the prophecy in a remarkable manner.

Following Columbus' successful voyages of discovery, and as the Europeans began to make land claims in America, the pope at Rome took a hand to protect the new continent for Spain. He drew a line 100 leagues west of the Azores and declared that "everything beyond that which shall be charted by our beloved servants shall belong to Spain," but after a heated protest from Portugal, which was also a Catholic country, the Portuguese were included as "our brothers" in the new territories. Nevertheless, the King of Spain, in defiance of the Portuguese, called America "New Spain."

While Portugal's main attention was directed to Brazil, Spain centered mostly on Florida, other parts of South America, and Mexico, eventually from there reaching up into southern California. Hence the Spanish names that still survive in abundance in that state.

France made a great effort to control a large part of the New World, seized much of Canada, and claimed the entire Mississippi valley, hurriedly making settlements in the area of New Orleans. But these settlements eventually were lost to the French, so that neither Spain, France, nor Portugal retained possessions in North America. Therefore, colonization in North America was left pretty much to the fairer-skinned people whom Nephi saw in his vision.

The majority of those early colonizers came from England, the first permanent settlement having been made by them in Virginia under the London Company, in 1607.

The New England region was settled by British Pilgrims coming to Plymouth in 1620, and they were followed ten years later by the Massachusetts Bay Colony, which subsequently absorbed the Plymouth settlement.

In 1621 William Penn settled Pennsylvania under royal charter, and shortly afterward the entire coastline between Canada and Florida became subject to Britain. From 1628 to 1641 more than 20,000 immigrants came from England alone.

Another "exceeding fair" people are the Dutch, who raised not a finger toward the discovery of the New World. They settled the New York area as New Netherlands and continued to come even after the British conquest of that region. By the end of the colonization period at least half of the 170,000 people in that area were Dutch.

The colony of New Netherlands, with the central settlement of New Amsterdam, was founded along the Hudson and Delaware rivers in the New York area, the original site being on Governor's Island, as we know it today.

A permanent fort was built on the lower end of Manhattan Island in 1625, with the town of New Amsterdam straddling along both shores of the East River. Peter Minuit bought Manhattan Island from the Indians by exchanging goods valued at about sixty Dutch guilders, or forty dollars in modern American money.

The Dutch West India Company fostered settlements there and expected all colonists to be members of the Dutch Reformed Church (Calvinist) and to teach Christianity to the Indians. It was specified, however, that no one was to be persecuted for having other religious beliefs.

Dutch farmers on Manhattan Island found that the soil was particularly good for growing rye and wheat, and in 1626 they exported 45,000 guilders worth of grain. By 1632 this amount rose to 125,000 guilders (about $80,000 in modern American money).

Peter Stuyvesant became governor there in 1647 and continued in that office until September 8, 1664, when British troops and warships attacked New Amsterdam and forced Stuyvesant to surrender. The name New Amsterdam was then changed to New York, in honor of the Duke of York, who directed the attack upon the Dutch. The Duke at that time also took over Swedish land on the west side of the Delaware River and ceded it to William Penn, who had settled Pennsylvania.

In 1653 an extensive Irish immigration began, with thousands coming every year. In 1771 and 1772, the number of immigrants from north Ireland alone amounted to 17,350. The early Irish immigration was so heavy that we find recorded in 1699 and later laws enacted to prevent too great numbers of Irish Papists being brought into the Protestant area of Maryland.

The Germans are another "exceeding fair" people. They had no part in the period of discovery either, but they loomed high in the colonization activity. In the year 1710 alone, more than 3,000 Germans landed in New York harbor, subsequently settling in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and the Carolinas.

And who are more fair than the Swedes? They also contributed heavily to the colonization movement, although they took no part whatever in the original exploration. In 1626, a company of Swedish merchants was organized under the patronage of the great King Gustavus Adolphus to promote immigration to America, and this continued over a period of years. The Swedish West India Company attempted to settle along the Delaware River in 1638, but Stuyvesant drove them out in 1655, doing to them what the British later did to him.

Is it not striking indeed that nations which took no part in the discovery period virtually took over the major colonization of the area that became the United States?

Nephi saw this in his vision six hundred years before Christ and recorded it in the Book of Mormon. Was God directing these movements? Was he not conducting these world affairs looking toward the restoration of his gospel?

From September 30, 1819, when the official count of immigrants to the United States began, until December 31, 1855, a total of 4,212,624 persons of foreign birth arrived in this country. Of that number:

1,747,930 were Irish.

1,206,087 were German.

207,492 were English. (Many thousands had come earlier.)

188,725 were French.

It is readily seen, then, that those nations of Anglo-Saxon, Nordic, Teutonic, and Celtic blood dominated the immigration scene, not only in the early colonization period but in later years as well. These are the "white and exceedingly fair" peoples seen by Nephi.

Still further significance is added to this prophecy by a study of the quotas established by the United States through its immigration laws, which fixed the number of persons allowed to come here from various nations. These quotas have been changed in recent years, but when they were based on the 1920 census, Britain and North Ireland were given the lion's share of future immigration with a combined yearly quota of 85,135. The German quota under this plan was 20,028; the Irish Free State, 8,330; while south European countries were limited to quotas around 100.

What a testimony is all this to the divine inspiration of Nephi, who foresaw it and foretold it six hundred years before the Lord's birth!

But what great evidence it is also that the Almighty, with full purpose in mind, worked it all out with a particular end in view—the end of setting up a free nation in which the gospel could be restored and from which it could go to all mankind as the missionaries seek out the scattered house of Israel, "even from the holes in the rocks," as the Prophet Jeremiah said.
