Mark E. Petersen, Great Prologue ( 1975)

6

THEY WERE BELIEVERS

The Gentiles who came as early colonists to the area which became the United States—that is, those who came intending to make their homes here in permanent settlements—were God-fearing people. This is another significant point of identification shown to Nephi 2200 years before American colonization began.

It is another proof, too, of the accuracy of the prophecy, and a great testimony to the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon. Says the prophecy:

"And it came to pass that I, Nephi, beheld that the Gentiles who had gone forth out of captivity did humble themselves before the Lord; and the power of the Lord was with them." (1 Nephi 13:16.)

There are two important points to be made here: (1) that the colonists did humble themselves before God, and (2) that the power of God was with them.

Let us first mention their humble faith.

As has been indicated, they came to America for religious liberty, not for gold or lands. All they desired was to worship the Lord according to the dictates of their own consciences and not be compelled to accept state-dominated churches.

But of course we should remember that these permanent settlers were not the only newcomers to America. The discovery of this hemisphere opened these lands to two kinds of people: the settlers and the exploiters, although there were some who were a little of both.

The settlers were the empire builders who pioneered the way and laid the foundations for the "mighty nation of the Gentiles" which was to come.

The exploiters were the opportunists whose only purpose was selfish. They were the conquerors of the Lamanites of Mesoamerica and South America, those simple people who had been taught to await their promised "White God." They were also the gold seekers, the plunderers, and the pirates who plagued America in those early times.

They were the trappers and fur traders who thrived on the destruction of fur-bearing wild life in the north and who often went out of their way to discourage the establishment of permanent settlements, which would tend to disperse the animals whose skins were like gold to them.

And they were likewise the early exploiters of the Grand Banks off Newfoundland where fish ran in fantastic numbers, men who opened up a whole new field for business-hungry Europeans. It was John Cabot who, in 1497, brought back to England tales of this "solid sea of fish." The French had previously fished off Newfoundland, but they had kept it a secret until Cabot brought the word back to England.

In the 1500s fleets of fishing boats from Europe drew numberless tons of cod from those waters and set up on shore only those facilities needed to slice, salt, and barrel their seemingly endless catch. They had no interest in permanent settlements.

These many exploiters left their scars on the New World from one end to the other and then disappeared. But not so the Gentiles whom the Almighty chose to "set up" this new nation. They were the God-fearing ones; they were the educated, the townspeople, the farmers and tradesmen who built fibre into the America we know today.

As families they came—and to stay—to make homes and raise their children. They established schools and farms and businesses. They erected churches, worshiped God, honored the Sabbath day, and thanked the Lord for this new free land in which they could enjoy good family life under wholesome circumstances.

When John Cabot returned to England from his exploration of the New World in 1497, he fired the imaginations of the Bristol merchants with his glowing but not too well-advised accounts of the prospective wealth to be obtained so easily in America. Actually he knew very little about the New World, having seen but a tiny bit of its shoreline.

Unwisely, some of Bristol's money-hungry businessmen started a rush for land grants and, after obtaining them, began selling off huge acreages and inducing people to emigrate. In some instances fifty acres of free land were offered to each emigrant, plus another fifty acres for each person he would persuade to join the trip.

The grants they received, however, were in Newfoundland, where Cabot had been during the lovely month of August and where, in the nearby waters, he had seen the fishing banks. These unsuspecting plungers, knowing nothing of the severe winters prevailing in that northern land, organized the Bristol Company and began sending families over there. Failure after failure resulted.

The notable John Guy of the Bristol Company advertised Newfoundland as a "land of lucrative profits." John Mason, the appointed governor, did likewise. Wealthy Welsh Sir William Vaughan bought lands there, came over himself, and promptly went broke. Sir George Calvert, who later became the first Lord Baltimore, found to his dismay that land purchases in Newfoundland were very poor investments, and he promptly turned his attention to the area of what is now Maryland.

In 1622 John Mason bought large tracts in what was called New England even at that early time, and named his area Maine. Seven years later he bought what is now New Hampshire. But settlements in these cold regions came very slowly and much later, particularly in view of the experience the settlers had had in Newfoundland.

In the entire northern part of the continent, the fur trade prospered tremendously. It was this enterprise that led the French explorer Champlain to set up a fur station in 1608 at a place he called Quebec. There were a total of eight in the colony, all French.

By the time the Pilgrims landed at Plymouth Rock in 1620, Quebec was still a small village of only forty-six inhabitants, and it grew very little in the next half century. The fur traders of the area simply did not want permanent settlers around and discouraged them all they could. Fur trading in the entire St. Lawrence River basin was exceptionally profitable for the French, and "fur fever" became contagious; but lasting colonization by these people came very slowly.

In the Virginia colonies business soon developed into a major consideration also. Trading in tobacco became an attractive project, as Europeans were addicted to the use of the "weed." At London markets raw tobacco sold for six times the price of wheat.

The Pilgrims and Puritans who came to New England, however, were neither trappers, businessmen, nor gold seekers. Like the Quakers in Pennsylvania, they wanted freedom of religion above all else. Being Englishmen, they were well versed in the transition of their country from Catholicism to the established Church of England as it was brought about by King Henry VIII. They wanted no more of it.

It was Henry who had been decorated by the Roman church and given the title "Defender of the Faith" in recognition of his aid to the papal forces during the religious wars on the continent. But it was also this same King Henry who now—for the love of another woman—rejected his wife, repudiated the pope, banished the Catholic clergy, seized their property, and set up his own state church, requiring all England to accept it.

Henry was certainly no churchman. Quite the opposite. But he was determined to throw off the Catholic yoke at all costs, because, rebuffed by the pope, he wanted a divorce and a new wife more than he wanted friendship with Rome. It most assuredly meant more to him than any form of dogma or ethereal promises of eternal bliss. It was the "here and now" that concerned him, and he was ruthless in what he did to gain his ends.

But not being a churchman, Henry was not especially interested in ritual or doctrine either, with the result that he allowed (knowingly or otherwise) many of the Roman customs to go on functioning in his new church.

People such as the Pilgrims rebelled in their quiet way and set up separatist or independent congregations. It was this activity that subsequently disturbed King James I, who declared that he would "harry them out of the land," and this he did. These humble people willingly gave up their homes in the nation of their birth as the price of the enjoyment of religious liberty.

The persecution heaped upon them by the king and his bishops was more than harassment, however. It was bitter, cruel, and heartless. But the separatists did not flinch. To face the hard winters of cold New England was little enough price to pay for the privilege of worshiping Him whom they had learned through the scriptures to love, and doing it in the way they felt was right.

They knew that compulsion was a violation of true Christian principles, and they refused to be forced to worship in the manner the king had prescribed. They remembered the three Hebrew children in the days of ancient Babylon who refused to worship according to the prescription of another dictatorial monarch. God had blessed them for their faithfulness, and the Pilgrims felt certain of receiving divine approbation for taking a similar stand.

Thus, as Nephi said, they humbled themselves before God.

When they arrived in America under the leadership of William Bradford, they wrote one of the most famous documents in history, the Mayflower Compact. It too was a potent expression of their humility before God.

Historians, in discussing the compact, say that it was not intended to set up a constitutional form of government, but rather, as the Documents of American History points out, it was "an extension of the customary church covenant to civil circumstances." (New York: Meredith Corp., 1968.)

The compact reads:

In the name of God, Amen. We, whose names are underwritten, the Loyal Subjects of our dread Sovereign Lord King James, by the Grace of God, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Having undertaken for the Glory of God, and the Advancement of the Christian Faith, and the Honour of our King and Country, a Voyage to plant the first colony in the northern Parts of Virginia; Do by these Presents, solemnly and mutually in the Presence of God and one another, covenant and combine ourselves together into a civil Body Politick, for our better Ordering and Preservation, and Furtherance of the Ends aforesaid: And by Virtue hereof do enact, constitute, and frame, such just and equal Laws, Ordinances, Acts, Constitutions, and Offices, from time to time, as shall be thought most meet and convenient for the general Good of the Colony; unto which we promise all due Submission and Obedience. In Witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names at Cape Cod the eleventh of November, in the Reign of our Sovereign Lord, King James of England, France, and Ireland, the eighteenth and of Scotland, the fifty-fourth, Anno Domini, 1620.

The history of New England, Pennsylvania, and Virginia reflects the religious attitudes of the American colonists in detail too extensive for this writing.

It is admitted that many of the colonists were not religious and did not belong to the churches of their communities. But the leaders did—they who charted the destinies of this new land.

One matter of great significance should be mentioned at this point, relating to William Penn and the Pennsylvania colony. Penn framed the first charter in America separating church and state and accomplished it at the Quaker colony of West Jersey in 1677. It was a great step in wiping out thought in that early time of a government-controlled state church in the New World.

Separation of church and state in America was a vital prerequisite to the restoration of the gospel. Had a state religion been established here, how could the gospel have been restored under restrictions such a church and such a government would impose? And how would permission have been given to take this gospel to other nations, if a local government-controlled clergy were involved?

Again the hand of the Lord was evident as he unfolded the pattern of American life.

The decade of the 1630s in the Massachusetts Bay Colony, however, was marked by severe conflict over religious freedom. Devout as the Puritans were, they likewise were narrow and bigoted with respect to competing religious doctrines. So firm had they been in resisting the teachings of the Church of England and in setting out their own views that when Roger Williams and Anne Hutchinson and a few others departed from the strict Puritan interpretations, trouble was afloat.

Williams was banished from the colony in 1636 for his advocacy of religious freedom; he went to Rhode Island, where he established the town of Providence and set up a Baptist church.

Anne Hutchinson likewise threw the colony into a turmoil by her "advanced" teachings. She too was ordered out of the Massachusetts colony, accompanied by all whom she had converted to her doctrines. In 1638, aided by Williams, she and William Coddington, one of her followers, purchased the Island of Aquidneck, later (1644) called the island of Rhode Island, from the Narragansett Indians. A year later Coddington moved to the southern end of the island and established the town of Newport, where he welcomed people of any and all religious faiths.

Whereas Roger Williams founded the Baptist Society of America, Mrs. Hutchinson laid the foundation of Quakerism, assisted by Coddington, who also set up the Quaker faith in Newport. Due to its openhearted policy, it wasn't long until Newport had in its midst Quakers, Baptists, Presbyterians, Independents, and worshipers with no church affiliation at all. Subsequently, in this free-thinking society, divisions occurred among the Baptists, and soon there were Anabaptists, Six-principle Baptists, Free-will Baptists, and Seventh-day Baptists.

But regardless of what may be said of their varying religious creeds, the fact remains that these people made secure at that critical time in colonial history the principle of freedom of worship, which was so vital to the ultimate destiny of America and the restoration of the true gospel through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

The importance of this step is emphasized by the case of Mary Dyer, one of Mrs. Hutchinson's converts. After Mrs. Hutchinson's departure from the colony, Mrs. Dyer carried the torch of Quakerism in Massachusetts. She was threatened with her life for doing so and was banished from the colony, but she soon returned. She was then convicted by the Puritan court for daring to assert her right to worship as she pleased and was hung on June 1, 1660.

And the Puritans had fled from England to escape from the religious tyranny that plagued them there!

The deep religious convictions of our early leaders—wherein not only religious freedom was revered, but all liberty as well—formed the foundation on which they subsequently based their demands for self-determination and independence from the Mother Country. As the scriptures say: ". . . where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty." (2 Corinthians 3:17.)

The Book of Mormon makes it abundantly clear that the Spirit of the Lord was with the colonies, and out of that spirit sprang the whole concept of American liberty—political as well as religious—a concept that eventually precipitated the Revolutionary War. Further evidence of the manner in which these Gentiles humbled themselves before God came in the beginning of that war. In the Declaration of Independence we read:

We, therefore, the representatives of the United States of America, in General Congress assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the world. . . . And for support of this declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection of Divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our lives, our fortunes, and our sacred honor. (Italics added.)

As George Washington assumed the leadership of the colonial armies, he too humbled himself before God. He is quoted as saying, before the war got fairly underway, that "the God of armies may incline the hearts of my American brethren to support the present contest and bestow sufficient abilities upon me to bring it to a speedy and happy conclusion, is the first wish and most fervent prayer of my soul." (Paul Leicester Ford, The True Washington, p. 291.)

And who can forget Washington at Valley Forge? In the midst of the afflictions of that period, could anyone have been more humble before God than he? Could anyone have prayed more fervently than did the great George Washington? Some historians say that free America actually had its birth at Valley Forge.

Yes, the Gentiles humbled themselves before God truly enough, and as a result, the power of God was with them, as we shall shortly see.

Now let us return to the vision of Nephi and note its further unfolding.
