Mark E. Petersen, Great Prologue ( 1975)

7

THE WAR BEGINS

When Nephi saw in vision that these people humbled themselves before God, and that divine power accompanied them, he saw also—

that their mother Gentiles were gathered together upon the waters, and upon the land also, to battle against them.

And I beheld that the power of God was with them, and also that the wrath of God was upon all those that were gathered together against them to battle.

And I, Nephi, beheld that the Gentiles that had gone out of captivity were delivered by the power of God out of the hands of all other nations. (1 Nephi 13:17-19.)

This is a remarkable prophecy in many ways. How could Nephi, more than 2300 years before these events took place, have known about them in such detail?

How could he reveal that it would be a war between the colonists and their mother country?

How could he foresee that this would not be a war fought with one of the predatory nations who for so long greedily sought—and stole—the wealth of America?

Only revelation may be credited with such foresight. Again, what a testimony to the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon! But also, what a clear statement it is regarding the birth of the nation which would be chosen as the site of the restoration of the gospel and the base from which that gospel would be taken abroad!

When Nephi said that the mother Gentiles would fight the colonists both on land and sea, we are reminded of the story of Paul Revere and the lanterns in the old North Church—one if by land and two if by sea. And the attack came by both land and sea—by land from Canada and from the sea by what was regarded as the strongest navy in the world at that time.

It will be remembered that the Savior, in predicting the rise of this new nation, declared that these Gentiles would "be set up as a free people by the power of the Father." (3 Nephi 21:4.)

Nephi, 600 years earlier, saw that the power of God would be with them, and that "the wrath of God was upon all those that were gathered together against them to battle." (1 Nephi 13:18.)

Here was double action that no enemy could withstand and no human could foresee. The power of God was with the colonists. The wrath of God was upon their opponents. What an unbeatable combination for the colonists!

But it could have been no other way. The colonists by themselves were no military match for Great Britain, which had the greatest war machine of the time. They were three million people, as against Britain's eleven million. They were scattered all along the sea coast, their towns were small, and they had no standing army and no navy. They were in no way prepared to fight a war with such an antagonist.

The colonists at first had no intention of seceding from Great Britain. From 1765 to 1775 they had pleaded earnestly with the Mother Country to give them only the rights extended to other British subjects. They said in one of their communications to the Crown: "We claim nothing but the liberty and privileges of Englishmen." However, with the coming of the stamp tax and the subsequent Boston Tea Party, which in turn brought on the quartering of British troops in American towns, attitudes changed.

The Boston Massacre, wherein armed British troops fired into civilians on the street, brought torrid reaction. Immediately, New England towns were flooded with printed broadsides, pamphlets, and letters to the press, demanding independence. Town meetings were held in which similar demands were made.

A popular liberty song of the day was:

Come, jolly sons of liberty, Come all with hearts united; Our motto is "We dare be free," Not easily affrighted. Oppression's land we must subdue, Now is the time or never, Let each man prove his motto true, And slavery from him sever.

Lack of strength for war was one of the chief arguments of the pacifists opposing the conflict. While a number were loyal to the Crown, many others were simply frightened. They feared their own weakness and inadequacy, but especially did they fear reprisals when and if they were defeated.

It was common knowledge among the colonists that few of them had any zest for open war, for as John Adams had expressed it, "a third of us took up arms, a third is either openly or secretly loyal to the British, and a third of us just don't give a——."

They were anything but united.

The colonies stretched for 1,400 miles from Maine to Georgia and were, as Alistair Cooke says, "in one place a royal colony, in another a barony, in a third a land-grant company. The laws of each were administered by a royal governor, or by planters, or by shippers, or by clergymen, or by 'Quaker peacemakers.'" (Alistair Cooke's America, p. 93.)

So divided were they! So widely did their interests differ! How could they fight the strongest power on earth and hope to win?

All of this created an almost hopeless apathy among many of those who should have supported the cause. The condition showed up even in Congress and was responsible also for the reluctance of the male population to enlist in the army. It was tremendously evident too in the lack of finance, which nearly drove Washington to distraction.

Britain had over two million men who could be called to the colors, although in 1775—a year before the conflict broke out—she had a standing army of but 55,000. At the height of the war, her force had increased to 100,000, plus 20,000 German mercenaries who were hired to go to America.

The British and the Germans were professional soldiers, whereas the Americans were raw militia men when Washington took over, a miscellany of trappers, farmers, and tradesmen.

Britain was the undoubted mistress of the seas in 1776. The colonies had no navy at all, for they had depended upon the British fleet to protect them, inasmuch as they were British subjects.

Neither did the colonists have any arms or munitions factories. All their guns and powder had come from England, but now they had to import such things from other countries.

In the face of all this, the Americans could only look toward heaven for assistance. But they were not disappointed. Had not Nephi said: "I beheld that the power of God was with them, and that the wrath of God was upon all those that were gathered together against them to battle"? And had not he also said that he beheld that the colonists were delivered from their enemies by the power of God?

The Lord now moved quickly into the conflict. And with what supreme effectiveness!

Sentiment in England switched in favor of the colonists to a large degree, and powerful men such as Edmund Burke openly opposed the Crown in its effort to impose unfair conditions upon America. They decried war and demanded a peaceful settlement at all costs.

The stubborn king, however, would not listen, and he proceeded with his attacks. Providence then entered the drama in proportions that shook the whole British empire. For the English, the American Revolution suddenly became a world war.

France, seeing an opportunity to even up old accounts with her traditional enemy, came in on the side of the Americans. Her navy and several armies of foot soldiers were quickly pledged, her forces being headed by Admiral de Grosse and Generals Lafayette and Comte de Rochambeau.

De Rochambeau came to Washington in the spirit of both helpfulness and humility, as is seen from the letter he wrote to the American general from Newport, Rhode Island, July 12, 1780. Said he:

Sir,

Being ordered by the King, my master, to come and [place] myself under your command, I arrive with the deepest feelings of submission, of zeal, and of veneration for your person, and for the distinguished talents which you display in supporting an ever memorable war.

We are now, Sir, under your command.

The King charged me personally to assure your Excellency, that he would give all possible assistance to his allies, and that this advanced guard [the first French contingent to arrive] would be supported by his whole power; and the strongest proof, which I can give you of it, is, that the whole detachment was ready to embark at Brest on the first of April, if there had been a sufficient number of transports.

It is hardly necessary for me to tell your Excellency, that I bring sufficient funds to pay in cash for whatever is needed by the King's army, and that we shall maintain as strict discipline as if we were under the walls of Paris.

(Signed) Jean Baptiste de Vimeur, Comte de Rochambeau

The coming of the French was most heartening to Washington, but the fact that they brought their own expense money—to pay in cash for all their needs—likewise was highly important, for at this time the American war coffers were empty, and Washington's men were without pay, without proper clothing, and often without food.

A fleet and 3,000 French foot soldiers came first, followed shortly afterward by another 5,000 men. Lafayette, the brilliant young French general and later a close friend of General Washington, became a most valuable aide to the Americans. This was evident later at the battle of Yorktown, when on October 19, 1781, a force of 16,000 French and American troops under Washington and Lafayette conquered Cornwallis with his 7,000, just two days before a British fleet was to come to his rescue. French warships had blocked Cornwallis so that he could not escape by sea. They previously had driven all British ships out of the entire Chesapeake Bay area.

When the war was half over, Spain and Holland came in, determined to punish their longtime enemy Great Britain. The war became virtually a world conflict at this point. The Dutch navy attacked British shipping in the North Sea, while French and Spanish warships attacked the British in the Mediterranean and even in the far-off waters of South Africa and India.

Minorca fell in February 1782, and shortly afterward heavy attacks were made upon Gibraltar. "The Rock" withstood a five-day assault, however, and was saved only by the arrival of a new fleet of British warships.

The French and Spanish navies combined gave the Americans support of 120 first-class fighting ships, sufficient to challenge the vaunted British mastery of the seas.

At one time France had even considered invading England and had amassed 50,000 French troops facing the English channel in 1779, but events elsewhere persuaded the government in Paris that such an invasion was not necessary to victory.

General Washington had long been convinced that the war could be won only by divine intervention. Surveying the weakness of the colonies in their scattered and divided conditions, and contrasting it with the strength of mighty Great Britain, he had felt from the beginning that only through the help of God could freedom come to the colonies. But the help did come, as we have seen. After the treaty of alliance had been signed with Paris, on February 5, 1778, Washington wrote to his troops a reminder of the part heaven was playing in this war:

It having pleased the Almighty Ruler of the Universe propitiously to defend the cause of the United American States . . . by raising up a powerful Friend among the Princes of the Earth to establish our liberty and Independence upon lasting foundations, it becomes us to set apart a day for gratefully acknowledging the divine Goodness, and celebrating the important Event which we owe to his benign interposition. (William H. Wilbur, The Making of George Washington, Patriot Education Inc., 1973, p. 198.)

If Washington had been compelled to depend upon the Americans alone to win the war, defeat would have come in a matter of a few months. Often Congress would not assist him; there were too many loyalists among them, and too many frightened men who feared reprisals if the war was lost. The separate colonies were not united; governors of those units refused in many instances to raise either money or men, and when men were called, short-term enlistments were allowed that prevented any real effort to train them for effective service.

Writing to Congress from Valley Forge in December 1777, Washington declared that unless Congress acted at once to supply both men and provisions, his army must inevitably starve, dissolve, or disperse.

On December 17 of that year he described the pitiful condition of his men, but said that he himself would share in every hardship and seek no advantage for himself; he would join with his men in partaking "of every inconvenience."

Two days before Christmas he wrote from Valley Forge that there were 2,898 men "now in Camp unfit for duty, because they are barefoot and otherwise naked." And this was in the dead of winter.

But George Washington never gave up. He paid some of the war expenses himself. He was convinced that independence must come to America and that God would provide it, despite the refusal of so many colonists to sacrifice for the cause. He often expressed his gratitude to God for His providential and constant care. He felt that he was fighting a war on two fronts: the British on the one hand and American indifference on the other.

But thankful to God, this great leader said in his farewell orders to the army, dated at Rocky Hill, near Princeton, November 2, 1783:

A contemplation of the complete attainment, at a period earlier than could be expected, of the objects for which we contended against so formidable a power, cannot but inspire us with astonishment and gratitude. The disadvantageous circumstances on our part under which the war was undertaken can never be forgotten. The singular interpositions of Providence in our feeble condition were such as could scarcely escape the attention of the most unobserving: while the unparalleled perseverence of the armies of the United States through almost every possible suffering and discouragement for the space of eight years was little short of a standing miracle.

When Washington addressed Congress on resigning his commission, dated at Annapolis, December 2, 1783, he said:

Happy in the confirmation of our Independence and Sovereignty, and pleased with the opportunity afforded the United States of becoming a respectable nation, I resign with satisfaction the appointment I accepted with diffidence; a diffidence in my abilities to accomplish so arduous a task, which, however, was superseded by a confidence in the rectitude of our cause, by the support of the Supreme Power of the Union, and the patronage of Heaven. (Edward C. Boykin, ed., The Autobiography of George Washington, 1753-1799, New York: Reynal & Hitchcock, 1935, p. 82.)

From Washington's first inaugural address, dated April 30, 1789, we read:

No people can be bound to acknowledge and adore the invisible hand, which conducts the affairs of men, more than the people of the United States. Every step, by which they have advanced to the character of an independent nation, seems to have been distinguished by some token of providential agency. . . .

Another striking expression of Washington's belief that God was fighting the battles of the colonists came after the surrender of Cornwallis at Yorktown. The great American general issued the following orders to his men:

Divine service is to be performed tomorrow in the several brigades and divisions. The commander-in-chief earnestly recommends that the troops not on duty should universally attend, with that seriousness of deportment and gratitude of heart which the recognition of such reiterated and astonishing interposition of providence demands of us.

Can anyone doubt that the Almighty liberated those Gentiles whom he expected to set up as a free people? Can anyone doubt the fulfillment of prophecy?

One is reminded of the words of Richard Hovey when he wrote:

The guns that spoke at Lexington Knew not that God was planning them The trumpet word of Jefferson To bugle forth the rights of men.

No wonder we read in Wilson's History of the United States these significant words:

Thus closed the most important war in which England had ever been engaged, a war which arose wholly out of her ungenerous treatment of her American colonies. The expense of blood and treasure which this war cost England was enormous, nor, indeed, did her European antagonists suffer much less severely. The United States was the only country which could look to any beneficial results from the war, and these were obtained by a strange union of opposing motives and principles unequalled in the annals of history.

France and Spain, the arbitrary despots of the old world, had stood forth as protectors and aids of the infant republic and had combined, contrary to all principles of their political faiths, to establish liberties in America. They seemed as blind instruments in the hands of providence employed to aid in founding a nation which should cultivate those republican virtues that were destined yet to regenerate the world on the principles of universal intelligence and eventually to overthrow the timeworn system of tyrannical usurpation of the few over many.

On the eighth anniversary of Paul Revere's ride, April 18, 1783, Washington proclaimed hostilities at an end and sent his men home to their families and farms "without a farthing in their pockets," but with faith that their new government eventually would pay them for their military service. The final articles of peace were signed September 3, 1783, and on the following November 23, the last of the British soldiers sailed out of New York harbor.

A few days later Washington bade farewell to his officers and retired to his home at Mount Vernon, where he hoped "to move gently down the stream of life, until I rest with my fathers." (Boykin, op. cit., p. 84.)
