Mark E. Petersen, Great Prologue ( 1975)

8

"OF ALL OTHER NATIONS"

A very interesting expression in the prophecy of Nephi says that the colonists, in winning the war, were also "delivered by the power of God out of the hands of all other nations." (1 Nephi 13:19. Italics added.)

What could that possibly mean? Was Nephi being extravagant with his words as he told of the manner in which the colonies were delivered out of the hands of the British? Or were there other nations with predatory designs?

This is significant, because since the Lord was setting up this nation, he certainly would not allow predators to come in and seize control. The nation was to have a destiny, a mission, and no despotic powers would be allowed to interfere.

What were the facts?

History indicates that at the time there were other nations out of whose hands it was necessary that the colonists, now weakened by an eight-year war, should be delivered.

France and Spain entered the war as allies of the Americans, but not out of any love they had for them. Their primary purpose was to defeat their old enemy, Great Britain. Although they greatly helped America, these nations themselves fared badly in the conflict. Spain especially suffered in her naval engagements with England, but she did keep a large part of the British navy away from America. In this she served a good and useful purpose.

However, France, friendly with Madrid, sought to appease the Spanish inasmuch as France had induced them to come into the war in the first place. She thought to do so at the expense of America.

Thereupon those two nations plotted together to pay Spain for her part in the conflict by ceding large portions of American territory to her.

The matter went so far that Vergennes, the French minister, had a map prepared on which the United States would be restricted permanently to the little colonial strip between the Alleghenies and the sea that they had occupied prior to the war. Under this plan, France and Spain would occupy the lion's share of inland America. France looked to her own interests, of course, but offered to placate Spain with large land possessions at the expense of the Americans.

Thus the new republic would have been robbed of the fruits of eight years of extreme effort; the Mississippi River would have become a Franco-Spanish stream; and the United States would have been doomed to mediocrity, or less, among the world powers.

To make matters worse, Jay, Adams, and Franklin, the American ministers who were to arrange peace terms with England at the end of the war, were instructed by Congress to sign only such terms as would be acceptable to France. This instruction arose out of what Congress felt was a sense of gratitude for the great assistance of the French forces during the war. But the Congressmen were nearly three thousand miles from Paris, communication was slow, and these lawmakers were not as yet aware of the schemes of France and Spain.

The American ministers, well-informed as to the facts (and who can say that they were not inspired?), ignored the instructions of Congress and hurriedly signed a separate peace with England in defiance of all the demands of both France and Spain. Thus they obtained for America not only a clear title from England to the territory west of the Alleghenies, but also fishing rights on the banks of Newfoundland.

But the difficulties did not end there. They eventually culminated in the War of 1812. France continued to cause constant trouble for America.

Both the French Revolution and a new Franco-British war had serious repercussions in America, and for a time again our country was in serious jeopardy. The French did their best to draw the United States into the war on her side and opposed to Britain, while at the same time she accused the Americans of favoring the English.

In France, local citizens who had pro-American sentiments were imprisoned. The French challenged U.S. commerce on the high seas, assuming that every ship sailing out of American ports was headed for England with supplies with which the British could embarrass the French. Therefore, they harassed American shipping at every opportunity.

The U.S. army was greatly increased now to meet possible war. The Americans wanted peace and offered to negotiate the trouble. However, as a precaution, Washington was called back to the colors, as commander of U.S. forces. Undeclared war did break out on the high seas between France and America, and U.S. forces captured eighty-four French ships during the dispute.

The British navy likewise harassed American shipping, seized a number of American merchantmen, searched them under the guise of looking for British deserters, confiscated cargoes, and, what was more serious, kidnapped (or impressed) American sailors.

The scheming French minister Vergennes made every effort to involve America in her war against England, even going into U.S. ports and plotting to place on board American ships munitions and other supplies for the French. At the same time he accused the Americans of supplying the British.

Only through long and hazardous negotiations did America avoid fighting both of these contending powers at this time. The problems continued, though, and were not settled finally until after the War of 1812.

But from it all, America came out again a free and independent nation, with full rights to commerce on the high seas and, a few years later, with a Monroe Doctrine that protected the Western Hemisphere "from all other nations." Then through the Louisiana Purchase and the acquisition of Florida, the entire South and West were opened up to the Americans. The Mississippi now became an American stream, and the hold of foreign powers was loosed completely.

So the Lord was guiding the affairs of the little new republic. He did provide liberty for it, and he did deliver it out of the hands of "all other nations," as Nephi had said.
