Mark E. Petersen, Great Prologue ( 1975)

9

NO KINGS ON THE LAND

When the Lord planned to set up America as a free nation, by act of God, one of the stipulations was that there should be no kings raised up unto the Gentiles on this land. One of the important passages in the predictions of Nephi refers to this condition laid down by the Lord: "And this shall be a land of liberty unto the Gentiles, and there shall be no kings upon the land, who shall raise up unto the Gentiles." (2 Nephi 10:11.)

There were kings among both the Nephites and the Lamanites, but this scripture says "no kings . . . unto the Gentiles," which is very interesting under the circumstances.

The effort of Napoleon to establish a monarchy in Mexico is well-known. Its failure was predetermined by the Almighty, as this scripture explains. However, a real effort was made to establish a monarchy in the United States at the close of the war.

This movement arose in the army, but it also raised its head in Congress. It was with difficulty that it was suppressed in Congress, where there were still men with strong royalist leanings. It was hard for them to envision a government of the people, by the people, and for the people. They had received directives from the Crown all their lives and could hardly conceive of anything else.

General Washington was considered as one candidate for king, but some of the members of the constitutional convention went so far as to suggest inviting "the bishop of Osnaburgh," the second son of King George III, to come to America as king. What could have been more repugnant?

The army officers who had proposed the monarchy were disgruntled at the end of the war. Pay had been slow in coming. The looseness of the federal government during and immediately after the war had disgusted them. They thought that if this were a sample of republican administration, they wanted none of it. They saw in the unsettled conditions prevailing at the end of the war an opportunity to set up the monarchy. They were great admirers of Washington and knew of his personal sacrifices in behalf of the colonies. They also knew that he was a fair and unselfish administrator and thought, therefore, that he should be the ruler of the country.

They had seen how inefficiently Congress had worked and were afraid that more of this kind of administration would spell the doom of the infant nation for which they had placed their all upon the altar of war.

Colonel Lewis Nicola was selected by his fellow officers to present the proposal to the commander-in-chief. Nicola had often approached Washington on other matters pertaining to the miseries of the poorly equipped men and the difficulties the army suffered because of the inadequacies of the government. He write the proposal in the form of a letter and sent it to the general in May of 1782.

To a man in whom patriotism and love of country—love of freedom—were less deeply rooted, the plan might have been a sore temptation. Certainly no one had suffered quite to the extent endured by Washington. It was he who had struggled so constantly with Congress and the national treasury in an effort to sustain the war as it should have been, and who had felt the sting of repeated disappointment in these negotiations.

He was a man of decision. He knew the needs of the country and understood full well how to cope with them. But he knew that a monarchy was not for America. The colonists had had enough of that. Self government—a true democratic rule of, by, and for the people—was what Washington wanted. That is what he knew the baby nation must have. Therefore, Nicola's proposal was revolting to him. He was deeply incensed that his officers would so much as consider such a thing. The general immediately penned the following reply to Nicola on May 22, 1782:

Sir,

With a mixture of great surprise and astonishment, I have read with attention the sentiments you have submitted to my perusal. Be assured, Sir, no occurrence in the course of the war has given me more painful sensations than your information of there being such ideas existing in the army as you have expressed, and I must view them with abhorrence and reprehend with severity. For the present the communication of them will rest in my own bosom, unless some further agitation of the matter shall make a disclosure necessary.

I am much at a loss to conceive what part of my conduct could have given encouragement to an address, which to me seems big with the greatest mischiefs that can befall my Country. If I am not deceived in the knowledge of myself, you could not have found a person to whom your schemes are more disagreeable. Let me conjure you, then, if you have any regard for your Country, concern for yourself or posterity, or respect for me, to banish these thoughts from your mind and never communicate, as from yourself or any one else, a sentiment of the like nature.

I am, sir, George Washington.

With such firmness did the father of our country quench that outburst of monarchical sentiment.

However, it was different in Congress, and not so easily put to rest.

Primarily the monarchical movement in that body was limited to the Senate, in which there was still strong royalist sentiment. Those who wanted a monarchy were favorable to having Washington as their chief executive but urged that he be crowned as king, permitting him also to set up a life tenure with the power to establish a dynasty, for that is the only kind of monarchy these men knew. Several attempts were made to provide such a form of government, but each time it was voted down.

After Washington was elected president, efforts were made to give him a title that at least sounded like royalty. During these debates in the Senate the monarchist faction urged the adoption of a title for him such as "His Elective Majesty" or "His Elective Highness." One suggestion was that he be known as "His Mightiness," and another, that he be known as "His Highness, the President of the United States." However, the more sensible and democratic-minded House of Representatives settled the matter by voting that the chief executive should be known simply as the president of the United States.

Thus ended the attempt to set up a king "or anything like unto it" in the United States, and thus was fulfilled a prophecy made 2,300 years before the incident took place.
