Mark E. Petersen, Great Prologue ( 1975)

10

BLESSED WITH PROSPERITY

One of the promises made to the colonists as revealed in Nephi's vision was prosperity. Said he: "And it came to pass that I, Nephi, beheld that they did prosper in the land." (1 Nephi 13:20.)

This was very modest language considering the tremendous fulfillment that has come to America.

The United States has only about six percent of the world's population. Yet, over the years, she has produced most of the airplanes, most of the radios, most of the modern medicines, and a high percentage of other products. It should be remembered also that it was in America that most of the great inventions were made that have so dramatically raised the world's standard of living.

The Associated Press almanac for 1974 shows that the gross national product of the United States is about 40 percent of the world total. It exceeds that of all the western European nations combined and is three times greater than that of the entire Far East.

The same source shows that the United States in 1973 produced one-third of the entire world output of motor cars and trucks. Our production of electrical energy in 1973 was about 25 percent of all electrical energy in the world.

The wage levels in America are much higher than may be found anywhere else. The educational level is likewise. The general standard of living in this country is far above anything found in most nations of the world.

The U.S. Census Bureau, based on 1972 figures, defined poverty as having an income less than $4,275 for a non-farm family of four. In most countries of the world such an income would seem fabulous to the common man, not to mention the starving thousands in some underprivileged lands that have little or no income at all. The average family income in the United States in 1974 exceeded $10,000.

Travelers the world over recognize American airplanes as the most used craft in the air. America has become one of the best markets for imported automobiles from such nations as Japan, Italy, Sweden, Germany, and Great Britain, this in addition to the millions of new cars produced and sold here. America's contribution to the space industry must be regarded as one of its outstanding evidences of prosperity. Only a nation as wealthy as this could afford the billions of dollars we have put into space.

Certainly mention should be made of America's contributions to underprivileged nations (foreign aid) in the form of both money and food. No matter how America is hated abroad, the fact remains that this nation has been the most generous one of all in fighting starvation and economic collapse in poorer nations and in shipping immediate emergency relief to areas struck by hurricanes, earthquakes, and other natural disasters.

Shortly before Christmas of 1974, Secretary of Agriculture Earl Butz said that of all the free food sent by world powers to the starving nations in recent years, 84 percent of it came from the United States.

The generous heart of America is certainly one of its greatest assets, and when the day of retribution comes, surely these benefactions will be remembered by the Great Judge of all.
