Mark E. Petersen, Great Prologue ( 1975)

11

BUILDING A UNION

Giving America its independence from foreign powers was one thing, but setting it up as a free nation with a government of its own was something else again. Chaos could have followed the end of the Revolutionary War had not divine influence been over this land.

There were still many Tories in America whose interests continually looked to the former mother country overseas. There was also much disagreement among the loyal colonists themselves as to the type of government that should be established here. Unity seemed very remote. The views in Virginia did not harmonize with those in New England, and those of Pennsylvania were in conflict with those expressed in the Carolinas.

Only an overruling Providence could bring to America what was necessary for the establishment of a country fitted for the work the Lord expected to do here.

Let us review the words of the Savior: "For it is wisdom in the Father that they [the Gentiles] should be established in this land, and be set up as a free people by the power of the Father. . . ." (3 Nephi 21:4. Italics added.)

How would the Lord "set them up"?

He had won the war for them. This, of course, was necessary before an independent government could be established here. That accomplished, the Lord now proceeded to provide a form of government under which his plans could be brought about. And what did he do? He raised up wise men and inspired them to create a nation that would provide the degree of liberty required for his work. (See D&C 101:80.)

The leading men in the colonies had long felt that a central government for all of the colonies was required if they were to prosper. It was inconceivable to such men as Washington and Franklin particularly that there should be thirteen separate small nations on the Atlantic seaboard. Their only hope of survival as well as protection from predator powers would be to band together in one overall organization.

As Franklin had said at the beginning of the war, they must all hang together, or most certainly they would all hang separately. That applied as much to the post-war period as it did when the colonists signed the Declaration of Independence and opened hostilities with England.

Twenty years before the Revolution, Franklin began to promote the idea of a federal union of the thirteen colonies under "one general government," as he expressed it. Some of the suggestions he made at that time, looking to such a union, were finally written into the U.S. Constitution.

Beginning in 1757, Franklin worked tirelessly in both Britain and America to bring harmony between a united group of colonies and the English Crown, and it was only after thirteen years of such efforts had proved fruitless that he began to promote the idea of independence. At first he had no thought of secession. But through it all he could see that a federal union of the colonies was necessary to their well-being whether under English rule or not. If they were to continue as colonies of Britain, such a union would give them a stronger bargaining position, made so necessary by the attitude of the Crown. Or if they were to seek independence, only a united effort could win the war.

The differences between the colonies themselves were so great, however, that few heeded Franklin's plea. As a matter of fact, the colonies looked upon each other with more suspicion than trust. Even during the war, American soldiers would fight each other with fists as men from one state jealously faced those of another.

These affairs reached riotous proportions on a few occasions. It is reported that one day Washington, riding through camp on his horse, came upon such a brawl. He was bigger than most of the soldiers. Seeing a few of his men fighting each other, he got off his horse, charged at the first two, knocked their heads together, and made them stop fighting. He took on several other pairs in the same manner, telling them to save their fighting for the British.

Throughout the war, Washington tried to instill in the minds of both national and state leaders the idea of a central government. He knew that he could not successfully fight the war with thirteen independent quarreling states to depend upon. Only a strong central power could mold them into any kind of unity.

During the war he pleaded over and over again with the vacillating Continental Congress to bring about some unity of effort. But the congressmen themselves were far from united. It was difficult for a man from Virginia to dedicate himself to interests of Maryland or Massachusetts, in which he felt little or no concern. Even when the Boston Tea Party was perpetrated, and when the Boston Massacre occurred, Virginia and the Carolinas were not too deeply disturbed. The northern colonists were similarly indifferent to the South.

Many of the members of this early Congress clung tenaciously to the idea that each of the thirteen colonies was now entirely independent, not only of England but of the other colonies as well. And they were determined to keep it that way if they could.

Washington and Franklin stood out constantly for united central government. There must be one America, not thirteen, they repeatedly told their contemporaries.

These two men in truth were the main architects of national unity, and in a large measure, it was Washington himself who brought it about. He was the only man in whom all thirteen colonies had complete trust. He had earned that confidence by his direction of the war. This was well-known to soldiers and the nonmilitary alike. Particularly did the men under arms have great love and respect for him. They had seen him under every type of stress. Always he had been fair. At no time was he selfish. He took no side but that of right.

It was this universal confidence in the man that ultimately led the colonists to accept his proposals for a united government—if he would be the head.

Not long before he relinquished his command of the army in 1783, Washington sent a letter to the governors of all thirteen colonies in which he made a dramatic appeal that the people of the various and separate states "forget their local prejudices and policies, make those mutual concessions which are requisite to the general prosperity," and "sacrifice some of their individual advantages in the interest of all." He listed his reasons for having "an indissoluble union of the States under one federal head" and declared that "there should be lodged somewhere a supreme power to regulate and govern the general concerns of the confederate republic." (The Making of George Washington, p. 207.) Without it, he warned, only chaos and confusion could result.

No immediate response came and little was done. But the chaos did develop as he had said. Washington, however, was the central figure who settled most serious disputes, even before the constitutional form of government was established.

When Shay's Rebellion (which was, in fact, really an insurrection) took place in Massachusetts in 1786, Washington's firmness helped to bring about peace. When Connecticut planned a war over the Wyoming River controversy, Washington's influence was likewise potent. When New York sent troops to her eastern boundary in a dispute over the line between that state and New Hampshire, "The General," as he was always known, helped settle that.

This continued to demonstrate the confidence people had in Washington. As disputes of this kind repeatedly occurred, it became more and more obvious to all concerned that Washington was right: a strong central government was needed. The states must be molded into a solid union; otherwise there would be no nation.

In April 1783, Washington wrote: "To avert these evils, to form a constitution that will give consistency, stability and dignity to the Union and sufficient powers to the great council of the nation for general purposes, is a duty which is incumbent on every man who wishes well to his country."

Three years later he wrote to John Jay, saying, "We cannot long exist as a nation without having lodged somewhere a power which will pervade the whole Union in as energetic a manner as the authority of the state governments extends over the states."

To James Madison he wrote, under date of November 5, 1786: "The question of a federal government is the great and most important of all subjects," and he added that we are already having "anarchy and confusion" which can only be stopped by setting up such central power.

Washington's efforts seemed about to bear fruit when a convention of the thirteen colonies was called to meet in Annapolis in September 1786 to consider a federal union, but only five states sent representatives. Yet this group did accomplish one thing: it decided upon a convention of all states to be held in Philadelphia the following May.

Still there were delays. Indifference was widespread, and fear of larger states haunted smaller ones, who wondered if they were to be swallowed up in the process. This fear became one of the chief stumbling blocks in the constitutional convention when finally it was held.

Problem after problem continued to arise. Only an overruling Providence, working through men whom he had raised up for this very purpose, could bring about harmony and unity. And this he did!
