Mark E. Petersen, Great Prologue ( 1975)

13

THE MEN "RAISED UP"

"Wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose" is the expression used by the Lord (D&C 101:80) in describing the patriots he called and through whom he worked to give this nation birth.

President Brigham Young saw the true perspective in the call and careers of those men. He knew that America was set free for the special purpose of the Lord, that of restoring his gospel in these last days. Without hesitation he declared from the pulpit that the Lord prepared these men for their work and raised them up "unto this very purpose."

Let us look briefly at some of these men "raised up" by the Lord. What a balance there was between them! What a splendid distribution of talent to meet every need of the rising nation! What superior men they were!

There was George Washington, the experienced soldier, the levelheaded leader whom all trusted because of his dedication without selfish motives; the honest, clear-sighted inspirer of men; a firm believer in a strong federal union.

And Benjamin Franklin, the best diplomat of his day, in America or in Europe; highly skilled in dealing with other men; with a great concept of a federal union for the colonies.

Thomas Jefferson, a giant in every sense; skilled in statesmanship; highly educated; fluent writer and trained lawyer, with a clear view of the meaning of freedom; a notable advocate of a federal union for the colonies.

John Adams, great parliamentarian, diplomat, experienced minister to European nations, teacher, farmer, lawyer; a patriot through and through, a believer in an American union.

And so we might go on: each man a leader in his own right, each highly competent, well educated, firmly patriotic, deeply religious. How could God have chosen better?

It is noteworthy that six of them not only sustained the war for independence and helped establish the Constitution, but they also became presidents of the United States as well—the first six—in succession.

How wise indeed was the Almighty to raise them up to help set the nation free and assist in charting its constitutional course, and then to place them in the most influential position in the nation—at the helm of the ship of state—to keep that ship on course as she went through the initiatory waters of statehood.

One of his great leaders, however, did not become president. He was Benjamin Franklin, who, for that particular time, probably did a greater work for the infant republic than he might have done even as president.

As no other man in America could have done, he dealt with the foreign powers in Europe, cementing and protecting the interests of America and helping to preserve her from predatory interests.

His influence is still felt in America. It is still recognized in Europe, where he was regarded as the most effective statesman to visit the monarchical courts during that entire explosive period.

Those who became the first six presidents of the United States, and who thus had opportunity to keep the fires of freedom aglow during their administrations, even as they had during the war and postwar periods, were:

General George Washington

John Adams

Thomas Jefferson, who wrote the Declaration of Independence

James Madison, sometimes called the father of the Constitution

James Monroe

John Quincy Adams

There were numerous other great patriots who supported these leaders and who put their possessions, their lives, and their "sacred honor" upon the altar of liberty. They too had seen the war through to a successful conclusion. They now rallied around their leaders in support of the Constitution, obtaining its ratification and putting it into effect nationwide. And they also helped to forge these thirteen separate colonies into one united nation. Were they not raised up for this purpose? They included:

Robert Morris, close friend of Washington and his host while the general did his business in Philadelphia. He was a merchant and financier.

Gouverneur Morris, lawyer and graduate of Columbia College, forerunner to Columbia University.

John Blair and George Wythe, prominent judges, Wythe being also on the faculty of William and Mary College Department of Law.

James Wilson, lawyer, graduate of three Scottish universities.

James McClury of Virginia, physician, educated at the University of Edinburgh, Scotland, and a surgeon during the war.

Patrick Henry, fiery Virginia orator who had declared, "Give me liberty or give me death," prior to the war. He was appointed to the constitutional convention but for various reasons was not able to attend.

George Mason, who in May 1776 had drafted the Virginia Declaration of Rights, upon which Jefferson drew heavily in his draft of the Declaration of Independence in July of the same year.

John Rutledge of South Carolina, governor of the state during the war and a member of both first and second Continental Congresses.

Robert Yates, justice of the Supreme Court.

Highly gifted Alexander Hamilton, lawyer, aide to General Washington during the war, member of the Continental Congress; representative from New York.

Alexander Martin, governor of North Carolina.

Hugh Williamson, physician and scientist.

Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, educated in England at both Westminster and Oxford universities, a brigadier general in the Continental army.

David Brearley, chief justice of the New Jersey Supreme Court.

John Marshall, young Richmond lawyer, later chief justice of the Supreme Court, one of the brilliant minds of that day.

Then there were other such worthies as John Hancock, John Wentworth, Jr., and Samuel Adams, not to mention many more.

These are referred to merely to point out that the men whom the Lord chose were stalwarts of superior attainment, men of stature, of refinement, and of exceptional education for those days. They were truly qualified!

As President Brigham Young indicated, the Lord sent these gifted spirits from the preexistent life to fill these positions. How else could God "raise them up"? They were men of the hour, sent to the earth at the proper time to perform a special work essential to the development of the kingdom of God, which was destined to arise here following the establishment of this nation. The kingdom is The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

All were instruments in the divine hand; all did their work well.

There were lesser lights, of course; and there were enemies within their ranks, as so often there are even in the circles of the elect. Was there not a Judas in the original Twelve?

But the leading men whom God raised up for this purpose were none such. His chosen ones were like trees that tower above the forest. Their clear vision and persuasive manner pointed the way. Under the inspiration of the Lord, they accomplished the divine will regardless of opposition about them, and others then lined up and followed them.

Washington and Franklin towered above them all, Washington physically as well as otherwise.

"The General," as he was lovingly referred to by his men in the service, was six feet two inches tall and of big frame. He was, as one historian described him, "simply a big man."

His size, his impressive bearing, his noble head and features, his stride, his agility, his ability as a horseman, his skill as a soldier, his strength of wisdom, and his discernment in council all testified to his great leadership.

Washington's unselfishness is one thing that appealed to the military and nonmilitary alike. When he accepted the call to serve as commander-in-chief, he refused any salary or other compensation. He asked merely that his actual war expenses be paid from the public treasury.

In writing to John Hancock, president of Congress at the time, on June 16, 1775, he said:

As to pay, Sir, I beg leave to assure Congress, that as no pecuniary consideration could have tempted me to accept this arduous employment at the expense of my domestic ease and happiness, I do not wish to make any profit from it. I will keep an exact account of my expenses. Those I doubt not they will discharge, and that is all I desire.

His ability to inspire his soldiers was remarkable. As the war was barely getting underway, he wrote to his men from headquarters in New York, August 23, 1776:

The Enemy have now landed on Long Island, and the hour is fast approaching, on which the Honor and Success of this army, and the safety of our bleeding Country, depend. Remember officers and Soldiers, that you are Freemen, fighting for the blessings of Liberty—that slavery will be your portion, and that of your posterity, if you do not acquit yourselves like men. Remember how your courage and spirit have been despised and traduced by your cruel invaders; though they have found by dear experience at Boston, Charlestown and other places, what a few brave men contending in their own land, and in the best of causes can do, against base hirelings and mercenaries. . . .

He was as honest as Abraham Lincoln and was equally deliberate. Washington was slow to reach conclusions, always seeking to hear all sides of a question. But when decisions came, they were well-founded.

The general had blue eyes and brown hair, although in later years, especially during events of state, he wore a powdered wig, as did most other leading government officials of the day.

It was Thomas Jefferson who urged him to accept both his first and second terms as president. Washington was offered a third but declined, being convinced that two terms should be the maximum for any president. When Jefferson persuaded him to accept his second term, he said to Washington: "The confidence of the whole Union is centered in you. North and South will hang together if they have you to hang on."

This was literally true both during and after the war. It was his tremendous influence—often exerted in silence—that held the constitutional convention together. When he was elected its president, no other candidate was even considered.

There he again demonstrated his fairness, his impartiality, and his vision in shaping the terms of the Constitution. His word was seldom questioned. There was no need for it. He possessed seemingly inspired wisdom. His perception was such as few if any other men had at that convention. He knew that from that assembly must evolve a government of the people, by the people, and for the people, and it was accomplished.

When the work was finished, he looked back on the long, hard debates and conflicts between men of various interests and geographical areas and commented that indeed, it was nothing short of a miracle. The differences between the various regions had truly seemed insurmountable. Only through divine Providence was the common understanding achieved.

On Washington's death, Jefferson said, "Never did nature and fortune combine more perfectly to make a man great, and to place him in . . . an everlasting remembrance." (Wilson Sullivan, The Presidents, American Heritage, 1968, 1:11.)

It was Jefferson who had served as Washington's secretary of state, through which assignment he came to know the president intimately, and he revered him.

Benjamin Franklin was an old man when the war broke out, seventy years old, in fact. He was born January 17, 1706, in Boston, Massachusetts. His father, Josiah, married young and had seven children. Josiah's wife then died and he married again, having ten children by the second wife.

Benjamin was the tenth son born to his father. Since he was his "tithe" son, the father wanted him to enter the ministry. Young Benjamin was quick of mind and a good reader, having learned to read at an early age. In fact, he said he did not remember a time when he could not read. But under the custom of all boys learning a trade of some kind, Benjamin was taken out of school at the age of ten, having had only two years of formal education, and was apprenticed to his own father, making candles. He disliked the trade, and wanted to go to sea as had one of his older brothers. His father was strongly opposed to that, however, and apprenticed him to his brother James, a printer. Here Benjamin learned the printing trade and subsequently became a newspaper publisher.

He was an avid reader and a profound student all his life. By the time he was twenty-three, he had his own newspaper, the Pennsylvania Gazette, which eventually became the Saturday Evening Post.

Franklin was a man of widely varied attainments. He was a statesman, a soap maker, a candle maker, and a printer; he was a student of ocean currents and tides, a scientist, an inventor, and an electrician.

He founded the University of Pennsylvania and was a leading factor in establishing the first hospital in Philadelphia. As a self-taught man he spoke French, Italian, Spanish, German, and Latin.

He set up the first mail-delivery system in Philadelphia and was prominent in extending such service elsewhere in the United States and Canada, including Quebec and Montreal.

He organized Philadelphia's first fire department and reformed the police department.

He promoted the first daylight savings time in America.

His inventions were numerous. One of the simplest but most beneficial to his time was the invention of a type of stove with specially designed flues that increased the heat in a room by twice with much less fuel consumption. William Pitt, great British statesman, told the House of Lords that Franklin should be rated with Isaac Newton as a scientist, so highly was he regarded in Europe.

Franklin was the only man to sign all four of the following documents: the Declaration of Independence, the Treaty of Alliance with France, the Treaty of Peace with England, and the Constitution of the United States. The Europeans themselves said that he was the ablest American diplomat ever sent abroad.

His influence at the constitutional convention was tremendous. He stood with Washington on the basic fundamentals of the formation of a strong Union.

When it seemed that the delegates could not agree on a one-house Congress as had been urged, he was instrumental in bringing about the "Great Compromise" whereby a lower house would be made up of representation from the various states based on population, with a senate in which every state would have equal representation—two senators for each. The states with small populations had strong local loyalties and had been frightened that they might be completely absorbed by the large ones if there were a one-house Congress and if representation were based on population alone.

The compromise was acceptable to everyone. Both large and small states could now retain their own individuality, feeling that in the Senate small states would have equal voting strength with the large ones, and thus the rights of all would be protected.

Washington felt deeply indebted to Franklin for his great and wise influence. He said at one time: "No one entertains more respect for your character, none can salute you with more sincerity or with greater pleasure than I."

Carl Van Doren, in his biography of Benjamin Franklin, said that Washington and Franklin were the two outstanding delegates at the constitutional convention, and that "without their presence and support the Convention would never command the full respect of the people."

Franklin indeed was one of the greatest Americans of all time. In one of his many writings he penned the following:

It is said that the Persians, in their ancient constitution, had public schools in which virtue was taught as a liberal art or science. It is certainly of more consequence to a man that he has learned to govern his passions in spite of temptation, to be temperate in his pleasures, to support himself with fortitude under his misfortunes, to behave with prudence, in all of his affairs, and in every circumstance of life—I say it is of much more real advantage to him to be thus qualified than to be a master of all the arts and sciences in the whole world besides. Virtue itself alone is sufficient to make a man great.

He also said this:

We are spirits. That bodies should be lent us while they can afford us pleasure, assist us in acquiring knowledge, or in doing good to our fellow creatures, is a kind and benevolent act of God. When they become unfit for these purposes and afford us pain instead of pleasure, instead of an aid become an encumbrance, and answer none of the intentions for which they were given, it is equally kind and benevolent that a way be provided by which we may get rid of them. Death is that way.

Franklin's self-written epitaph reads:

The body of Benjamin Franklin printer (Like the cover of an old book, Its contents torn out, And stript of its lettering and gilding) Lies here, food for worms. Yet the work itself shall not be lost, For it will, as he believ'd, Appear once more In a new And more beautiful edition, Corrected and amended By its Author!

It was Franklin who made the earnest appeal for daily prayers at the constitutional convention. The delegates had debated long and hard with considerable bitterness when he arose and suggested that clergymen be invited daily to open the sessions with an invocation to God.

Said Franklin:

If a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without His notice, is it probable that an empire can rise without His aid? I believe without His concurring aid we shall succeed in this political building no better than the building of Babel.

His motion failed, but it did have the effect of cooling the tempers of the delegates. Afterward Franklin wrote in his notes: "The convention, except for three or four persons, thought prayers unnecessary."

So although there were the irreligious involved in those critical times, the great leaders were indeed prayerful men, and they were the truly influential ones. They were the ones whom God had raised up as his leaders for this work. It was through these humble and prayerful patriots "whom I raised up unto this very purpose" that God worked his miracle, and Franklin was certainly one of them. They had the light of inspiration. They had the true concept of republican government in mind. They led the way, and the others eventually followed, no matter how noisy they had been during the debates in the convention.

Franklin was a peace-loving man. He had worked for thirteen years to avert the war with England, but when it came, he fully supported it as the only means of achieving justice for the Americans. However, when the war was over, he was glad. In one of his letters we read:

I join with you most cordially in rejoicing at the return of peace. I hope it will be lasting, and that mankind will at length, as they call themselves reasonable creatures, have reason enough to settle their differences without cutting throats; for in my opinion, there never was a good war, or a bad peace.

What additions to the conveniences and comforts of life might mankind have acquired if the money spent on wars had been employed in works of utility!

What an extension of agriculture, even to the tops of the mountains; what rivers rendered navigable or joined by canals; what bridges, aqueducts, new roads and other public works, edifices, and improvements might have been obtained by spending those millions in doing good, which, in the last war, have been spent in doing mischief in bringing misery into thousands of families and destroying the lives of many working people who might have performed the useful labors.

Justice is as strictly due between neighbor nations as between neighbor citizens. A highwayman is as much a robber when he plunders in a gang as when single; and a nation that makes an unjust war is only a great gang.

He wrote the following as his creed:

I believe in one God, the Creator of the universe. That he governs it by his providence. That he ought to be worshipped. That the most acceptable Service we render to him is doing good to his other children. That the soul of Man is immortal, and will be treated with Justice in another life respecting its Conduct in this. (Letter to Ezra Stiles, March 9, 1790.)

He indeed was one of the wise men "raised up" by the Lord. The Prophet Joseph Smith so regarded him. When the Prophet became a candidate for the presidency of the United States, he issued a statement on government in which he spoke of Franklin as "that golden patriot, Benjamin Franklin."
