Mark E. Petersen, Great Prologue ( 1975)

14

EARLY PRESIDENTS

Much can be said of the strength of the men whom the Lord raised up "for this very purpose," speaking of the establishment of the American government.

They were exceptional in many ways. They even had the spirit of martyrdom. They had offered their lives and all they had in the war for freedom. They felt an intense loyalty to the new country. They were honest, courageous, and without an exception God-fearing men.

It is no wonder, then, that the Almighty could work through them. And he did, all toward one purpose: the launching of his great work of restoring the gospel and preaching the word to all nations, in fulfillment of the promise made to Abraham.

PRESIDENT GEORGE WASHINGTON, inaugurated April 30, 1789, left an invaluable legacy to the United States as he concluded his service as our first president.

With forthrightness he had been God's instrument in winning the war. In many respects he was like Moroni, the noted general of the Book of Mormon, who, with similar concepts in mind, hoisted his banner of liberty.

Washington was the personification of honesty, even as Lincoln, with whom he became a supreme example of integrity in public office. He had the true vision of one united nation of separate states, with an inspired Constitution to give strength to the whole, but with liberty assured to the several units.

As he wrote to Henry Knox from Philadelphia, August 19, 1787, the new American government must be such "that it can never be in danger of degenerating into a monarchy, an oligarchy, an aristocracy, or any other despotic or oppressive form, so long as there shall remain any virtue in the body of the people."

Again he wrote to Knox under date of October 15, 1787, and declared:

The power under the Constitution will always be in the people. It is entrusted for certain defined purposes and for a limited period, to representatives of their own choosing; and whenever it is executed contrary to their interest, or not agreeable to their wishes, their servants can and undoubtedly will be recalled.

Washington believed in representative government but insisted that elected officials consider themselves only as the servants, not the masters, of the people, and that they be fully accountable to the electorate at large. He then concluded this letter to Knox with these frightening words: "Should the states reject this excellent Constitution, the probability is that an opportunity will never again offer to cancel another in peace,—the next will be drawn in blood."

The Lord established America as a sovereign nation, separate, independent, and free, giving to its citizens rights and privileges that were not known among other nations. American freedom was looked upon from abroad as a peculiar and hopeless experiment in government. Of course it was peculiar and different. It came from God. And Washington was one of the Lord's great servants in bringing it about.

Washington also taught America how to deal effectively with other powers, and warned her against foreign alliances and entanglements. He implanted in American minds the great fact that success could come to the nation only in direct ratio to her reliance upon divine Providence.

How can we ever forget his inaugural words? ". . . we ought to be no less persuaded that the propitious smiles of Heaven can never be expected on a nation that disregards the eternal rules of order and right which Heaven itself has ordained. . . ."

JOHN ADAMS was second president of the United States. He was inaugurated March 4, 1797, in the senate chamber in Philadelphia.

He was vice-president during both of Washington's terms and earlier had served in the Continental Congress. He was regarded there as a most vigorous delegate. He had strongly urged that the colonies sacrifice their regional interests in favor of a united nation and that each colony during the war contribute generously to the one continental army under Washington. He also had served on the committee that drew up the Declaration of Independence.

Being slightly obese, Adams was not cut out for the military, so he went into diplomacy and assisted Franklin greatly in his dealings with European courts.

Troubles with France marked his administration. Although in the United States there was divided feeling between pro-British on one hand and pro-French on the other in a new dispute between those two European powers, Adams skillfully kept America in a neutral position.

He was a devout man, too, a Unitarian.

He was sixty-one when he became president. As he was inaugurated, he said: ". . . may that Being who is supreme over all, the Patron of Order, the Fountain of Justice, the Protector in all ages of the world, of virtuous liberty, continue His blessing upon this nation and its Government and give it all possible success and duration consistent with the ends of His providence."

THOMAS JEFFERSON came into the presidency on March 4, 1801, and was inaugurated in the Capitol Building at Washington.

Few men had given as much to the creation of the United States as had he. Few men loved his country more.

Jefferson was a tall, red-haired Virginian. His idea of democracy included the concept of "a nation of land owners living under as little government as possible." He gave sixty years of public life to the proposition of "eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of man."

He doubled the territory of the United States during his term by completing the Louisiana Purchase, which gave to America, for the sum of fifteen million dollars, the Mississippi River Valley, New Orleans, and the vast territory to the west held by France and Spain alternately. It was he who had sent out Lewis and Clark to explore the region.

Not only was Jefferson the author of the Declaration of Independence, but he also wrote the Virginia civil code. He founded the state university of that state, and devised the decimal system of coinage in dollars and cents.

Since he was one of the foremost intellectuals of his day, he amassed a large library, which ultimately became the nucleus of the Library of Congress.

Under his presidency, Congress passed a law prohibiting further slave trade.

Like Washington, Jefferson was a devout man, a lover of peace, but a fearless defender of the right. He urged upon his countrymen the philosophy—so like Washington's—"peace, commerce and honest friendship with all nations, but entangling alliances with none."

He, like Washington, had fought earnestly in the constitutional convention for freedom of religion, opposing to the last the suggestions that had been made that a state religion be established in America, with the Church of England being the denomination.

"In matters of religion," he said, "I have considered that its free exercise is placed by government, by the Constitution, independent of the powers of the general government."

In taking the powers of presidency he said to his countrymen:

I shall need, too, the favor of that Being in whose hands we are, who led our fathers, as Israel of old, from their native land and planted them in a country flowing with all the necessaries and comforts of life; who has covered our infancy with His providence and our riper years with His wisdom and power, and to whose goodness I ask you to join in supplication with me that He will enlighten the mind of your servants, guide their councils and prosper their measures, that whatsoever they do shall result in your good, and shall secure to you the peace, friendship and approbation of all nations.

As is seen from this quotation, he, like Washington and many other patriots, believed that God had brought his people to America and blessed them in their infant government as well as in their riper years. He prayed that "that Infinite Power which rules the destinies of the Universe lead our councils to what is best and give them favorable issue for our peace and prosperity."

Although preeminently a statesman, Jefferson had many other sides. He was a skilled lawyer and writer, a naturalist, a farmer, an architect, a musician, a linguist, a philosopher, a botanist, and a paleontologist. It is said that some of his chief interests were fossils, mathematics, and grammar. He read Latin, French, Greek, and Spanish. He compiled Indian vocabularies, studied fauna and flora, and had a hobby of collecting old coins.

As a connoisseur of art, he had one of the finest collections of sculpture and paintings in America. He was a graduate of William and Mary College, an outstanding jurist, and a Virginian, one of ten children.

JAMES MADISON was the fourth president, another patriot of the war of Independence, another devoted adherent of the Constitution. By some he was called the "father of the Constitution" for his valiant labors in its behalf.

He served well with Washington and was Jefferson's secretary of state, after a long period in Congress. He was a giant in statesmanship, although a very small man physically. Madison was only five feet six inches tall and weighed a scant one hundred pounds. But he was such an orator that when he spoke, few thought of his physical condition.

He was a scholar of great attainment. He knew both Hebrew and Greek. Although he was one of the youngest men in the Continental Congress, he was one of the most skilled. He led the debates on the Bill of Rights. He was one of the great men of that day who sought to abolish slavery. To use his words, he pleaded for "the extinguishment of slavery in the United States."

Madison also recognized the hand of God in the creation of the new nation. Said he, on being inaugurated March 4, 1809: "In these [the virtues of my fellow citizens] my confidence will under every difficulty be best placed, next to that which we have all been encouraged to feel in the guardianship and guidance of the Almighty Being whose power regulates the destiny of nations whose blessings have been so conspicuously dispensed to this rising republic. . . ."

JAMES MONROE was the fifth president. He had been a soldier in Washington's continental army, having joined when eighteen years old. He became a captain and was appointed an aide to General Lafayette. Washington spoke of him as a brave, active, and sensible officer.

He was a pupil and protege of Jefferson in the law. He enjoyed a period of peace in his administration, which began in 1817 and concluded in 1825.

He was the author of the Monroe Doctrine, America's most famous foreign policy statement. He was an Episcopalian and a lawyer. He was U.S. minister to both France and England, was secretary of state and secretary of war, and served successfully in Congress. He too was a Virginian.

Like his predecessors, he recognized the hand of God in the creation of America, and prayed at his first inauguration that "the Almighty . . . will be graciously pleased to continue to us this protection which He has already conspicuously displayed in our favor."

JOHN QUINCY ADAMS, the sixth in this series of Revolutionary War patriots to hold the office of president, was in fact but a youth during the open warfare. However, having been born and reared in the home of his father, the great John Adams, he was effectively indoctrinated and trained in all of the fundamentals for which the Americans had fought.

John Quincy Adams came into power March 4, 1825. He lacked the advice of such men as Washington, Franklin, and Hamilton, all of whom were now dead, but he had been trained well by his father in all of the philosophies of free government. John Adams and Thomas Jefferson were still alive in 1825, but within a year of John Quincy Adams' inauguration, they both passed on.

The new president became embroiled in severe conflicts with Henry Clay and Andrew Jackson over political ideologies. The debates at times were fierce. But be it said to his credit that he constantly pleaded "that the nation's welfare should be placed ahead of party considerations."

In his inaugural address he said: "I shall look for whatever success may attend my public service, and knowing that 'except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain,' with fervent supplications for His favor, to His overruling providence, I commit with humble but fearless confidence, my own fate and the future destinies of my country."

He too was a Unitarian. He had studied in Paris, at The Hague, in Amsterdam, and at Harvard. He was a lawyer and university professor. He had served as minister to Prussia, Great Britain, and The Netherlands. He had served also as secretary of state and as a member of the U.S. Senate. There were twenty-seven states in the Union when he became president.

In the election of 1824, Andrew Jackson was his opponent. Although Jackson had more votes than Adams, none of the four candidates had the required majority, so the election was taken to the House of Representatives, which chose Adams.

John Quincy Adams was a man of impeccable character and was regarded as one of the most effective congressmen of his time. He was so persuasive in his public speaking that he was dubbed "Old Man Eloquence."
