Mark E. Petersen, Great Prologue ( 1975)

15

THE CURTAIN RISES

The time had now arrived for the curtain to rise on the next vital act in the Lord's great drama of latter days.

Washington died in 1799, closing his great performance on the Almighty's stage of preparation. Six years later—to the very month—Joseph Smith was born. Events now began to move rapidly toward the reestablishment of the Lord's true church and kingdom on earth. From Joseph's birth only fourteen years went by—from Washington's death, only two decades—until the Father and the Son appeared in vision in the Sacred Grove.

What an event! The shackles of spiritual bondage now collapsed, and the Lord set his hand for the last time to gather Israel.

Nephi had said that after the house of Israel was scattered and confounded, the Lord would raise up a mighty nation among the Gentiles. This was now accomplished through the men whom he had "raised up for this very purpose."

Then, said Nephi, after this had been achieved, "the Lord God will proceed to do a marvelous work among the Gentiles." (See 1 Nephi 22:8-9.)

It was also as the Savior had taught the ancient Nephites:

For it is wisdom in the Father that they [the Gentiles] should be established in this land, and be set up as a free people by the power of the Father, that these things [the gospel] might come forth from them unto a remnant of your seed, that the covenant of the Father may be fulfilled which he hath covenanted with his people, O house of Israel. (3 Nephi 21:4. Italics added.)

Modern Israel, therefore, would be gathered by the preaching of his restored gospel through the labors of those Gentiles, and they would be gathered as a necessary preliminary to the second coming of the Lord. But the gospel must be restored first, for it would be the means of gathering.

A preparer of the way also must come:

Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in; behold, he shall come, saith the Lord of hosts. (Malachi 3:1.)

Joseph Smith was that messenger.

How like John the Baptist he was. Each prepared the way for an advent of the Savior, John in the meridian of time, Joseph opening the way for the glorious second coming of the Lord prior to the millennial reign.

John had preached: "Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." So did Joseph Smith. The Prophet Esaias described John as "the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight." (Matthew 3:2-3.) Joseph's message was the same.

John came testifying of the Savior. So did Joseph. John cried out: ". . . one mightier than I cometh, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire." (Luke 3:16.)

It was John who, after baptizing the Savior, heard the voice of God from heaven identifying the Lord as his beloved Son. It was he who saw the sign of the Holy Ghost descending from heaven and alighting upon Jesus. It was he now, in turn, who could identify the Christ to all about him, and this he did, beginning with his own disciples, whom he had prepared to accept the Savior when he came and whom he had converted to the anticipated Son of God.

This bore out the words of the angel who foretold to Zachariah the purpose of the mission of John:

For He shall be great in the sight of the Lord. . . .

And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God.

And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, . . . to make ready a people prepared for the Lord. (Luke 1:15-17.)

This was a necessary part of his preparing of the way. John's disciples must be converted to Jesus as the Christ and must become the Lord's followers. This was the manner in which John prepared the way. This was the purpose of John's coming.

So as Jesus walked by one day, and John was standing with some of his followers, the Baptist said to them: "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world. This is he of whom I said, After me cometh a man which is preferred before me: for he was before me."

John further declared to them, by way of definitely identifying the Savior, "I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God." (John 1:29-30, 34.)

So John's disciples followed Jesus, as was intended.

Again the next day after John stood, and two of his disciples;

And looking upon Jesus as he walked, he saith, Behold the Lamb of God!

And the two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus.

Then Jesus turned, and saw them following, and saith unto them, What seek ye? They said unto him, Rabbi, (which is to say, being interpreted, Master,) where dwellest thou?

He saith unto them, Come and see. They came and saw where he dwelt, and abode with him that day: for it was about the tenth hour.

One of the two which heard John speak, and followed him, was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother.

He first findeth his own brother Simon, and saith unto him, We have found the Messias, which is, being interpreted, the Christ.

And he brought him to Jesus. And when Jesus beheld him, he said, Thou art Simon the son of Jona: thou shalt be called Cephas, which is by interpretation, A stone.

The day following Jesus would go forth into Galilee, and findeth Philip, and saith unto him, Follow me.

Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter.

Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith unto him, We have found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.

And Nathanael said unto him, Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? Philip saith unto him, Come and see.

Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and saith of him, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!

Nathanael saith unto him, Whence knowest thou me? Jesus answered and said unto him, Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee.

Nathanael answered and saith unto him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel.

Jesus answered and said unto him, Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, believest thou? thou shalt see greater things than these.

And he saith unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man. (John 1:35-51.)

For a time after Jesus began his work, John also continued in his ministry, making all the converts he could, and to all he preached Christ, the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world. While baptizing in Aenon, near Salim, he again testified of the Lord in language so beautiful that his words might have come from the lips of the Savior himself. Said John at this time:

Ye yourselves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am sent before him.

He that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's voice: this my joy therefore is fulfilled.

He must increase, but I must decrease.

He that cometh from above is above all: he that is of the earth is earthly, and speaketh of the earth: he that cometh from heaven is above all.

And what he hath seen and heard, that he testifieth; and no man receiveth his testimony.

He that hath received his testimony hath set to his seal that God is true.

For he whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God: for God giveth not the Spirit by measure unto him.

The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things unto his hand.

He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him. (John 3:28-36.)

John, therefore, prepared the way for the Christ by preaching Jesus even before the Lord's actual ministry began, and he did so in unmistakable terms.

As John made perfectly clear in the minds of his own followers that Jesus was the Son of God, he whom John preached and clearly identified, those disciples accepted the Lord, just as John intended.

Was it not He who John said would give them the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost? And would they not need that latter ordinance to make their baptism at John's hands complete?

So harmonious were the works of John and Jesus.

Recognizing that his mission would decline, now that the Savior had arrived on the scene, John told his disciples that he himself would decrease and that Jesus would increase. John's work was about completed; his purpose had been accomplished; he had gathered a congregation of believers who gladly accepted Jesus as John's heralded superior, whose shoe laces, John said, he was unworthy to undo.

Since John had so nobly filled his mission and made available to Jesus this nucleus of believers whom he had converted for this very purpose, can anyone wonder that Jesus called John the greatest prophet born of woman? (See Luke 7:28.)

What a calling it was to introduce the Son of God, the Savior of the world, as he began his ministry! And what an advantage it was to the Lord to have John turn over to Jesus a group of earnest believers in the midst of an unbelieving and hostile populace! With them he could begin to build his church, adding, of course, all who were converted by the Lord's own miracles and teachings.

Joseph Smith was the modern counterpart of John the Baptist. He too was a preparer of the way. He too identified to a doubting world Jesus the Christ, the Son of God, the Messiah of the Jews, the Savior of the Christians. And he likewise provided believers—now increased into the millions—willing to receive their Lord at his coming.

As John's followers looked forward to their coming Messiah as preached by the Baptist, so the followers of Joseph Smith today look toward the glorious second coming of the Master.

Joseph's testimony of Jesus was like that of John. Each saw the Lord face to face and talked with him as one man speaketh to another. John saw him in mortality; Joseph saw him in resurrected form. But both saw him and knew him and testified of him.

Who can doubt Joseph's words as he with Oliver Cowdery said:

We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber.

His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying:

I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father. (D&C 110:2-4.)

And who is there to dispute this declaration of Joseph and Sidney Rigdon:

And we beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his fulness;

And saw the holy angels, and them who are sanctified before his throne, worshiping God, and the Lamb, who worship him forever and ever.

And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voices bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God. (D&C 76:20-24.)

Joseph was assailed even as a fourteen-year-old boy for announcing that he had seen God. He wrote:

It caused me serious reflection then, and often has since, how very strange it was that an obscure boy, of a little over fourteen years of age, and one, too, who was doomed to the necessity of obtaining a scanty maintenance by his daily labor, should be thought a character of sufficient importance to attract the attention of the great ones of the most popular sects of the day, and in a manner to create in them a spirit of the most bitter perseuction and reviling. But strange or not, so it was, and it was often the cause of great sorrow to myself.

However, it was nevertheless a fact that I had beheld a vision. I have thought since, that I felt much like Paul, when he made his defense before King Agrippa, and related the account of the vision he had when he saw a light, and heard a voice; but still there were but few who believed him; some said he was dishonest, others said he was mad; and he was ridiculed and reviled. But all this did not destroy the reality of his vision. He had seen a vision, he knew he had, and all the persecution under heaven could not make it otherwise; and though they should persecute him unto death, yet he knew, and would know to his latest breath, that he had both seen a light and heard a voice speaking unto him, and all the world could not make him think or believe otherwise.

So it was with me. I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two Personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart: Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision; and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation. (Joseph Smith 2:23-25.)

What would have happened to Joseph if he had borne such a testimony in lands having no religous freedom?

What would a state church have done to him? In Europe people were burned at the stake for merely reading the Bible. If scripture reading was subject to such persecution, how would a vision of God have been received?

In this regard, President Joseph F. Smith said:

This great American nation the Almighty raised up by the power of his omnipotent hand, that it might be possible in the latter days for the kingdom of God to be established in the earth. If the Lord had not prepared the way by laying the foundation of this glorious nation, it would have been impossible (under the stringent laws and bigotry of the monarchical governments of the world) to have laid the foundations for the coming of his great kingdom. The Lord has done this. His hand has been over this nation, and it is his purpose and design to enlarge it, make it glorious above all others, and to give it dominion, and power over the earth, to the end that those who are kept in bondage and serfdom may be brought to the enjoyment of the fullest freedom and liberty of conscience possible for intelligent men to exercise in the earth. (Gospel Doctrine, p. 409.)

Yes, a free land was required for God's modern work, and the Lord provided it. He knew what he was doing when he set up—by act of the Father—a nation in which men could worship God according to the dictates of their own consciences.

So he prepared America for the gospel restoration. In this land was his work given to modern mankind, and it will continue to spread from here to other lands until the Lord appears as King of kings, and Lord of lords.
