Mark E. Petersen, Great Prologue ( 1975)

16

AMERICA'S FUTURE

The future of the United States is glorious, but a cleansing must precede its final destiny.

As has been seen, the establishment of this nation was a necessary early step toward the final acts of the great latter-day drama of the Lord. The restoration of the gospel and the kingdom of God is, of course, likewise prologue to the coming of the Savior.

To restore the kingdom of God is one thing; to bring its mission to fruition is quite another. But it will come—and on this land. Indeed it will be glorious.

The kingdom of God is now on earth. It is The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The kingdom of heaven is yet to come, to be merged with the kingdom of God when Christ reigns.

President Joseph F. Smith defined the kingdom of God like this: "What I mean by the kingdom of God is the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, over which the Son of God presides, and not man. That is what I mean." (Gospel Doctrine, p. 72.)

In October of 1831 the Lord gave a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, section 65 of the Doctrine and Covenants, in which he said: "Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight."

It was like the message of John the Baptist heard again in modern times.

Giving an insight into the future events and the meaning of it all, the Lord then continued:

The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto men on the earth, and from thence shall the gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole earth.

Yea, a voice crying—Prepare ye the way of the Lord, prepare ye the supper of the Lamb, make ready for the Bridegroom.

Again how like it is to the Baptist's warning at the first advent of Christ. The Lord then added:

Call upon the Lord, that his kingdom may go forth upon the earth, that the inhabitants thereof may receive it, and be prepared for the days to come, in the which the Son of Man shall come down in heaven, clothed in the brightness of his glory, to meet the kingdom of God which is set up on the earth.

Wherefore, may the kingdom of God go forth, that the kingdom of heaven may come, that thou, O God, mayest be glorified in heaven so on earth, that thine enemies may be subdued; for thine is the honor, power and glory, forever and ever. (Italics added.)

It is a remarkable revelation, and it will be fulfilled here in America. The great modern city of New Jerusalem will be built in Jackson County, Missouri (see D&C 57), in the heartland of America. That is what the centuries of preparation were all about.

The Prophet Joseph declared that "the whole of America is Zion itself from north to south, and is described by the Prophets, who declare that it is the Zion where the mountain of the Lord should be, and that it should be in the center of the land." (History of the Church, 6:318-19.)

Jackson County is equidistant from coast to coast and from border to border in the United States. It is the center of the land, and there the city of Zion, or the New Jerusalem, will be built, a place of refuge and peace for the latter days.

How important this is! What a great destiny! How wonderful is the future of America!

It is just as we say in our tenth Article of Faith:

We believe in the literal gathering of Israel and in the restoration of the Ten Tribes; that Zion will be built upon this [the American] continent; that Christ will reign personally upon the earth; and, that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory.

And it is as Isaiah said so long ago when he looked to our day: ". . . for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem" (Isaiah 2:3), and this to all the world.

By revelation in July 1831, the Lord designated Jackson County as the place for the city of Zion. (See D&C 57 and 58.)

The presiding brethren went from Kirtland to Independence, Missouri, where, under the direction of the Prophet Joseph, that land was dedicated by Sidney Rigdon on August 2, 1831. The Saints from Colesville, who had settled in Kew County, Missouri, were directed by the Prophet in laying the first log "for a house, as a foundation of Zion, in that place." The log was carried by twelve men representing the twelve tribes of Israel.

Wrote the Prophet: "It was a season of joy to those present, and afforded a glimpse of the future, which time will yet unfold to the satisfaction of the faithful." (Joseph Fielding Smith, Essentials in Church History, Deseret Book, 1974, p. 110, Italics added.)

The words of President Rigdon as he consecrated the land are the interesting: "I now pronounce this land consecrated and dedicated unto the Lord for a possession and inheritance for the Saints, and for all the faithful servants of the Lord to the remotest ages of time. In the name of Jesus Christ, having authority from Him. Amen." (History of the Church, 1:196. Italics added.)

The faithful Saints made a heroic effort to build the city at that time, as the Lord had directed. Great divine promises were made to them if they would do so faithfully. But there were dissonants among them who hedged up their way and who caused discontent and even enmity among some of the Saints, and this was displeasing to the Lord.

It was the plan of the Lord that the city of Zion should actually be started at that time, or he would not have called his people there for that purpose. But he can only work on righteous principles, and when his people do not observe his commandments, he cannot work through them.

As he projected the city of Zion at that time, he said that "the city of New Jerusalem shall be built by the gathering of the saints, beginning at this place, even the place of the temple, which temple shall be reared in this generation." (D&C 84:4.) That was his instruction. He was ready to proceed with this great undertaking—if the people were worthy and able. He had given revelation commanding the Saints to gather there to build the city and the temple. Many had already arrived, and many more were expected.

As the Lord described the temple to them—the building they were invited and commanded to erect—he said that "this generation shall not all pass away until an house shall be built unto the Lord, and a cloud shall rest upon it, which cloud shall be even the glory of the Lord, which shall fill the house." (D&C 84:5.)

Some of those Saints were later to see this very thing take place at the Kirtland Temple, where indeed the glory of the Lord was present.

But the promises thus made by the Lord for Jackson County rested upon the obedience and righteousness of the Saints. He gave them the opportunity, one of the most blessed in the latter days, to erect the temple and city of Zion. But they could not—or did not.

A number of the brothers and sisters became rebellious and by doing so made it impossible for the Lord to use them in this holy enterprise, the building of Zion. Their stubbornness cancelled out all of the sacred promises so far as they themselves were concerned and forced an indefinite postponement of their fulfillment.

Hence, in their day neither the city nor the temple could be built as the Lord had promised them if only they had been faithful. By their wickedness they forfeited this great privilege. The work now must await a later and more righteous generation of Saints.

Because of the Saints' lack of harmony, the Lord allowed the mobs to come upon them all, worthy and unworthy alike, and the whole colony was driven out, the obedient, as usual, being compelled to suffer with and because of their disobedient brothers and sisters.

Since such impressive promises had been made concerning the building of the city and its temple at that time, and since now all seemed to be lost, the Prophet Joseph was deeply disturbed. He could not understand why the Lord had allowed the mobs to so afflict the Saints. He pleaded in humble prayer for an answer and was told:

1, the Lord, have suffered the affliction to come upon them, wherewith they have been afflicted, in consequence of their transgressions.

Behold, I say unto you, there were jarrings, and contentions, and envyings, and strifes, and lustful and covetous desires among them; therefore by these things they polluted their inheritances.

They were slow to hearken unto the voice of the Lord their God; therefore, the Lord their God is slow to hearken unto their prayers, to answer them in the day of their trouble.

In the day of their peace they esteemed lightly my counsel; but, in the day of their trouble, of necessity they feel after me. (D&C 101:2, 6-8.)

Thus the Lord withdrew his promised blessing, allowing the mobs to prevail, and the Saints were forced to leave their Zion.

Were the plans of the Lord then to be frustrated? No! They never are! But in this, as in other instances where the people have disobeyed, he simply postponed his plans. And so he said: "Therefore, in consequence of the transgressions of my people, it is expedient in me that mine elders should wait for a little season for the redemption of Zion." (D&C 105:9.)

So all was postponed: the building of the city, the construction of the great temple, the gathering of the people to that place. The promises that had been made were for the time being suspended.

But all this was only a postponement. Otherwise, plans were not changed. "Zion shall not be moved out of her place," the Lord promised; the Saints will yet return "to build up the waste places of Zion—And all these things that the prophets might be fulfilled. And, behold, there is none other place appointed; neither shall there be any other place appointed. . . ." (D&C 101:17-20.)

So in the Lord's own time the city will yet rise in its glory. In the Lord's own time his temple will yet be erected. A new generation will be allowed to carry on instead of those who began it, but who, "because of transgression," were not permitted to continue it. Transgressors cannot build the city of Zion nor its temple, for "Zion cannot be built up unless it is by the principles of the law of the celestial kingdom; otherwise I cannot receive her unto myself." (D&C 105:5. Italics added.)

But Jackson County—in the United States—is still the place for it, and its development will be a part of the future destiny of America.

In writing to N. E. Seaton, a publisher in Rochester, New York, on January 4, 1833, the Prophet Joseph said:

The city of Zion spoken of by David, in the one hundred and second Psalm, will be built upon the land of America. "And the ransomed shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads" (Isaiah xxxv: 10); and then they will be delivered from the overflowing scourge that shall pass through the land. But Judah shall obtain deliverance at Jerusalem. See Joel ii:32; Isaiah xxvi: 20 and 21; Jeremiah xxxi:12; Psalm 1:5;Ezekiel xxxiv: 11, 12 and 13. These are testimonies that the Good Shepherd will put forth his own sheep, and lead them out from all nations where they have been scattered in a cloudy and dark day, to Zion, and to Jerusalem. . . . (History of the Church, 1:315. Italics added.)

In the same letter he predicted that the United States will be cleansed of the wicked by pestilence, hail, famine, and earthquake "to open and prepare the way for the return of the lost tribes of Israel." (Ibid.)

The overflowing scourge he refers to is mentioned by the Lord in section 5 of the Doctrine and Covenants, wherein he says:

For a desolating scourge shall go forth among the inhabitants of the earth, and shall continue to be poured out from time to time, if they repent not, until the earth is empty, and the inhabitants thereof are consumed away and utterly destroyed by the brightness of my coming.

Behold, I tell you these things, even as I also told the people of the destruction of Jerusalem [Matthew 24]; and my word shall be verified at this time as it hath hitherto been verified. (D&C 5:19-20.)

It is referred to likewise in Doctrine and Covenants 45:31.

But the Prophet, as above quoted, says the righteous will be delivered from this affliction. Also in the United States, the Ancient of Days, Father Adam, who is Michael the archangel, will come prior to the final day, there to meet the Saints and the Savior. That will be at Adam-ondi-Ahman, which again is in Missouri.

President Wilford Woodruff quoted Brigham Young as saying, "Joseph, the Prophet, told me that the Garden of Eden was in Jackson County, Missouri. When Adam was driven out he went to the place we now call Adam-ondi-Ahman. Daviess County, Missouri. There he built an altar and offered sacrifices." (Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff: History of his Life and Labors, Bookcraft, p. 481.)

Tribulations will not deter the work of the Lord. Both latter-day movements—the pouring out of tribulations upon the wicked and the forward march of the kingdom of God—will go forward simultaneously, neither one obstructing the other.

Said President Joseph F. Smith:

The kingdom of God is here to grow, to spread abroad, to take root in the earth, and to abide where the Lord has planted it by his own power and by his own word in the earth, never more to be destroyed nor to cease, but to continue until the purposes of the Almighty shall be accomplished, every whit that has been spoken of it by the mouths of the holy prophets since the world began. (Gospel Doctrine, p. 76.)

President John Taylor made this declaration:

It has been asked . . . whether this kingdom will fail. I tell you in the name of Israel's God it will not fail. I tell you in the name of Israel's God it will roll forth, and that the things spoken of by the holy prophets in relation to it will receive their fulfilment. But in connection with this I will tell you another thing: A great many Latter-day Saints will fail, a great many of them are not now and never have been living up to their privileges, and magnifying their callings and their priesthood, and God will have a reckoning with such people, unless they speedily repent. (Gospel Kingdom, p. 137. Italics added.)

President Taylor further said:

When the people shall have torn to shreds the Constitution of the United States, the elders of Israel will be found holding it up to the nations of the earth and proclaiming liberty and equal rights to all men, and extending the hand of fellowship to the oppressed of all nations. This is part of the program, and as long as we do what is right and fear God, he will help us and stand by us under all circumstances. (Gospel Kingdom, p. 219.)

President Harold B. Lee said:

. . . this nation, founded on principles laid down by men whom God raised up, will never fail. . . . I have faith in America; you and I must have faith in America, if we understand the teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ." (Ye Are the Light of the World, Deseret Book, 1974, p. 351. Italics added.)

If we have any doubt about the part the United States will continue to play in this great unfolding drama, President Brigham Young's words will reassure us:

When the day comes in which the Kingdom of God will bear rule, the flag of the United States will proudly flutter unsullied on the flag staff of liberty and equal rights, without a spot to sully its fair surface; the glorious flag our fathers have bequeathed to us will then be unfurled to the breeze by those who have power to hoist it aloft and defend its sanctity.

How long will it be before the words of the prophet Joseph will be fulfilled? He said if the Constitution of the United States were saved at all it must be done by this people. It will not be many years before these words come to pass. (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 360.)

After its cleansing, the United States will go on under righteous leadership, as the "home base" of the Lord's latter-day operations, looking toward the glorious coming of the Holy One of Israel.

Through all the tribulations, the Saints who obey the commandments will be preserved to complete their work.

Said the prophet Nephi concerning these days:

For the time soon cometh that the fulness of the wrath of God shall be poured out upon all the children of men; for he will not suffer that the wicked shall destroy the righteous.

Wherefore, he will preserve the righteous by his power, even if it so be that the fulness of his wrath must come, and the righteous be preserved, even unto the destruction of their enemies by fire. Wherefore, the righteous need not fear; for thus saith the prophet, they shall be saved, even if it so be as by fire.

Behold, my brethren, I say unto you, that these things must shortly come; yea, even blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke must come; and it must needs be upon the face of the earth; and it cometh unto men according to the flesh if it so be that they will harden their hearts against the Holy One of Israel.

For behold, the righteous shall not perish; for the time surely must come that all they who fight against Zion shall be cut off.

And the righteous need not fear, for they are those who shall not be confounded. But it is the kingdom of the devil, which shall be built up among the children of men, which kingdom is established among them which are in the flesh. (2 Nephi 22:16-19, 22.)

And then Nephi concludes:

And now behold, I, Nephi, say unto you that all these things must come according to the flesh.

But, behold, all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people shall dwell safely in the Holy One of Israel if it so be that they will repent. (1 Nephi 22:27-28.)
