Mark E. Petersen, Great Prologue ( 1975)

17

"OF THE FATHER"

Both the Savior and his prophet Nephi declared that this great American drama was "of the Father," referring, of course, to God our Eternal Father.

The very fact that the scriptures would say so is itself highly significant. It is another great testimony to the truthfulness of the entire work of latter days.

The restoration could not be other than "of the Father" or it would violate the divine pattern, for the entire plan of salvation is of him. It was so from the beginning.

In the premortal council in heaven, who presided?

And who chose Jehovah to be the Savior at that time?

And to whom did Jehovah say, in accepting his call, "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever"?

Lucifer, the fallen angel who was soon to become Satan, also knew whence this great plan emanated, as is shown so clearly in the scriptures:

And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying: That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me, saying—Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor.

But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me—Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever.

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down;

And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice. (Moses 4:1-4.)

Or, as Abraham recorded it:

Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born.

And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever.

And the Lord said: Whom shall I send? And one answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me. And another answered and said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said: I will send the first.

And the second was angry, and kept not his first estate; and, at that day, many followed after him. (Abraham 3:22-28.)

Let us next ask, who was in charge during the creation?

Abraham refers to the Creators as "the Gods" and says that "they went down at the beginning, and they, that is the Gods, organized and formed the heavens and the earth." (Abraham 4:1.)

The Book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price is very enlightening concerning the creation. We do not review the entire account, of course, but we do point to the leadership of the Father in it all. Note these particular verses:

And behold, the glory of the Lord was upon Moses, so that Moses stood in the presence of God, and talked with him face to face. And the Lord God said unto Moses: For mine own purpose have I made these things. Here is wisdom and it remaineth in me.

And by the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth.

And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten. (Moses 1:31-33.)

Paul's epistle to the Hebrews is significant on this point also:

God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets,

Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds;

Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. (Hebrews 1:1-3.)

When it came time to place Adam and Eve on earth, we read of this same leadership. Says the scripture:

And I, God, said unto mine Only Begotten, which was with me from the beginning: Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and it was so. And I, God, said: Let them have dominion over the fishes of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

And I, God, created man in mine own image, in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them.

And I, God, blessed them, and said unto them: Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth. (Moses 2:26-28.)

During his own mortal ministry Jesus made it clear—and did so repeatedly—that he was sent "of the Father." As a twelve-year-old child, when he was found in the temple "sitting in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them, and asking them questions," he indicated this great fact.

His mother and Joseph had searched for him for three days, "and when they saw him, they were amazed: and his mother said unto him, Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing.

"And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" (Luke 2:46-49.)

In his marvelous sermon recorded in the fifth chapter of the Gospel of John we read:

For the Father loveth the Son, and sheweth him all things that himself doeth: and he will shew him greater works than these, that ye may marvel.

For as the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth them; even so the Son quickeneth whom he will.

For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son:

That all men should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father. He that honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father which hath sent him. (John 5:20-23.)

And then he continued, giving further detail:

But I have greater witness than that of John: for the works which the Father hath given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father hath sent me.

And the Father himself, which hath sent me, hath borne witness of me. Ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape.

And ye have not his word abiding in you: for whom he hath sent, him ye believe not.

Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me.

I am come in my Father's name, and ye receive me not: if another shall come in his own name, him ye will receive.

How can ye believe, which receive honour one of another, and seek not the honour that cometh from God only?

Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father: there is one that accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye trust.

For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: for he wrote of me.

But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words? (John 5:36-39, 43-47.)

The directing influence of the Father was evidenced too in the account of Jesus' baptism when the Almighty identified him as his Only Begotten Son.

Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be baptized of him.

But John forbad him, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?

And Jesus answering said unto him, Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness. Then he suffered him.

And Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water: and, lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon him:

And lo a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. (Matthew 3:13-17.)

At the transfiguration, the testimony of the Father was again given in identifying Jesus as his divine Son, but with the added injunction that his teachings be listened to:

And after six days Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up unto an high mountain apart,

And was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light.

And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him.

Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias.

While he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him. (Matthew 17:1-5.)

This was, therefore, not only an identification, but also a divine command from the Father: "Hear ye him.'"

The entire sermon recorded in the sixth chapter of John's Gospel is based also on this same lofty concept: Jesus came down from the Father.

The Lord's parable recorded in Matthew 21:33-41 reflects this same great truth. He had taught that he came into the world from the Father and that he would return to the Father at the conclusion of his mortal ministry. A beautiful case in point is the account of his meeting Mary in the garden following his resurrection:

But Mary stood without at the sepulchre weeping: and as she wept, she stooped down, and looked into the sepulchre,

And seeth two angels in white sitting, the one at the head, and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain.

And they say unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? She saith unto them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.

And when she had thus said, she turned herself back, and saw Jesus standing, and knew not that it was Jesus.

Jesus saith unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest thou? She, supposing him to be the gardener, saith unto him, Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away.

Jesus saith unto her, Mary. She turned herself, and saith unto him, Rabboni; which is to say, Master.

Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God. (John 20:11-17.)

The Sermon on the Mount is replete with references to the Father, indicating the Savior's continued deference to him. One of the most pertinent examples is found in his instruction regarding prayer. He told his followers to address their prayers to the Father, giving the Lord's Prayer as the example: "After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name." (Matthew 6:9.)

However, he instructed further that when we pray to the Father, we do so in the name of the Beloved Son, his own name, Jesus the Christ;

Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do; because I go unto my Father.

And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.

If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it. (John 14:12-14.)

He repeated this instruction later in these words:

And in that day ye shall ask me nothing. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you.

Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.

At that day ye shall ask in my name: and I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you:

For the Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God.

I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father. (John 16:23-24, 26-28.)

When the Savior taught the principle of forgiveness, again he deferred to his Father:

For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you:

But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. (Matthew 6:14-15.)

When Peter bore his impressive testimony, the Savior made it clear that the knowledge thus expressed came to the disciple from the Father—by revelation.

And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. (Matthew 16:17.)

And when he gave us the description of the great and final judgment as recorded in Matthew 25, he said:

Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. (Matthew 25:34.)

Note that the scripture indicates that "the King shall say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father." Jesus is the King, yet he recognized the priority of the Father.

When the Savior delivered his remarkable sermon on missionary work, he gave a parable to the disciples in which the kingdom of God was likened to a vineyard, but he said, "My Father is the husbandman." (John 15:1.) So the Father was depicted as being in charge of the vineyard. Jesus represented himself as the vine in the vineyard, placing himself in a lesser position.

His humility was shown again as he said, ". . . my Father is greater than I." (John 14:28.)

And when he told the story of the sheepfold he declared: "My Father, which gave them me, is greater than all. . . ." (John 10:29.)

As he urged his missionary-disciples to be productive in the work, he said: "Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall ye be my disciples." (John 15:8.)

He also said this significant thing: "If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my Father's commandments, and abide in his love." (John 15:10. Italics added.)

He then added: ". . . all things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you." (John 15:15.)

Jesus was the advocate with the Father. He repeatedly taught this, indicating that the final decision with regard to our salvation rests with the Father. This doctrine was taught also by his disciples, as is indicated in Paul's instruction to Timothy: "For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus." (1 Timothy 2:5.)

John likewise wrote:

My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous:

And he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. (1 John 2:1-2.)

While on the cross he pleaded with the great Judge of all: "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do." (Luke 23:34.)

It was to the Father he cried out in agony: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Mark 15:34.)

And it was into his Father's hands that he committed his spirit as he expired. (Luke 23:46.)

The epistles of the New Testament likewise refer to the Father in the same pattern as do Jesus' own teachings.

James speaks of him as "the Father of lights." (James 1:17.)

Paul taught that our Eternal Father is the progenitor of our spirits (Acts 17:28-29) and that we must be in subjection to him (Hebrews 12:9).

John spoke of the "love of the Father" as necessary for our salvation (1 John 2:15) and repeated the thought as he taught that we are the children of God (1 John 3:1).

It was he who explained the Trinity in heaven: "the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are one." (1 John 5:7.)

Paul taught that it is through the Holy Spirit that we have access to the Father. (Ephesians 2:18.)

The ultimate blessing that can come to mankind is that we may become like the Father. It was this that the Savior taught as he commanded: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matthew 5:48.)

Similar Bible references might be multiplied showing the Father to be the central figure in our salvation, but that we come to him through Jesus Christ—and only through Jesus, who is our Lord and Savior, "for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." (Acts 4:12.)
