Mark E. Petersen, Great Prologue ( 1975)

18

TO HIS OTHER SHEEP

The Savior's teachings to the ancient Americans refer to the Father in exactly the same manner as they do in the New Testament. All of chapters 12, 13, and 14 of Third Nephi follow this pattern. He also emphatically said:

And this is my doctrine, and it is the doctrine which the Father hath given unto me; and I bear record of the Father, and the Father beareth record of me, and the Holy Ghost beareth record of the Father and me; and I bear record that the Father commandeth all men, everywhere, to repent and believe in me.

And whoso believeth in me, and is baptized, the same shall be saved; and they are they who shall inherit the kingdom of God.

And whoso believeth not in me, and is not baptized, shall be damned.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, that this is my doctrine, and I bear record of it from the Father; and whoso believeth in me believeth in the Father also; and unto him will the Father bear record of me, for he will visit him with fire and with the Holy Ghost.

And thus will the Father bear record of me, and the Holy Ghost will bear record unto him of the Father and me; for the Father, and I, and the Holy Ghost are one. (3 Nephi 11:32-36.)

When he spoke of his "other sheep" he said:

Ye are my disciples; and ye are a light unto this people, who are a remnant of the house of Joseph.

And behold, this is the land of your inheritance; and the Father hath given it unto you.

And not at any time hath the Father given me commandment that I should tell it unto your brethren at Jerusalem.

Neither at any time hath the Father given me commandment that I should tell unto them concerning the other tribes of the house of Israel, whom the Father hath led away out of the land.

This much did the Father command me, that I should tell unto them:

That other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.

And now, because of stiffneckedness and unbelief they understood not my word; therefore I was commanded to say no more of the Father concerning this thing unto them.

But, verily, I say unto you that the Father hath commanded me, and I tell it unto you, that ye were separated from among them because of their iniquity; therefore it is because of their iniquity that they know not of you.

And verily, I say unto you again that the other tribes hath the Father separated from them; and it is because of their iniquity that they know not of them.

And verily I say unto you, that ye are they of whom I said: Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. (3 Nephi 15:12-21.)

He further said:

And verily, verily, I say unto you that I have other sheep which are not of this land, neither of the land of Jerusalem, neither in any parts of that land round about whither I have been to minister.

For they of whom I speak are they who have not as yet heard my voice; neither have I at any time manifested myself unto them.

But I have received a commandment of the Father that I shall go unto them, and that they shall hear my voice, and shall be numbered among my sheep, that there may be one fold and one shepherd; therefore I go to show myself unto them.

And I command you that ye shall write these sayings after I am gone, that if it so be that my people at Jerusalem, they who have seen me and been with me in my ministry, do not ask the Father in my name, that they may receive a knowledge of you by the Holy Ghost, and also of the other tribes whom they know not of, that these sayings which ye shall write shall be kept and shall be manifested unto the Gentiles, that through the fulness of the Gentiles, the remnant of their seed, who shall be scattered forth upon the face of the earth because of their unbelief, may be brought in, or may be brought to a knowledge of me, their Redeemer. (3 Nephi 16:1-4.)

As he gave the Nephites the sacrament of the Lord's supper, he said:

Blessed are ye for this thing which ye have done, for this is fulfilling my commandments, and this doth witness unto the Father that ye are willing to do that which I have commanded you.

And this shall ye always do to those who repent and are baptized in my name; and ye shall do it in remembrance of my blood, which I have shed for you, that ye may witness unto the Father that ye do always remember me. And if ye do always remember me ye shall have my Spirit to be with you.

And I give unto you a commandment that ye shall do these things. And if ye shall always do these things blessed are ye, for ye are built upon my rock.

But whoso among you shall do more or less than these are not built upon my rock, but are built upon a sandy foundation; and when the rain descends, and the floods come, and the winds blow, and beat upon them, they shall fall, and the gates of hell are ready open to receive them.

Therefore blessed are ye if ye shall keep my commandments, which the Father hath commanded me that I should give unto you.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye must watch and pray always, lest ye be tempted by the devil, and ye be led away captive by him.

And as I have prayed among you even so shall ye pray in my church, among my people who do repent and are baptized in my name. Behold I am the light; I have set an example for you.

And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words unto his disciples, he turned again unto the multitude and said unto them:

Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, ye must watch and pray always lest ye enter into temptation; for Satan desireth to have you, that he may sift you as wheat.

Therefore ye must always pray unto the Father in my name;

And whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you.

Pray in your families unto the Father, always in my name, that your wives and children may be blessed. (3 Nephi 18:10-21.)

The Doctrine and Covenants is so much a part of the restoration that its teachings are vital in this matter. As is shown in the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and the writings of Moses and Abraham, the Doctrine and Covenants sustains forcefully the position of the Father as the director of this work—always, however, through his Beloved Son, to whom he has given all power in heaven and on earth. (Matthew 28:18.) Truly the Father and the Son are united as one.

The Father was in charge of the work of restoration. In the Prophet Joseph's boyhood experience in the grove, it was the Father who spoke to him first. It was the Father who introduced his Beloved Son to the boy prophet. It was the Father who instructed Joseph to accept direction from the Beloved Son. "Hear Him!" were his words.

Upon this direction from the Father, the Beloved Son—our Savior—replied to Joseph's questions.

Then throughout the restoration period, the Savior's instruction followed this same pattern, so well set forth in the ancient scriptures. For example:

Ask the Father in my name, in faith believing that you shall receive, and you shall have the Holy Ghost, which manifesteth all things which are expedient unto the children of men.

Wherefore, all men must take upon them the name which is given of the Father, for in that name shall they be called at the last day;

Wherefore, if they know not the name by which they are called, they cannot have place in the kingdom of my Father.

And you shall fall down and worship the Father in my name.

And after that you have received this, if you keep not my commandments you cannot be saved in the kingdom of my Father. (D&C 18:18, 24-25, 40, 46.)

Again he said:

I, having accomplished and finished the will of him whose I am, even the Father, concerning me—having done this that I might subdue all things unto myself—

I am Jesus Christ; I came by the will of the Father, and I do his will. (D&C 19:2, 24.)

The Savior also declared to Joseph Smith that he is our advocate with the Father: "Lift up your hearts and be glad, for I am in your midst, and am your advocate with the Father; and it is his good will to give you the kingdom." (D&C 29:5.)

In the Kirtland Temple he said: "I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father." (D&C 110:4.)

When he spoke of the gathering, the Lord said:

And ye are called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect; for mine elect hear my voice and harden not their hearts;

Wherefore the decree hath gone forth from the Father that they shall be gathered in unto one place upon the face of this land, to prepare their hearts and be prepared in all things against the day when tribulation and desolation are sent forth upon the wicked. (D&C 29:7-8.)

And when he spoke of the final judgment, he said:

And again, verily, verily, I say unto you, and it hath gone forth in a firm decree, by the will of the Father, that mine apostles, the Twelve which were with me in my ministry at Jerusalem, shall stand at my right hand at the day of my coming in a pillar of fire, being clothed with robes of righteousness, with crowns upon their heads, in glory even as I am, to judge the whole house of Israel, even as many as have loved me and kept my commandments, and none else. (D&C 29:12.)

The covenant of the priesthood is enlightening:

And also all they who receive this priesthood receive me, saith the Lord;

For he that receiveth my servants receiveth me;

And he that receiveth me receiveth my Father;

And he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him.

And this is according to the oath and covenant which belongeth to the priesthood.

Therefore, all those who receive the priesthood, receive this oath and covenant of my Father, which he cannot break, neither can it be moved. (D&C 84:35-40.)

We have this also in section 84:

And every one that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit cometh unto God, even the Father.

And the Father teacheth him of the covenant which he has renewed and confirmed upon you, which is confirmed upon you for your sakes, and not for your sakes only, but for the sake of the whole world. (D&C 84:47-48.)

The highest blessing that will come to this earth after it is renewed and glorified is explained in these words: "For after it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father." (D&C 88:19.)

As the Savior gave instruction concerning our worship, he said:

I give unto you these sayings that you may understand and know how to worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness.

For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace.

And now, verily I say unto you, I was in the beginning with the Father, and am the Firstborn;

And all those who are begotten through me are partakers of the glory of the same, and are the church of the Firstborn.

Ye were also in the beginning with the Father; that which is Spirit, even the Spirit of truth. (D&C 93:19-23.)

He expanded upon this doctrine as he later said:

Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion.

Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name?

Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed?

And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was?

I am the Lord thy God; and I give unto you this commandment—that no man shall come unto the Father but by me or by my word, which is my law, saith the Lord. (D&C 132:8-12.)

As he taught us to be faithful to the end, he said: "Pray always, lest you enter into temptation and lose your reward. Be faithful unto the end, and lo, I am with you. These words are not of man nor of men, but of me, even Jesus Christ, your Redeemer, by the will of the Father. Amen." (D&C 31:12-13.)

And he added: "Continue in these things even unto the end, and you shall have a crown of eternal life at the right hand of my Father, who is full of grace and truth." (D&C 66:12.)

In the glorious vision known as the seventy-sixth section of the Doctrine and Covenants, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon said:

By the power of the Spirit our eyes were opened and our understandings were enlightened, so as to see and understand the things of God—

Even those things which were from the beginning before the world was, which were ordained of the Father, through his Only Begotten Son, who was in the bosom of the Father, even from the beginning. (D&C 76:12-13.)

We have these interesting words also in this same section:

That he came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness;

That through him all might be saved whom the Father had put into his power and made by him;

Who glorifies the Father, and saves all the works of his hands, except those sons of perdition who deny the Son after the Father has revealed him. (D&C 76:41-43.)

A significant passage is found in verses 107 and 108 of this same section, again showing the presiding capacity of the Father in the whole plan of salvation:

When he shall deliver up the kingdom, and present it unto the Father, spotless, saying: I have overcome and have trodden the winepress alone, even the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God.

Then shall he be crowned with the crown of his glory, to sit on the throne of his power to reign forever and ever.

The Savior taught that many mansions are in the house of his Father: "And if thou art faithful unto the end thou shalt have a crown of immortality, and eternal life in the mansions which I have prepared in the house of my Father." (D&C 81:6.)

He also said: "Let not your hearts be troubled; for in my Father's house are many mansions, and I have prepared a place for you; and where my Father and I am, there ye shall be also." (D&C 98:18.)

These verses, of course, are fully in harmony with the familiar: "In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you." (John 14:2.)

There is nothing more sacred than the ordinance of the Last Supper. The prayers of that ordinance are addressed to the Father, and as we accept them with our "amen" and partake of the sacred emblems, we enter into solemn covenant with the Father that we will always remember his Beloved Son and keep the commandments that he has given us. (See D&C 20:77-79.)

Let us emphasize this point: We make these covenants with our Eternal Father! Can anything be as important as that?

The whole process of the restoration of the gospel and the events leading up to it rest upon the covenant made by the Father with Abraham. (See 3 Nephi 21:4.)

However, we of today are under two sets of covenants with God. Not only do we have the benefit of the Father's covenant with Abraham—being descended from him—but as members of his restored church, we make covenants of our own, directly and personally with the Father.

We do this in baptism, in ordination to the priesthood, and otherwise, but especially do we ourselves so covenant in partaking of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Note these words:

O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it, that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him and keep his commandments which he has given them; that they may always have his Spirit to be with them. Amen. (D&C 20:77.)

It should make us tremble even to think of violating that sacred compact, either by deliberate rebellion, willful neglect, or plain carelessness.

God tells us that he will not be mocked (D&C 63:58). He teaches that we must not trifle with sacred things (D&C 6:12). He teaches further that this is a day of sacrifice (D&C 64:23) and asks that each of us shall make the sacrifice of a broken heart and a contrite spirit (D&C 59:8).

To be acceptable to him, he declares:

Verily I say unto you, all among them who know their hearts are honest, and are broken, and their spirits contrite, and are willing to observe their covenants by sacrifice—yea, every sacrifice which I, the Lord, shall command—they are accepted of me. (D&C 97:8.)
