Mark E. Petersen, Great Prologue ( 1975)

19

OUR GLORIOUS DAY

For 2,000 years the Lord has prepared for this day in which we live, and his preparation has been as extensive as it has been miraculous. We are the beneficiaries of this marvelous work and a wonder. So now, as he offers us his pearl of great price—which is eternal life with him—he appeals to us as his children and says:

. . .awake, and arise from the dust, O Jerusalem; yea, and put on thy beautiful garments, O daughter of Zion; and strengthen thy stakes and enlarge thy borders forever, that thou mayest no more be confounded, that the covenants of the Eternal Father which he hath made unto thee, O house of Israel, may be fulfilled.

Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness; and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness and love God with all your might, mind and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ; and if by the grace of God ye are perfect in Christ, ye can in nowise deny the power of God.

And again, if ye by the grace of God are perfect in Christ, and deny not his power, then are ye sanctified in Christ by the grace of God, through the shedding of the blood of Christ, which is in the covenant of the Father unto the remission of your sins, that ye become holy, without spot. (Moroni 10:31-33.)

No people have had a greater opportunity or a more important calling in the service of God than the Latter-day Saints. No people have been given a greater trust. Will we fulfill that trust?

Already the broad vista of the future is taking shape. The Church has reached worldwide proportions in a miraculously rapid manner. The Lord's hand is everywhere evident. He has distributed his people among the nations in such a way that strong groups are quickly gathered together, with competent leadership.

As the missionaries have carried the gospel abroad, from Australia to Finland, and from South Africa to the Orient, his sheep who know the voice of the Good Shepherd have heard it, recognized it, and followed it.

So it is that the Church has become strong throughout the Western Hemisphere and Europe, in South Africa, in Australia, New Zealand, Samoa, Tahiti, Tonga, and elsewhere in the South Seas.

So it is that the blood of Israel is being gathered into the Church in strength among the Japanese, the Chinese, the Koreans, and in the Philippines.

So it is that the good word begins to be received by "other sheep" in Indonesia, Vietnam, and parts of India and Pakistan. Arabs, Iranians, Lebanese, and related peoples also are beginning to give ear.

Areas now closed will be opened by the blessing of the Lord, for all nations, kindreds, tongues, and peoples must receive the glad word. The Lord will send tribulations to cleanse the earth before his coming, but through it all he will protect his Saints wherever they are, for they are his servants on whom he depends to do the very work he requires to build his kingdom. They will be preserved to meet him at his coming.

Zion is the pure in heart, as the Lord told the Prophet Joseph Smith. So no matter where they live, the pure in heart are God's Zion, and they will provide the righteous setting required for the coming of the Lord. They will meet him and will reign with him through a thousand years of millennial peace. All that has gone before in preparation for that event constitutes the Great Prologue.
