“My Service as a Single Member,” page 12: After reading Sister Burdett’s story, consider discussing the blessings that come from serving in the Church. You could invite family members to share a meaningful experience they have had while serving in a calling.

“The Peace and Joy of Knowing the Savior Lives,” page 18: Consider asking family members what they can do for the Savior next year. Read the final paragraphs of the article under “Our Gift to Him.” What does Elder Nelson say is the greatest gift we could give to the Lord?

“Come, Let Us Adore Him,” page 42: Before the lesson, prayerfully select the section or sections that best apply to your family. If you choose the section about the shepherds, you may wish to share President Monson’s counsel to “never postpone following a prompting” and discuss with your family the significance of this statement. To demonstrate this point with younger children, whisper an instruction in their ears and encourage them to follow it.

“Meet Brother Joseph,” page 58: Consider displaying a picture of Joseph Smith as you read the list of facts about him from the article. You may want to play a game after the lesson to see how many facts your family can remember.

“Those Words,” page 60: After reading the story as a family, consider discussing what family members can say if someone around them uses bad language. You may also want to explain to small children why we are commanded in Exodus 20:7 not to use the Lord’s name in vain (see also D&C 63:60–64).

When I was in a young adult ward, I had family home evening with my ward family. One of the most memorable family home evenings I ever attended was a night when the full-time missionaries were in charge.

The elders invited several of the converts in our ward to share their conversion stories. As the converts spoke, the Spirit’s presence was undeniable.

After the stories had been shared, my mind returned to my own missionary experiences—as both a full-time and a lifetime missionary. I reevaluated my own actions in sharing the gospel on a day-to-day basis and continued to reflect on them for weeks to come.

When I was later called to be in charge of family home evening in the ward, I made it a point to continue “the conversion stories night” activity periodically, asking different converts in our ward to participate.

Janna McFerson, California, USA
