I woke up early the day before Christmas worried because we didn’t have any food for our Christmas dinner that night; nor did we have any money to buy food. I was then living with my sister Edicta in Maracaibo, Venezuela.

When I got out of bed, I knelt down and began to pray. I pleaded with my Heavenly Father to remember us. I asked Him to grant us at least some food for that very special day, la Noche Buena (Christmas Eve).

As I prayed, I was filled with peace. I seemed to hear a soft voice saying to me, “Everything is going to be fine. Don’t worry.” When I had finished my prayer, I knew that something good would happen that day.

After waking up my sister, I went to sweep the front porch. The neighbor across the street saw me and came over to give me 1,000 bolívares that she owed me for a Christmas tablecloth and decorations I had embroidered for her. I was surprised because I hadn’t remembered that she owed me money.

I ran to my sister’s room and showed her the money I had received. Surprised, she asked me where I had gotten it. “With God all things are possible” (Matthew 19:26), I responded.

A few minutes later we heard someone outside calling for my sister. When we realized it was the same neighbor, we went out to talk to her. She then paid my sister 1,000 bolívares she owed her for some sewing. My sister and I were very happy because now we could buy breakfast, lunch, and dinner.

After we had returned from grocery shopping, we found a friend waiting for us. He asked if he could spend la Noche Buena with us because he didn’t want to spend Christmas Eve alone. We explained that we would be having just a small dinner at home but that he was welcome to join us. He contributed 2,000 bolívares to help with the cost of dinner. We could hardly believe how much God was blessing us.

Later my niece called to tell us that she would be arriving that night and would be bringing 33 pounds (15 kg) of marinated meat. And at noon my nephew arrived with his wife and their children. They asked if they could return that evening with some food and celebrate Christmas Eve with us.

“We’re not going to have a grand dinner,” we answered, “but we will have enough for everyone.”

That evening Edicta and I made baked chicken, potato salad, a lemon dessert, and majarete, a traditional coconut pudding dessert, which we enjoyed with all of our guests. But first we gave thanks to Heavenly Father for the great blessings He had given us. That day we were reminded that if we have faith and doubt not, He will bless us when we ask for His help.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="127218860" id="aside1_p1">When I got out of bed, I knelt down and began to pray. I pleaded with my Heavenly Father to remember us.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
