It seems incredible to me that one’s brain has the storage capacity of one-quadrillion bits of information. If this is true, allowing for the possible error of ten or twelve bits, why does one have such difficulty memorizing the thirteen Articles of Faith, the missionary discussions, the basics of a biology course?

It is equally amazing to me that there is a close relationship between memory and mood, memory and testimony, memory and models, memory and thoughts, and memory and you. Permit me to share some ideas about these five relationships in a gospel context.

Memory, according to the experts, often conditions our moods. Those who remember only the disappointing experiences of life tend to become bitter and cynical. Those who recall only their enemies and the forces lined up against them may lose their courage. Those who recall only past injuries may continue to battle with the world. But those who recall the positive and encouraging times, remain bright and optimistic.

I remember one missionary with whom I labored who had a very unpleasant disposition. Obviously, he was consumed with a heavy burden of unpleasant memories. These memories affected his entire outlook on life. How awful it would be for one to go through life with everything distorted by negative memories.

I do not know Enos’s mood when he went into the forests to hunt beasts and had his wrestle before God. One is led to think that he was feeling somewhat depressed, for he had not received a remission of his sins. However, as he stimulated his memory by recalling the words of eternal life spoken by his father, as he reflected upon the joy of the Saints, the cloud of gloom was dispelled. Through prayer and the exercise of faith, Enos emerged from the woods feeling lifted, his burdens lightened (see Enos 1:1–8).

When Alma and his friends were seeking to destroy the church of God, a holy angel appeared to them and corrected them. Alma says that when he remembered all his sins, he was racked with eternal torment. Then, when he remembered all that his father had prophesied about Christ’s atonement, something marvelous occurred. He said: “And now, behold, when I thought this, I could remember my pains no more; yea, I was harrowed up by the memory of my sins no more.

“And oh, what joy, and what marvelous light I did behold; yea, my soul was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain!

“Yea, I say unto you, my son, that there could be nothing so exquisite and so bitter as were my pains. Yea, and again I say unto you, my son, that on the other hand, there can be nothing so exquisite and sweet as was my joy” (Alma 36:19–21).

I would ask: Do you allow your mind to wallow in memory of past hurts and injuries, thus becoming blind to everything else? Or do you recall the positive and encouraging things that cause your life to remain bright and optimistic? What is the mood of your memories? Remember, the memories are yours, and you determine the mood.

In our missionary service, we frequently invite our investigator friends to obtain a testimony by reading the Book of Mormon and praying about its contents. Our point of reference is chapter 10 of Moroni, verses 3–5 [Moro. 10:3–5]. We usually say to our friends: “Read this book and ask God if it is not true.” Then we promise, as the book states, “The truth of it will be manifest unto you by the power of the Holy Ghost.”

I don’t fault any who have used the process described above. I do, however, suggest a better and more successful approach. Let me read the verses and highlight four steps to a testimony, two of which are often neglected:

“Behold, I would exhort you that when ye shall [1] read these things … that ye would [2] remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down until the time that ye shall receive these things, and [3] ponder it in your hearts.

“… I would exhort you that ye would [4] ask God … if these things are not true; and … he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost” (Moro. 10:3–4; italics added).

I emphasize the words, remember and ponder. I do so because I feel strongly that reading the things of God without remembering and pondering how those things fit into the divine scheme tends to confuse, not enlighten. Enlightenment occurs and truth is revealed as things are fitted together in an understandable way. In the process, mind is stimulated, memory is stirred, and the heart is prepared to respond to the whisperings of the Spirit.

Ammon presented many truths to King Lamoni before he was converted. Among other things:

“… he began at the creation of the world, and also the creation of Adam, and told him all the things concerning the fall of man, and … laid before him the records and the holy scriptures of the people, which had been spoken by the prophets” (Alma 18:36).

Similarly, Aaron did the same with the father of Lamoni. He, as Ammon, preached of Adam, the Fall, the plan of redemption, and the atonement of Christ. All of this was done to place things in proper perspective and to build the foundations of a testimony.

When your testimony weakens or appears to stumble along the way, why not remember the goodness of the Lord. In the process of positive recall, perhaps you can experience the spiritual healing which King Lamoni and his father experienced. How very exhilarating it is to ponder the merciful nature of God, and how very healing it is to remember the eternal gifts of Christ.

Most of us have been deeply influenced by other men and women. I suspect that this is the way it should be. It was Elder James E. Talmage who wrote that the Father’s original purpose was “to use persuasive influences of wholesome precept and sacrificing example with the inhabitants of the earth, then to leave them free to choose for themselves” (James E. Talmage, Articles of Faith, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986, page 55; emphasis added).

All of us, I would guess, have a model or hero tucked away in the recesses of our memory. You could have many. From time to time, you may think of that model and from him or her draw needed inspiration. This is particularly true when the decision you have to make seems especially difficult.

Helaman knew the value of memories and models for he instructed his sons—

“… I have given unto you the names of our first parents who came out of the land of Jerusalem; and this I have done that when you remember your names ye may remember them; and when ye remember them ye may remember their works; and when ye remember their works ye may know how that it is said, and also written, that they were good.

“Therefore, my sons, I would that ye should do that which is good, that it may be said of you, and also written, even as it has been said and written of them” (Hel. 5:6–7).

You should not clutter your memories with men or women of doubtful reputation. They will disappoint you and drag you downward. But, rather, you should selectively place in your mind the giants of goodness and, each time you think of them, resolve that you will walk in their footprints and go beyond their mark.

Our minds are largely a product of what we put into them. This certainly is no startling fact; everyone seems to know it. Yet, people continue to read pornographic materials, view suggestive films, and sing songs with improper words. Knowingly or not, those who do these things will store polluted memories.

I find it difficult to understand how some members of the Church can openly disregard this divine injunction:

“… let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distill upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.

“The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth” (D&C 121:45–46).

What a gold mine of promises are contained in this scripture! Who in his right mind would place in jeopardy the promise of confidence, the doctrine of the priesthood, and the companionship of the Holy Ghost?

Do not become enslaved by destructive or degrading thoughts. They can become as strong and disabling as Satan’s iron chains.

Do not forget that memory and thoughts are inseparably connected; one runs into the other. So garnish your thoughts with virtue, count your blessings, and have fellowship with the great minds of the human race. Those actions will build you a sacred sanctuary of pleasant memories.

It is said that God gave us memory so we could enjoy the remembrance of roses in winter. But it is also true that without memory we could not have a self in any season. The more memories you have, the more ‘you’ you have.

I did not fully appreciate memories and self until I, with the help of others, compiled my personal history. I gave my wife a draft copy to read and asked her to edit it. My instructions were: “You know me better than I know myself, so please read it carefully and make corrections in the manuscripts.” A half hour later, when I returned to see how she was doing, she was crying. I said, “My goodness, is it that bad?” “No,” she answered, “it is that good!” “Have you made any changes?” I asked. “No,” she replied, “it is you speaking, and I don’t want to erase or edit you out of the record.”

Later, we gave bound copies of my history to our children. Both of us knew that the thing would probably be placed on a shelf and read only sometime. A few weeks ago, however, one of our daughters said to me: “Dad, I love you so very much.” I wondered what was wrong and asked: “What made you say that?” She explained, “It was your personal history; I have been reading about your life.” She added: “I did not realize what you had done, or all that you had experienced.”

Do we not read that records kept by the ancients enlarged the memory of the people? Of course, it is true. Records do preserve language, safeguard truth, and inspire future readers, if they are kept properly.

What a pity it would be if your children and grandchildren were denied that part of you that really should be recorded. Make certain that you are passing on to your posterity, along with other graces of life, your innermost thoughts, your deep feelings, and your sincere testimonies. You owe the rising generation this blessing and more.

There is so much more that could be said about memory and remembering as related to you and the gospel of Jesus Christ. For instance, I’ve said nothing about the need to remember our sacred covenants, our vows, our ordinances. Nor have I talked of the role that memory will play on Judgement Day.

I do pray that you will sanctify yourselves through repentance and believing in God’s promise—“He who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more” (D&C 58:42).

At the same time, I pray that you will live so that your name will appear on the list of the righteous, and that it can be written in that “book of remembrance” which serves as a registry “for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name” (3 Ne. 24:16).

I testify of the importance of memory. It does mold our moods. It is associated with testimony. It should include models of righteousness. Of a certainty, it is the product of thoughts. And, in the end, it is you.
