Throughout the world, many children and adults suffer because of problems caused from dehydration. Even in the healthiest of societies children can die because they lose too much water from their bodies through vomiting and diarrhea. This loss of water is called dehydration. Hydrate means to have water. Dehydrate means to lose water. If our body loses more water than it takes in, we become dehydrated—a life-threatening condition.

It is especially easy for a child with diarrhea or vomiting to become dehydrated. It can also happen to a person who is too sick to take in enough food or liquid. People of any age can become dehydrated, but dehydration develops more quickly and is most dangerous in small children. Any child with watery diarrhea is in danger of dehydration.

It is important that each person in the family learn to recognize the different signs of dehydration and how to prevent and treat it. A dehydrated person will usually have a dry mouth, or the person will be thirsty. There will be little or no urine, or the urine will be a very dark color. There may be vomiting or diarrhea. The skin on the abdomen will not retract when pinched. The soft spot on the top of an infant’s head will sink in. The eyes may be sunken and tearless. There may be a sudden weight loss.

The World Health Organization recommends that a special drink be given to those who are suffering from dehydration. This rehydration drink is the best home treatment to give a person who is dehydrated because it replaces important salt and sugar lost in the body.

Dehydration can usually be prevented if the victim is given plenty of liquids or the rehydration drink at the very first signs of dehydration. This is especially important for small children with watery stools.

In one liter of water put 2 level tablespoons of sugar, 1/4 teaspoon of salt, and 1/4 teaspoon of baking soda (bicarbonate of soda). If you do not have soda, use another 1/4 teaspoon of salt. It is very important to get the right amounts of each of these ingredients in the rehydration drink. Before giving the drink, taste it and be sure it is no more salty than tears. If available, you can also add the juice from one orange, a mashed banana, or coconut water to the drink.

Give the dehydrated person sips of this drink every five minutes, day and night, until he begins to urinate normally. A large person needs three or more liters a day. A small child needs at least one liter a day, or one glass for each watery stool.

Keep giving the rehydration drink often, in small sips, even if the person vomits. Not all of the drink will be vomited. If the dehydration gets worse or if the person does not urinate within four to six hours, find a health worker who can help give liquid in a vein (intravenous solution).

When you give the rehydration drink, keep giving food, and keep giving breast milk to babies. In some countries, small envelopes of “rehydration salts” are available for mixing with water (usually 1 liter). These salts are good to use, but if they are not available, wise mothers can learn to make their own rehydration drink at home. If you do not have what is needed to make the rehydration drink, give clear liquids like water, fruit juice, or thin soup, until you are able to make the special drink. It would be wise to always keep the ingredients in your home as part of your family preparedness plan.

The Relief Society General Presidency encourages all families to learn how to identify and treat dehydration. Relief Society Homemaking activities might include a mini-class on how to recognize the signs of dehydration and how to make a rehydration drink.
