Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Joy ( 1980)

Introduction

Joy: Who? Why? What? When? Where? How?

There are in my memory some small, bright, open places that never close or fade. I remember as if it were yesterday the moment when the doctor put our just-delivered, still-wet, first child on my trembling arm.

I remember the outside things: the antiseptic hospital smell, the unique combination of joy and fatigue on my wife's face, the exquisite perfection of each tiny new finger and toe. Even more, I remember the inside feelings: the sighing relief, the welling joy, the almost irresistible urge to throw open the hospital window right then (at 3 A.M.) and announce the new arrival to the world.

Slid in, just under the joy, was another feeling: the weight of responsibility, the sudden remarkable reality that this soul, this spirit, this tiny real person was ours now, ours to raise, her destiny so totally trusted in our inexperienced, untried, untrained parenthood.

Within the next hour there were calls to new grandparents and the fun of hearing their voices jump from grogginess to excitement. Then, finally, with new baby and new mother fast asleep, there was nothing more for me to do but drive home. By then it was early-summer dawn, with deserted streets and delicate, pale gold sky. Spontaneously, as I drove, I started to pray out loud. Somehow the joy, the marvel, the miracle of birth had lifted my spirit higher, closer, so that it seemed natural right at that moment to just talk to God. "Thank you" was the essence of the prayer; thank you for something so great I could not comprehend, for something I could not imagine I was worthy to receive.

After the thank you, all that was left was the desire (not the obligation) to repay, to commit, to promise—to somehow make my thanks more than just words by pledging that I would honor the stewardship, that I would strive to be a great father. Suddenly the fullness of the word struck: "Father." The Father of us all had just allowed me to take that role, that title (his role, his title) for one of his children. I remember the exact words that came next in my prayer: "Oh, Father, help me to be a father."

There is another open space in my memory, two and a half years later. We were flying home after a visit to Grandma's. Little Saren had her face pressed close to the rounded pane as we took off.

"Daddy, look at the tiny people! They're like the ants."

"What ants, honey?"

"The ants on the ant hill—see—hurrying back and forth."

"What ant hill, honey?"

"You know, by the groundhog holes."

Then I remembered: last spring, eight months before, walking through a field showing her ants and groundhogs. She still remembered; the impression was still there!

Children start as a blank slate for us to write on, and they retain everything we write. Absorbing, learning from every experience, every exposure, they are unexposed film, and pictures are registering as fast as the shutter can click.

Amazed at Saren's memory, I reflected on the previous eight months. During that time she had learned to talk, to recognize the seasons, to relate to a baby sister, to ask questions . . . a thousand things. I remember thinking, "I hold the chalk; I can write whatever I will on this fresh slate, and though it may be partially erased later, the underlying traces will always remain." What had I written on her slate so far? What had I taught? All I could think of were incidental things, questions she had asked or thoughts that came, unplanned, to my mind. And love. Of course I had taught her love. (Or is that what she had taught me?)

In that moment, as I marveled at my daughter's amazing receptivity, I asked myself: Is love enough? What else should she learn? What can I give her, teach her, show her? The thoughts of stewardship flooded back. Was I doing all that I could? Was I keeping that early-morning pledge to be a great father?

By the time our plane landed, I had decided to spend the five remaining days of my vacation reevaluating my fathership. The next morning I went to a bookstore and bought eleven "raising children" books. I read everything from Montessori to Dreikurs, from Dobson to Suzuki. The books didn't agree on very much (different people with different ideas), but what they did agree on made me feel worse rather than better. They agreed that most of a person's intelligence, character, and outlook on life are formed by the time he is five years old, that a small child's mind is an intricate computer, with every circuit open, ready to be programmed.

When I finished my reading, the basic question was still unanswered: What is the most important thing children should learn during this most important learning time? The books covered so much, and were collectively so complex. The authors left me with an impression of good people who had tried hard, who had studied the wisdom of other people and of their own minds, but who somehow lacked the one beam of pure light, the one clear, hard, diamond-gem answer to what life is really for, what little children need to gain in order to find their own lives, their own dreams, and later, their own Maker. The next day I went back to the office, the vacation over, the question unresolved.

A few months later Saren turned three and wanted to go to nursery school. We looked at several and found none we liked. They each fit one of two categories: either academic, pressure-to-learn, first-grade-for-three-year-olds, or do-nothing, baby-sitting, day care. The first seemed determined not to let children be children. The second seemed undetermined to help children do anything. We knew neither was right for Saren; we doubted either was right for any three-year-old. Somehow it was easier to see that they were wrong than to see what was wrong, or what they lacked that Saren needed. We looked more and reached out further—Montessori schools, experimental schools, then specialized schools: dance, art, music. It was clearer to us than ever before that the incredible, open-circuit mind of a three-year-old needed stimulation in massive doses. The question was what form that stimulation should take. We realized that we now knew rather precisely what the question was and what the answer wasn't. I sat down and wrote out the question: "What is the most important thing (other than love) to give and to teach preschool-age children?"

Then I made a list of some of the wrong answers: to read and write a year or two early, to do basic ballet steps, to know the names of the birds and animals, to add and subtract and multiply and divide.

The next specific moment I remember was just a few weeks later. We were driving up a winding canyon road . . . bright autumn day, early morning . . . children both asleep in the back of the station wagon. The beauty of the day somehow created an atmosphere of free thinking, and the two of us talked randomly. Ideas came easily; so did questions.

What were we looking for that we didn't find in the preschools? What would we teach if we had a preschool? If we could give our children one gift, what would it be?

Suddenly the questions started knitting together. The last answer came first—we would not give possessions, not wealth, not even education. We would give happiness—joy—the gift that everyone wants for himself, and that everyone wants to give to those he truly loves.

Once the word joy came into the formula, everything else began to fit. Children teach us so many kinds of joy: spontaneity, living in the present, being totally interested and so often thrilled with life. But they must learn other joys: sharing, service, conscious goal achievement, searching and finding, planting and harvesting.

Can young children gain these varieties of joy? Can they actually experience them at a tender age? Yes! All true forms of joy are simple and pure. Children can feel them more easily, more naturally than adults.

The answer, then, to the question Is love enough? is "No!" And the answer to What else? is "Joy!"

If children, in their most impressionable years, can gain the capacities to experience and recognize real joy—if joy flows into the clay of their lives before it hardens—then perhaps they may inherit joy as a lifetime gift.

Our thoughts continued to tumble together that autumn morning as we wound down the canyon. Things fit together quickly, as they often do when a breakthrough, long sought, is finally reached. Out of the thought-tumble came two personal commitments: (1) to start a "joy school," to teach what we hadn't found in other preschools, and (2) to write this book, to say what we hadn't found in other books.

The first objective was a joy to accomplish. We bought a house and converted it (a wall torn out here, a sandpile put in there) into a nursery school. We formulated and classified our ideas as we repainted walls. We defined and dissected and analyzed the concept of joy as we landscaped the yard. We worked out joy-teaching, joy-experiencing methods as we brought in toys and play equipment.

By the time the school opened we had developed a curriculum of fifteen separate "joys," and we had found many other parents who shared our view that the word joy summarized what we most wanted our children to gain. Among our fifteen joys were five that children are born with, forms of joy that we hoped the school would buttress and encourage, strengthen and preserve. The other ten were joys we felt children had to gain, capacities they did not inherently possess but that they could feel if given the opportunity.

The fifteen joys now become the chapters of this book. The school and the home have been our laboratories.

If children, in their most impressionable years, can gain the capacities to experience and recognize real joy (if joy flows into the clay of their lives before it hardens), then perhaps they may inherit joy as a lifetime gift.

Back to that autumn morning when we first began to think about teaching children joy. We first determined—

—that joy is the basic purpose of life,

—that a person's capacity for joy is formed mostly in his first five years of life,

—that our greatest stewardship (parenthood) is best fulfilled by giving children joy,

—that joy can be effectively sought and taught,

—that joy can be divided into a number of specific and particular types of joy,

—that the sources of these individual joys can be discovered and developed,

—that the gospel of Jesus Christ is the key text of these joys,

—that, in its basic form, each joy is simple enough to be grasped and understood by small children,

—that we (the two of us) wanted to make the teaching of joy to our children our highest priority,

—that to crystallize and specify our thinking on teaching joy to children, we would write a manuscript.

Once we had decided all of this, we still faced the formidable task of "subdividing" joy, of defining the word, pinpointing its sources, breaking into its various forms. We had in mind many different feelings and experiences and situations that generated various levels of joy.

What we needed was a filter, a collator, some sort of framework to press all the random joys through that would organize them into neat stacks so that we could talk about them by category, so that we could dissect each stack and see what each was made of, and so that we could feed those basic ingredients into the formative minds of our children.

We had to organize and categorize joy. The question was not "Which joys can we teach children?" We had already decided that children are capable of experiencing the basic levels of all joys. The question was "What is the full range of joys that man can experience, and how can we teach the capacity for each to little children?"

Finally, we held three fireside chats with groups of people whose minds we respected. Without telling them why, we asked each person to recall some specific moment of joy, some particular time and place in his life when he was consciously aware of deep, genuine happiness. We paused for fifteen minutes, asking each person to pin down a particular moment. Then we tape-recorded their answers. Thirty people on each of three separate nights gave us ninety individual responses; none were duplications. Then we tried to organize and catalog the responses. What was the essence of each? Where were the similarities?

We shuffled and rearranged, and finally, one morning we found ourselves with five groupings of joy, each with three subgroups. Each of our ninety "instances of joy" fit nicely into one of the fifteen categories. The result was a table of contents for this book. Take a moment and look at it. Notice that there are three spiritual "joys," three physical "joys," three mental "joys," three emotional "joys," and three social "joys."

Our effort to categorize the joys led us to one intriguing and unexpected insight into children and their capacity to learn joy. In each of the five categories of joy, children are born with the basic seed of joy that, if nurtured properly and kept alive, can become the tree on which the two related joys can grow and develop.

In each of the five areas, then, there is one joy to preserve and two to teach. For example, the mental joy of curiosity and interest, which children are born with, can, if it is encouraged and preserved, become the basic capacity or vehicle for learning the joy of imagination and creativity and the joy of priorities and goal achievement. As a second example, in the social joys, if we can preserve a child's natural openness and candor, that inherent joy can become the cup into which we pour the learned joys of communication and relationships and of sharing and service.

It is as though the Lord sent each small child down with fifteen precious gems. Five were finely cut, highly polished; ten were rough, uncut, but potentially valuable. Parents are the jewelers. This book is a manual for keeping the five polished stones bright and for cutting and finishing the ten rough ones. Each chapter—each joy—is presented in six simple parts:

The fastest summary and justification for the notion of Teaching Children Joy comes through a quick overview of the six questions: who, why, what, when, where, and how.

Who?

Little children, our greatest stewardship, who come to the earth "holy and incapable of sin."

Our brothers and sisters, who come to us as children in our charge.

Our children, who are the future of this world and of God's kingdom.

Why?

Because rearing children is the greatest single obligation of earth life.

Because rearing children is the greatest single opportunity of earth life.

Because "No other success can compensate for failure in the home" (David O. McKay); because "The most important work you will ever do will be within the walls of your own home" (Harold B. Lee); and because "Home is the place to save society" (Spencer W. Kimball).

Because Christ said, "Feed my lambs." Many people qualify as lambs, but none so obviously and profoundly as our own children.

Because the Lord commands us to! "Bring up your children in light and trust." (D&C 93:40.) "Teach [them] to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord." (D&C 68:28.) "Train up a child in the way he should go; and when he is old, he will not depart from it." (Proverbs 22:6.)

What?

First, the basic physical necessities of life: food, clothing, shelter.

Second, love—so unconditional and so deep that it can never be doubted.

Third, joy, which is the goal of life (2 Nephi 2:25), recognized by all men of all ages as the most priceless gift, a product of understanding and living the Savior's teachings (John 15:11), and a framework for all the specific things we want to give our children. (Confidence, calmness, testimony, security—each is a kind of joy.)

When?

In their preschool years, when 80 percent of a lifetime's learning takes place and 50 percent of one's basic intelligence is gained.

In their preschool years, when basic personality, character, ability to relate and cope, capacities, emotional structure, outlooks, and attitudes toward others are formed.

In their preschool years, when we have them before schools, social activities, and friends begin to gradually and systematically take a percentage of their time away from our sphere of influence.

In their preschool years, when they are blank slates—when we can write on those slates what we will without having to erase what is already there. (The older they are, the harder it becomes to erase.)

Where?

First of all, in the home and family, where the emotions and relationships can exist that teach the child the most important and basic joys.

Second, in a group with other children, where social and creative joys can be most easily taught and where peer relationships and confidence can be formed.

It is interesting to hear the frequently repeated debate on preschools:

"Preschool children should be with their families, with their mothers."

"But they need exposure and social relations with other children."

"They can get that with neighborhood friends and in Primary."

"But to get ready for school, they need structured group situations."

"Mothers cannot pass off the teaching responsibility to others."

"No, but some kinds of things can only be taught in groups."

Both sides of the argument are right, and the two sides are not necessarily opposed to each other. It is true that the responsibility is the parents', that children need the parental input, that the bond formed by a parent teaching and showing a child is valuable, irreplaceable. But it is also true that some things (indeed, some joys) can only be taught in groups.

The "bring-together" answer is mothers' groups. Mothers agree to a teamwork situation that gives children the beneficial experience of being in a friend's home and being taught a particular "joy" by a friend's mother. Mothers (a dozen or so) alternate the responsibility. Two or three times a week the group meets at one of the homes. This book is the manual, the method-giver. Each mother comes up for her turn only every three to six weeks.

Joy Schools (patented name for schools operated or franchised by R.M. Eyre & Associates, Inc.), where they are organized, accomplish the same thing. Children are allowed to attend no more than three short, half-day periods per week, dramatizing the fact that the schools are supplements rather than substitutes for parents.

How?

By creating situations in which children actually sample or feel a certain joy. Children learn by reinforcement, and nothing reinforces better than joy. Therefore, if a parent can get a child to actually feel and recognize a particular joy, then he has given the child the capacity to repeat that joy by doing once again the thing that caused it.

By showing joy yourself. Children will emulate what they see in you. The beautiful by-product of teaching children joy is that, in order to do so, you must experience more joy yourself.

By role-playing and utilizing other forms of imagination that place children in situations that are "as if" they were experiencing a particular joy.

Through identifiable stories where children vicariously feel the joy.

Through "reinforcement-recall": remembering and thinking back (thus reliving) to a moment when one of the joys was felt, remembering not only the moment, the incident, but also the actual feeling.

By systematically concentrating on one of the fifteen joys each week. Parents should read the chapter on each week's joy at the beginning of that week. They should then plan together just how and when to teach it. Thus, once every few months, each joy is taught for a full week.

By sitting down once a month as parents and evaluating together the progress of each child on each joy, pinpointing the particular joys that need the most work.

By simply being aware enough of the various joys that you can convey and teach them to your children subconsciously.

Shortly after we started the Joy School, and as we were beginning this book, Linda made an entry in our collective diary that presents an overview of the theory of this book. She called her thoughts "I.Q. vs. J.Q."

"We started our school because of our strong disagreement with the common supposition that the greatest thing that a child can possess (or that we as parents can help him to attain in order for him to 'succeed' in today's society) is a high I.Q. Too much stress is placed on young children's abilities, on being able to put together numbers and letters quickly, on manipulation skills. The world at large seems to be overly aware of 'How soon will my child read?' or 'Just listen to him count or recite.' While these things do have their place, we strongly believe that real happiness, contentment, and ability to cope with the world lie in a child's J.Q. (joy quotient). Ponder, for a moment, the quality of a child's life once he has obtained confidence in his own ability to make decisions, to enjoy and be aware of nature, to understand another person's ill feelings, to set a goal and accomplish it, to share with and serve his friends, and to see himself as a totally unique individual with a great deal to offer to others. Each of these are joys that can be taught, and we are of the opinion that the ideal time to teach them is before the age of five and before the beginning of formal education. With a foundation of these 'joy' concepts, the other abilities often associated with I.Q. will come quickly and naturally. By teaching a child joy, we can give him both a calm spirit and an active mind."
