Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Joy ( 1980)

Section I

Spiritual Joys

Small children, with their pure faith and fresh innocence, can quickly grasp and feel joys of the spirit. Spiritual joys intensify other joys. For example, we recognize that the world is beautiful, but it seems even more beautiful when we realize that our Father made it for us.

Gratitude is very nearly synonymous with joy. Spiritual joys teach us of the Being to whom our gratitude must be directed. He has told us: "I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth." (3 John 1:4.) "They shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly. " (D&C 68:28.)

"If [parents] have one child or one hundred children, if they conduct themselves towards them as they should, binding them to the Lord by their faith and prayers, I care not where those children go, they are bound up to their parents by an everlasting tie, and no power of earth or hell can separate them from their parents in eternity. " (Brigham Young.)

"I know that if ye are brought up in the way ye should go ye will not depart from it." (2 Nephi 4:5.)

1

Preserving the Joy of Simple Faith and Receptivity to the Spirit

"Pray in your families unto the Father. " (3 Nephi 18:21.)

"Parents, have you ever noticed that your little children have exercised faith for you when you have been sick? The little daughter, seeing you sick, will lift her heart with a pure, angelic-like prayer to heaven; and disease is rebuked when that kind of faith is exercised. God bless the children!" (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 206.)

I. Examples and Description

A. Child: The most painful illness I remember ever having was a severe ear infection. I was five years old. I have clear recall of that day: the warm, hollow tock, tock of the pendulum clock, the brow-furrowed look on my mother's face, and my father's simple, clear explanation of the priesthood's power to heal the sick. I suppose, at that age, there was little inclination not to believe . . . this was simply the way God had told us to use his power to cure sickness. "Let's do it," I said. "I want to be well."

I remember the dizzy warmth of heavy hands on my head. I don't recall the words of the blessing but I do recall, right after it, walking back into my room and waiting, wondering if it would be five minutes or five hours until I was better (never thinking to wonder if it would work).

Children are believers. For a child, prior to the world's infection of criticism and pseudosophisticated doubt, it is easy and natural to believe in God, in a loving, father-like God who is real, who cares, who hears and answers the prayers of his children.

Children are acutely receptive to feelings, to atmosphere. Put a child in a calm, happy place and you can almost see him absorb the peacefulness and joy. Anyone who can develop this childlike faith (or repossess it) can be lifted and touched by the Holy Spirit. Parley P. Pratt tried to describe what that Spirit can do: "The gift of the Holy Ghost adapts itself to all these organs or attributes. It quickens all the intellectual faculties, increases, enlarges, expands, and purifies all the natural passions and affections, and adapts them, by the gift of wisdom, to their lawful use. It inspires, develops, cultivates, and matures all the fine-toned sympathies, joys, tastes, kindred feelings, and affections of our nature. It inspires virtue, kindness, goodness, tenderness, gentleness, and charity. It develops beauty of person, form, and features. It tends to health, vigor, animation, and social feeling. It invigorates all the faculties of the physical and intellectual man. It strengthens and gives tone to the nerves. In short, it is, as it were, marrow to the bones, joy to the heart, light to the eyes, music to the ears, and life to the whole being." (Key to the Science of Theology, Deseret Book, 1978, p. 61.)

Who would not want to feel this great spirit? Isn't it interesting that the description "fits" most children so well?

Not long ago, riding alone with six-year-old Saren, I asked, "How is school going, Saren?"

"Fine." (Ask a not-much-thought question, get a not-much-thought answer.)

I tried again, harder: "Saren, how do you usually feel inside while you're in school?"

"I have a good, calm feeling inside, Dad . . . [pause] because I know my family loves me and I know Heavenly Father loves me [pause] so it makes me feel warm and like I love everybody."

B. Adult: Can people keep that feeling? that spirit? that childlike trust? I think of my Grandma Swenson because she had childlike faith. I first realized that when I was ten and she was seventy. She was at our house, and my father called on her to lead our family prayer. She literally cried unto the Lord. (She always cried when she prayed.) She asked as if she knew he heard. I remember thinking that she sounded like my little brother when she prayed. I remember that she talked to God as though he were a father and she were a child. I remember that her prayers were always answered.

Again the question: Can we learn more from children than we can teach them? Somewhere there is an eternal law that relates humility, teachability, and childlike faith with receptiveness to the Holy Ghost.

II. Methods

A. Strive to keep the Spirit always in the home.

What a joy can be found in the spirit of a home! In a world so high-strung, so selfish, so untrusting, what a strength it is to step out of the world and into the home—like stepping out of war into peace, out of hard tension into soft serenity, out of the wind into the calm and stillness of the eye of the storm.

How can we make it that way? We can do it through—

—Prayer: personal, open, to a loving Father; family prayer.

—Kindness and sensitivity, to people and things.

—Service to each other.

—No quarrels in the home—go outside if voices must be raised.

B. Help children explore and compare.

There is a profound connection between childlike joy and childlike faith. How can we as parents preserve the faith and "belief tendency"? How can we bolster it and encourage it enough that it can weather the criticism and cynicism of the world? Perhaps the way lies in doing the opposite of what may come naturally.

The first impulse is to protect and isolate—to build a wall between the child and the doubts and falsehoods of the world. Actually, the danger of cynicism, like the danger of atheism, is greatest not among those who are exposed and who carefully explore, but among those who don't. The best way to help a child prepare his basic faith is to help him explore, to encourage questioning and testing, and to let him see our total confidence in the ultimate answers of the gospel.

In the long run, encouraging children to question and explore will not only strengthen their testimonies, but it will also develop their knowledge, broaden their tolerance and respect for other beliefs, and open the doors of their minds to new ideas.

C. Protect the calmness of the home.

Remember Ozzie and Harriet, the television show? Not very dramatic or exciting—but I used to love to watch it as a child. Thinking back, I believe it was because of the calm feeling it always gave me. There were no catastrophes; when someone made a mistake, Ozzie would say, "Well now, that's too bad, isn't it—here, let's fix it so it won't happen again."

Children, when their physical wants are filled, are inherently calm and peaceful; only as we teach them frustration and agitation do they change.

D. Bring spiritual influences into the home.

If you have the priesthood in your home, use it often in your family. We have a tradition of giving each child a father's blessing on each birthday.

Some say the priesthood should be used only in time of real need. But is there not real need when a father is leaving on a three-day business trip? when a five-year-old is worried about starting school? when a new pregnancy begins? when a little boy can't sleep because his tummy aches? One great purpose of the priesthood is to bless the home and family. The Lord is displeased not by excess use, but by lack of use.

Also, talk about the Holy Ghost. Comment on the moments when his presence is felt; ask the children, "How did you feel during that blessing?"

E. Have early-morning "quiet time" and family devotionals.

The spirit that begins a day so often stretches through and fills the whole of that day. If a day can get off to a peaceful, spiritual start, children will have an inner peace that will buffer them against aggravation and worry even several hours later.

Begin breakfast at a set time each morning. Teach children that the time before breakfast is "quiet time," when we get dressed and think peacefully about our blessings and about the day ahead. Everyone whispers. There are some squeezes of hands and pats on the head and smiles of love and pride in each other.

Breakfast starts with a simple "devotional." A one-verse scripture is read. (Often a parent can read it a line at a time and a child can repeat it.) The idea or message of the scripture is discussed in simple terms, and then the morning kneeling prayer is held.

Properly applied (it takes a little time for small children to feel the peace of the idea), this procedure can turn the first hour of a family's day from a time of noise and confusion to a time of peace and order.

III. Family Focal Point: Family Prayer

Family prayer, in one form or another, is held in most genuinely religious homes. But there are two factors that can make the practice particularly meaningful to children:

A. Regularity: Families ought to have two specific times set aside every day for family prayer. At least one dependable, committed time, when every member is there, is essential. For most families, just before breakfast and just before dinner are the most reliable times. If necessary, get up early to assemble for prayer. Let children see that it is the highest priority.

B. Thoughtfulness: If family prayer becomes too routine, too automatic and habitual, children will begin to view it as ritualistic rather than relevant. Take two or three minutes together before starting the prayer to discuss what you as a family are particularly thankful for that day. Discuss what needs the family has and what should be asked for. Then ask someone to say the prayer.

IV. Story: "How Heavenly Father Helped Me"

Every other chapter in this book has a particular story. This opening chapter does not, because personal stories have the greatest effect in preserving and developing a child's faith.

Each parent should accept the challenge of thinking of a clear, simple incident from his own life that illustrates the power of faith or the working of the Spirit. When a child hears his parent say, "This is a story about how Heavenly Father helped me," he will listen, he will remember.

V. Reading List

Baird, Coleen. Seven Days and Prayer. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1980.

Barnes, Kathleen H., and Pearce, Virginia H. Testimony. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974.

———. What Is a Miracle? Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1975.

Bickerstaff, George. The Gift of Prayer. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1976.

———. My Special Family. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1977.

Hays, W., and Hook, F. My Jesus Book. Cincinnati: Standard Publishing Co., 1964.

———. My Thank You Book. Cincinnati: Standard Publishing Co., 1968.

VI. Postscript

A. Little Saren, five, had gone with her father, who had a speaking engagement in a ward some thirty miles away. The meeting had been very special and the spirit seemed very strong, partly because of the twenty-three nonmember investigators attending that day with missionaries. On the way home, Daddy asked Saren how she liked the meeting. She said, "Well, I didn't understand the words too well, but it really felt good in there. It felt real soft, just like in family home evening."

B. One day, a week or so after a long family talk on thinking before we pray, the children were called in from their play in the year's first snow. Mother was called on to offer the evening family prayer. It was a fairly normal prayer, but when it was over, four-year-old Josh looked seriously at her and said, "Hey, you forgot to say thanks for the snow. If you would think a little harder you'd remember these things!"
