Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Joy ( 1980)

2

Teaching the Joy of Obedience and Decisions

"The home is the best place in which to develop obedience which nature and society will later demand." (David O. McKay, Stepping Stones to an Abundant Life, Deseret Book, 1971, p. 289.)

"Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it." (Proverbs 22:6.)

I. Examples and Description

Wrong decisions avoided and right decisions made produce happiness. Many of life's decisions are made simply by the existence of law: moral law, natural law, governmental law, God's law. Obeying a law always yields a reward; breaking one inevitably produces punishment. One who knows and is committed to a law makes in advance decisions related to that law. (Most of us have decided in advance not to jump off tall buildings because we know and respect the law of gravity.) To those who know and accept other laws, it can be equally natural to decide in advance to marry in the temple, to finish one's education, to turn the other cheek, to stop and help those in need, to attend church and fill church assignments, to go on a mission, or to live the Word of Wisdom.

The other decisions, the laws without a right and wrong, the laws with many alternatives, are somewhat more difficult; yet they constitute one important aspect of why we are here on earth: to learn to weigh, to analyze, to think, to ponder—to make free choices with our free agency. The Lord stands ready, as he states in Doctrine and Covenants, section 9, to confirm and assure us in our decisions if they are right, and to give us a "stupor of thought" (to tell us to start over) if they are wrong.

The joy of obedience and of correct decisions is the joy of progress, of being on the right course. Some might say that this "course-keeping" joy is the prerequisite to eternal joy.

A. Adult: I have a good friend who likes to talk about decisions. He says: "The Lord has made so many of our decisions for us. He's told us what to do, but he's left us with the excitement of deciding how and when and where and with whom. For example," he goes on, "I feel sorry for anyone who tries to decide what to do with one-tenth of his earnings, or where to get married, or what to do on Monday nights. The Lord has already told us these things. I save my mind for the hard decisions, for the ones where the teacher hasn't already given out the answer sheet."

This friend relishes decisions. He loves to lay out the alternatives, to think things through, to decide—and then to take his decision to the Lord for confirmation. I see two consistent joys in him: the joy of obedience (in the things God has already decided), and the joy of decisions (in the things he has left up to us).

I asked my friend once just where he learned to think that way. He said, "As a child in family councils and in private interviews with my father."

B. Child: Romping out of the candy store, our four-year-old Saren, just learning to count money, discovered she had been given change for fifty cents rather than a quarter. Initial excitement: "I've got more money than when I came, and the candy." Then conscience: "I'd better give it back to the man." Then the real joy as she came back out of the store: "Daddy, he said he wishes everyone was honest like me!" There is true joy in simple, voluntary obedience.

That story reminds me of another time, another store, another child—Saren's father. I was age eight, and buying my first bicycle. I had twenty-five dollars, saved up from Grandma's gifts and from collecting and returning coat hangers and pop bottles. There were two used bikes in town for twenty-five dollars, one a red Schwinn and one a silver Silverchief. I couldn't choose. First I wanted one, then the other. My wise father took me back out to the car, found a large white sheet of paper, and drew a line down the center. "Let's list the reasons for the red bike in one column and the reasons for the silver bike in the other," he said. I did. I remember the thrill of thinking in a way I had never thought before. When the list was done, the silver bike was selected. (After all, no one else had one like it.) I kept that bike for ten years, and the memory of the joy of deciding on it never dimmed.

There is tremendous joy and satisfaction in learning that things are governed by laws. Psychologists tell us that small children usually believe that their desires control circumstances and cause things to happen. The time when a three- or four-year-old realizes that this is not the case, that things happen independently of his wants, can be a very traumatic time. Or, if he is being taught about laws in a positive, constructive way, it can be a time of real awakening joy.

In the gospel it is not only interesting but eternally instructive that the first law taught, the first covenant entered, is that of obedience. Laws and discipline are outgrowths of love—of God's love. Too many of us adults think of laws as restrictions, confinements; it's too bad the words commandment and law sound so repressive. We should remember that the Ten Commandments could also be called "The Ten Ways to Be Happy." Obedience to law actually gives freedom by rescuing us from the natural consequences and confinements of broken laws. Freedom and truth are first cousins.

The priesthood is the power to control laws. Faith is the belief in laws we can't understand. Children, even small ones, can grasp these truths—sometimes more easily than adults can. Children need to be given the latitude to make their own decisions. They will make some wrong ones, but will learn, with our help, from the consequences. While they are young, the decisions and their consequences will not be weighty enough to do permanent damage. And by the time decisions become important, they will know how to make them.

II. Methods [^1]

A. Teach children to differentiate between situations governed by law and situations governed by decision.

*1. The picture game: Show various pictures and ask with each one, "Is there a law, or do we decide?"

a. car going past speed limit sign (law of the land)

b. person walking by a cliff (law of gravity)

c. child getting dressed (we decide which shirt)

d. children fighting (law of God)

e. child buying ice cream at 31-flavor store (we decide)

*2. Make up stories that get to points of "What should he do?" (Is there a law that tells him, or does he make a decision?)

B. Expect and demand "perfect obedience."

Teach children that "perfect obedience" means to say, "Yes, Mommy," or "Yes, Daddy," and to obey immediately whenever they are told to do or not to do something. This may seem rather arbitrary or militaristic, but children inherently love discipline—it gives them a type of security that is otherwise unavailable. Always say "please" to children so that they feel your respect and love. Make "please" a trigger word by teaching them that whenever they hear it, they should say, "Yes, Mommy" and obey. When they do not respond quickly, just say the words "perfect obedience" to remind them to say "Yes, Mommy."

Children should know that they have the right to ask why, but that perfect obedience (with the "Yes, Mommy") is expected right after the why answer is given.

C. Design frequent opportunities for decision making.

*3. Let the children choose only one tool to work with in sculpting clay or whipped soap flakes.

*5. Set up a treasure hunt where a series of correct decisions leads to a surprise or treasure.

D. Tell stories about wise or foolish decisions you have made and what the consequences were.

E. Reinforce and discuss the consequences of decisions. "What will happen if you do that?" "Will that make your sister happy or sad?"

F. Discipline. Parents must make their own decisions about the methods of discipline, but certain principles always apply.

G. Teach the principle of repentance. Children should learn that through genuine repentance they can avoid punishment. Teach children the beauty of repenting toward each other. We have learned in our family that when one child teases another, or hurts another in some way, a simple form of repentance can restore good feelings much faster than punishment. We remind the guilty child, "You'd better repent." Repentance, for one of our children, consists of four things: (1) a hug for the other child; (b) a request, "Will you forgive me?"; (3) a statement, "I'll try not to ever do that again"; and (4) asking Heavenly Father for forgiveness that night in prayer.

III. Family Focal Point: The Family Laws Chart

One of the most memorable family home evenings we have ever had was the night we agreed to the "family laws." We had prepared a framed piece of heavy posterboard and put a nail in the wall to hang it on, and now we explained to Saren (four) and Shawni (three) that this was to be a list of our family laws.

We talked for a moment about "nature laws" and "country laws" and "church laws" and, as usual, got the best definition of the word from Saren.

"What is a law then, Saren?"

"Something that, if you keep it, you're happier, and if you don't keep it, a bad thing happens to you." The stage was now set.

"What are some laws for our family that, if we keep them, will make us happier?" The list gained momentum. Saren's openers got Shawni thinking and the list grew:

"Don't hit other little girls."

"Don't plug in plugs."

"Don't ruin things that are not for ruining."

"Say the magic words (please, thank you, excuse me)."

We had to help with some that they didn't think of:

"Stay in bed when put there."

"Keep your seat belt on when riding in a car."

"Don't walk while holding the baby."

"Don't go in the road unless holding Mommy's or Daddy's hand."

"Mind with no back talk." (Saren added a clarification here: "But we can ask why!")

We really didn't realize, at the time, what a help the list would be. Rather quickly the children grasped the idea that they were obeying laws that they had helped decide on, laws that would make our family happier.

Some time later, in another family home evening, we decided as a family which punishments should go with which laws. The children decided that a little spank was the most appropriate punishment for hitting and for certain other serious or dangerous violations. They decided that "going to our room" should be the penalty for whining and for certain of the other laws. On some laws, we decided that one warning should be given before a punishment would be required. By the raise of hands, we sustained each punishment and wrote it on the "family laws board."

IV. Story: "Cheekey and the Laws"

Cheekey was a baby monkey. He lived with his sister and his mother and father in a tree. Their tree was in the jungle. In the jungle there were some laws. They were called the Jungle Laws. Do you know what laws are? (Things that you must do right or else you get punishment.)

Do you know what a punishment is? (Something sad that happens when you break a law.)

There were two laws in Cheekey's jungle. One was that whenever you were in a tree, you had to hold on with your hand, or your foot, or your tail. What do you think the punishment was if you broke that law? (You would fall!)

The other jungle law was that if you saw a lion coming, you had to quickly climb up a tree. What do you think the punishment was if you broke that law? (You would get eaten up!)

In Cheekey's own family tree, there were two family laws. One law was that you couldn't go out of the tree without asking. Why do you think they had that law? (So Cheekey wouldn't get lost.)

Why didn't his mother and father want him to get lost? (Because they loved him.)

What do you think the punishment was if Cheekey went out of his tree without asking? (His mother gave him a little swat with her tail right on his bottom.)

Why did his mother do that? (So he wouldn't go out of the tree again.)

Why didn't she want him to do it again? (Because she loved him and didn't want him to get lost.)

The other monkey family law was to never drop your banana peels on limbs of the family tree. Why do you think they had that law? (So no one would slip on them and fall out of the tree.)

Why did the monkey family decide to have a law like that? (Because they loved each other and didn't want anyone in their family to get hurt.)

What do you think the punishment was for breaking that law? (A little swat on the bottom.)

Why would the mother do that? (Because she loved Cheekey and wanted him to remember not to do it again.)

Now, I'm going to tell you the things that happened to Cheekey one day. Sometimes there were laws to tell him what to do and sometimes there weren't any laws and he could decide for himself.

When Cheekey first woke up in the morning, he had to stretch and yawn, and he almost let go of the branch. Was there a law to tell him what to do? (Yes—hold on or he would fall.)

Then he looked at his two hats, a red one and a green one. Was there a law to tell him which to wear? (No, he could choose whichever one he wanted. He chose the red one.)

Then he wanted to climb down out of the tree to find a banana for breakfast. Was there a law to tell him what to do? (Yes—ask his mother so she would know where he was and he wouldn't get lost.)

He found a big banana and a little banana. Was there a law to tell him which one to choose? (No—he could choose either one he wished.) Cheekey chose the big one because he was very hungry.

While he was walking back to his tree, he saw a lion. Was there a law to tell him what to do? (Yes—climb up a tree quickly or the lion would eat him!)

Cheekey climbed up a tree. After the lion went away he went back to his own tree and wondered which limb to sit on to eat the banana. Was there a law to tell him where to sit? (No—he could choose any limb he wanted.)

When he peeled the banana, was there a law about the peel? (Yes—don't leave it on a limb.)

Cheekey had a fun, safe day. It's fun and safe when you know the laws and do what they say and it's fun to decide things when there isn't a law about them.

V. Reading List

Arnold, A. The Yes and No Book. Chicago: Reilly & Lee Books, 1970.

Coombs, P. Lisa and the Grompet. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard, 1970.

Gunthrop, K. Curious Maggie. New York: Doubleday and Co., 1968.

Johnston, J. Edie Changes Her Mind. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1964.

Leaf, M. Fair Play. New York: J. P. Lippincott Co., 1939.

Lowrey, J. S. The Pokey Little Puppy. New York: Golden Press, 1942.

Odor, R. Cissy, the Pup. Chicago: Child's World, 1977.

Rice, I. A Long Long Time. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard, 1964.

Waber, B. Ira Sleeps Over. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1972.

Williams, B. If He's My Brother. New York: Harvey House Publishers, 1976.

VI. Postscript

As the teacher was reading a story, Travis kept bothering Andy, who was interested in the story and was trying to listen. After twice reminding Travis that it was "listening time," the teacher removed him from the group and Andy was heard to say, "I'm glad we have rules in this school."

Jamie's mother told this experience: As they pulled up to a large office building that Jamie's father had recently built, Jamie said, "Daddy, that was really a big decision you had to make on where to build this building, wasn't it?" Then her younger sister added, "Was it a good decision, Daddy? Did it make you happy?"

---
Notas:
[^1] Have two kinds or colors of juice to choose from. Children should be disciplined in private rather than in public.
