Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Joy ( 1980)

3

Teaching the Joy of Gratitude and of Knowing God as Our Father

"And in nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey not his commandments." (D&C 59:21.)

"For we labor diligently . . . to persuade our children . . . to believe in Christ." (2 Nephi 25:23.)

"I love these little people, and it is not a slight thing when they who are so fresh from God love us." (Charles Dickens.)

I. Examples and Description

A. Adult: I remember a powerful speech I once heard fifteen years ago, but it seems like last week. For half an hour, the speaker discussed how infinite and incredible the universe is and how insignificantly small we are. He said man has discovered 7 x 1015 stars. Then he asked, "If each star were represented by one page in a book, how thick would the book be?" Five feet? A hundred yards? Ten miles? No—as thick as the distance around the world six hundred times!

Each of us, he said, is a speck on one tiny earth that revolves around one of those 7 x 1015 stars. We were awed; we felt so small that we wondered if we were even still there. Then he made this point: "When I look out on the night sky, I see the handiwork of God, but when I look upon your faces, I see God's offspring."

What I remember most is the warm glow that settled on that meeting—the secure, privileged joy that struck my heart as I contemplated the fact that I was more important to my Father than all of his stars, that they were made for me, that I was his son.

Can children feel this joy? Of course they can! It is based on simple, childlike faith—faith that God not only lives, but also loves us as his children.

As we come to think of God as a loving, personal Father, we begin to feel a natural expansion of gratitude. One reason God told us to be like little children is that children feel gratitude so easily and naturally, and God knows how closely related gratitude is with joy.

If we can understand that God's definition of a joyful man is "a grateful child," then we may begin to see one of his most quoted phrases—"Be like a little child"—as the method of achieving one of his other most-quoted phrases: "Men are that they might have joy."

B. Child. How well I remember the day when our fifth child, Jonah, was born two months premature. That evening, with him in an incubator and breathing with a respirator, with Linda under sedation at the hospital, and with my own mind full of worry and fear, I returned home and explained to six-year-old Saren, five-year-old Shawni, and three-year-old Josh about the baby's need for our prayers. We knelt down together by the bed. Josh prayed first: "Bless my new little brother Jonah that he will breathe better and get big so he can play with me." Then Shawni: "Heavenly Father, I love you. Thank you for Jonah. Help him stay here on the earth with us because we love him." Then Saren: "Our dear Heavenly Father, we love you. Thank you for sending little Jonah down to be in our family. Help him to breathe by himself. Help him to come home soon to his new family so we can hold him and love him." As I held those three children to me, the world was blurred by my tears, but the faith in my heart had never been more clear. Their prayers, by the way, were answered.

Children teach us so much. I remember asking Saren one day, as we drove home from the grocery store, what she was grateful for. She felt gratitude for things I hadn't even noticed: the warm heater in the car, the snow on the pine trees, the frozen peas we had just bought, the stove we had to cook them on, our fingers so we could hold hands, for we were holding hands right then.

One day I bought eighteen-month-old Jonah his first balloon. He was awe-struck, overcome with excitement as he batted it, squeezed it, sat on it, squeaked it. He toddled over to me again and again to show me, always beaming with delight, and that night he leaned his little head on my shoulder in a special way that I knew meant "thank you." Little children can feel such genuine joy. If we can teach them that God gave them all things, then all things can give them joy.

II. Methods

A. Prayer. Discuss before family prayer: What are we grateful for? What does Jesus look like? How can Heavenly Father hear our prayers? How does he want us to talk to him? What are the things we really need that we should ask him for? Children who think of a Heavenly Father and Brother can pray with the realness and candor that the Lord has told all his children to use. We can pray often together and help children to understand that they can pray always in their hearts.

B. "Favorite Things Wall." The wall or board discussed in chapter 6 can be a great prompter of gratitude and of recognizing the small things for which we feel thankful.

C. The "Aren't We Blessed" game. Have a tradition of saying, whenever there is a special moment of pleasure or gratitude, "Aren't we blessed!" Say it as you sit down to a meal; when you get home safely after a long drive; at the high point of a family home evening; after opening presents at Christmas; as you see someone less fortunate. Just say, "Aren't we blessed!" Be sure the children understand the meaning, and they will soon be saying it too—at just the right moments.

D. Role-play the premortal existence. All children are there with Heavenly Father and can see a mother and father down on the earth. Heavenly Father sends down one at a time—oldest first. He stays up there watching us, hoping we do the right things and have happy families, listening carefully to our prayers and answering them. Then the father or mother gets old, goes back up, and tells Heavenly Father what a happy life and happy family he or she has had.

E. Fasting. Even small children are capable of missing one meal and of feeling the special temporal gratitude that comes from fasting. Put some money on the table and dramatize that "these four dollars will be saved by not buying one meal today, and we'll give these four dollars to poor people who miss many meals." Sometimes the sponsorship of a particular child through an overseas "help fund" makes this more dramatic. Have a picture of the child; explain that he only gets one meal a day, that "our four dollars buy food and clothes for him."

F. Turn other joy forms to spiritual ones. All of the appreciation methods in chapters 5 and 6 (joy of body, earth) can turn to spiritual forms of gratitude as the element of thanks-oriented prayer is added.

G. "Gratitude input." Tell a child how blessed he is. Do it often, pointing out specific blessings: you have two great sisters, you are strong, you can run fast, you have two grandpas, you have a kitten, you have a healthy body, you have a smart brain.

H. "Gratitude poster." At Sunday dinner, decide on one particular thing to be grateful for during the coming week. (Start during the first weeks with simple things like rain, food, schools, clothes. Later include more complex things like freedom and self-respect.) Have a child "draw" the item for gratitude each week on a sheet of paper and put it on the wall by the dinner table where it is noticed and talked about often and mentioned in prayers. Each week as the previous poster comes down, save it with the others to bind together at the end of the year as the "gratitude book."

I. Answer out loud a child's prayer. Do this just once in a while to give him the idea that God is real and really does hear prayers. For example: Child says, "Thank you for the beautiful flowers." Parent says, "You're welcome. I made them because I love you, and I'm glad you like them." Explain that you are just showing what God might be thinking while he listens to the prayer.

III. Family Focal Point: The Family Testimony Meeting

In the mission field we had a practice as companions of bearing our testimonies to each other each Sunday morning. It always surprised me that, even though we'd been together all week, feelings and insights came out in those private testimonies that were never mentioned otherwise. The spirit and atmosphere of the occasion made it a time of true openness. All barriers were down, and we said what we felt.

We do the same thing now as a family each fast Sunday before our dinner. If it was helpful and beautiful in the mission field, it is even more so now in our family. Each person takes a turn right around the table, even the little ones. (The very little ones get some help, just as they would in a prayer.) Each family member expresses his gratitude, his feelings, his testimony. It is a time when children learn to stand up and express themselves, when little differences get apologized for and cleared away, when gratitude is truly felt and expressed, both to each other and to God, and when testimonies are voiced, nourished, and given room to grow.

As children are old enough, they are encouraged to say only what they really feel, and to never say something just because it is expected or just because someone else said it. It is a sharing time, a time to share gratitude, conviction, perspective, and love.

IV. Story: "Your Story"

This is a story about you. Before you came to live with us, you lived with Heavenly Father. Heavenly Father was called God. He had a great many children, and he loved them all very much. You had a different kind of body then. It was made out of spirit, and you couldn't learn quite as much or feel quite as much with that kind of body. You wanted a body like Heavenly Father's, one made out of flesh and bones. The way to get that kind of body was to be born on earth. Heavenly Father had made the earth for us so that we could learn many things. You knew that things would be kind of hard on the earth and that you would have some sad days. But you really wanted to come here because you knew the earth was so beautiful, and you wanted to get a body and have a mother and a father and brothers and sisters.

You and Heavenly Father looked down and tried to find just the right family for you. When you saw your mother and father you said, "That's the family I want." Heavenly Father agreed, so he started a little body for you inside your mother's tummy. At first it was just a tiny little seed, but it grew and grew, and when it was big enough for you to be born, Heavenly Father put your spirit into that little body.

Before he did, he asked you to do two things while you were down on the earth: first, to love him and to love all his other children in the world; second, to help your family and someday to have a nice family of your own.

Heavenly Father knew that you would be a baby for a while after you were born and that you would forget a lot about him and about what he told you, so he gave us some special books that would help us remember where we were before we were born, and what he told us. He also picks out certain special men on the earth that he talks to so that they can tell us what he wants us to know.

More than anything else, Heavenly Father wants us to come back and live with him after we die. If we love everyone and have good families as he told us to, then we can go back and live with him in heaven.

V. Reading List

Baird, Coleen. Seven Days and Prayer. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1980.

Barnes, Kathleen and Pearce, Virginia H. Forever and Ever. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1975.

Bickerstaff, George. Before I Was Born. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1974.

———. My Body Is a Temple. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1978.

Field, R. Prayer for a Child. New York: Collier Books, 1941.

Griffin, Glen C. and Mary Ella. About You . . . and Other Important People. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1979.

Hays, W., and Hook, F. My Thank You Book. Cincinnati: Standard Publishing Co., 1968.

Johnston, D. Stop, Look, and Listen. Cincinnati: Standard Publishing Co., 1977.

Larson, D. I Am a Child of God. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1971.

———. My Gift from Jesus. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1972.

Pearson, Carol Lynn. My Turn on Earth. Hollywood, California: Embryo Music Co., 1977. (Also available in record form.)

VI. Postscript

A. Five-year-old Shawni had been allowed to hold her new baby brother for a moment. She sat on the couch and gazed at his little face for several moments, lost in her thoughts. Then in a caring, sweet little voice she said, "You tiny little one, I bet you're thinking about heaven where you were a few days ago. You haven't forgotten how Heavenly Father looks yet, have you?"

B. Josh, age four and a half, finished one of his first "by myself" bedtime prayers. As he jumped into bed his mind was still on the prayer. He said, "Dad, it's really neat that Heavenly Father still loves us even though we've been gone for a long time, and he's got really really good ears too, doesn't he? Because he can hear us from way up there when we pray."

In his prayer he had said he was thankful for water. As I tucked him in, I asked why. He said, "Because without water we couldn't flush the toilet . . . and there would be no goldfish . . . and no popsicles."
