Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Joy ( 1980)

Section II

Physical Joys

"The morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy" at the prospect of a physical existence. (See Job 38:7.)

4

Preserving the Joy of Spontaneous Delight

Do you want to know the purpose of mortality? Then listen to the sound of a child's laughter.

I. Examples and Description

A. Child: I was upstairs in my bedroom; eighteen-month-old Josh was right below me downstairs in his sister's room. At first I thought he was crying, but as I listened again, I heard it for what it was: a loud, spontaneous belly laugh. I knew he was down there by himself, because I could hear his sisters with Linda in the kitchen, so I sneaked quietly down to observe. I peeked through the door just in time for the next peal of laughter. Josh, his back to me, sitting on his haunches, was facing Saren's bed. The bedspread, hanging to the floor, suddenly bulged and then lifted to reveal Barney, our big black Labrador, squirming out from under the bed. There was something funny about Barney's shifty-eyed, kind-of-sheepish look as he pushed his head out from under the spread. Josh laughed so hard he fell sideways. Then he promptly crawled under the end of the bed, Barney following, crawled back out from under the bedspread, and turned to watch Barney come out again.

Josh's laugh made me smile, made me feel free. Adult laughs are too often sarcastic or boisterous or somehow forced and brittle. Josh's spontaneous laugh pealed out like a thousand bells—the kind of free, delighted laugh that most little children have and most adults lose.

There is often a paradox in adult minds. On one hand, we admire spontaneity; we speak of the free spirit, the unconventional, with at least a lingering trickle of envy. On the other hand, we associate maturity with words like sophistication, reserve, and proper. Too often parents convey the inhibitions of "the other hand" to their children. How many times have you seen a parent give a sideward, brow-furrowed look of scorn to a child whose spontaneous delight and enthusiasm was "socially improper." We let our own inferiorities and inhibitions stamp out the spontaneity in our children, and we let our schools and institutions do the same thing. If we are not careful, it becomes harder to preserve and protect in our children the joys they were born with than to teach them the ones they came here to learn.

B. Adult: I was alone one day, walking to lunch on a busy Boston street. Ahead was an old man, begging, "Any spare change?" The young businessman ahead of me brushed him off. "No, no—sorry." Too busy. Life is a pattern, each man with an image of himself. The businessman was sophisticated, on a time schedule: "can't be interrupted," "don't stop for this unsavory character,"—"he's not on my daily calendar." Then I came up to the beggar. I saw his face. I saw character mixed with tragedy in the old eyes. "Come on—come to lunch with me." Spontaneous, spur of the moment. The man was surprised. I was surprised. I'll forget other lunches, but never that one. The incredible story of a broken man's break—it did him good to tell it; it did me good to hear it. He left with a full stomach and with a flicker of hope because someone had cared and listened. I left happy because I had helped, but also because I had done something spontaneous—free—open.

II. Methods

As with each of the "joys to preserve," the key method is encouragement and reinforcement. Children will repeat what they are praised for.

There are many ways to encourage and sanction a particular behavior; perhaps the best way of all is by participating in that particular behavior yourself. (And perhaps the great benefit of preserving the natural, childlike joys in children is that we may recapture them in ourselves.)

A. Get excited with children. Swallow your sophistication—be a child with them, emote with them. When they say, "Oh look," you say, "Wow, yes." Don't say, "Calm down, son," or "Not here, dear." Let them be your teachers. They are the experts in spontaneity—do what they do. Live in the present with them. Praise them for watching, and watch with them what they watch!

B. Help them relive spontaneous joy moments by remembering. "Remember when we saw the bird pulling up the worm, Josh? Wasn't that great?" "Remember at the picnic when the grasshopper jumped into the potato salad? Didn't we laugh hard?"

C. Do spontaneous things with them. "Hey, Shawni, instead of a bedtime story tonight, let's put on your pajamas and go to the ice cream shop for a cone before you go to bed." "Josh, your mom looks tired. Let's put her to bed for a nap, and you and I will fix dinner."

D. Make spontaneity a high priority. Place enough value on spontaneity that you let it happen even if it's a little inconvenient. Suppose you are walking outside on a warm summer afternoon and you spot your two-year-old stomping with delight in his first puddle. Resist the urge to yank him out with a "No, no!" Take off his shoes and let him do it. (Or take off your shoes and do it with him!)

E. Surprise-oriented group games. Play games together in which the adults share and encourage the children's spontaneous delight, such as hide-and-seek and musical chairs.

F. Opening packages. Wrap things up—share the surprise as children open them. Have them guess what's inside before opening.

G. Put new surprises into old fairy tales. It's amazing the delight that the mixing of two familiar fairy tales can cause. "While the three bears were walking in the woods, they heard a funny little man singing a song. 'They'll never guess that Rumpelstiltskin is my name."'

H. Do things with children that are a little silly and that show how acceptable it is to enjoy unexpected things. (1) Put a mitten on the doorknob and "shake hands" with the door. (2) Pop popcorn in a popcorn popper without a lid (put the popper in the center of a large sheet so the popped kernels fly up and fall down on the sheet). (3) Get up and do a little dance when the music and the mood hit you. (4) Catch grasshoppers in a field (in a delighted way).

*I. Engage in the kind of play that produces exciting and unpredictable results. (1) Blow bubbles with a straw (in a glass of soapy water, or in the tub at bath time). (2) Finger paint with thick paint. Let the children mix colors. Let them try it with their feet. (3) Play in the water with empty plastic bottles, straws, or funnels.

III. Family Focal Point: The Family Treasure Chest

We have a "treasure chest." It is just an old wooden box, painted many beautiful colors, with a big combination lock on it. The children know from experience that there is always a surprise in it.

Once or twice a week, on special occasions or perhaps for rewards, it is opened by Daddy, the only one who knows the lock's combination. It is amazing how delighted a child can be with one small piece of candy, or a pinecone, or even a small sponge so he can help wipe off the table. Anything, so long as it comes out of the treasure chest, produces spontaneous delight.

IV. Story: "The Bears Save the Baby"

(This story is for children familiar with the stories of "The Three Bears" and "Rumpelstiltskin.")

Once upon a time there were three bears; a daddy bear, a mama bear, and a little baby bear. One day they were having soup for dinner and the baby bear said, in his wee, little voice, "This soup is too hot." "It is," said the daddy bear in his deep, big voice. "Let's go for a walk in the woods while it cools off."

So they did.

They skipped off into the woods singing their favorite song, which was "The Bear Went Over the Mountain." When the song ended and their voices were quiet, the baby bear said, "Shhh, listen—I hear someone else singing." They all listened, and they heard a little song coming out of the deepest part of the woods. "Let's go see who it is," said the mama bear. They crept very quietly, as only bears can do. Pretty soon they were close enough to hear the singer clearly. His was a strange, croaky little voice, and the song went like this:

"Today I cook, tomorrow I bake The next day the queen's child I take. For she will never, never proclaim That Rumpelstiltskin is my name."

The bears got close enough to see through the trees and into a little clearing. They saw a tiny, wicked-looking man dancing around his fire. He sang the last line again, "For Rumpelstiltskin is my name."

In a tiny whisper, the daddy bear said, "Come this way," and the three bears walked quickly and quietly away until they could not hear the little man anymore. Then the daddy bear said in his deep, big voice, "Who was that?"

"He was bad," said the baby bear in his high, squeaky voice.

"What was he singing about?" asked the mama bear in her soft, gentle voice.

Daddy: "About the little princess, I think."

Baby: "He is going to take her away from the queen."

Mama: "Unless the queen can guess his name."

Baby: "She'll never guess a funny name like Rumpelstiltskin."

Daddy: "Unless we tell her."

Baby: "Let's run to the palace."

Off went the three bears as fast as their legs would carry them. At last they saw the palace. At first the guard was afraid when he saw them, but the mama bear said in her soft, gentle voice, "Don't worry, we have come to tell the queen the name of the bad little elf."

"You know his name?" said the guard. "We've all been trying to figure it out. Come with me right this way."

When they found the queen, she was crying and sobbing. "How can I ever learn his name?"

"We know it, we know it," said the baby bear in his high, squeaky voice.

"What? Who are you?" asked the queen, looking up.

"We found the little man in the woods," said the big daddy bear respectfully. "He didn't see us but we heard him say his name."

The queen clapped her hands with joy, and the baby bear whispered in her ear, "Rumpelstiltskin."

That night when the little elf showed up, laughing and thinking that he would take the baby, the bears were carefully hidden under the table so they could watch.

"Well, you don't know my name," he said, "so I'll be taking the little princess."

"Let me guess first," said the queen. "You said I had three guesses."

"All right, but hurry," said the elf. "You can never guess it."

The queen was enjoying herself now. She decided to use all of her guesses before getting it right. "Is it Joshua?" she asked.

"No, no, no," laughed the little man, rubbing his hands together. "Guess again."

"Is it Jonah?" said the queen.

"No, no, no, no. You'll never guess."

"Well," said the queen, "for my last guess, is it Rumpelstiltskin?"

The elf turned red in the face with anger. He stomped his feet so hard that he disappeared right through the floor and was never seen again.

There was a great celebration at the palace, and the queen invited the bears to stay and to become special palace guards. The bears thanked her but said they had to get back to their house to see if their soup was cooled off yet.

V. Reading List

Aliki. Is It Blue as a Butterfly? New York: Prentice Hall, 1965.

Asheron, S. The Surprise in the Storybook. New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1963.

Barret, J. Animals Should Definitely Not Wear Clothing. New York: Atheneum, 1970.

Baun, A., and Baun, J. Know What? No, What? New York: Parents Magazine Press, 1964.

DeReginiers, B. What Can You Do with a Shoe? New York: Harper & Brothers, 1955.

Lund, D. H. Did You Ever. New York: Parents Magazine Press, 1965.

Slobodkin, E. Caps for Sale. New York: William R. Scott, 1947.

Stone, J. The Monster at the End of the Book. Racine, Wisc.: Western Publishing Co., 1971.

Zolotow, C. Not a Little Monkey. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard, 1957.

VI. Postscript

Lisa (age 4): "I'm going to stay with my grandma tonight—all right?"

Teacher: "Do you like to do that?"

Lisa: "Yes, and Grandma likes it too. She says she likes me to come 'cause I make her laugh a lot."

Teacher: "Oh? How do you make her laugh?"

Lisa: "She's funny. Whenever I laugh, she laughs."

Teacher: "And what makes you laugh?"

Lisa: "I don't know. I guess it's just the 'happy' coming out. And do you know what?"

Teacher: "No, what?"

Lisa: "Grandma's pretty old, but I can do something better than she can."

Teacher: "Oh? What's that?"

Lisa: "Laugh."

Then Lisa laughed.
