Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Joy ( 1980)

5

Teaching the Joy of the Body

The body is an instrument for feeling. We feel things with our bodies that would otherwise be unknown to us. The beauty and challenge of life are that we choose what our bodies will feel. I want to choose joy.

I. Examples and Description

A. Adult: It wasn't that he was extraordinarily healthy, it was just that he enjoyed things about his physical body that most take for granted. He was a farmer, middle-aged, living in the flat, middle plain of America. He loved the hard, sweat-producing work in his field. "The hot sun limbers up my body," he would say, "makes me feel more loose and easy." He liked winter work as well. "My lungs like to feel that cold mornin' air a-fillin' 'em, and if I work hard enough, in ten minutes, I'm warm as summer."

On Wednesday evenings, after a long day's work, he played softball. He was the oldest member of the team. He said that part of the enjoyment was the competition and the company, but most of it was the physical joy. The catch, the throw, the hit—each, for him, was a momentary splurge of physical pleasures, a bump of joy.

The same physical joy showed in a different way when he took out his old fiddle. His tone was sometimes wrong—his position always was—but the rhythm in the twitch of shoulder and tap of toe told me that his wide smile reflected uninhibited joy.

This man loved his senses and his senses loved the earth. He'd close his eyes so he could listen better to whippoorwills. He'd stop just to breathe the lilac breeze in early May. He'd let the soft black soil sift through his fist just to feel its texture. And when his wife baked apple pie, he would hold the first bite in his mouth for half a minute "to be sure I taste it all."

He found amazement and wonder in the natural processes of his body—the rejuvenation of sleep, the fuel of food. Much of this world's progress and possessions had passed by this man, but his ability to feel the joy of his own body twinkled his eye and brightened his face so that the world looked back with envy.

B. Child. Here is a conversation I had with my three-year-old.

"Why did Heavenly Father give you a body?"

"To skip with!"

"To skip with?"

"Yes."

"I see. What's the best part of your body?"

"The eyes."

"Why?"

" 'Cause I see the flowers."

"Oh?"

"But the nose is too, 'cause I smell them."

"Do you hear them?"

"No, but if you close your eyes you do hear teensy little things."

"Like what?"

"Wind and trees."

"How do they sound?"

"Swish, swish, but quieter than that."

"Any other parts of the body you like?"

"The tongue to talk—you hold onto it and you can't talk—try it—say my name."

"Unghun—uwam."

"See!" (Laughter)

"Shawni, does your body make you happy?"

"My body is the happy!"

The spontaneous delight and built-in curiosity of little children make them receptive to the joy of the body. They are perfect pupils, but they still need teachers. The sensing equipment is built in—they receive the sensation—but they need to interpret it to feel its joy. A child's senses are more acute than ours, but the joy of the body lies in understanding what we sense, and that is where the teaching comes in.

What joy is in the body! The joy of work and of hard purposeful effort, the joy of singing, the joy of sport and activity, the joy of tenderness and physical touch, the joy of controlling physical matter. Children have a tendency toward them all. Softly feel a baby's head, rough-house with a two-year-old, watch a three-year-old squeeze shapes from a square block of clay, and you'll see the opening melodies of the body's joy.

Inhibition and fear take away the body's joy. Children learn inhibitions and fear from us. How can we avoid it? First, we must help them to try physical things, without intimidation, embarrassment, or fear. We must help them begin to sense the simple enjoyment of the functioning of their bodies. Then, beyond that, we must help them find and concentrate on the particular physical things that they do especially well, the things in which they are gifted, be they sports, music, crafts, dance, or whatever their own particular gifts suggest.

II. Methods

A. Learning the names of body parts.

*1. Play "Simon Says." The leader gives various commands: "Touch your tummy." "Lift your left foot." "Close your eyes." The rest of the players follow a command only if it is preceded by "Simon Says."

*2. Play "Hokey Pokey." Players stand in a circle and act out this rhyme: "You put your left foot in, you put your left foot out, you put your left foot in and you shake it all about. You do the Hokey Pokey and you turn yourself about. That's what it's all about—hey!" Rhyme is repeated with each part of body.

*3. Make a large puzzle of the body out of heavy cardboard pieces for children to put together. As they do, they name each part and tell what it can do.

B. Teaching appreciation for the body.

*1. Focus the children's attention on one sense: Close your eyes (or use blindfold). Ask: "What can we hear? Listen closer—is there anything else we can hear?" (Do this outside and inside, in city and in country.)

Close your eyes and ears. What can we smell?

Close your eyes and ears. Taste something and identify it.

Close your eyes and ears. Feel something with your feet and identify it.

With no eyes (blindfolded), try to put a piece in a puzzle. With no thumbs (tape them to fingers), try to pick up a penny. With only one hand (other one in pocket), try to catch a big ball. Without bending knees (keep legs straight), try to walk up stairs.

*3. "What is it?" game. Blindfold the children. Then let them hear and smell and touch and taste various things and try to identify them. Use things with interesting textures (sandpaper, cotton, polished stones); different sounds (bottled water, marbles in a box, a bell); distinct odors (perfume, popcorn, pickles); distinct tastes (sugar, salt, peanut butter, root beer).

*4. Identify sounds. Tape-record a variety of sounds; play them and have children identify what they are.

*5. Teach appreciation of the human body over other bodies. Pretend you are an elephant, bird, squirrel—what can you do? What can't you do? (Walk on two legs, pick up things with fingers, talk, walk while carrying something.) Now pretend you are a plant—what can't you do? (Almost everything.)

*6. Sensory stimulation. (a) Take a walk on a windy day. (b) Put a popcorn popper with no lid in the middle of a large, clean sheet or tablecloth on the floor. Watch and listen while the popping corn spews out like a fountain (see it, smell it, hear it, feel it, taste it). (c) Finger-paint with chocolate pudding. This also uses all five senses.

*7. Teach how the body moves. What parts of the body can open and close? What parts of the body can bend? Shake? Twist? Can you make a "T" with your body? an "E"? a "C"? (Some letters require two children to make their shapes.)

C. Use and development of bodily skills.

*1. Dancing and marching. Use a variety of music, ranging from light, fairylike ballet pieces to heavy soldier marches. The stronger the rhythm the better. Encourage freedom of movement and lack of inhibition: "Try to kick the ceiling." "Look like a big tree swaying in the breeze." Most children can feel the mood of music; encourage them to let it out. Sometimes a partially darkened room helps children to feel more free. Use a particularly free, uninhibited child as an example.

*2. Learning to catch a ball. Few abilities give a child a greater sense of physical confidence and satisfaction. A large foam or sponge ball is easy to catch, a good first step. Also, teach children to shoot a basket; both boys and girls need the feeling of physical prowess and ability. Again, use a sponge ball with a low basket. Teach them that missing is just fine; take it all lightly.

*4. Provide balancing toys, such as swing sets and tumbling mats. Encourage, but don't push, exploration, swinging, hanging, climbing, jumping off. Set up a simple obstacle course.

*5. Teach simple songs and offer the children praise for singing. Tape-record their music and let them have the joy of listening to it again.

Always give total encouragement and praise. A negative word can ruin fragile physical confidence and delay or thwart the very physical joy you are trying to create and teach. If the result is good, praise the result: "You did skip!" "You sang that right on tune!" If the result is not good, praise the attempt, the effort: "What a good try! Before long you'll do it!"

D. Care of the body.

III. Family Focal Point: The Family Activity Board

There is something special about a family that does physical things together. There is something special about any relationship that is partially born out of shared physical activity. We learn when we play ball with someone, swim with someone; the activity brings the minds together, relaxes the atmosphere, and opens up the communication. This is doubly true in families. Families that play together stay together.

Our family has a list on a big, paper-covered bulletin board that we call "The Family Activity Board." Any family member, upon thinking of a physical or sports activity that he would like to do with the family, jots it down on the list with a big circle by it. Anticipation builds until a family home evening or free night comes along and allows the activity to happen. When it does, the circle is colored in.

We have defined what kinds of things can go on the board: things we can do together as a family that let our bodies stretch and exercise and feel good. Even the little ones understand. The list has become a rather interesting mixture of the conventional and the unconventional. It has included bowling, swimming, canoeing, sand-surfing at the dunes, walking to church instead of driving, bike riding all the way to Burke Lake, hiking in the Appalachians in the fall, using the stopwatch and having "records" for running around the block, and having Mom show us her yoga.

On one section of the activity board, we've put a "family records list"—the fastest time for running around the block, for skipping rope around the block. This charts the children's improvement and teaches the joy of progressing and excelling physically.

IV. Story: "Ben, the Rich Boy"

Once there was a boy named Ben. He was a strong and healthy lad. But he thought he was very, very poor because he had no money. When he saw people with money and fine things, it made him want to be rich.

Ben knew that there were four very rich men in the land. One day he decided that he would visit each of them and ask them how to be rich.

The first man lived on a hill in the northern part of the land. Ben asked him how to become rich. The man said, "Look out my window and tell me what you see." Ben looked out and saw beautiful red and orange leaves, because it was autumn. He saw blue sky, and purple, snowcapped mountains in the distance. He saw a hummingbird pausing at hollyhocks to collect honey. He told the man what he saw. "You are rich," said the man, "because of everything that your eyes can see." Ben left the first man's house. He wanted to be rich, and if that man wouldn't tell him how, he would find someone else who would.

The second rich man lived in a valley in the eastern part of the land. He was an old man with a long beard. Ben asked him how to become rich. The old man looked at Ben and said, "How did you get to my house?" "I walked from the north," said Ben. "Then you are rich," said the man. "You are rich because you have strong legs—you can walk and dance and skip and jump and run. I am old and lame. I would give every penny I have if I could walk like you." And Ben wondered why the man wouldn't tell him what he wanted to know.

Then Ben went to the third man's house, which was in a city in the southern part of the land. The man was out on his patio. Ben introduced himself and said, "Would you tell me how to become wealthy?" The man looked at Ben for a long time, then said, "Do you hear the crickets in my bush?" Ben said, "Yes." "Do you smell the food that is cooking?" "Yes." "Then you are rich. My senses are dim. I know of the sounds and smells only because I remember them. I cannot taste or feel or smell or hear as clearly as you. If I could, I would gladly give every penny I have." Again Ben wondered why the man wouldn't tell him what he wanted to know.

The last man lived in a castle in the western part of the land. Ben went to him and said, "You are my last hope. Will you tell me how to be rich?" "But you must be rich," said the man. "Look at the fine shirt you wear." "This?" said Ben. "I had to make this shirt with my own hands and sew it with the thread made from the wool from my sheep." "Then you are rich. Your hands can make shirts and paint pictures and play musical instruments. My hands are old and shake so much that I can do none of these things. If I could, I would give every penny I have."

Ben left the man and started to go home. None of the men had told him how to be rich. All they had told him was that he was rich already because of his body and the things it could do. As Ben walked along, the sun shone warmly on his back and he heard the birds and animals around him and saw the flowers along his way. Perhaps he was rich. Maybe his body and the things he could be were worth more than money.

What do you think?

V. Reading List

Aliki. My Five Senses. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Co., 1962.

Baylor, B. Sometimes I Dance Mountains. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1973.

Bickerstaff, George. My Body Is a Temple. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1978.

Ets, M. H. Just Me. New York: The Viking Press, 1967.

Gibson, M. What Is Your Favorite Thing to Touch? New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1965.

Krauss, R. The Growing Story. New York: Harper & Row, 1947.

McGuire. You, and How Your Body Works. New York: Platt & Munk, 1974.

Merriam, E. Andy All Year Round. New York: Funk & Wagnalls, 1967.

Moncure, J. B. About Me. Chicago: Child's World, 1976.

Peterson, G. Fun and Discovering with Your Five Senses. Kansas City, Mo.: Hallmark Cards, 1977.

Showers, P. Follow Your Nose. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Co., 1963.

Steiner, C. Listen to My Seashell. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1959.

Tudor, T. First Delights. New York: Platt & Munk, 1966.

Watson, J. W. My Body, How It Works. New York: Golden Press, 1972.

Records:

Brady, Janeen. Watch Me Sing. Salt Lake City: Brite Enterprises.

Hap Palmer Record Library, Educational Activities, Inc., Box 392, Freeport, N.Y.: Creative Movement and Rhythm Expression (AR 533); Getting to Know Myself (AR 543); Learning Basic Skills through Music (AR 514); Movin' (AR 546).

VI. Postscript

A. Julie's mother said she was hanging sheets on the line as four-year-old Julie handed her the clothespins. The sun was shining and a slight breeze was blowing. As a wet sheet blew against Julie, she grasped it with both hands and held it to her face. Then she stood back and looked at it and said, "This sheet looks so nice and clean. It smells good too, and it feels different when it's wet." Then she smiled and said, "I'm using some of my senses. I have five senses, but I can't hear the sheet or"—with a giggle, "I wonder what it tastes like."

B. As a group we were putting together a large puzzle of the body. As each child put on one part he would tell what it was for: eyes are to see with, knees are to bend. Becky, age three, whose mother had recently had twins, put on the arms and said, "I'm glad Heavenly Father made us with two arms so I can hug both my babies at the same time."
