Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Joy ( 1980)

6

Teaching the Joy of the Earth

The earth is the totally equipped laboratory for the "joy experiment." The raw materials are time and laws and agency. We are to turn these into joy.

I. Examples and Description

A. Adult: Flat green, tilted mountainside darker greens, rocky mountaintop grays; I drink these in as the plane descends to land in Jackson Hole. Half an hour later I'm fishing in a clear brook. To my back stretches the soft, morning-lighted forest. Long, late-July grass carpets the ground below the large spruce; a smaller fir grows to my left. The downstream surface of the brook faintly flickers, reflecting light green trees at the back, dark green mountains in the middle, and blue sky in front of me.

Across the stream from me lies the Snake River Valley, and behind it, the Teton range. White, midsummer glaciers mark the crags and shaded spots in the jutting rock. A hawk floats, wing-tip feathers spread, across my field of vision. To my right, upstream, rise the Grand Tetons themselves, drawing the eye with an excitement that speeds the heart. They push through the only clouds in the sky. (A lonely cloud often sits there as if caught and held by the peaks.)

When I shut my eyes to make more of my brain available to my ears, I hear two ripples in the stream: one just upstream in my right ear and the other downstream in my left—stereophonic sound!

And the birds. I count five different kinds of chirps—only one that I know, the meadow lark: "Ain't I a pretty little bird?"

Once in a while a plane can be heard droning in the distance, and occasionally a cricket's rasp, behind and tucked between the other sounds.

One can't describe the smell. It combines so much—the grass, the trees, the sage—floating on air as clear and cool as the water in the stream. They seem so similar, the air and water: both clear, both cool, both fresh, both flowing (the current and the breeze).

I guess one reason I love Jackson so much is the seasons—the change, the transition, and the fact that, since I come only five or six times a year, the changes are distinct rather than gradual. One time (early summer) it will be like the day at the brook. Next time (early autumn) brings Indian summer when cottonwoods start to turn color, Snake River starts to turn clear, air starts to turn crisp, and sagebrush mountainsides look like scuffed buckskin against the sky's deeper blue. Next time it's late fall: the mantle of golden quaking aspen filters and softens the sun's more slanted rays. Flamelike cottonwoods pull forth the valley's deep purples and the cloud's fleecy white. The air is even crisper, almost tart. Then I come again in midwinter to ski; to sit alone in a soft snowstorm on a split-rail fence; to hear the silence of the white world; to see the fleecy, buffeting flakes building into quiet, white mounds around the darker, colder, half-ice streams; to feel the whole vibrant world settle and sleep.

There is such beauty in the earth. Joy comes through sensing it—with all five senses. I remember a poet I knew once, one who wrote mostly of the earth, who saw so much in the earth that I didn't see. He had a sign on his wall that said: "Five Sense Sagacity." I asked him about it. He said that serendipity, which means happy accidents, pleasant surprises, comes about through sagacity, which means acute awareness, appreciation, sensitivity, which in turn comes about through applied, thorough use of all five senses. Think about that for a moment; it is quite a message: "Happiness comes through awareness."

Joy and opportunity lie in the appreciation of the earth's beauties. So often we miss these joys—not because the earth lacks beauty (for indeed, every part of it is beautiful) but because of our apathy, our failure to see and to notice, our tendency to take it for granted.

B. Child: Our son Josh was fifteen months old and it was April. The summer before, he had been too small to be outside much, so, on this first nice day of the year, he was seeing the backyard for the first time. I watched him in silence from the window. He started with the grass, first feeling it, then sitting down in it, moving his legs back and forth, so delighted that he laughed aloud. Then he lay down, mouth open with an expression of anticipation, as he felt the grass with the back of his head and neck. From that position he noticed the sky and the clouds. He lifted both arms, pointed both forefingers, formed a round O with his little mouth, and said, with a tone of reverence and amazement, "Oooooooohhh!" There was a spring breeze moving those fluffy clouds across the deep blue sky. He watched almost motionlessly for two or three minutes until the wind started to gust a little and he became more interested in the cool, feathery breeze on his skin. He stood up, turned his face into the breeze, squinted, gritted his teeth, and uttered his second descriptive sound, "Eeeeeeeeehhhhhhh."

Turning in a new direction, he noticed a small patch of tiny white and yellow flowers in the grass. Toddling over, he reached down to pick one. The stem was fairly stiff, and as it broke, he fell back on his bottom into a sitting position. From there he held the flower close to his face and pulled off one tiny petal with his thumb and forefinger—a use of his hands he had recently discovered. When he had finished, he threw his little arms up, let the rest of the flower go at the top, and brought his hands slapping down on his knees with a contented sigh.

Then a bird chirped in the nearby tree. Josh cocked his head, a little startled, not sure where the sound had come from. The bird chirped again. This time Josh saw where it was. He stood up and toddled toward the tree. The bird swooped down, floated twenty yards or so, and landed on the lawn. Josh followed the flight with a look of delight and utter amazement. As he watched, motionless, the bird began his staccato pecking at the grass and an instant later pulled up a squirming, wiggling worm. Josh shook his head, as if in disbelief, and started shuffling toward the bird. The bird fluttered back up into the tree, chirping all the way.

Josh repeated his earlier cloud gesture, pointing up at the bird with both hands and saying, "Ooooooooohhhhhhh!"

II. Methods

A. Teach the earth's terminology.

B. Teach deep appreciation for the earth.

*2. Use the senses chart again from the previous chapter; however, this time focus attention on the things from nature in the left vertical column rather than the senses in the top horizontal column.

*4. Put an ant colony in a glass case. The ants will make tunnels and the children can watch them work.

*6. Make a visible "growing bottle." Put wet, crumpled paper towels in a bottle with seeds between the glass and the moist paper. Set it where it gets sunlight. Watch as roots grow down and leaves and shoots grow up.

*9. Make four-season collections—nature things picked up from each season. Gather autumn seeds and grain from fall, flowers from spring, bare branches from winter.

C. Teach the joys of the use of nature.

*1. Get a small, simple loom to make cloth from wool.

*2. Milk a cow, drink the milk, make butter, gather eggs, and cook them.

*3. Gather wheat, take the chaff off yourself, grind the wheat, make dough, bake bread.

*4. Play a question and answer game about the uses of nature: "What can you do or make with a tree? with sand? with a cow?"

*5. Have a nature meal, with honey, eggs, milk, and home-baked bread.

III. Family Focal Point: The Family Favorite Things Wall

About the time our Saren turned three, her artistic talents becoming more manifest each day, she took to drawing on the walls. We tried various means to dissuade her from this practice, but our efforts were tempered by the creativity and beauty of her "artwork" and by the fact that she seemed to have far more interest in the walls than in paper, blackboard, or anything else we could provide.

Finally, in desperation, we designated one wall in the den, where nobody but our family goes, for drawing on. It consequently became known as the drawing room. Saren confined her efforts to that wall and, before long, its lower half was covered with faces and shapes of all description.

Not long after this, we held a family home evening on "favorite things." We were thinking of the small, simple things in life that give us pleasure: snowflakes, kites, crackling fires, the opening day of fishing season, single roses, the sound of crisp apples being dumped into a box, the sound of the woodpecker behind our house. The list kept growing, but we had nowhere to put it except on that wall.

Since that night we've called it the "favorite things wall." Whenever someone notices something he enjoys, something that gives him a small spark of pure joy, he writes it on the wall, thus sharing it and, through sharing, remembering it. (Children who are too young to write can draw their favorite thing.) The wall became so valuable to us over the years that when we rented the house to someone else, we included in the rental agreement a clause prohibiting any redecorating or painting over those favorite things.

IV. Story: "Earth Ernie"

Ernie was playing alone one day in his backyard with a little dump truck and a steam shovel. All at once he heard a whirling noise, and when he looked up, he saw a purple, round spinning thing that looked like a big plate. Ernie knew that it was a spaceship. (He had seen pictures.)

A hatch in the bottom opened, and out came a small purple man. Ernie knew right away that he was friendly, because he was smiling. "Hi," said Ernie, because he was friendly too. When the purple man said, "Hello, Ernie," it made Ernie think of two questions. One was, "How did you know my name?" and the other was, "How do you know how to speak English?" The little purple man said it was because he had been listening from his planet through his "ear telescope," which made faraway sounds easy to hear. "I came to see you," said the little purple man, "because you are one of the nicest people I've listened to. I'd like you to come for a ride with me to my planet. Our king is too old to travel, and he would like to meet an earth person."

"Well," said Ernie, "I sure would like to ride in your flying saucer and see your world, but my mother would worry about me."

"No, she won't," said the little purple man. "My spaceship goes faster than time, so I can have you right back here in your backyard before she even knows you've gone."

Well, Ernie didn't exactly understand that, but he surely did want to ride in that flying saucer, so he pretended he understood and climbed in behind the little purple man.

The ride was fun. Ernie got to drive the spaceship part of the way. It had a steering wheel like a car. The ship went very fast, and once the little purple man, who told Ernie his name was Thoyd, had to take the steering wheel because Ernie nearly hit a star.

Before long the ship slowed down, and Ernie could see a very round, very flat, very shiny purple world. "There's my planet," said Thoyd. "Isn't it pretty?" "Yes," said Ernie, "so shiny and flat." "It's made out of purple plastic," said Thoyd. "Plastic?" said Ernie. "Yes, we made it," said Thoyd. "We used to have a world like yours, but the air and water got so dirty and there was so much garbage everywhere that we had to make ourselves this new one."

"But where are your trees and your animals, Thoyd?"

"Oh, we don't have those things anymore. They don't grow on plastic. We have synthetic food. It comes in six flavors and looks a little like toothpaste."

"But do you have any mountains to climb or lakes to float in?"

"No," said Thoyd, "we lost those too, but this purple plastic world is great for roller skating." Thoyd went to get the king, and Ernie looked around. The air smelled like plastic. There were no flowers or grass, no fields or hills or rocks, no sounds of birds or babbling brooks or wind in the trees; there were no farm animals or cold milk or fresh eggs; no ears of corn to pick or potatoes to dig; not even any sand or soil. The blue sky didn't look as pretty as it should next to the shiny purple horizon.

Pretty soon Thoyd came back with a very old-looking little purple man who had a purple plastic crown and a long beard. Thoyd said, "This is King Pele. He is the only purple man old enough to remember our old world—and he has a message for you." The old king came up close to Ernie, held Ernie's hand, and leaned his mouth close to Ernie's ear. "Earth Ernie," said the old king in a faint, gruff whisper, "tell your people to know and love their earth, or they will lose it like we lost ours." The old king patted Ernie's shoulder and smiled at him; then he slowly walked away.

"Do you want to stay and have a tour of our world?" asked Thoyd. "No, thanks," said Ernie. He just wanted to get back to his beautiful earth to make sure it was still there. "I understand," said Thoyd, and they got back on the flying saucer.

They seemed to go slower on the way back, and Ernie wanted to get back so badly. Finally they landed in his backyard and, just as Thoyd had said, Ernie's mother was still inside and everything was just as they had left it.

As soon as Thoyd was gone, Ernie ran to get his mother and his little sister, Sue. "Come," he said, taking each of their hands. "Where are we going, Ernie?" "To the park," said Ernie. For the next hour, Ernie showed his mother the trees and grass, the flowers and bushes. They smelled roses, patted dogs, listened to every sound that nature made, and even picked up every scrap of litter they could find.

"We need to love our world, Mommy. Otherwise we'll lose it." Mother didn't know what had gotten into Ernie, but she agreed with him anyway.

V. Reading List

Bulla, C. A Tree Is a Plant. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Co., 1960.

Cornelius, C. Isabella Wally Bear Tiger Moth. Chicago Child's World, 1978.

Ets, M. H. Gilberto and the Wind. New York: The Viking Press, 1963.

Keats, E. J. The Snowy Day. New York: Viking Press, 1962.

Merriam, E. Andy All Year Round. New York: Funk & Wagnalls, 1967.

Moncure, J. Fall Is Here. Chicago: Child's World, 1976.

———. Spring Is Here. Chicago: Child's World, 1976.

———. Summer Is Here. Chicago: Child's World, 1976.

———. Thank You, Animal Friends. Chicago: Child's World, 1975.

———. What Will It Be? Chicago: Child's World, 1976.

———. Winter Is Here. Chicago: Child's World, 1976.

Parr, L. When Sea and Sky Are Blue. New York: Scroll Press, 1971.

Paull, G. Come to the Country. New York: Abelard Schuman, 1956.

Provensen, A., and Provensen, M. A Book of Seasons. New York: Random House, 1976.

Ranger Rick's Nature Magazine. National Wildlife Federation (12 issues per year), 1412 16th St. N. W., Washington, D.C., 20036.

Shulevitz, U. Rain, Rain, Rivers. New York: Farrar, Straus, & Giroux, 1969.

Tudor, T. Five Senses. New York: Platt & Munk, 1978.

Udry, J. M. A Tree Is Nice. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1956.

Watson, J. W. Wonders of Nature. New York: Golden Press, 1958.

VI. Postscript

A. Matthew is nearly five. His mother said the family had gone on a picnic for family home evening and Matthew kept calling everyone's attention to the mountains, the trees, the clouds, the wind, and so forth, saying, "That's part of our beautiful world." By the time they were ready to go home, he had gathered several things in a plastic bag to take with him. He had a large pinecone, a smooth stone, a wild flower, a bur, and a dead beetle. He wanted to share part of nature, he said, with the old man who lived next door.

B. According to his mother, David, age three, has started talking to the animals and trees. One day he gave the apple tree a friendly pat and said, "Thank you for the apples." As he watched a bee buzzing around the flowers, he said, "Thank you, bee, for the honey." And as they drove along a country road past a field of cows, he called out, "Thank you for the milk, cows, and for the butter and ice cream too."
