Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Joy ( 1980)

Section III

Mental Joys

"Our home joys are the most delightful earth affords, and the joy of parents in their children is the most holy joy of humanity. It makes their hearts pure and good; it lifts them up to their Father in heaven. " (Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi.)

7

Preserving the Joy of Interest and Curiosity

Ah, to see the world through the eyes of a child, where there is wonder in all things and where boredom or routine do not exist.

I. Examples and Description

A. Child: I remember sitting once, off to the side in a busy shopping mall, looking at passing people—watching to see who was watching. The adults were preoccupied with their jobs, their problems, themselves. Their eyes never met mine. Their eyes saw only what was necessary to navigate through the crowded corridor.

But the little children saw everything. Each child looked straight at me for at least a moment, and for a moment at everything. Their eyes and ears were receptors, taking in all the data, seeing, hearing, questioning.

It is no wonder that we learn as much in our first five years as in the rest of our lives. We see more, feel more. We are born with a natural and joyful curiosity and interest. What happens to it? Where did those adults drop it? When would those children lose theirs?

One study showed that babies spend one-fifth of their waking hours in motionless, focused gazing, simply figuring things out with their eyes. Their minds are so malleable, so impressionable! Parents can perhaps change their children's minds more, for better or for worse, than they can change either their bodies or their spirits.

B. Adult: I had been a student in Boston for two years. I loved the city and thought I knew it pretty well. Then a visitor came to spend a weekend with us on his way through the city. "What do you want to do?" I asked. "See Boston!" he said. I took him to my favorite places: the Wharf, Hay Market Square, the Freedom Trail. His eyes were wide the whole day. His comments were of fascination, even awe. "That really happened here?" His questions were questions of genuine interest, questions of history, of geography, of personality, of joyful curiosity. I couldn't answer most of them because I had never asked them. In those two days I think I saw more reflected in his eyes than I had seen in two years through my own eyes.

I thought I loved Boston, but my friend enjoyed the tour, enjoyed the day, the people, the smells, the feelings, more than I had the first time I had seen them or at any time since. The joy that I saw in his face was the involved, absorbed, wrapped-up, forget-himself-and-his-own-problems joy of curiosity and of interest. He had, preserved within him, a joy that nearly all small children possess and nearly all adults lose.

II. Methods

A. Learn from children's example; participate with and encourage them. My wife and I observed our three-year-old through the back window playing alone among the flowers on a warm, early-spring day. Her delight and intense interest showed so clearly that we felt it, and I murmured, "How can we keep that in her forever?" My wife replied, "By watching her watching, and watching what she watches.

Since then, we have come to know that that's the secret. Children are the teachers, the experts; we are the learners, the students. The teachers can be encouraged by the interest of the learners, and thus their interest-expertise can gain the element of pride that causes it to remain. Changes for application come daily: instead of pulling them away from their activity (jumping in leaves) and into yours (cleaning the house), how about occasionally leaving yours to join them in theirs? (Don't worry, the leaves will brush out of your hair.)

B. Answer and ask. While you are in those leaves, your teacher (your child) may ask, "Did a caterpillar make this hole in this leaf?" You might consider three responses: thanking him for teaching you to have an interest in that hole; answering him by saying, "Yes, a caterpillar probably did"; and opening a chance for more teaching by asking, "And where do you suppose that caterpillar is right now?"

How precious a question is! An alert mind that asks is the first step to answers, discoveries, solutions. Never ignore or criticize a question; this is like stepping on a flower bud just set to bloom. The moment a question is asked is like the moment a flower blooms on an early spring morning. The air is clean and crisp, the images precise and distinct. The child's mind is ready to absorb; the moment won't last. So many people—running, hurrying, preoccupied—walk past the flower, drive right through the spring morning without seeing or smelling it, and the moment passes, forever lost. The child asks and we defer, brush off, hurry the answer, or, even worse, say, "Don't bother me now, I'm busy." Oh, the need to go the other direction—to praise the question, to flatter him for asking it, to help a child glory in his wonderings!

Actually, to go back to the analogy, two mistakes are commonly made as the flower blooms on the new spring morning. One is to miss it, walk past it, never see it; the other is to pick it instead of appreciating it, enjoying it, helping if we can to make it grow.

With a questioning child, one of two similar mistakes usually occurs: (1) ignoring, brushing off, not noticing the beauty and potential of that moment, and (2) answering instead of reasoning together, helping, or asking questions of the child that will help him answer his own. When we take the time to discuss a question, we help the child to understand the wonderful concepts of reasoning, conceptualizing, researching—the ideas that allow him to glory in his wonderings and rejoice in discovered answers.

C. Respond to your child's initiative. A well-documented Harvard study reveals something few would expect: that parents of the smartest children don't try to teach them all the time, but try to teach only when the child wants to learn. The study took students from apparently similar backgrounds, all from good families, upper-middle-class homes, nonworking mothers, with no apparent hereditary differences and no apparent emotional differences. One subgroup had high I.Q.s and high grades, while the other had lower grades and lower I.Q.s. The object of the study was to determine where the difference first occurred, where the smart got smart and vice versa.

The researchers went back a year at a time, looking for differences. They didn't find any until they got to the preschool years at home. The difference was the mothers. Mothers of the high I.Q. and good-grade children (the "A" mothers) were consultants. They loved their children, but they let them develop in their own way. They gave freedom, an interesting environment, and time, but not all their time. They had a wide variety of other interests besides their children. They painted, they took violin lessons, or they played tennis, but they recognized teaching moments and taught what their children were interested in when they were interested in it. They gave the initiative to their children.

The "C" mothers overtaught, overprotected, and oversupervised their children and did their thinking for them. They constantly tried to teach things—with or without their children's interest. They were managers rather than consultants. Their children were long on fear and timidness, short on initiative, confidence, and self-reliance.

The "A" mothers organized and designed stimulating, open environments for children, with a rich variety of toys and household objects. Nothing was off-limits or "no no." Dangerous things were removed, and the child was free.

The "C" mothers actually spent more time with children, had fewer other interests, but their time was spent managing the child, force-teaching him, programming him. The "C" children were spoiled. They saw little fulfillment and excitement in the adulthood their mothers mirrored. They did not learn to struggle, to solve problems, to decide, or to take initiative.

Perhaps the saddest part of the Harvard study is that the "C" mothers thought they were doing so well. They were conscientious, diligent, and sacrificing. They thought they were putting their child's welfare above their own. The "A" mothers, consciously or subconsciously, realized that children have the joy of interest and curiosity and that the gift is best cultivated by encouraging initiative, by giving freedom, and by answering and teaching primarily when questions come.

The "A" mothers seemed to realize that ten minutes with a child when he asks, when he wants the time, may be more valuable than several hours when the parent has the time but the child is not interested.

D. Stimulation. The child's interest and curiosity behave a little like a beast of prey: as long as it finds enough food in its environment, as long as it is not starved, it continues to prowl. If a child gets enough stimulation, enough answers, enough of his parents' time when he wants that time, his interest and curiosity will flourish and grow and will continue to be the windows that open his mind to joy.

This principle applies even to very small children. As soon as babies can see, they need visual stimulation: mobiles, bright colors, moving objects to observe. Parents should show them things, talk to them, give their new eyes and arms and bodies chances to see and hear and feel widely different things.

*E. "Interest" games. These include simple question-and-answer games; simple science experiments with such things as water, air, magnets, and gravity (ask: "What will happen . . . "); simple magic tricks.

*F. "Interest" stories. Read and tell stories that excite children and make them anxious to see what happens, stories with suspense, mystery, or surprise.

G. Research. If you have access to a good set of encyclopedias, teach children that nearly all questions have answers, that it is good to ask and fun to find. Spend time in libraries. Teach children where the various sections are, and how they can find books on particular subjects, things they can understand. Be excited when they discover something themselves.

*H. Early academic skill. As is obvious to the reader by now, the whole direction of this book is away from forced, early academic skills, against the idea of pushing three- and four-year-olds to learn their basic reading and number skills a year or two early, against using these incredible impressionable years in teaching something as ordinary as the academic skills that they will spend the next twelve years learning anyway.

But there is another side of the coin that cannot go unnoticed. A child's academic confidence, which will largely determine how well he does in his twelve or more years of formal schooling, is largely framed in his earliest school experiences—kindergarten and first grade. A child who senses that he is behind, that some of his peers can read words and write numbers and he cannot, may suffer an academic self-image deflation that is hard and time-consuming to overcome. There are two fairly straightforward ways to avoid this:

The following checklist represents what a child ought to be able to do before his first day of school in order to start off with basic confidence. Your child will already know many things on the list, through the natural consequences of growing up and of being curious and asking. The others can easily be taught in the months immediately preceding school.

Shapes

Trace a line of shapes

Copy shapes and a series of shapes

Match shapes and equal numbers of shapes

Identify shapes

Recognize shapes in familiar objects

Recognize by name and be able to draw circles, squares, triangles, and rectangles

Colors

Match basic colors

Identify basic colors

Describe colors by name

Relate colors to familiar objects

Letters

Trace and copy letters

Remember order of three letters

Connect matching letters

Match letters

Recognize letters in own name

Print own name (lowercase except first letter)

Numbers

Trace and copy numbers

Identify written numbers up to ten

Compare larger-smaller numbers by circling largest amount of object, saying or choosing largest number, or indicating what comes before or after a given number

Count to 20

Relate groups of objects to numbers

Know phone number and street address

III. Family Focal Point: The Family Interest Book

Children who are made to feel proud of their interest and curiosity quickly want to share what they have noticed. If there is a way or vehicle by which they can share the discoveries or fruits of their curiosity and interest, then that vehicle, that chance to share, becomes an additional motivation to continue to be curious and interested.

In our family, we have an "interest book," not for finances or money, but for interest interest. It is nothing more than a simple, hardbound book of blank paper in which any family member can make note of something interesting that he has observed or discovered. Preschoolers, of course, tell a grownup to write in their observations. Reading back through that interest book is a joy:

"A blue and black bird is building a nest in the tree by the corner of the house." (Saren, age four.)

"Barney (our dog) can get over to his friend's house because there is a hole in the fence where it goes behind the shed." (Shawni, age three.)

"When you kick a rock so it bounces across the patio, it makes a hollow sound." (Daddy.)

"The reason robins stand so still before they peck for a worm is that they are listening to know where the worm is—they can hear the worm—that's why they cock their heads." (Saren, age five.)

Our interest book hangs on a hook in the family room. We are aware of it, so we like to share in it. Every month or so, in a family home evening, we read all the entries that have been made. Like certain other types of interest books, ours grows in value with the passage of time.

IV. Story: "Maisey and Daisey"

Maisey and Daisey were squirrels, and they were sisters. Maisey was more the hurrying type, while Daisey was more the curious type. One day they were walking to school and they remembered that it was their teacher's birthday. "I wish it were later in the year and the flowers were blooming," said Maisey. "We could bring her a bouquet!" "Well, there are some flowers blooming," said Daisey. "I saw them yesterday just down from the bridge over the creek." (Daisey, you see, noticed nearly everything.)

So off the girls went to the bridge. Maisey was hurrying to get there, but Daisey was noticing while they were walking. She noticed a big, hollow tree and a red ribbon someone had dropped, and she noticed that it was getting rather windy and cloudy.

They found the flowers and picked them. "Oh, if we only had something to hold them together," said Maisey. Daisey held up the red ribbon she had found. It was perfect. They tied the stems of the flowers together and started back for school.

Daisey was still noticing the wind and the clouds, and when they came to the big, hollow tree, she said, "Maisey, it's going to rain. If we go on, we'll get very wet. But if we get in this big, hollow tree, we can stay dry until the rain stops." It was a very good idea, and that's exactly what they did.

The rain didn't last long, and they soon came out, nice and dry, with a dry bouquet of flowers and a dry ribbon. Maisey looked at her sister Daisey and said, "If it weren't for you noticing everything so well, we wouldn't have any flowers for our teacher. And even if we had flowers, we wouldn't have a ribbon. And even if we had flowers and a ribbon, they would have all been spoiled and we would have been spoiled if you hadn't noticed that tree. I'm going to try to notice more things as you always do."

That made Daisey happy, and they put their arms around each other's shoulders and skipped off to school.

V. Reading List

Aliki. Is It Blue as a Butterfly? New York: Prentice Hall, 1965.

Epstein, S., and Epstein, B. Grandpa's Wonderful Glass. New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1962.

Ford, B. G. Do You Know? New York: Random House, 1979.

Goudey, A. E. The Day We Saw the Sun Come Up. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1961.

Hoban, R. Herman the Loser. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1961.

Johnson, D. Stop, Look and Listen. Cincinnati: Standard Publishing Co., 1977.

Moncure, J. Riddle Me a Riddle. Chicago: Child's World, 1977.

———. What Causes It? Chicago: Child's World, 1977.

Odor, R. My Wonder Book. Chicago: Children's Press, 1977.

Polgreen, J., and Polgreen, C. Good Morning Mr. Sun. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1963.

Rand, A., and Rand, P. I Know a Lot of Things. New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1956.

Schwartz, J. Now I Know. New York: McGraw Hill, 1955.

Tobias, T. Where Does It Come From? Chicago: Children's Press, 1977.

Wyler, R. What Happens If? (Science experiments you can do by yourself). New York: Scholastic Book Services, 1974.

Zolotow, C. When the Wind Stops. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1975.

VI. Postscript

Jason, age four and a half: "Teacher, yesterday I did the same things as that little boy in the story you read us."

Teacher: "What story was that, Jason?"

Jason: "You know. The one about the boy who kept his eyes and ears open during the day to find out what made all the noises he would hear after he went to bed at night. Well, I did that too, and now I know."

Teacher: "That's great, Jason."

Jason: "And guess what that scary noise is that I hear every night."

Teacher: "What is it?"

Jason: "Just the lady upstairs rocking in her rocking chair."
