Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Joy ( 1980)

8

Teaching the Joy of Imagination and Creativity

If one can imagine, he can create. If he can create, he can make the world a better place. Imagination is the first spark that ignites the flame of fulfillment.

I. Examples and Description

A. Adult: I remember once in college when Linda gave me a glimpse of the joy of imagination and creativity. I called her one crisp autumn Saturday morning to see if we could spend the day together. She said, "Sure, but let me plan what we do this time." I agreed. She said, "Come on over, and wear old clothes." We knew each other well but were not yet engaged.

When I got there, she came out with an assortment of sketch pads, paints, and brushes. "But I can't paint," I said. "Neither can I," she said. "I borrowed these from my roommate."

Under her direction, I drove toward the mountains. It was a clear, tingling day, with the sky a deep autumn blue. We wound higher into a flame-colored canyon; the red scrub oak and yellow aspen set the steep slopes on fire and made them somehow higher, vaster, so that they towered all around and almost over us. It was like driving through a tunnel of flame, with the cool blue and grey strips of sky and road just above and just below.

We turned onto a dirt road and wound upward until we came to a deserted cabin perched among the bright leaves. We set up our easels on the big front porch. I remember, looking down from there, that the hillside seemed alive, each round yellow aspen leaf quivering and rotating in the soft breeze. She said, "Now, make believe that you are a great artist." Her eyes sparkled with interest as she prepared to imagine the same thing.

She got into it faster than I did. Her brush strokes were big and bold, as though she'd painted all her life. She said, "Imagine that we just landed here from another planet. What would we think of this earth? What would we think of the town when we drove into it?" In spite of myself, I let her talk me into the discussion. We imagined as children do. We felt the joy and abandon of letting our minds go unshackled. I did more creating that day—with brush and mind—than I can remember in years before or since, and I was a better person for it—more light, more alive, more feeling. There was a certain wonder, a certain power, a certain joy.

B. Child: Several years later, after marriage and family, I came in the back door one afternoon, quietly, getting home from work early. Before anyone heard me, I heard my two girls, ages five and four, in their bedroom.

"All right, I'll be the doctor if you'll be the nurse."

"Okay."

"Now if we can get Barney (the dog) to stay under these covers, then he can be the sick guy."

"Yeah, and this stick can be for the operation." (I restrained my urge to defend the poor dog.)

"We'd better put the sick guy to sleep before the operation."

"These can be the sleep pills."

"Oh, but Barney won't close his eyes. I better sing him a song—then he can stay awake and it won't hurt. Oh sick guy, sick guy, you have such a big long tongue, we will do your operation and you'll look better and feel better too." (The tune was kind of a mixture between Mary Poppins and a Sunday School song; the words rambled on for several "verses.")

Later that week, at bedtime one night, I asked the five-year-old to tell me a bedtime story for a change. It was an incredible story that introduced two new animals to the earth: a "Caxton," a round animal with fur and no feet because it rolls along, and a "Sarapoo," a little animal with long ears like a bunny that has such shaggy hair that it can't see. We (Saren and I) later made an illustrated book of the story.

Children's minds are the most free, the most creative, the least bound by inhibition and tradition. Therefore, it's easy to teach them creativity and imagination. Unfortunately, it is also dangerously easy to say "that's silly," or "grow up," or "quit imagining things." It is an interesting paradox that the times when parents usually tell their children to be grown-up are the times when the children are having the most fun, feeling the most joy. Do we really want them to grow up, or would we do better to "grow down," to be more like they are—more free, more imaginative, less inhibited?

There is power in imagination. One who can imagine himself doing something gets that much closer to actually doing it.

There is safety in imagination. One who can imagine the future may avoid "future shock" when he gets there.

There is youth in imagination, and children should know from us, through us, that they will never get too old to imagine.

A child who imagines will become an adult who creates, who solves problems with lateral thinking and with innovative solutions; who will see the less obvious, do the less common, find the more unusual. A child who imagines being an adult will become an adult with less pain and less adjustment. Imagination is the magic "learning tunnel" that sometimes lets us learn without actually experiencing.

Too many of us think of imagination as impractical or irrelevant. Actually, in a world where children grow up to be engineers, consultants, computer operators, and perhaps many other things that you and I haven't yet dreamed of, imagination may be the best and most practical training they could have.

Oh, how children love it when they find that their parents have imaginations! I went up to tuck the two little girls in bed one night after shoveling the snow from the front walk. I still had on my big, white furry coat, so I pulled the hood down over my face and announced myself as "Polar Bear," come from the North Pole to tell a bedtime story. Since then, Polar Bear just has to come back once a month or so—alternating with other characters made up from very slight disguises and very big imaginations.

II. Methods

A. The old standby: liberal encouragement. Give enormous encouragement for the slightest show of creativity—from building with blocks to drawing a picture. Watch as though a masterpiece were being unveiled.

Sometimes encouragement involves more than just words. It may involve providing reams of scratch paper for the three-year-old to make pictures on. Often we tend to think of this as a waste because that's what our parents or teachers taught us, when in reality the child is creating something on each sheet and even possibly improving just a bit by being allowed to experiment. Though I have to bite my lip as I say this, as only recently I scolded my four-year-old for using practically a whole roll of sticky tape to get an old piece of Christmas paper to stick to his door, it's worth thirty-nine cents to have him feel he has really accomplished something. On closer examination, I found that he had been very meticulous and had covered every square inch of the paper with the tape.

B. The other old standby: being a child with them. When they imagine, we imagine. Play in the mud with them for a change. Don't inhibit through restricting any more than is absolutely necessary.

*C. Seeing in the mind. Listen to classical music with children. Close your eyes and see whatever the music makes you see. Describe it vividly: "horses with fine ladies and parasols, trotting on the green on a clear summer day." Ask the children to do the same.

*D. Making things.

E. Pretending.

*1. Save old dresses, shoes, and hats in a box or chest for dress-up clothes. What treasures they can be to an active imagination!

*2. Pretend that inanimate objects and body parts can talk: food that wants to be in the tummy, toys that want to be played with, ears that want to be washed.

*5. Dramatize children's favorite stories.

F. Solving problems.

*1. Have a hand puppet whisper in a child's ear an indistinguishable "psst psst." Let the child decide what he thinks the puppet said. Children will often talk with less inhibition when speaking for a puppet than when speaking for themselves.

*2. Play the "how else could he have done that" game. Examples: How could we get a chair over here without carrying it? (Tie a rope on it and drag it.) How could we get a marble from under the sofa? (With a stick.) How could we keep the tablecloth down at a picnic on a windy day? (With rocks.) How could we carry many things at once? (In pockets, in a box.)

G. Stories and games.

*3. Tell them a story with a not-so-happy ending; then tell it again and let them change the ending to make it happier.

*4. Have hand puppets act out stories or situations; let the children wear the puppets.

H. Creating through the ear.

*1. Try creative dance. Put on classical music and different kinds of other good music and let your body move the way the music wants it to.

*3. Have a rhythm band with simple instruments and marching.

*4. Play "once upon a time, I caught a little rhyme. I put it on the mat and it turned into a _______. I put it on my bed and it jumped up on my ________," etc.

I. Creating through the eye.

*4. Observe nature and ask children if they can find any place where nature made two things exactly the same. Compare with "sameness" of man-made things.

J. Combining creativity and imagination (more obviously than they are usually combined).

*2. Show a picture. Have a child make up a story about what's happening in the picture.

*3. Give a child varied materials: Styrofoam, toothpicks, pipe cleaners, colored paper, feathers, scissors, and glue, and let him make his own creation.

*4. Produce an 8mm movie together—let the children be the producer, director, cameraman, and actors. Make anything from a role-played fairy tale to a documentary on nature, such as "Signs of Spring." Do a cassette tape for the soundtrack. Invite friends over to see the finished production.

*5. Make a radio show on a tape recorder. Do the sound effects and have a moderator and characters. Invite friends over to listen to the story.

III. Family Focal Point: The Mommy-Daddy Proud Board

One Saturday, four-year-old Saren was "helping" me recarpet a room. We talked for a while as I worked; then I got involved and lost track of her for a few moments. Soon she tapped my shoulder and squealed delightedly, "Look Dad, a boat!" She had found two sail-shaped scraps and one boat-shaped scrap and stuck them together with the carpet backing. It really did look like a sailboat, and I made a fuss over her creativity.

Then Saren wanted a special place to display her boat. Mommy dug out an old bulletin board and we hung it in the family room with Saren's boat pinned right in the center. Within ten minutes, two-year-old Shawni had drawn two pictures and with her limited vocabulary was demanding equal billing.

That night Saren dubbed the bulletin board "The Mommy-Daddy Proud Board." It's never been off the wall since. The drawings and colorings and creations of all kinds stay up until new ones take their place, at which point they come down and go directly into the scrapbook. Children, like all artists, need appreciation and praise to fuel their creative fires.

IV. Story: "Epamanatus"

Epamanatus lived with his mother in a little house in the village. One day his mother said, "Epamanatus, you are old enough to go to the store for me." So Epamanatus went to the store, and he took along his little puppy. On the way home, the puppy ran away and was lost for nearly three hours. When the little puppy got home again, Epamanatus's mother said, "Epamanatus, use your brain. When you have a puppy, tie a string around his neck and lead him along home."

The next day she said, "Epamanatus, go to the store for me and get me a loaf of bread." Epamanatus remembered what his mother had told him. He tied a string around the bread and dragged it home. When his mother saw the dirty, beat-up loaf of bread, she said, "Epamanatus, use your brain. When you get bread, put it under your big high hat and pull your hat on tight and run along home."

The next day she said, "Epamanatus, go to the store and get me a pound of butter." Epamanatus remembered what his mother had told him. He put the butter on his head and put his hat on over it and ran home. The sun was hot that day, and the butter melted and ran down his face and inside his shirt. When his mother saw him she said, "Epamanatus, use your brain. When you have butter, take it down to the stream and dunk it in the water and dunk it in the water and dunk it in the water until it is most cold; then wrap it up in bog leaves and bring it home."

The next day Epamanatus's mother said, "Epamanatus, your puppy has run over to your grandma's. Run along and get him." Epamanatus remembered what his mother had told him. When he got the puppy, he took it down to the stream and he dunked it in the water and he dunked it in the water and dunked it in the water until it was most cold and almost dead. Then he wrapped it up in leaves and ran along home. What do you think his mother said when she saw him?

V. Reading List

Craig, J. Boxes. New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1964.

———. The Dragon in the Clock Box. New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1962.

DeRegniers, B. The Giant Story. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1953.

Freeman, D. The Paper Party. New York: Viking Press, 1974.

Gag, W. Nothing At All. New York: Coward, McCann, 1941.

Klimowicz, B. Fred, Fred, Use Your Head. New York: Abington, 1966.

Koch, D. When the Cows Got Out. New York: Holiday House, 1958.

Lionni, L. Frederick. Toronto: Pantheon Books, 1967.

McGovern, A. Stone Soup. New York: Scholastic Book Services, 1972.

Merrill, J., and Salbert, R. The Very Nice Things. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1959.

Moncure, J. A Beach in My Bedroom. Chicago: Child's World, 1978.

———. Rhyme Me a Rhyme. Chicago: Children's Press, 1977.

———. The Four Magic Boxes. Chicago: Child's World, 1978.

Sendak, M. Where the Wild Things Are. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1963.

Slobodkin, E. Caps for Sale. New York: William R. Scott, 1947.

Young, M. The Imaginary Friend. Chicago: Children's Press, 1977.

VI. Postscript

Mr. Nobody is our imaginary friend who visits the Joy School frequently during this unit. Each child has his own idea of Mr. Nobody's looks and actions. They all share their toys with him, ask him to sit by them, give him a drink of their juice. One day Amy, age four, announced that she had invited him to go home with her over the weekend. She helped him with his coat and boots and held his hand as she went out to the car. The next Monday she shared with us in some detail all the fun (and even one argument) she and Mr. Nobody had had at her house.

After this unit the children's drawings, paintings, and clay modeling activities became much more creative. They weren't trying to copy each other so much.
