Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Joy ( 1980)

9

Teaching the Joy of Order, Priorities, and Goal Striving

A child who can set and accomplish a simple goal will become an adult who knows the joy of changing the world. "Let this education begin early. Teach little children the principles of order; the little girl to put the broom in its right place, to arrange the stove furniture in the neatest possible way, and everything in its own place. Teach them to lay away their clothing neatly, and where it can be found. " (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 211.)

I. Examples and Description

A. Adult: A fireside speaker impressed me once with an uncommon answer to a common question. The question posed to him was: "With all you have to do, how do you look so relaxed?" (The boy who asked the question went on, partly for humor, partly for impact, to say that his father didn't have near as much responsibility, yet looked always frazzled and tired.) The answer was: "Each Sunday I spend some time alone, setting goals for the week—for the month on fast Sunday. I follow the priorities of family first, Church second, world third. I set objectives in each area, and if time is too short to do all I want to do, I put my goals into priority order, so that I know the most important ones will get done. Then I plan how, and write my plans into my weekly calendar book."

Most anxiety comes from wondering where we should be or what we ought to be doing. Most joy comes from knowing both.

The goal-striving process sparks joy in flames of changing heat and color. First comes the anticipating, "fire-laying" joy of goal setting and planning. Next comes the growing, fulfilling, "fire-igniting" joy of hard work toward the goal. Then follows the bright, confidence-renewing, "full-fire" joy of goal-reaching, and later on, the reflective, warm embers of remembering the achievement.

Children can feel each phase of the joy. The danger is that some parents, wanting high achievers, push their children to meet their (the parents') goals and end up with rebellion and negative views on accomplishment, or children who are high achievers for the wrong reasons. Other parents, who bring about situations in which children feel for themselves the joy of setting and reaching simple goals, end up with children who find and enjoy real success.

B. Child: One of my clearest childhood memories is of my ninth summer, when my dad and my little brother and I built our log cabin. I remember sights: the slow-motion fall of fir trees, the wet, white notches in the logs. I remember sounds: my father's "timburrr," the ring of hammer on nail. But most of all, I remember feelings: the good tired feeling of satisfied, accomplished exhaustion at the end of the day, and the buoyant joy of standing that autumn, with my brother and my dad, and looking up at a finished cabin, an accomplished goal, a work of our own hands. We had set that goal, we two small boys and our father, a year before. We had drawn plans and figured where to get the logs, and Dad had told us it would be work—hard work. That experience taught the joy of having a goal, of working hard on that goal, of gradually seeing results, and of finishing and reaching the goal.

Our four-year-old came home from Sunday School one day and said, "My teacher asked if I thought I could learn these lines to take part in next week's lesson, and I said I could."

"Well, honey, it's a pretty long part. It will be hard, but I think you can too. How can we do it?"

"You help me."

"Okay. Look at this calendar. Here is next Sunday. How many days do we have?"

"One, two, three, four, five, six."

"And how many lines on your part?"

"One, two, three, four, five, six. Hey, we can learn one line each day."

I noticed the sparkle in her eye. She had set a progressive goal; she was pleased and proud. That night we learned the first line. It wasn't easy, but her unmodest, wide smile after she finished it was pure joy.

On the second night, as we worked on the second line, she looked up and said, "Whew, Dad, this is hard, but I'll get it." (A miniature version of the joy of discipline, of work, of gradual, earned progress.) By Sunday, she knew the part. She delivered it with confidence and with the joy of a goal accomplished. Her Sunday School teacher has a problem now. Saren volunteers for everything, and she often says to me, "Dad, remember when we learned that part? Wasn't that fun?"

II. Methods

The joy of goal striving and achievement is like a diamond with many facets, each one a separate and distinct joy. There is the joy of knowing our long-range purpose, the joy of responsibility, the joy of discipline, the joy of hard work, the joy of planning, the joy of shorter-range goals, the joy of causes and commitment, the joy of organization and order, even the joy of failing occasionally and of sometimes making mistakes.

A. Knowing the lifetime goals. Children are capable of understanding that the purpose and objective of mortal life is to return to the presence of God. They can also understand that the prerequisites to this are obedience, service, and family unity. A child who knows these long-range goals will become an adult who sets the right short-range goals, who has the proper priorities, who "climbs the right mountain." Teach this commitment directly by telling children who they are, where they came from, why they are here, and where they are going. (Use the story at the end of chapter 3 as a tool.)

B. Understanding the concept of goals. A three- or four-year old is capable of understanding the concept and nature of goals. Explain that a goal is "something good that we want and that we work for." Read the story "Jason and the Circus Money" at the end of this chapter. Ask and teach: What was Jason's goal? (To get enough money to buy a two-wheeled bike.) What was his plan to reach his goal? (To grow and sell tomatoes.) How did he do it? (With hard work.)

C. Experiencing a goal. A three- or four-year-old can experience the joy of setting and achieving a simple goal. Ask the child if he can think of a goal for himself. Help him decide on one. It might be self-improvement: learning to zip his coat, flush the toilet, or walk across the street safely. It might be solving a problem: not getting so dirty at school, or not sucking his thumb anymore. It might be making a new friend, or earning money to buy something special.

Write the goal down and put a big circle by it. Periodically, as the goal is achieved, let the child fill in part of the circle. (When the goal is half-completed, the circle will be half filled in.)

Help the child develop a plan to meet his goal, such as asking the neighbors if they need work done, trying to zip his coat each night before he goes to bed, not kneeling down in the dirt, inviting a new child over to play, or putting his blanket away (the one he holds while sucking his thumb).

Praise the setting of the goal, praise the plan, praise every step the child takes toward the goal. Always relate your praise (or your criticism) to what he has done, and not to him. Instead of calling a child a good boy or a bad boy, call the thing he's done a good thing or a bad thing. Thus you reestablish your love for him as unconditional, as something that does not fluctuate with his goods or bads.

D. Feeling the joy of setting goals and working together. Have family goals planned and set together. These might be anything worthwhile, from reading the Book of Mormon to doing the spring housecleaning together as a family. Involve the children. Write down the goal and plan it first together; go to work on it; then discuss the results of each phase—how you are doing, how it makes you feel as each part is achieved.

Do the kinds of chores together in which results are visible, such as pulling weeds, washing windows, raking leaves, or waxing the floor or car. Part of the joy comes from seeing the result.

Reflect together on achievements after the fact: "Wasn't it great!" "Doesn't it look fine now that it is done!" "Isn't it nice to rest after getting it all finished!"

Have family jobs and responsibilities for each family member. For example, a little child can be in charge of clearing off the dishes after Sunday dinner. Again, lavish praise on the child, saying, "Doesn't that look nice?" Make a chart showing each family member's responsibility, and discuss these responsibilities in family home evening.

Family responsibilities can often be given to a child that relate to that particular child's gifts. Saren, whose personality has a particularly calming effect on the other children, has been designated our "family peacemaker." Shawni, with her passion for having things in place, is our "family orderkeeper." Josh (mostly due to wishful thinking by his parents) is our "obedience policeman." And happy little Saydi is our "family joygiver." It is amazing how each one takes his responsibility, reminds the others, and, most of all, becomes better at his assignment himself.

As you work together, teach by example the joy of discipline, of working hard and getting it done, and of afterwards feeling the fulfillment.

E. Games and stories that illustrate and teach the joy of achieving.

*1. Play games with timers. Can they do it before the buzzer?

*2. Tell stories that illustrate the joy of doing a good job and taking pride, such as "The Three Little Pigs."

F. Teach the law of the harvest. The joy of goal achievement and the law of the harvest are "Siamese twins"—they are inseparable. There is security in knowing you will reap what you plant. Teach this joy by actually sowing and actually reaping.

One way is to have a garden. Let the children plant, weed, water, and harvest. Then use the example of the garden as a way to explain many things: how brushing the teeth grows up into the joy of no cavities, how kind deeds grow up into the joy of happy feelings, how selfish deeds grow up like weeds to choke the family.

Another way is to teach children to save. We have a family bank that consists of a box with a lock on it. Each child has a bank book, kept in a special drawer for safety so it won't be lost. In the bank book, the banker (Daddy) records and initials all deposits or withdrawals and pays interest at the end of each month. Children learn number skills, but more importantly, they learn the joy and satisfaction that come from saving and seeing money grow.

G. Organization and order. Have a good set of shelves in a child's room. Help him organize his possessions, with a place for each item. Then give strong encouragement and praise as he keeps things in their places. The simple lessons of order in a child's life will go a long way in building the critical, later-life skill of organizing his thoughts and ideas.

Teach a child to put one toy away before taking the next toy out. Explain that this way he will know where his things are and will not have to play in a cluttered room.

"The Gunny Bag": Get a large bag (such as an old mail sack or a big plastic bag) that "lives" in some out-of-the-way place like the basement or the attic. Paint or draw a face on it and introduce it to the children as "The Gunny Bag" who comes around when we least expect and "eats up" all toys that are left out. He then returns to his cave. On Saturday he comes and coughs them up, but if he eats the same thing twice he may never give it back. He cries and cries when he can't find anything to eat.

Children will love making the "Gunny Bag" cry, and will be more aware, since he can come at any moment, of keeping things orderly and putting one thing away before taking something else out.

H. The joy of mistakes and failure. Discuss your own failures. Show your children that you are not perfect, but that you accept your failings and try to learn from them. The key here is simple: praise them as much when they fail as when they succeed. Praise the try, not the result. Praise the effort and show how it might be tried again more successfully. Always encourage trial and error. Set the example by being both a good loser and a good winner. And finally, tell and show how some goals take a great deal of time and effort before they can be achieved.

I. Share some of your goals with your children. The fact that you are reading this book probably indicates that you have a goal of being a better parent. Why not share that goal with your children? Tell them that your goal is to be the best daddy or mommy, and that you need their help on your goal, that you want them to tell you how you can improve. (It's an interesting experience to have a four-year-old tell you you've got to stop getting mad at the lawn mower.) This process of asking will teach children, by example, that it is good to seek others' help, that asking for help is not weakness, but intelligence. Then, later on, they will ask you.">

III. Family Focal Point: Sunday Goal-Setting Sessions

I have the habit of isolating one hour each Sunday to set goals and make plans for the week ahead. One week, four-year-old Saren interrupted: "What are you doing in here, Daddy?" I contained the "go back out and play" instinct and told her I was setting goals. "What are goals?" I simplified: "Things you want to try really hard to do." "Can I have a goal?" "Sure. What do you want to try hard to do?" "Skip rope." "Okay, Saren. You sit here and draw a picture of yourself skipping rope. That will show your goal." It was the beginning of a tradition at our house. Every Sunday now, just before church, each family member over three either draws or writes his goal, putting a circle by it to color in when he meets the goal. We call this our "Sunday session." Then, the next night in family home evening, we take a moment to discuss the goals, to praise, to encourage, and to talk about how past goals have been met. A child's Sunday session time can also be an opportunity to think about the week ahead and to help him understand a calendar so he can look forward to events of the week and plan which days he will work on his goal. It is also a time when I can have a brief "interview" with each child as he tells me his goals and as I focus on him individually and make him feel important through my interest and my praise. The children have taken to using this weekly interview as a time to tell me of the private problems or worries they have.

IV. Story: "Jason and the Circus Money"

It was Saturday morning and Jason was watching television. Between two shows there was a commercial about the circus. On the screen were elephants and dancing bears and clowns. A voice said, "The circus will be in your town in two weeks! Don't miss it!"

Jason ran to tell his mother he couldn't miss the circus. His mother said, "Jason, we've just spent a lot of money on your birthday. If you want to go to that circus, you'll have to earn enough money to buy your own ticket."

Jason thought hard about that—so hard that he didn't even watch the rest of the TV show. He looked under all the cushions on the couch and chairs and found two dimes. He went and asked his mother how much a ticket cost. She said, "Two dollars." "How many dimes is that?" asked Jason. "Twenty," said his mother. "As many as all of your fingers and all your toes." "I've got two already," Jason said, holding up his dimes. His mother smiled at him and took his hand. "Come with me," she said.

Jason's mother got a large sheet of paper and drew a big, king-size "20" on it. Then she made a long tube by the side with some marks on it. The paper looked like this:

She colored in two squares in the tube with a red crayon, like this:

Jason got the idea before she even told him. He said, "Every time I get another dime, I'll color a square until I get up to 20!" "Right," said his mother, "and there are some old soda bottles in the basement that are worth ten cents each."

Jason found three bottles in the basement. He put them in his red wagon and pulled them around the corner to the grocery store. He got three dimes and colored in three more squares.

"What now, Mom?" Jason said. "Well, I don't know," said his mother. "Can you think of any more ways to earn some more dimes?" Jason said, "More pop bottles." His mother said, "Sorry, that's all we've got." Jason said, "Maybe Mr. Johnson next door has some. I'll go see." Mr. Johnson didn't have any old pop bottles, but he did have a backyard that needed cleaning, and he told Jason he would give him two dimes to do it. Jason did it.

Jason kept thinking of things. By Saturday, do you know what his chart looked like? That's right, it was completely filled in—and it was a very good circus!

On the way home from the circus, Jason was thinking very hard. He said, "Mom, do you think I could ever earn enough money to buy myself a two-wheeled bike?" "I think so," said his mother, "but it would take a long time."

That night his parents had a long talk—and got a good idea. The next morning Jason's father said, "Jason, I think if you were to raise some tomatoes in the garden this year, you could earn enough to buy a bike. Let's use two dollars of my money to buy some tomato plants. If you take good care of them and sell the tomatoes when they grow, you can get enough money to give me back my two dollars and to buy your very own bike."

All summer Jason watered his plants and pulled the weeds out. When the tomatoes got red, he picked them and put them in a bucket; then he knocked on the neighbor's doors. "Would you like to buy some tomatoes?" he said. "Only a nickel each." Every day more tomatoes were red. Every day Jason sold them. By autumn Jason had sold all the tomatoes. He had enough money to pay his father the two dollars and also to buy one present for himself: a red bike, the same color as those tomatoes.

V. Reading List

Burton, V. L. Mike Mulligan and His Steam Shovel. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1939.

Conaway, J. Will I Ever Be Good Enough? Milwaukee: Raintree Publishers, 1977.

Felt, S. Rosa Too Little. New York: Doubleday & Co., 1950.

Greene, C. I Want to Be a Baseball Player. Chicago: Children's Press, 1963.

Holl, A. George the Gentle Giant. New York: Golden Press, 1962.

Keats, E. J. Whistle for Willie. New York: Scholastic Book Services, 1964.

Lexan, J. M. Benjie. New York: The Dial Press, 1964.

Moncure, J. All by Myself Chicago: Child's World, 1976.

———. See My Garden Grow. Chicago: Child's World, 1977.

Riley, S. What Does It Mean? Success. Chicago: Child's World, 1978.

Taylor, Barbara J. I Can Do. Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1972.

VI. Postscript

A. Dannie, age four, had set a goal at Joy School to sit still and be quiet when it was the teacher's turn to talk. She was a very active child, and it was difficult for her to pay attention. As she sat, with arms folded and a serious expression on her face, another child leaned over and said something to her. "Don't bother me," said Dannie, "I'm working on my goal."

B. Cathy, age four and a half, had reached the goal she was working on at school—zipping up her coat—and had chosen another goal to work on at home. Her mother reported that she brought her "special blanket" and said, "Put this on top of the refrigerator where I can't reach it. My new goal is to stop sucking my thumb." It wasn't easy, especially at night, but with the help and encouragement of her parents, Cathy broke her thumb-sucking habit within two or three weeks. She was very proud of herself, and brought her chart, which she had made herself and posted on her refrigerator, with the circle all colored in to share with the children at school.
