Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Joy ( 1980)

Section IV

Emotional Joys

"Homes are made permanent through love. Though you neglect some of your business, though you neglect some of your cattle, though you fail to produce full crops, study to hold your children's love. " (David O. McKay, Stepping Stones, p. 298.)

"I believe in indulging children, in a reasonable way. If the little girls want dolls, shall they have them? Yes. But must they be taken to the dressmakers to be dressed? No. Let the girls learn to cut and sew the clothing for their dolls, and in a few years they will know how to make a dress for themselves and others. Let the little boys have tools, and let them make their sleds, little wagons, etc., and when they grow up, they are acquainted with the use of tools and can build a carriage, a house, or anything else. " (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 210.)

"All happy families resemble one another. Each unhappy family is unhappy in its own way. " (Leo Tolstoy.)

10

Preserving the Joy of Trust and the Basic Confidence to Try

"The first thing that is taught by the mother to the child should be true; we should never allow ourselves to teach our children one thing and practice another. . . . [Parents] should never teach them anything unless they know it is correct in every respect. " (Discourses of Brigham Young, pp. 206-7.)

I. Examples and Description

A. Child: Our two-year-old Shawni came along to her older sister's dancing class. We were watching the older sister, and left the two-year-old sitting down the row of seats. I glanced over and saw her eyes growing wider. The next moment she was up, twirling, whirling, a two-year-old facsimile of modern dance. She wanted to try, to experience.

It was November, and when we got home after the dancing class it was still light and the first snow of the year was falling. Little Shawni happened to be the last one out of the car. She lagged behind in the driveway, and when I went back after her, she was sitting Indian-style in a drift, rubbing snow into her hair. Snow was new to her, and she was experiencing it in the most intimate way she could think of.

This is a joy to preserve, a joy that small children almost always have but they often lose early. (Think of the three-year-old afraid to touch the snow or the four-year-old too shy to sit on Santa's knee.) The symptoms of the loss of this joy are the phrases we have all heard: "Oh, I can't do it." "Will you help me? I'm afraid."

When did they lose it? Where do they leave it? Why? It is our fault. We fail to preserve it in three ways. First, in our preoccupations and "busyness," we fail ourselves to experience new things and to manifest the joy that comes from them. Failure no. 1: lack of example.

Second, again in our involvement with "more important things," we fail to praise and encourage their exploration. The encouragement could be verbal or, better yet, could be expressed by us learning from them, trying things with them. By criticizing instead of praising, we build fear and rub out the continuing desire to try. A child performs an important experiment by pouring his milk into his soup, and we call him a mess. A child takes off his shoes to see how the grass feels, and we tell him "that's silly," and doesn't he know he will get dirty. A child pats a big, friendly dog on the head, and we say, "Watch out, he might bite you." A child picks a flower to give to a friend, and we tell her she didn't get enough of the stem to fit in the vase. Failure no. 2: criticism instead of praise.

Third, we often compare our children with each other or with other children, thus making them feel inferior. Johnny tries to run a race or improve on the piano and glows with the joy of trying until we say, "Say, that Jones boy sure is learning fast," or "I wonder how the Smith girl got so good on the piano? She's only had lessons for as long as Johnny." A four-year-old wants to climb the monkey bars, or go up a little ladder at the shallow end of the pool, or climb up on the shed in the backyard, and we say, "No, no, you'll fall and get hurt. Don't try it by yourself." Failure no. 3: discouragement by comparison or by overdone caution.

Again we've got it backwards. It's children who have the joy of spontaneity, of trying new things, of trusting. We should be learning, not teaching. We should be following and encouraging their lead, not leading with our own lost ability. If we do, the joy of trust and trying can come back into our adult lives.

B. Adult: I spent a summer in Hawaii one year working and saving money for the next year of school. I had a friend there named Kathy. It was the first week in Hawaii for both of us. We had just met each other, and we had both just met a Hawaiian named Kiki. Kiki invited us to a beach party, "a real Hawaiian one," he said. It was on a Saturday afternoon, on a beach at the far side of the island. As I recall, the party had three distinct parts: surfing, eating, and dancing. My inclination was to watch all three. Her inclination was to do all three.

I can remember her out in the surf, trying to catch a wave, missing one, getting tipped over by the next, falling off the board until she was exhausted. What I remember is her face. Kathy was not an exceptionally pretty girl, but in that surf her face was radiant, her eyes dancing with the joy of trying something new, of feeling a new sensation. She was not embarrassed or self-conscious because she couldn't do it yet. She felt—and her face showed it—a simple childlike joy of the moment.

Finally dark came and the huge beach bonfire was lit. It was time to eat. I had never seen poi and neither had Kathy. My instinct was to bury it while no one was looking; her instinct was to eat it and love it. I watched her expression, the corners of her mouth, for signs of distaste or of the discomfort of something foreign. Instead I saw delight—not that she had an immediate taste for poi (no one does), but she loved the experience, the new texture, the opportunity to know how it did taste. She added a little sugar and ate the whole bowlful.

Then came the dancing. There was an extra grass skirt. Right away Kathy was trying her first hula. Compared to the swaying perfection of the brown-skinned Hawaiians, Kathy was clumsy, but there was no inhibition in her clumsiness, no discomfort or embarrassment. Her smile, her sparkle, her obvious enjoyment of the moment compensated, and somehow she looked almost good at it.

The very purpose of life is experience, and the joy of trying things and of new participation and new interest is a classic and significant joy. There is so much to do in the world, so many good things to try, 360 degrees of experience. Most of us eat the same narrow 10-degree sliver of the pie over and over again, too afraid or inhibited (or sophisticated?) to try the other 350 degrees. Somewhere we have lost our grasp of the joy of the basic confidence to try.

The telltale symptoms of children who are losing this joy are their words: "Oh, I'm no good at that." "You help me do it. I can't by myself." "I don't want to try it, I've never done it before." Now we "turncoat" on them; we push them; we say, "Don't be so shy—don't be so scared—you won't get hurt—come on, at least try."

First we create the fear, the hesitancy; then we criticize it, which, of course, magnifies it and makes it worse.

There are two kinds of basic fears in the world: fear of getting hurt and fear of failure. Both are tools of the adversary: both work against God's purposes and objectives for us. "For God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind." (2 Timothy 1:7.) Both kinds of fear apply to all facets of life. We fear failure mentally, spiritually, physically, emotionally, and socially, and we fear being hurt physically, emotionally, and socially. Both fears are self-fulfilling. Physical fear often causes physical hurt, and fear of failing almost always causes failure.

Children are born with neither of these two fears; it is the learning of the fears that takes away the joy. Perhaps the easiest way to look at preserving the joy of trust and the basic confidence to try is to look at its synonym, "avoiding the conveyance of the fear of being hurt and the fear of failure." Remember, this is a "preserving" chapter; the parents' challenge is not to teach children, but to avoid destroying what they already have.

II. Methods

A. Understand the delicacy of a child's confidence, of his desire to try. In her book Times to Remember, Rose Kennedy speaks of the physical freedom she gave her children at Hyannis Port, Massachusetts. They could climb, explore, try new things. There were skinned knees and even broken arms—but her book correctly relates physical freedom to physical confidence, and physical confidence to every other kind of confidence (and regardless of their overall opinion of the Kennedy family, most people would agree that they did and do possess great confidence). The point is that a broken arm is better than a broken spirit. Of course, a healthy respect for real danger is important, but that is different from the overcautious fear of physical hurt that many children develop.

B. Let children try things physically. Break down and try things with them. Climb a tree. Jump off the diving board. It will do you good and give verbal and nonverbal encouragement to your children's physical confidence. Particularly, try things you are not good at. Let the children see that lack of skill is no reason for not trying. Lack of physical fear promotes coordination. When you think of it, athletic coordination and ability are, in large part, an absence of physical fear and inhibition.

The trick is to create a basically safe environment, rather than having to constantly warn about physical danger. Fence the creek until the children are old enough to wade in it; put the porcelain figurines up high until they are old enough not to break them.

C. Win and keep the children's trust. The quality we call trust is basically an absence of the fear of being hurt—physically or emotionally or socially. The child who "jumps to daddy" trusts that he won't be dropped. The child who is nice to his friend trusts his friend to be nice to him. The child who returns your love trusts your love for him.

Children trust us until we violate their trust. A broken trust not only hurts them at the moment, but it also hurts permanently because it teaches fear of being hurt. Keep their trust by never lying, even a little. Don't say, "The doctor won't hurt you." Don't say you'll spank them if they do it again and then not spank them when they do. Don't tell them to tell the telephone caller you're not at home. Don't forget a promise. If they never learn to doubt you on small things, then they'll never doubt your compliments to them, your advice to them, your love for them.

D. Don't snap-judge your children. Don't condemn them without a trial, without knowledge of the facts and circumstances. We assume an arrested man is innocent until proven guilty, but often we fail to give our children the same benefit of the doubt.

E. Encourage children to try new things. Look for and set up new experiences. When they ask for help, first say, "I'll be here to help, but try it first." Then praise the try as much as or more than the success.

F. Understand the need for encouragement. It has been said that when we can see failure as an indispensable way of learning, we free the mind and the spirit. What a lesson! When the basic confidence to try is replaced with the fear of failure, a child's outgoing joy is replaced with in-turning doubt. Children, like fragile flowers, can be crushed so easily by the fingers of criticism and comparative judgment; bright, innovative attempts can be replaced with sullen fear to try.

Parents hold the control lever. Parental encouragement will win out over "other-people" discouragement. A "Good try!" from parents can counterbalance scoffs from peers. It is so important to try to avoid saying no unless real danger is involved. Instead, try saying "Let's try it a different way," or "Wouldn't this be better?" Substitute the positive for the negative.

G. Praise the attempt. To praise the result when the result is not good violates the trust. But to praise the try, to compliment the effort—this sort of praise will bring about more tries and eventually more success. We thus teach that there is such a thing as successful failure: failure from which we learn and grow. "It's okay not to be able to do it. It's okay to miss, to fall down, to make a mistake. This is how we grow."

By not teaching the fear of being hurt or the fear of failure, we can help preserve children's joy of trust and the basic confidence to try. However, the two greatest keys in the safeguarding process are the two related joys that children do not inherently possess. These two joys follow in the next two chapters: "The Joy of Confidence in Self as a Unique Individual" and "The Joy of Security and Identity as Part of a Unified Family." Family security and unique individual confidence can preserve forever the joy of trust and the basic confidence to try, and can even restore the trust and confidence that some children have already lost.

III. Family Focal Point: Daddy Dates and Mommy Dates

Our four-year-old Shawni doesn't know the days of the week by name—she knows them by activity: "Church Day," "Family Home Evening Day," "Daddy Doesn't Go to Work Day." Wednesday is "Daddy Date Day." We take half an hour after work when she is in charge, and we listen. We go where she wants, talk about what she thinks of. I encourage her as she tries things, as she says and thinks things. I reinforce her basic confidence. I watch for teaching moments that can give her the understanding that eliminates fear. Most of all, I am alone with her, learning from her the joy of trust and the basic confidence to try. What I learn from her I mirror back to her so she'll know that it is good.

IV. Story: "Pedro the Squirrel"

A whole town of squirrels lived in the trees at the top of the hill. It was a perfect place to live, with hollow trunks for houses, lively branches and boughs for running and leaping, and plenty of sunshine. And it was far enough up the mountain that the wolves didn't come past very often. The only problem was that the nut trees were quite far away. But never mind, all the men and boy squirrels ran every day in the autumn to the nut trees and filled up a big box with nuts. Then they dragged the box back to the trees at the top of the hill to be stored for winter.

All the boy squirrels except Pedro helped out. Pedro was the smallest squirrel, and his legs were too short to go all the way. He tried it once, but he couldn't pull hard enough to help very much. "Never you mind," his father would say. "Some squirrels are fast and have long legs, and others are strong. Each one is good at something. You are good at thinking of new ideas."

It was true. Pedro did have lots of ideas. He thought he would be an inventor when he grew up. But most of his friends thought it was better to be strong and to run fast than to be an inventor.

One day Pedro was thinking of new ideas, and he thought of the idea of putting wheels on the big box. Late that night he made two wheels and put them on the nut box. Sure enough, it was much easier to pull than before when it didn't have the wheels. In fact, Pedro could pull it all by himself. Pedro was excited, but he was so tired from thinking of the wheels that he fell asleep in the box.

The next morning all the strong squirrels grabbed the ropes to drag the box to the nut tree. (They didn't even see little Pedro asleep in the box.) Hey, how easily the box pulled along! Were they stronger? No—it was those round things on the bottom. Who put them there? What were they? All the excitement woke up Pedro. He popped up from the box and told the other squirrels about the wheels.

What a hero Pedro became! With the wheels, the squirrels could make six trips a day to the nut tree instead of just one. After that day, Pedro was never afraid to say anything and never afraid to try out any of his new ideas.

V. Reading List

Anderson, C. Crooked Colt. New York: The Macmillan Co., 1954.

Conaway, J. Will I Ever Be Good Enough? Milwaukee: Raintree Publishers, 1977.

Friskey, M. Seven Diving Ducks. Milwaukee: E. M. Hale & Co., 1965.

Kraus, R. The Trouble with Spiders. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1962.

Moncure, J. All By Myself. Chicago: The Child's World, 1977.

Piper, W. The Little Engine that Could. New York: Platt & Munk Co., 1954.

Seuss, Dr. Green Eggs and Ham. New York: Beginners Books, 1960.

Tobias, T. Easy or Hard? Chicago: Children's Press, 1977.

Williams, G. Timid Timothy. New York: William R. Scott, 1944.

Zolotow, C. Over and Over. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1957.

VI. Postscript

A. One day the children had made their own sandwiches in school for a little picnic. Doug, age three, an only child who was used to being waited on, surprised his mother that evening by saying, "I can spread my own bread." The bread was soft and the butter was hard, but Doug did his best. When the bread broke into several pieces, Doug said, "That's okay. Everyone makes mistakes sometimes. I'll probably do better next time."

B. Several children were playing a beanbag toss game, but Brant said, "I don't know how." The teacher talked him into trying, and each time he tossed the beanbag, the other children said, "Nice try, Brant." He relaxed a little, and even though he never threw the beanbag through the hole, he was laughing and enjoying the game.
