Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Joy ( 1980)

11

Teaching the Joy of Family Security, Identity, and Pride

"A child has the right to feel that in his home he has a place of refuge, a place of protection from the dangers and evils of the outside world. " (David O. McKay, Stepping Stones, p. 323.)

"To make a happy fireside clime To weans and wife, That's the true pathos and sublime O' human life. " (Robert Burns.)

I. Examples and Description

A. Adult: When I was growing up, I knew a group of brothers and sisters, schoolmates of mine. I was always impressed because they seemed so unconcerned about being with the "in group" or the "right people." They didn't even care much about wearing the newest thing, the latest style. They were all friendly, though, and all well liked. They seemed so secure, unafraid of failure.

Each of the six had his own personality, but all possessed one similar quality, a quality that I grew to greatly admire. It was a peace, a calm, a security, a naturalness, a confidence. None of these adjectives quite describe it, but it was there. You could feel it; you knew they had it. I was always interested in where it came from. It wasn't from individual brilliance, or from exceptional athletic abilities, or from particular handsomeness or beauty; they were pretty average in each of these categories. The clue seemed to be in their love and acceptance of each other.

I remember that one boy played on the high school basketball team. He sat on the bench most of the time, but I noticed that his brothers and sisters were always at the games, all of them—and I knew a couple of them well enough to know that they had little interest in basketball. They supported each other. Each had his own circle of friends, but none were ever too busy with friends to have time for a brother or sister.

One day an unexpected opportunity came to discover the true source of their confidence. The family moved into a house just through the block from my house. Now, instead of seeing them just in school, I saw them at home, and the secret was revealed! The confidence, the assurance, the security, the unity came from the unconditional love of their home. From the outside their home was ordinary; on the inside it was extraordinary.

I remember the youngest child, who was just turning two. The first words he ever said were "Ah, mush," a phrase often used in the family in mock-fun-poking at the frequent hugs and pats and physical affection that were shown in the home.

I was with one of the sons one day as he brought home a not-so-good school grade, a grade he hated to show his father. I wish I could describe the father's reaction. There was no anger, no belittling, no criticism, just a look that somehow said, "Son, a grade could never alter my love and respect for you; I have complete confidence in you. I just assume there is a reason for this grade, and you don't need to tell me what it is." I remember suddenly realizing that my friend's apprehension about showing the grade was not because of fear that his father would be critical or angry, but because he knew his father wouldn't be angry. He knew his father loved him unconditionally, and he was proud of him unconditionally.

But at the same time my friend was proud to be a part of a strong family, a family that had a tradition of doing its best, and he felt bad that he had let down that tradition and that family with the poor grade. He was motivated by love, not fear; by a desire to please and be part of his great family, rather than by apprehension of criticism or of anger.

Yes, I know now that the secret was the warmth and acceptance and security of that home—a joy irreplaceable, and unavailable from any other source.

B. Child. I'll always remember our daughter's prayer on the evening before Linda and I left on a week's vacation. Saren was four and was looking forward to spending the week with her grandmother. Still, she knew our family would be separated for a time, and she felt concern. She said, "Please bless us while our family will be halfed."

She felt the security of family and missed that security when we weren't together. I also remember the joy in her face the night we got back together and knelt again in family prayer. I saw her smile contentedly as we all held hands in the circle. She said, "Thanks that our family is back together and happy again."

Benjamin Franklin thought so much of the goodness and naturalness of marriage that he likened a single person to half a pair of scissors. Something similar, perhaps even stronger, could be said about a child without a loving, unified family. No child of any age has enough confidence or emotional independence to successfully exist as an island, untied, with nothing to cling to or be one with.

A family can be a base, a bastion of unconditional love that a child can always turn to after failure, after a disappointment, after being hurt or rebuffed or intimidated. There he can return to love, to a unit that he will always be part of, always welcome in, always important in.

I once asked a group of young people what they thought heaven might be like, how they imagined it. As they described their impressions, their words seemed to focus on two key elements: who will and won't be there, and what will and won't be happening there.

Think about those two factors for a minute. Who will and won't be there? Will: people you love, who love you. Won't: people who hurt you, use you, embarrass you. What will and won't happen there? Will: progress, growth, beauty, happy new experience. Won't: fear, failure, ridicule.

Suddenly a new meaning for an old phrase came alive in my mind: "The home can be a heaven on earth." Why not? Do we not control both who is in our home and what happens there? Cannot the home, therefore, be a place of sanctuary, of security, of sharing, of progress, of love—in short, a heaven?

Virtually all concerned parents in the Church have participated at one time or another in the classic debate of "Where is the ideal place to raise children? In Utah or out of Utah? In the city or country? Small towns or large towns?" It is an endless debate with one true answer: "None of the above." Children are not reared in the city or the country, in Zion or in the mission field, they are reared in the home. If the home means a unified family, an environment of unconditional love, then other environmental elements by comparison are of little consequence.

II. Methods

A. "Family Institution." Security and confidence are bred from membership in institutions. A great university, a great fraternity, a great corporation—each lends strength and well-being to its members. Institutions surround people with a mother-henlike emotional protection, giving them an identity, a pride, a thing to be a part of.

Institutions become institutions by virtue of traditions, accepted norms that become part of the institution, part of the identity. For example, a school has school songs, a school symbol, a school mascot, school codes, school decisions, school councils, school trips, school games, and school jokes. Now take the "school" off each and add "family," and you have a family institution.

B. Genealogy. Children love knowing "where they came from" in the genealogical sense. Some ways to convey this:

First, frame old family pictures and group them together on a special wall.

Second, tell true stories about the parents as children, including memories about grandparents. These will become the favorite bedtime stories and will get a child in touch with his roots. For one of our most successful family projects, we have taken a large, hardbound ledger book and turned it into what we call our "Ancestor Book." The two of us have written stories in children's language about our parents, grandparents, and great-grandparents—simple incidents and experiences from their lives, particularly their childhoods. Best of all, the children have illustrated the stories and therefore seem to remember every detail. It has become the children's favorite storybook, and I sometimes feel sure that I see a distinct look of pride on their faces as they hear of the courage and good deeds of their ancestors.

Third, draw a simple family tree, with each child as a branch and the parents as the trunk. Put pictures of the parents and grandparents on the appropriate trunk and roots and of brothers and sisters on the limbs. Frame it and hang it on the same wall as the ancestor pictures.

C. Consistency. Children need to be able to depend on certain constants in their lives. Predictable, consistent things build security. Inconsistency breeds fear and insecurity.

There are four places where consistency is particularly important: (1) In discipline. If a family law is broken, the punishment or consequence should be automatic—expected—consistent. (2) In example. Make yourself predictable to them—always doing right in their presence, but admitting mistakes. (3) In regular schedules for certain important things such as the evening meal or the weekly family home evening. (4) In always keeping promises.

D. Constant awareness of each other. (1) Leave notes to each other, perhaps on the refrigerator, telling where you are and when you will be back. (2) Support each other's activities. If one participates in a school play, all attend. (3) Show love for spouse openly. As the saying goes, "The greatest thing a father can do for his children is to love their mother."

E. Display open gratitude for children. How simple—and how incredibly important—it is to let a child know he is wanted and needed, how precious and important he is to the family.

*2. Make up a paper chain linked into a circle with a family member's name on every other link and the word love on the links between the names. Show how important each link is: if one comes out, no more chain.

F. Working together. We always do the evening dishes together. With six of us working at it, it only takes ten minutes—our record is seven and a half—and there is something about working together, in teamwork, that is fun. It leaves the whole load on no one and stimulates interesting conversation. Our six-year-old Shawni loves to repeat over and over, like a locomotive, while we're working: "Many hands make light work." It's true—and furthermore, many hands, working together, make a strong family.

III. Family Focal Point: Family Traditions

As mentioned, there is great security in belonging—to a club, a fraternity, an association, an institution, an entity with which one can identify. Children who think of their family as an institution have a powerful sense of belonging, of identity, of security. We decided years ago that we would like that identity and association to be so strong in our family that if one of our children were asked the many-option question "Who are you?" his second response (after "a child of God") would be "a member of my family."

A family should be an institution. A family should not be people grouped together for convenience, where children live until they can be on their own, any more than a great university should be a group of buildings full of books and people. Someone once defined an institution as "something with rules and traditions and pride." Certainly a family should have all three. We have talked about the first one in chapter 2. The middle one, traditions, can be the key to the third one, pride, and can provide tremendous momentary joy as well as build within children the secure feeling of being part of a great institution.

Here are a few of our family traditions, just for the sake of illustration:

Last year, Daddy, playing the part of Mary's father, asked eight-year-old Saren, playing Mary, "Oh, Mary, don't you think you could wait just until the baby is born before you and Joseph go to Bethlehem?" Saren answered, very lovingly but very firmly, "No, father. You know what King Herod is like, and we wouldn't want him mad at us now, would we?" Joseph, played by four-year-old Josh, chimed in, "Mary's right, Dad. We've got to leave tomorrow." After supper, we act out the nativity scene, complete with innkeepers, shepherds, wise men, and animals.

Another Christmas tradition is a nativity scene of small clay figures, with an empty manger. Each time a child does a kind deed for another member of the family, he is allowed to put one straw into the tiny manger. The more kind deeds that are done, the softer the manger will be when the figure of the baby Jesus is placed in it on Christmas Eve.

We also like to prepare a self-produced 8mm movie of family members doing day-by-day things. This, along with a child-narrated sound track on cassette tape, is sent to faraway grandparents for a special Christmas gift.

Each child buys his own Christmas gifts. The children save their pennies, and we take each one shopping individually to a variety store, where he can buy something for each family member with his own money. Each child wraps his own gifts completely by himself. These gifts are opened on the morning of December 24 so the larger "Santa gifts" don't overshadow them.

Without any question, our children feel more joy in giving and in seeing their brothers and sisters open their gifts than in receiving. One example was three-year-old Saydi running across the room, throwing her arms around Josh, and saying, "Thank you for the bee. I love it!" (Four-year-old Josh had picked a fifty-cent wind-up bee that flapped its wings.) The real joy was on Josh's face an hour later when he tugged on my sleeve and beamed up at me, saying, "Dad, Saydi loved that bee I got her, didn't she!"

During the week before Christmas, each child also chooses one toy that is still new and still loved to give to a less fortunate child. As a group, the family goes to an orphanage and gives the wrapped gifts. Shawni can still remember with great joy the name and virtually every detail about the little orphan girl to whom she gave her doll three years ago.

A gift for Jesus is another cherished tradition. Each family member writes on a piece of paper something that he is going to do for Jesus during the new year and puts the paper into a special box. The gifts are pulled out and read two or three times during the year at a family home evening.

Such Christmas traditions, as they are recalled and discussed during the year, can be great ongoing vehicles for teaching children joy.

IV. Story: "Fluffy Needs His Family"

Once upon a time there was a baby goose. He was so soft and downy that he was called Fluffy. He had three brothers and three sisters, and every day he had swimming lessons from his beautiful mother. He and his brothers and sisters swam in a line behind their mother. Fluffy was fourth in the line. He always had three sisters in front of him and three brothers behind him. Each evening when they swam to shore they saw their father, who was finishing an extension on the family nest.

Whenever Fluffy didn't know something, he asked his mother or father. Whenever he didn't know how to do something, they helped him. Whenever he was hungry, they caught some tasty little bugs for him to eat. Whenever he wanted to play, he played with his three brothers and three sisters. His mother made sure he was warm; his father made sure he was safe.

Fluffy learned that his last name was Honker. That was his parents' name; that was his family name. Fluffy was proud to have that name, and proud to swim behind his mother, and proud to see his father able to do so much and fly so fast.

One day a big storm came, and the wind blew so hard that it made big waves on the pond. Mother Honker started to swim for shore and the babies followed, but it was rainy and foggy and hard to see. Suddenly Fluffy saw a big wave go up in front of him. He couldn't see his mother. He couldn't see his sisters. He turned around and he couldn't see his brothers. Fluffy was alone. Fluffy was lost.

Oh, how Fluffy cried! The storm didn't last very long, but when it was over he couldn't see his family anywhere. It was a rather big pond and all of the banks looked the same, so he didn't know which way his home might be.

Fluffy felt terrible. He was hungry and cold, and there was no one to feed him or get him warm. He was lonely, and there was no one to play with. He missed his family; he needed his family. He started to wish that he had minded his mother better and been nicer to his sisters. He started looking everywhere to see if he could see anyone he knew or anything he could remember.

Finally he saw an old ring-neck duck swimming by the shore. Fluffy didn't know him, but he had a kind face, so Fluffy swam over to him. "Can you help me? I'm lost," said Fluffy. The wise old duck squinted his eyes at him. "What's your name?" he asked. "Fluffy," said Fluffy. "Fluffy who?" said the wise old duck. "Ummm" (for just a minute Fluffy forgot his family name—then he remembered and he was so proud and so glad)—"it's Fluffy Honker," he said. "Oh," said the wise old duck, "are you the lucky boy with the beautiful mother and strong father?" "Yes," said Fluffy—he was excited now. "Are you the lucky lad with the six brothers and sisters?" "Yes, I am, sir," said Fluffy.

The wise old duck knew exactly where Fluffy lived, and he took him right home. Mr. and Mrs. Honker were very happy to see their lost baby. They put their wings around him and said over and over, "Thank goodness." Fluffy's brothers and sisters stood all around him and said, "Peep, peep, peep," in a very excited way.

It's very good to have a family!

V. Reading List

Aliki. This Is My Family. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1963.

Bickerstaff, George. My Special Family. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1977.

Brown, M. B. First Night Away from Home. New York: Franklin Watts, 1960.

Gezi, K. Beebi, the Little Blue Bell. Chicago: Child's World, 1976.

Hallinan, P. K. We're Very Good Friends, My Brother and I. Chicago: Children's Press, 1976.

Koinaiko, J., and Rosenthal, K. Your Family Tree. New York: Parents Magazine Press, 1963.

Miles, B. A House for Everyone. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1958.

Moncure, J. A New Boy in Kindergarten. Chicago: Child's World, 1977.

———. What Does a Koala Bear Need? Chicago: Children's Press, 1976.

Schlein, M. The Way Mothers Are. Chicago: Albert Whitman & Co., 1963.

Swetnam, E. The Day You Were Born. Racine, Wisc.: Western Publishing Co., 1971.

Vasiliu, M. Do You Remember? New York: The John Day Co., 1966.

Zolotow, C. Over and Over. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1957.

———. The Sky Was Blue. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1963.

———. Sleepy Book. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard, 1958.

VI. Postscript

A. A mother volunteered to come to a Joy School class with her baby. She talked about how much she loved the baby, and showed the children how she bathed, dressed, and fed him. Then each child had a turn to sit in the rocker and hold the baby for a moment.

When Benjamin, age three, went home, he said to his mother, "You really wanted me, didn't you? I was so cute when I was a baby and you loved me so much. Thanks for rocking me and changing my diaper."

B. Each class at the Joy School is identified by a color name: the red class, the blue class, and so on. The children develop pride in their class and feel the security of belonging to a group of their peers. Johanna joined the orange class in the middle of the year, and on her first day, Tyler took it upon himself to show her around and introduce her to the other children. He was heard to say, "You'll like the orange class. They're the 'specialist' kids in the Joy School."
