Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Joy ( 1980)

12

Teaching the Joy of Individual Confidence and Uniqueness

"Ye have . . . lost the confidence of your children, because of your bad examples before them." (Jacob 2:35.)

"Study [your children's] dispositions and their temperaments, and deal with them accordingly." (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 207.)

No two flowers are alike, and no two children alike, yet every flower and every child is equally beautiful.

I. Examples and Description

A. Adult: I had a favorite professor in graduate school, a man whose every move transmitted a certain "I'm okay, you're okay" type of joy to all who were around him. He had remarkable patience. When a student could not seem to grasp a point, he would not chide or criticize; instead he would compliment the student on some other point where he was strong. He supervised a research report I did, and I came to know him well. He had some strange quirks (typical, I guess, of an absent-minded professor), such as wearing two pairs of glasses at once and occasionally walking into class in midsummer with a pair of winter galoshes on his feet. He was a small man with a bad leg that had always precluded athletics. He couldn't sing or speak well. In fact, he seemed to have few particular abilities, yet he always seemed totally self-confident—not cocky or overbearing, just quietly of the belief that he could discuss anything, do anything. I guess he was a celebrity of sorts, because he was often in the company of other celebrities, from the governor of the State to the star right fielder of the Boston Red Sox. There was a joy in his confidence, a vigor, a lust for life. I'll never forget the day in class when he said that fear was the antonym of confidence, and joy was the synonym.

I did well in his class, in part because I found him so interesting, and by the end of the year I knew him well enough that we had lunch together once in a while. I asked the source of his confidence. To my surprise, he answered rather quickly, as though he had thought it through many times, almost rehearsed it. He said there were two elements, the first of which was his faith. He said he liked the word faith better than confidence, because faith implied the inputs of a higher power. He expressed to me, with no hesitation or inhibition, his belief in a higher power to whom he could pray and who he felt would guide and nudge and help him through life.

"What is the second thing?" I asked. "Well," he said, "I'm a little like the great craftsman who made the finest violins in the world. Stradivari used to say, 'The Lord can't make a Stradivarius without Antonio Stradivari.' I have certain gifts, and I think I have discovered what most of them are. I am very, very good at conceptualizing and analyzing 'production-line bottlenecks.' I am very, very good at understanding what motivates people. I am sufficiently confident in two or three basic areas that I feel equal to anyone. I am as far superior to my friend Carl in these things as he is to me at baseball. Thus, we respect each other; we see each other as totally different equals."

I've thought a great deal about what he said. His joy was confidence. His confidence was a combination of faith and self-discovered gifts. I realized that everyone can have both, that no one is precluded from faith, and no one is without particular, unique gifts.

B. Child: Children can feel the joy of confidence and individual uniqueness. This fact is often illustrated by children themselves at our experimental Joy School. Early in our first year, when we were dealing with the physical joys, I had an experience that taught me something about the joy of individual confidence. A group of children were dancing, and the teacher was showing them how to skip. I was sitting at the side, observing. There were about ten children, four of whom just could not grasp the technique or coordination of skipping. It intrigued me that three of the four looked dejected, embarrassed, and upset because they couldn't do it. Each of the three, in his own way, stopped trying: one cried, one walked out, and one started acting silly and boisterous to distract attention from his failure. The fourth little boy showed absolutely no embarrassment or concern or self-consciousness for not being able to skip. He kept watching, kept trying, kept failing, kept watching, kept trying. When the exercise was over, I asked him some questions:

"Do you like to skip?"

"Yes, but I can't do it very good."

"Well, did you wish they'd stop skipping and do something you were better at?"

"No, because I want to learn how."

"Do you feel bad because you can't skip?"

"No."

"Why not?"

"Because I'm better at other things."

"Like what?"

"Mommy says I'm good at painting pictures."

"I see."

"And I'm 'specially good at keeping my baby brother happy."

"I see, Jimmy. Thanks for answering my questions."

"That's all right. Don't worry, someday I'm going to be good at skipping too."

An amazing interchange for a four-year-old. But the principle behind it is not particularly amazing—it's quite natural. A person who is secure in the knowledge that he is good at certain things can much more easily accept the things he is not good at.

II. Methods

A. Obvious, open, unconditional love. A child who feels an inalterable parental love has a built-in foundation for confidence. He knows that no failure, no mistake, will rob him of that love and family acceptance. Tell him of your consistent love. Always separate your anger or disappointment or criticism of the thing he has done from your unchanging love for him.

B. Know each child well as an individual. You can't help a child build confidence around his inherent gifts and talents unless you come to know what those gifts and talents are. Two ways to learn: (1) in private chats with the child, time spent together watching and appreciating; and (2) in organized time, spent as husband and wife, discussing each child, sharing perceptions, taking notes, discovering together more about the personality and individual character of each child. In our family, we call this kind of discussion a "five-facet review." It consists of simply getting together as husband and wife (perhaps while going out to dinner) and discussing each child individually, one at a time. We ask ourselves, How is he doing physically? How is he doing mentally? How is he doing emotionally? Then we proceed through each facet for each child, asking ourselves if he is experiencing each of the fifteen joys in this book. It is remarkable how much parents can learn from each other's observations.

C. Genuinely respect each child and his own gifts. Our children are really our brothers and sisters—as old as we, coeternal with us, quite possibly more advanced in an eternal perspective than we are. With this thought in mind, sometimes it becomes a bit easier to (1) show an added measure of faith in them after any kind of failure; (2) discuss our own failures with them and tell them what we learned from each; (3) praise their accomplishments lavishly and honestly, particularly accomplishments in areas where we perceive special aptitude; and (4) never criticize or tear the children down personally. We should criticize instead the bad things they have done, making sure they still know our total love for them. Never criticize in public—"praise in public, correct in private."

D. Independence, self-reliance, responsibility at an early age. Confidence and its joy tie directly into being able to do useful things. Each child should have a job in the family, for the family—particularly daily or weekly jobs—for which he is praised and made to feel very able and very important, very much a key part of the family.

Another way to build responsibility is to let children make their own decisions whenever possible—what to wear, what to do on Saturday morning—and then to praise their judgment.

*E. Teaching and establishing the fact that everyone is different.

The Rock Game: Blindfold the children and give them each a rock. (Use widely different sizes and shapes.) Have them feel the rocks very carefully, getting to know what their particular rocks are like. Then put the rocks in the center of the circle and take the blindfolds off. Let each child find his own rock. Teach the children that everything God has made is unique: no two rocks are the same, no two flowers, no two leaves. All people are different too. Some are good at one thing, some at another, but Heavenly Father loves us all the same, regardless of what we are good at.

F. Help children to see what their own unique gifts are—and that these gifts are as good as anyone else's.

*1. The "One Thing I Like About You" game: Sit five or six children in a circle, with one in the middle. Let each child say something he likes about the one in the middle, such as "One thing I like about Tommy is that he can tie his own shoes."

*2. Individual profile charts: Trace a profile from each child's shadow on a poster. Then, under each profile, write in the eye color, hair color, sex, age, position in the family, and what the child is good at. Put the posters up on the wall and let each child take pride in his uniqueness.

*G. Make a book about the child. Help each child to make a book about himself. You might use wallpaper samples for decorative covers. Suggested title: All About Me or I Am Special. Suggested pages:

*H. Pin a badge on the child that says "I am John and I'm special."

I. Help each child to be secure in his own uniqueness.

*1. Multiple answer games: Who are you? (The children respond with their self-perceptions—an artist, a tricycle rider, a dancer, a skipper.) Who loves you? (Teacher, parents, grandparents, brothers and sisters, the milkman.) The process builds a long list of reassurance and confidence.

*2. The "which is better" game: Ask children which is better: blue eyes or brown, to be an artist or a baseball player, and so on. The answer is always, "They're both just as good."

J. An exclusive club for each child. "Nothing makes a child feel more special than to share something with a parent that none of the other children (or the other parent) are included in. We have four such clubs in our family; each has only two members—Daddy and one child. Saren and Daddy's club is "The Literary Discussion Club." (They discuss books in a very grown-up way.) Shawni and Daddy's is "The Brown Eyes Club." (They are the only ones in the family who have brown eyes. Their club has a secret handshake and password.) Josh and Daddy's is "The Train, Boat, Airplane, Race Car, Go-cart Club." (The name is self-explanatory.) Saydi and Daddy's is "The Smile Club." (Saydi was only two when this club started, and smiling was what she did best.) There is a feeling of specialness, of uniqueness, of exclusivity, that makes children more aware of their individual worth.

K. Special nicknames for each child. A similar feeling of specialness comes with an affectionate nickname, especially when it is used exclusively by one parent. To Daddy, Saren is "Princess," Shawni is "Pixie," Josh is "Herkimer," Saydi is "Sugar Plum," Jonah is "Boomer Bumpkin," and Talmadge is "Mudgie." Each perhaps feels a little more special because of it.

L. Mommy and Daddy dates. Set aside a special time each week when there is a one-to-one relationship between mother or father (or both) and one child. These occasions may sometimes take planning, and other times they may consist simply of maximizing the moment.

M. "Empty Books." A dear friend mentioned at the time our first two children were still tiny that she got a great deal of satisfaction from buying an "empty book" (well-bound with empty pages) for each child when he was a baby and recording special events and character changes in the child's life as he grew. The ultimate plan was to present it to him on his wedding day.

We have followed her example and have found many benefits that we hadn't planned. The children know we are keeping the books and they feel a great sense of uniqueness and pride in knowing that even though, for the most part, the contents are secret until their wedding day, they themselves are individuals in their parents' eyes. They see us writing about those special events and are secretly thrilled that we take time for just them. Also, in reading back over events from these first few years, we realize how easily we forget those momentous moments (birth, toddler's mischief, starting school) in a child's life unless they are recorded. They'll make great "vicarious journals" and will be lots of fun for our children's children to read some day. Reading back through them is also, for us, a good chance to evaluate and analyze the progress and needs of each child.

N. A little, private "chest" for each child. Give each child a wooden box with some kind of lock. Let it be his very own place to keep little special private things, from ribbons to marbles, from jewelry pins to keys to wind the toy train. Then, as parents, respect the privacy of each child's chest. In our family, we made the treasure chests together from plywood in our "workshop." Each child painted his own.

III. Family Focal Point: Family Experts Board

Each child has unique gifts. The challenge is one of identifying them and reinforcing them. A useful tool is a "family experts board." Rule off a large mounted sheet into sixteen four-inch squares. Within each square put a picture of a family member doing something he is good at. This started in our family one family home evening night when we decided to talk about the things in which each child excelled. At first the answers were not obvious or readily apparent to us, and we realized that we didn't know our children as well as we should.

A child's age doesn't matter. We made our first family experts board when Saydi was only six months old, but she was listed as the family expert in several important categories: "noticing," "waving bye-bye," "making loud noises." As the children grew older, the board began to change; the real gifts, those things that can breed the joy of individual uniqueness and confidence, began to emerge and surface on the board. Saren, at age five, had on her list "creative dance," "playing the violin," and "being friendly to strangers." Shawni, at age four, had "singing right on tune," "sharing," "skipping," and "counting and doing sums."

Children can draw in the board's squares illustrations of each area of expertise, such as a girl playing the piano or a boy running. As parents and children focus regularly on the gifts that should be listed on the chart, they begin to identify and reinforce those qualities that give their children the lifetime gift of joy.

IV. Story: "The Ping Pong Ball and the Christmas Tree Bulb"

Once upon a time, at Christmastime, there were two friends. One was a Ping-Pong ball and the other was a Christmas tree bulb. Late each night, after the people in the house went to bed, the ball and the bulb used to talk. (They could talk to each other easily because the Christmas tree was right beside the Ping-Pong table.) Even though they were friends, they were jealous of each other. The Ping-Pong ball would say to the Christmas tree bulb: "Bulb, you are so lucky. You just hang there all day and people look at you and say how pretty you are. I spend the whole day getting hit with a paddle." The bulb would say, "You're the one who's lucky. All day you get to play with the children; they hold you and pat you and have fun with you. I just hang, hang, hang. No one ever touches me or plays with me."

On Christmas Eve, when Santa came, he had one of his magic elves with him. The elf heard what the ball and the bulb were saying. He said to them, "Would you like to change places?" They both said yes, and with one wave of his hand, the elf turned the ball into a bulb and the bulb into a ball. Just before the elf went up the chimney with Santa he said, "The only way you can change back into what you were is to get very, very wet."

At first the bulb was happy being a ball. The children picked him up and played with him—but he got dizzy from flying through the air, and soon he missed his tree branch. He wanted to be back there doing what he was supposed to do: hanging nice and still, and looking pretty.

The ball was happy for a few minutes being a bulb. He enjoyed being shiny and bright. After a while, though, he got bored. His neck hurt from hanging on the tree, and he missed the children and the paddles. He realized that he was meant to be a Ping-Pong ball; he was good at that and not good at being a bulb. Both of them were sad. They wanted to be themselves again. Soon they were both wishing that someone would throw water on them so they could change back. They got more and more sad. Finally they got so sad that they started to cry. Their tears got them wet, and suddenly they changed back into themselves.

V. Reading List

Behrens, June. Who Am I? Chicago: Children's Press, 1968.

Berger, T. I Have Feelings. New York: Human Science Press, 1971.

Charlip, R. Hooray for Me. New York: Parents Magazine Press, 1975.

Freeman, D. Dandelion. New York: Viking Press, 1964.

Friskey, M. Rackety, That Very Special Rabbit. Chicago: Children's Press, 1976.

Hallinan, P. K. I'm Glad to Be Me. Chicago: Children's Press, 1977.

Hoff, S. Ida the Bareback Rider. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1972.

Johnston, M. Sing Me a Song. Chicago: Child's World, 1977.

Kent, J. Just Only John. New York: Parents Magazine Press, 1968.

Larris, A. People Are Like Lollipops. New York: Holiday House, 1971.

Moncure, J. Try on a Shoe. Chicago: Child's World, 1976.

Slobodkin, L. Millions and Millions and Millions. New York: Vanguard Press, 1955.

Seuss, Dr. "The Sneetches" from The Sneetches and Other Stories. New York: Random House, 1961.

Wulf, K. I'm Glad I'm Little. Chicago: Child's World, 1977.

VI. Postscript

A. Saren, four and a half, and Shawni, three, were drawing on the blackboard. Saren had drawn quite a detailed picture of a little girl, including eyebrows and eyelashes, dress, shoes, and ribbon in hair. Shawni had drawn a simple face with arms and legs coming out of the sides and bottom of the head. Saren viewed Shawni's picture and, confident in her own artistic ability, did not criticize it, but instead said, "Shawni, that's very good for a three-year-old, but don't you remember we have tummies?"

B. We were discussing how no two persons are exactly alike. One child, pointing to Travis and Terry, identical twins who had recently started school and who both had many behavior problems, said, "These two are." Then Danielle countered with, "No, they aren't. Travis hits when he gets mad and Terry cries."
