Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Joy ( 1980)

Section V

Social Joys

"The Church is an aid to the training of children; so also is the state, but neither is supreme. . . . The home is the center of civilization, and the responsibilities of the home rest upon the parents of the home. . . . The greatest trust that can come to a man and woman is the placing in their keeping the life of a little child." (David O. McKay, Stepping Stones, p. 301.)

"Every home has both body and spirit. You may have a beautiful house with all the decorations that modern art can give or wealth bestow. You may have all the outward forms that will please the eye and yet not have a home. It may be a hovel, a log hut, a tent, a wickiup, if you have the right spirit within, the true love of Christ, and love for one another . . . you have the true life of the home. " (David O. McKay, Stepping Stones, p. 288.)

13

Preserving the Joy of Realness, Honesty, and Candor

"What did you promise your little girl if she would do so and so? Did you promise her a present for well doing? 'Yes.' Have you recollected it? 'No, it has gone from my mind,' says the mother. If she does ill have you promised her a chastisement? 'Yes,' Did you keep your word? You have not, and the child forms the conclusion in its own mind that the mother tells that which is not true—she says she will do this or that, and she does not do it " (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 210.)

I. Examples and Description

A. Child: Children are born with the gift of realness, congruence, honesty, candor. At first, they know nothing else. People have to learn to be false, to cover up feelings, to lie. Josh just turned three and hasn't learned to do any of them yet. Last time I tried to give him a bath, the big new shampoo bottle was empty. "Did you dump it out, Josh?" His brow furrowed as he anticipated the worst, but a lie never occurred to him. "Yes, Dad." We have a family law against "dumping" and Josh knows the law, so he needed a little punishment. But I praised him so much for telling the truth that it outbalanced the punishment.

As Josh splashed in the bath, my mind went back to another time when the shampoo was dumped, when Saren was five and Shawni four. "Did you do it, Saren?" Her look showed that she was about to say, "No, Shawni did." Then a change came to her eye. "Daddy, sometimes it's hard to tell the truth, isn't it." I felt inner rejoicing. She had consciously chosen truth over a lie.

Josh pulled me back to the present. "Daddy, dry me off!" As I dried Josh, I had candor and honesty on my mind and happened to hear Saren, now six, in whom we had tried so hard to preserve that quality. She was in her bedroom with a new friend from school. They were discussing dolls.

Saren: "This doll has a problem. Her skirt has lost its elastic so it slips right off."

Friend: "Let's tie a string around it."

(Silence for several minutes)

Saren: "It scares me when Miss Christie calls on me to read in school. Does it scare you?"

Friend: "A little."

Saren: "I'm getting over it, though."

Friend: "The more you do it, the easier it is."

Saren: "I guess so. There, we got the skirt almost ready."

(Pause)

Friend: "Saren, do you like me?"

Saren: "Of course, silly, I like everything about you."

Friend: "Everything?"

Saren: "Except I didn't like it when you played with Patty at recess—but Mommy says I was just jealous."

Friend: "What's jealous?"

Saren: "Not wanting someone to have more fun than you."

Friend: "I like you too, Saren."

To be honest, to be open, to talk freely about the real feelings—what a joy!

What a need there is to reinforce children in their natural honesty, to get across to the clean slate of their minds the fact that it is just as all right to be sad or mad as to be glad, that what really counts is being real.

Congruence, in a psychological sense, is a matching up of how you really feel, how you think you feel, and how you say you feel. Straightforward honesty and candor, added to congruence, can free and lift the mind into the clear realm, void of "games" and "fronts" and "stiff upper lips." Grown-ups, too, can find this congruence.

B. Adult: I watched a local political race with more than usual interest one year because my friend John was a surprise candidate. John was a surprise because he seemed so unpolitical. He was the most honest and candid man I knew, and my first thought was, "He's too honest to make the promises that win elections."

I was right about John, but wrong about the result. John was brutally honest, and he enjoyed people's surprised reaction to his unbending truthfulness. He disagreed with many of the people he was supposed to agree with. He said no to people who weren't used to hearing the word. He said "I don't know" when he didn't know.

A week before the election, John was calm and seemingly unaffected, unlike the many on-edge politicians I had known. "Don't you care if you win?" I asked him. "Maybe not," he said, "at least not in the way you mean. I've been straight on every point. If I win, the real me wins. If I lose, I'm still the real me. I'd rather be the real loser than the unreal winner." John won. I was happily surprised.

There is power in utter candor, and joy in simply saying what you really think, in being right with self and with others and with God. The freedom of a clear conscience is endless.

II. Methods

A. Example. Be as real and congruent as your children are. Sharing your example (or following theirs) is the strongest possible reinforcement. Verbalize your real feelings, fears, and insecurities as well as your joys and loves. Show control, but show honesty! Tell them how you feel—"I'm upset about what happened this afternoon, so I got more angry with you than I should have." Never let them hear you lie about anything to anyone.

Forsake the false parental notions of not arguing when they're there, and not punishing when you are angry or upset. Certainly there is a need for control, but be genuine. It's all right to show some honest indignation, and it's all right for children to see a parental disagreement as long as (1) the light of love shines through, (2) it's not about them (the children), and (3) you make up afterwards—and they see that you do.

B. Reinforcement and praise. Since children start with realness, congruence, and honesty, recognition and reinforcement become the two great keys. Whatever they get attention for, they'll probably do again; whatever they get praise for, they'll very likely do again; whatever they get joy and praise out of, they'll almost certainly do again. Encourage them to always tell how they feel—to tell not only you but also other family members, school teachers, friends, or even Primary teachers.

Psychiatrists tell us that it's usually as hard to get a person to know how he really feels as it is to help him know why he feels that way. The reason it is so hard to know how we feel is that we stop so early in life telling anyone, even ourselves, how we really feel. We need to recognize emotions, accept them, and, if possible, enjoy them.

C. Show acceptability of letting our feelings show.

*1. Show pictures from magazines of children and grown-ups crying. Ask: "What made them cry?" "Is it okay?" Respond: "Sure! Crying helps to get the sad and the mad out. Just be careful not to cry without a reason."

Oh, how children teach us! Just now, as I write, five-year-old Saren has a question. I give her a too-quick, ask-it-later answer. She says, "Dad, when you say that, it makes me feel like you don't care about me . . . you only care about your book." I put down the book, praise her, answer her.

*6. Pantomime certain emotions, such as sadness, anger, and happiness.

III. Family Focal Point: Happys and Sads

Bedtime is a good time for a little honest, important dialogue between parent and child. Years ago we started a tradition of asking each child as he was tucked in, "What was your 'happy' and your 'sad' today?" Children like to think back through the day, to recognize and talk about emotions. "My happy was when my friend came over to play," or "when I got two desserts," or "when I jumped in the leaf pile," or "when Daddy came home." "My sad was when Lisa wouldn't play with me at school," or "when I couldn't hop very good in hopscotch," or "when I cut my finger," or "I didn't have any sads today."

The answers open up quick, golden chances to talk about real feelings. "How did it feel to play with Susan?" "Why do you suppose Lisa wouldn't play? Did something sad happen to her?" "Did you feel that someone else was better at hopscotch than you?" "What can you do better than they?"

IV. Story: "Isabel's Little Lie"

One day Isabel told a little lie. She wasn't supposed to feed her dinner to her dog, Barker, but she did, and when her mother came in and saw her plate all clean, Isabel said that she had eaten it all. (That was a little lie, wasn't it?) The dinner was chicken, and Barker got a little bone in his throat and pretty soon he started to cough and snort and act very uncomfortable.

"Do you know what's wrong with Barker?" asked Mother. "No," said Isabel. (That was another lie, wasn't it? But Isabel had to do it so her mother wouldn't know she told the first lie.) Mother looked in Barker's mouth but couldn't see anything. "Did Barker eat something, Isabel?" "I don't know, Mommy." (That was another lie, wasn't it? But she didn't want her mother to know about the first two lies.)

Barker got worse, and Mother took him to the dog hospital. Isabel went too. "What happened to the dog?" asked the doctor. "We don't know," said Isabel. (That was another lie, wasn't it? But if Isabel had told, then Mother and the dog doctor would know she had lied before.) The dog doctor said, "If it's just a bone, we could get it out with an instrument, but it might be glass, so we may have to operate. "

Isabel decided it was time to tell the truth. She said, "It's a bone, and I did know Barker ate it, and I didn't eat all my dinner, and I did give it to Barker, and I won't tell lies any more, because if you tell one you might have to tell more and more." Isabel started to cry, but her mother loved her, and she decided she really would tell the truth from then on.

V. Reading List

Behrens, J. How I Feel. Chicago: Children's Press, 1973.

Berger, T. I Have Feelings. New York: Human Sciences Press, 1971.

Brown, M. First Night Away from Home. New York: Funk & Wagnalls, 1960.

Erickson, P. Stand Tall. Salt Lake City: Hawkes Publishing Co., 1978.

Helena, A. The Lie. Chicago: Children's Press, 1977.

How Do You Feel. Chicago: Child's World, 1973.

Keates, E. Peter's Chair. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1967.

Riley, S. What Does It Mean? Afraid. Chicago: Child's World, 1978.

———. What Does It Mean? Angry. Chicago: Child's World, 1978.

Sendak, M. Where the Wild Things Are. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1963.

Thompson, V. Sad Day, Glad Day. New York: Scholastic Book Services, 1962.

Whitney, A. M. Just Awful. Massachusetts: Addison, Wesley Publishing Co., 1971.

Zolotow, C. If It Weren't for You. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1966.

———. The Night When Mother Went Away. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard, 1958.

VI. Postscript

A. Aaron is four. His grandmother, who sometimes picks him up from Joy School, told this experience: She had been tending Aaron and his brother and sisters. She was tired and got upset with the children for something they had done. She yelled at them crossly. When things calmed down, Aaron came to her and said, "Grandma, you were really angry, weren't you? And yelling at us helped you get the mad out. But I know you still love us even when you yell." Later that evening, when his little sister got angry and hit him, Aaron explained to her, "Melissa, it's all right to hit things, but not people. Here, you can hit this pillow."

B. Sammy, age three, fell in the play yard and scraped his elbow. He began to cry loudly, and other children gathered around to see what was the matter. Jodi, four, put her arm around him and, quoting from a song they had learned in school, announced to the other children as well as to Sammy, "It's all right to cry. Crying gets the sad out of you."
