Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Joy ( 1980)

14

Teaching the Joy of Communication and Relationships

"In my experience I have learned that the greatest difficulty that exists in the little bickerings and strifes of man with man, woman with woman, children with children, parents with children, brothers with sisters, and sisters with brothers, arises from the want of rightly understanding each other." (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 203.)

I. Examples and Description

A. Adult: I once knew a middle-aged man, an accountant, who had a ledger-book-sized Christmas card list. In his thick book all the pages were filled; there were hundreds and hundreds of names. "Business contacts?" I asked. He glanced over, paused for a moment as though considering whether he should tell me something pretty important, then said, "No, they're relationships." He anticipated my next question and went on in his accounting terminology: "Every relationship you form, no matter how small, if it is genuine, can be an asset of eternal duration. No other entry can cancel it out. Some of us spend all our time on temporary assets: money, positions, achievements. We ought to spend more on the eternal assets like relationships. Whenever I earn one, I make an entry on my Christmas card list."

I watched the accountant closer from then on, and found that he practiced what he preached. When he met someone—on a plane, in his business, at a PTA meeting—his attitude seemed to be: "What can I learn from you? What is interesting and unique about you?" For him, life was a fascinating kaleidoscope of relationships, of endless people, each endlessly interesting and each offering more potential inner joy than a new car or a new position.

B. Child: For little children, particularly those with strong self-images, genuine relationships are easy. Friends came by the other night, a business acquaintance and his wife. The four of us sat in the parlor, playing self-conscious "I" games: "How can I impress them?" "What can we talk about that I know a lot about?" "How can I seem sophisticated and 'with it'?"

Meanwhile, their five-year-old daughter went upstairs to play with our daughter of the same age. Their discussion (I caught part of it when I went up to get some papers) was more mature than ours because it was real, honest, open, and without ulterior motives. "Janet, you should bring your pajamas next time you come. No one uses the bottom bunk bed, so we could sleep in the same room." "Will your mommy care if I do?" "No, she likes your mommy." "Good, because I like you." When it was time to go, they came downstairs holding hands, smiling, friends, as if they'd known each other for years.

II. Methods

A. General

B. Communicate

*8. Discuss the fact that people are the only ones who can communicate with words—they don't have to fight like animals. Say "Let's talk about it," whenever a conflict comes up.

C. Relationships

*2. Talk out disagreements. Sit them down face to face to work out problems or disagreements they have with each other.

*5. Role-play relationship problems and let the children give ways to solve particular difficulties. Role-play how and what to do if you want a toy someone else has, or if you hurt someone, or if you both want to be the mommy when you play house, or if someone calls you a naughty name. Have children act out a situation that ended in unhappiness and show how it could have been handled better and ended happily.

Mother: "Josh, who's your best friend?"

Josh: "Christopher."

Mother: "But who is the friend you play with most of the time and the one who makes you laugh when she plays peek-a-boo?"

Josh: "Oh, Saydi."

Mother: "That's right."

*10. Make a little booklet of "kind words" with a child. Let him paste in the words:

*11. Play the game "Which is the best way?" in which children act out a good and bad way of deciding who should have the first turn, getting the dishes done after Sunday dinner, getting ready for school in the morning, or deciding which television show to watch.

III. Family Focal Point: "Guess Who's Coming to Dinner"

When Saren was four, she went through a short but painful phase of "I don't have any friends." She seemed shy in nursery school, not her normal, initiative-taking self. Then one day she asked if she could invite a friend over for dinner. Of course we were glad—a "breakthrough" perhaps? It was more than that. Something about having a friend in her home, to see her house and family, seemed to wipe the shyness right away.

Ever since then, we have had one special supper each week when one family member, on a rotating basis, parents included, has a friend over for the evening meal. It shows children how important relationships are, and it exposes them to strangers, to interesting people, some of whom are very different from them. It puts the premium where it should be: on the joy of communication and relationships.

IV. Story—"Herman Finds a Friend"

Herman was a baby bird. He had a mother who brought him worms to eat in their small nest in the big sycamore tree. He had learned to fly. He had pretty blue feathers. Nest, mother, worms, blue feathers, air to fly in—he had everything to make him happy, right?

Then why was Herman sad?

He didn't even know why, but he was.

Then one day another bird's nest was built on the next highest limb of the tree. A new bird family, the Robin Redbreasts, moved in. They had a boy bird just Herman's age named Reginald. Herman and Reginald flew together, played together, explored together. Herman wasn't unhappy anymore.

What made the difference?

V. Reading List

Ets, M. H. Talking Without Words. New York: The Viking Press, 1968.

Guilfoile, E. Nobody Listens to Andrew. Chicago: Follett Publishing Co., 1957.

Hallinan, P. K. That's What a Friend Is. Chicago: Children's Press, 1977.

Hook, F. My Book of Friends. Cincinnati: Standard Publishing Co., 1968.

Penn, R. B. Mommies Are for Loving. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1962.

Riley, S. What Does It Mean? Sorry. Chicago: Children's Press, 1978.

Udry, J. M. Let's Be Enemies. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1961.

———. Next Door to Laura Linda. Chicago: Albert Whitman & Co., 1965.

Zolotow, C. Big Sister and Little Sister. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1966.

———. Do You Know What I'll Do? New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1958.

———. My Friend John. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1968.

———. The Quarreling Book. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1963.

VI. Postscript

A. Meredith, Michael, and Kevin were in the playroom putting on dress-up clothes. Michael and Kevin both wanted the same jacket and tie. They were hitting and pulling as each declared in a loud voice, "I'm the daddy." Then Meredith spoke up. "Let's talk about it," she said as she took another jacket from the hook. In a minute they had it all worked out and everyone was happy. Kevin would be the daddy and Michael would be the uncle. Meredith, the mediator, was only four years old.

B. One day Mac, five, accidentally knocked down the house that Andrew, four, had built with the large blocks.

Andrew: "Hey, watch out!"

Mac: "I'm sorry. I'll help you build it again."

Andrew (with a smile): "You're forgiven."
