Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Joy ( 1980)

15

Teaching the Joy of Sharing and Service

"Ye will teach them [children] to love one another, and to serve one another." (Mosiah 4:15.)

I. Examples and Description

A. Adult: I have a friend who taught me a lesson about joy. He is a public person: that is, the public knows him. (I would guess that 50 percent of all persons in the western world recognize his name, 95 percent of those interested in sports.) One conversation we had drifted to pleasure. What did we do with our spare time? What did we do with those rare moments—rarer for him than for me—that we really had to ourselves? (Keep in mind, he could do anything, go anywhere, have anything that money could buy.) He said, "When I have a moment for myself, I try to use it to find some way to help someone. That's where I find real happiness. It's so much more fun than doing something for yourself."

I'd heard that you can judge a man by what he does with his spare time. I used that criteria and judged this man as being great; maybe more importantly, I judged him to be joyful, because the joy of giving is so great. We know that is true, or should know it, because it was taught by the greatest giver of all time, in the meridian of time. (It's interesting how, as I write, the words give and great keep knotting together.)

"He that loseth his life shall find it." The joy comes from losing one's self in helping others, from dismissing self-worries to make room for other-worries. We make our living by what we get, but we make our life by what we give. Emerson said, "See how the masses of men worry themselves into nameless graves . . . while, here and there, a great, unselfish soul forgets himself into immortality."

I was traveling on business, two full days away, meetings all day, free evenings. The first night I treated myself (hard day, I deserved it) to the finest meal at the finest restaurant. I went to bed satisfied, dulled. The next evening on my way to the same spot, I noticed a blind man sitting with his dog in front of a little shop, selling baskets he had made. I stopped, talked for an hour, bought a basket and a stool, cheered him up, listened to him, learned from him. ("I've lost one sense and gained four," he said.) I told him that I liked his company, liked him as a friend, that I'd be back. I saw tears in his blind eyes as we shook hands. I went to bed that night thrilled, tingling—and, in a small but deep sort of way, a better man.

B. Child. On the Christmas when Saren was four and Shawni was three, we tried something. Starting in the fall, they began to "earn" their own money by doing extra household chores. Each got a new piggy bank "for deposit only." I was amazed at the anticipation of a three-year-old and how anxious she was to "buy my own presents for people with my own 'earned money."' That year, there were two Christmas days. One was on the twenty-third of December when we went to the variety store and the girls picked out a teacup for Grandma, measuring spoons for Mommy, and a tennis ball for three-year-old Josh (because "he can start thinking about how to hit it"). They watched the check-out clerk count their nickels and pennies. They carried their carefully concealed treasures up to their rooms and wrapped them themselves. All the while they were anticipating the joy of giving, sharing, making others happy; the feelings grew and became real from within. "Won't Grandpa be happy when he sees this?" "What will Mommy say when she opens this?"

When Christmas day came, the reactions were remarkable. The children were still grateful for their own dolls and filled stockings, but we saw real joy in the four-year-old's face when Grandma opened her cup and said, "Oh, Saren, just what I needed. I'll drink my Postum out of it every morning and think of you." There was a tear in the four-year-old's eye and a choke of real joy in her voice when Saren said, "I saved up and picked it out for you, Grandma, because I love you." Since then, we've thought back countless times: "Wasn't it fun when Josh opened his ball? Didn't that make us happy?" Children can feel the joy of sharing and service, and when they feel it, they want it again—and when they want it again, they've learned it.

We took a group of children to an old folks' home to put on a program, to pass out little gifts they had made, and to share their love. We explained, "These are old people without grandchildren to love them." I wish I had a picture of one three-year-old on an eighty-year-old's knee, arms around the neck, tears in all four eyes. And the joy of reflection afterward, as one four-year-old said to another, "We made the grandpas and grandmas happy, didn't we?" "Yes, and they made me happy." "Let's do it again."

A personal recollection (Linda's) may further illustrate the joy:

"I remember that a particularly miserable time in my life came when I was in the sixth grade. I was eleven years old, considered my leftover baby fat anything but cute, and wore salmon-colored 'cat-eye' glasses which I abhorred. I sensed that I had no style and, worst of all, thought I had no friends. I was worried about who liked me and who didn't, and each day I wondered whether or not the one marginal friend I thought I had would be nice to me.

"One Saturday afternoon while I was getting ready for a school party, I began telling my mother my feelings. I don't remember whether I just had not bothered to tell them to her before or whether she had passed them off lightly as childish whims when I had mentioned them. On this particular day, however, she took me seriously and could see that I was really concerned. As I donned my party clothes, I said, 'Mom, sometimes I feel so left out when I'm with other people. I just can't think of anything to say and yet I feel so uncomfortable if no one talks to me.'

"My mom, in her wisdom, gave me some counsel in those next few minutes that changed my life: 'Linda, whenever you are with a group of people who are socializing with one another, look around; just stand back and look around for a few minutes, and you will almost always see someone who needs you, someone who is feeling insecure and in need of a friend. You can tell by a look in the eye, a nervous mannerism, someone off by herself. Decide who needs you and then go to them; relate to them, ask questions about them, show them you care!'

"This advice was like a miracle drug for my ailing soul. I went to the party. I stood back and observed. 'There she is,' I thought as I saw Beverly, the girl with the stringy hair and the buck teeth, sweet but not too bright. Everyone knew that she lived in a strange, broken-down house outside of town with about nine brothers and sisters, equally untidy and shabby. I remember her as though it were yesterday, sitting quietly in a chair, looking at her hands, while those around her giggled and chattered and ignored her. But what will everyone think? I cringed in my immature mind. If I talk to her, everyone will think I'm dumb and 'out of it' like she is. But my conscience told me it was right, so I walked over to her. Suddenly instead of muddling in my own misery because I didn't have any friends, I became her friend. I started by asking questions about her family and farm, and as the party wore on, I felt her warm acceptance and saw the joy in her eyes as she understood that somebody cared about her. But even more important to me, I was needed. I was providing a service to someone that, in time, made me grow to appreciate her. I also noticed that no one shunned me because of my association with her.

"The experience gave me such a good feeling that I tried to pick out those who needed someone in other situations, from the schoolroom to the Sunday School class. As I began to forget myself in other people, I found that I was surrounded by a host of friends who really liked me for what I was.

"If I could instill this in our children at an even younger age, how great their rewards would be. So often we say 'Oh, they're too young to understand.' I wonder. Try teaching this principle to a four-year-old—you might be surprised."

II. Methods

A. By example. Oh, how children learn by what their parents do! Help an old woman with her bags. Take any opportunity to help someone while your children are with you. Build a family reputation for service and for helping. Always stop to help: people in distress, people out of gas, people looking for directions. Let your children see that helping other people is the thing to do.

Indoctrinate children with a serving orientation: "Where much is given, much service is expected." Teach children that the gifts and talents they have been given are there to allow them to help other people—to serve. Teach them that God gives us talents so that we might help our brothers and sisters.

B. Help the less fortunate.

C. Serving each other within the family.

D. Doing good deeds together.

*1. Help a needy family anonymously on Christmas. Have each child sacrifice a toy, and plan a way to get the toys under the family's tree without their knowledge.

E. Sharing games.

*1. Feeding each other: at lunchtime, tie splints to children's arms so they can't bend their elbows. Ask, "How are you going to eat?" (They will have to feed each other.)

*2. Sharing tools: Pass out molding clay but give each child only one tool (one a roller, one a cookie cutter, etc.). Ask, "How can you make everything you want with only one tool?" (They can share tools.)

III. Family Focal Point: The Family Round Table

We have a big round table in the family room. Whenever a family member finds something worth sharing—a special picture, a pretty rock, a new book, anything he wants to pass around—it is put on the round table. Children, aware of that table and the opportunity they have to put something on it, seem to become more oriented not only to sharing but also to observing, to finding something worthwhile to share. It needn't be a round table; it could be any place that's out of the reach of infants and pets, a place designated for the joy of sharing.

IV. Story: "The Sharing Tree"

"Please don't make me push them any further," little Oakley pleaded. "It's so cold and damp down there, and I keep bumping into rocks." The baby oak tree was about to cry when Oakhurst, the grand old oak standing beside him, explained again, "Now Oakley, my son, soon it will be spring, with hard spring winds, and then summer, with summer storms. Your roots must be strong to hold the rest of you in place. They must be deep in the rich, moist soil to find nourishing food to make your trunk and branches sturdy and healthy. By next year you will have grown so much, you won't believe it! " "Very well," sighed Oakley with a sad but determined grunt. He pushed his roots deeper into the ground, a little further each day, until spring arrived.

One warm, beautiful spring day, Oakley glanced over at his branches and was amazed to see beautiful green buds all over his tips. He thought they were gorgeous, and he was feeling great until one day he started to feel that his beautiful buds were about to burst. "Oh, Oakhurst, he gasped as he looked at his magnificent friend beside him, "my branches, my beautiful branches! They're about to burst and I can't stop them, no matter how hard I try! " "My dear Oakley," smiled the big, calm tree, "stop trying! Instead of losing something, you'll find a pleasant surprise. You must learn that when you let go of something very precious to you, it will be replaced by something better." Because he trusted his kind friend so much, Oakley reluctantly let go. Almost like hundreds of little jack-in-the-boxes, tiny green leaves began to appear all over his branches. "Oh, look at me now! " Oakley cried. "You were right!"

As days passed, Oakley became more and more beautiful. He loved the feeling of the wind rustling through his leaves, but the thing that made him happiest was to watch the lovely family of robins who had built their home in his branches. They were happy there, and that made Oakley happy too. He was so glad that he was strong and sturdy with deep roots and that he was sharing with others the beauty and comfort of his leaves. Before long he noticed little brown seeds beginning to form, which Oakhurst told him were acorns; he was proud of them too.

One day as he was watching the robin children play, he noticed that his leaves were not so green. Some had even begun to turn gold, and one of his acorns fell off, and then another, and then another and another. "Stop!" he screamed. "I need you all to keep me beautiful! " But they continued to fall, and he shouted, "Oakhurst, what is happening? I'm changing color, and my acorns are falling!" "Don't be afraid," said Oakhurst kindly. "Remember what I said to you before. Any time you give up something very special to you, you are giving service and it will always be replaced by something better. Soon you will lose all your acorns. Many of them will be gathered up by our little friends the squirrels, who will store them for food for the winter so they won't be hungry when all the berries have gone. Some will even find a warm spot in the earth, and then when spring comes, they will sprout roots of their own and begin to grow. And you'll find that you'll turn from green to gorgeous orange and red, and then the weather will turn cold and you'll lose all your leaves!" "Lose all my leaves!" shrieked Oakley. "Then I will be ugly and cold, and I'll never grow to be so wise and beautiful as you." "Ah, you are wrong, my little friend," said the grand old Oakhurst. "That's exactly how I became wise and strong."

At the time, Oakley thought that was all very strange, but as the days passed he began to realize what his friend meant. He saw his acorns drop and his little friends gather them for winter food. His leaves turned a beautiful red, and then, just as Oakhurst had said, they began to drop off. He was sad at first, but when he saw the children rustling through them and having so much fun playing in them, he was glad for the opportunity to share. And when the cold winter came (and Oakley did look a bit ugly some days) he was happy that he had shared himself. He knew that when springtime came again he would be stronger, his roots would be longer, his leaves and branches would be bigger, and he would be better . . . and more like his great friend Oakhurst.

V. Reading List

Bonsall, Q. It's Mine, the Greedy Book. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1964.

Brown, M. Benjy's Blanket. New York: Franklin Watts, 1962.

———. Company's Coming for Dinner. New York: Franklin Watts, 1959.

Flack, M. Ask Mr. Bear. New York: The Macmillan Co., 1932.

Monsell, H. A. Paddy's Christmas. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1942.

Odor, R. Lori's Day. Chicago: Child's World, 1977.

———. Sarah Lou's Untied Shoe. Chicago: Child's World, 1976.

Riley, S. What Does It Mean? Help! Chicago: Children's Press, 1978.

———. What Does It Mean? Sharing. Chicago: Children's Press, 1978.

Silverstein, S. The Giving Tree. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1964.

Zolotow, C. Do You Know What I'll Do? New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1958.

———. Mr. Rabbit and the Lovely Present. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1962.

VI. Postscript

A. One day Ryan, age four, said, "Teacher, I really fooled my mom last night." His eyes sparkled with joy as he continued, "While she was in the bedroom with the baby, I set the table. I was very quiet. When she came in the kitchen to finish dinner she was so surprised. She just couldn't figure out who did it, and I didn't tell."

B. After our unit on sharing and service, many of the children at the Joy School (especially the older ones) seem to really enjoy helping others to zip their coats, put on boots, find where a puzzle piece goes, or put away the blocks. At clean-up time, everyone joins in and helps each other with very little help or suggestion from the teacher.
