Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Foreword

From the life histories of the founders and early members of the Church, we receive a legacy of faith that all Church members should appreciate and remember. Faith, sacrifice, and service were constantly required and fulfilled in the lives of our pioneer forefathers.

I know of no early pioneer life history that exemplifies any faith, sacrifice, and service greater than the life history of Henry Ballard. Few men gave more for the Church than he did. From his humble birth and challenging early youth in Thatcham, England, Henry learned from loving parents the basic principle of hard work. He was encouraged by his parents to seek an education any way that he could.

With a believing heart, Henry Ballard knew and recognized the truth when the gospel was presented to him. Even with his limited education, he studied and learned the basic teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Blessed with a sensitivity to the promptings of the Spirit, Henry came to know that Joseph Smith was a prophet and that the Book of Mormon was the word of God. Henry's faith in and knowledge of the restoration of the gospel gave him courage to remain true and faithful all the days of his life. Joining the Church at the age of 17, he heroically moved from England to Salt Lake City. This epic event in his life is one that every family member should read, ponder, and appreciate.

This book will help the Ballard family discover the faith and the courage of Henry Ballard, his eternal companions, and faithful children.

Arriving in the Salt Lake Valley with next to nothing, Henry accepted many different assignments and fulfilled them well. He soon was numbered among the very faithful whom the leaders of the Church could trust and rely on.

Speaking for the family, many thanks to Douglas O. and Farris R. Crookston for this fine work. We are grateful that Douglas responded to the promptings of the Spirit to assemble Henry's life history.

May the legacy of Henry's faith, sacrifice, and service be exemplified in our lives today.

M.Russell Ballard
