Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Preface

Throughout a good portion of his life, Henry Ballard kept a journal or memoir. His journal is more than a sketch of the life and times of Henry; it is a history of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints and of Cache Valley, Utah, from his point of view. Henry was not trying to write a history of either—it just worked out that way.

No claim of historical accuracy is made for this book, nor does the author consider it to be a definitive history of Henry Ballard, the Church, or Cache Valley. Everything contained herein is based on Henry's journal, family notes, or the author's observations, with few exceptions, and was written to help keep the legacy of Henry Ballard alive—nothing else was ever intended.

To the casual reader some of the entries may seem irrelevant; however, it is hoped that many of Henry's descendants will find them interesting—hence their inclusion.

Some footnotes are included where there may be other information of interest. Others are noted to clarify terms no longer in general use. Hopefully readers young or old will find them helpful.

To be found within these pages is a saga of how the West was won. In your mind's eye you will see sailing vessels, riverboats, plagues, and pestilence. You will see hand carts and wagon trains in a vast wilderness. Rivers will be forded. Wagons and cattle will drift downstream to be recovered later. You will watch as Indians raid settlers and travelers alike. You will see the effects railroads and telegraph lines had on the pioneers. You will meet settlers in the valleys of the mountains, few in number, living as best they can off the land. You will learn about a people in a struggle to survive against a nation that once tried to exterminate them, and of a people dedicated to their God and the building of temples.

Perhaps most important of all you will watch as their daily lives unfold before your very eyes. Babies are born, crops are harvested, accidents happen, and children die simply because that's the way it was back then.

Hopefully you will have a much greater appreciation for these pioneers, some of which may be your very own ancestors.

This narration is rich with characters of character who came before us—men like Brigham Young, Orrin Porter Rockwell, Peter Maughan, Bishop William Preston, and Ezra T. Benson, to name but a few.

Henry Ballard himself was no less a character than they. All were important in the settling of the West.

His memoir (referred to as a journal from this point on) is rather sketchy in places—consisting of only three entries in the first eleven years. Here and in other places it was necessary to draw heavily on the notes of family members and others to fill in missing gaps. For the most part, however, the story belongs to Henry, and he tells it in his own unique words with his own unique spelling.
