Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Chapter One

The Early Years

William Ballard worked hard to scratch out a living in the green, rolling hills of England. It was difficult to do, even for the educated and the wealthy—William was neither. However, William was a youthful, humble, intelligent man who was diligent in his efforts. For these reasons, William was appointed head gardener on the estate where he had found employment. This allowed him to work close to the main buildings. It also gave him the opportunity to mingle with the household staff—Hannah Russell in particular.

William immediately became attracted to Hannah. She worked as a servant and, during some of her off hours, spent time with William. They were drawn together, and remain together to this day. [^1] They married in Purley, Berkshire County, England, in 1820.

Life was hard, and poverty became a constant companion. The newlyweds moved to Newberry, England, to see if they could improve their circumstances.

A family followed—three sons: Charles, George, and John. Though these boys brought joy and happiness into the home, poverty continued to plague the Ballards. This prevented even the thought of an additional child. There were six more years of work, struggle, and poverty as they moved to Thatcham in search of a better life. Hannah again found herself with child—a child she was not sure she wanted, a child she felt would be a burden to her.

Thoughts raced across Hannah's mind. There would be one more mouth to feed and one more body to clothe. There was never enough time or money to care for the three sons she had already borne. Hannah tried to solve the problem naturally by lifting too much or straining herself. The problem remained, and in due time she gave birth to another son. They named him Henry Ballard. Later in life Henry remarked:

The harder she tried to loose me, the harder I clung to life, for I guess it was destined that I should be born.

They were poor, but honorable people, and many times I feel to thank God that I had good parents to train me in my young days, that I was not dragged down into the sins and vices of the world. I know that many times they have thanked God for their youngest son and were proud of me.

Henry was born on January 27, 1832. Though he may have been unwanted at the time, this was not to be the pattern for life. Henry was more than a favorite son; he was a blessing and a strength to Hannah, and a son she was justifiably proud of.

Honesty, integrity, and righteousness, though great gifts from God, do not always ease the burden of keeping a family fed, clothed, and educated. Schooling was not a priority, especially if a child could help stock the family larder through physical labor. In fact, anything that kept a child from contributing to the family income was viewed as a distraction, and many children were denied formal education. Henry, more fortunate than most, was admitted to the Blue Coat School at the age of nine years. The school was a charity institution specifically set up for those who could not afford to pay. William and Hannah could barely scrape up enough money to secure food for the table, and certainly not enough to pay for Henry's tutelage.

The school itself had little money, but was established to help forty boys become clothed and educated. It was housed in the ruins of a small church in Thatcham. Lady Francis Winchcomb, who founded the school, directed that:

...funds should be used to buy bibles, common prayer books and other useful books. The boys were to be taught to read and understand English, to write and keep accounts so as to qualify them for some honest calling.

Henry did well in these subjects. After four years he was considered educated and ended his formal schooling.

Poverty was still a constant companion to his par-ents. Because of the love he had for them, Henry felt he nee ded to contribute as much as he could to the family. "Educated" at thirteen, he set out to find employment wherever he could.

Henry found work on a farm as one of several employees of Mr. Northaway. He herded sheep, did field work, or whatever else needed to be done. Henry tells of working with a Mr. Joseph Kimber. The two spent much time together in the fields, and had many long talks with each other. Despite their age difference, Henry and Mr. Kimber became good friends.

Henry had a good background in religion. This is not surprising; he was raised by honorable people who attended church regularly. Also, he had just completed four years training at the Blue Coat School. The emphasis there was on religious study.

Henry's conversations with his friend, Mr. Kimber, eventually turned to religion. Mr. Kimber told of his belief, and his interpretation of the Bible. He was a convert to a new religion, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, often referred to as the Mormon Church.

Everything Mr. Kimber told Henry was different from anything he had heard before. Henry was both in-terested and curious. The new doctrine made so much sense to him that Henry became dissatisfied with his own religion. In time, he was introduced to other elders in his newfound faith, and Henry attended meetings with them.

This relationship could have spanned a long period of time, for Henry's journal is silent from June 24, 1845, until February 1849. The silence is broken with this entry:

I was baptized by Joseph Kimber at my birth place...

Sometime during this period, Henry's heart was touched and his soul satisfied that he had indeed found the true church of God. Henry's simple statement was his announcement of a new life for a new man. He never looked back.

Henry was only seventeen years old at the time he joined the Church. There were numerous adjustments to make, and many were difficult for him. If Henry could have foreseen the hardships he was to endure because of his baptism and commitment to the Church, he may have had second thoughts.

Many people in England embraced Mormonism, but most of those who did not considered it the work of the devil. Priests and ministers of other faiths were quick to condemn it, and condemn anyone foolish enough to accept the doctrines of such a scandalous re-ligion. Henry's brother George was no exception.

Sometime during the winter months of 1849, Henry traveled to London News, a community a few miles north of London, to live with his married brother George. George, along with Charles and John, had es-tablished a fairly successful carriage business in the area. They had much to offer Henry—especially mate-rial things. George was always kind to Henry, and being eleven years older, felt the need to protect and watch after his welfare. The following incident bears this out.

It was Sunday evening, and Henry had just returned from church. George, curious about Henry's where-about s, inquired as to where he had been. "To church," Henry replied. George, having already attended church without seeing Henry there asked, "What church?" "The Mormon church," Henry said truthfully. Amazed and astonished, George vocally wondered why, in heaven's name, would he attend the "detestable" Mormon church. "Because I am a member of it," replied Henry. Henry then bore his testimony of the truthfulness of what he believed to be the only true church. George, unconverted, became angry.

George reprimanded Henry severely and told him he had just made the biggest mistake of his life. Henry remained firm, but feared what his older brother might do.

When George could see he was getting nowhere, he enlisted the support of his minister. Three days passed as they tried to persuade Henry to change his mind. First one would pray, then the other, in an effort to save Henry. Henry held steadfastly to his convictions, never wavering nor doubting. The Holy Ghost had told him the Church was true. He dared not deny it. Convinced no argument of reason, no amount of supplication, and no pleading on bent knees would ever change Henry's mind, George took another approach.

As Satan tempted Christ, George tempted Henry—or tried to. He offered to give him the best carriage in all of London. He would give him a coachman to drive him around and cater to all of his whims. Henry would be a gentleman as he presented himself in his fine clothes, kid-skin gloves, and silk hat.

How could Henry refuse the hospitality of George's fine home for as long as he wished? Henry would never have to work, unless it became his desire. A part of the business would be his, and he would never again live in poverty, as his father and mother had all their lives. No religion would be worth losing all this. George only asked for Henry to give up the "foolish notion" of Mormonism.

Like Joseph Smith, Henry kept the faith. His testimony and strength of character prevailed.

George was explosive. He expelled Henry from his home—forever. Henry left, heavy of heart over being such a disappointment to the brother he loved, a brother who had been so kind and giving. Henry was never to set eyes on him again in this life.

Into the stormy night Henry walked, shaking from cold and fear, penniless and hungry. He found refuge in an old barn, and laid a tired, wet and aching body on the hay, hoping for relief, even in fitful sleep. Morning found him still tired and wet. He dragged his weary frame upright and walked on toward his father's humble cottage in Cold Ash, Thatcham.

While he was somewhat welcome at his parents' home, they turned a deaf ear when he talked to them of Mormonism. His baptism was not well received by his family. From time to time his father would listen with some interest, but his minister railed against all Mormons, and against Henry in particular. If Henry was ever to convince his parents of the truth of the Mormon doctrine, he would need a miracle.

England was swept with a sickness known as "The Black Plague of 1849." It left a path of death and destruction in its wake. It struck rich and poor, weak and healthy—and seventeen-year-old Henry.

Although his illness didn't seem like a blessing at the time, it later proved to be the miracle his parent s needed.

1849 February about midsummer of that year I was taken very sick with the Typhoid fever when I was brought down very low and many thought I should never recover[.] [^2] in fact my parents and my three Brothers thought so, but the Elders came [^3] one evening and asked me if I had faith in the Ordinances to be healed[.] I told them I had if they would have faith in me al-though I could not turn in bed without help, it was in an upstair room[.] my father was an eye witness to what was done[.] after the Brethren administrated to me. they staid a Short time talking, and I rested good through the night[.] the next morning I got up and dressed me and went downstairs before my mother knew that I was getting up, She begged me to go back to bed as She thought I had again lost my reason as I had done before dureing my sickness, but I told her I was much better and would Set up awhile which I did for about 6 hours, in a few days I went out of doors and was soon able to go back to my work, but before I went back to work my father went and got baptized, through my previous testi-monies to him with regard to the gospel and this power-full manifestation of the power of God wrought upon my fathers mind so that he could no longer stand outside of the church[.] and he lived to that honest conviction till the day of his death which lasted 37 years, about 3 months after I was healed, my mother went and got Baptized [^4] and remained faithful to her death which was eight months before my father[.] they both died in my home in Logan at the ripe old age of (my mother) 86 years and my father 96[.] [^5] they both emigrated a month later than I did[.] they were sent out by the P.E. Fur Company, the first company that was sent out by that company from England, [^6]

Henry now looked toward America, and Utah. He set sail on January 10, 1852.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] At this time, drinking a cup of coffee was a frowned on but usually tolerated practice in the Church. The Word of Wisdom was not yet a commandment.
[^2] This was a wound that would plague Henry throughout his life. He carried a scar and soft spot, about the size of a dime, with him to the grave
[^3] Henry's parents left England the month following Henry's departure. They were on a small, engine-powered sailing vessel with only 39 passengers. It sailed much faster than the Kennebec. It wasn't stranded on the mud flats of the Mississippi for ten days, and they were free from the other problems Henry encountered. Word apparently reached Henry somewhere along the line, for he appears to have known they were already in Salt Lake City.
[^4] Henry's parents packed their few belongings and left the humble cottage they had called home for so many years. They said good-bye to Charles, George and John, their sons. The sons had been unforgiving and unkind to them after they joined the Church. Left behind were five grandchildren as well as William's 89-year-old father. They left behind brothers and sisters and their families, as well as many cousins, all of which abandoned William and Hannah because they joined the Church. Imagine their feelings as they trod up the gangplank of the small sailing vessel, a vessel that would take them to a place of strangers in a land they knew nothing of, while everything they held dear was to remain behind-everything except Henry, a child Hannah, at one time, was not sure she wanted to conceive.
[^5] After arriving at Council Bluffs, William Ballard, though 57 at the time, (old for his day) shouldered his musket and walked to Utah at the side of the wagon in which Hannah was riding. They arrived in September 1852.
[^6] 6. The journal entry dated February 1849 was not written until many years later. Some of the events he mentions didn't occur for at least 36 years.
