Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Chapter Three

The Utah War

Henry soon found his parents. They were located on a ten-acre plot of ground in what was then called Mill Creek.

The hills north of Salt Lake City were exposed to the sun and offered a little feed for animals. Henry spent t he winter there, taking care of the very sheep he had driven across the plains.

I did not see a soul and I read the entire Bible from cover to cover it was indeed good company for me.

Even though Henry had been baptized, he was baptized again in the Jordan River in January of 1853. To be baptized more than once was a lot more common in the early days of the Church. It was a recommitment of sorts.

He later was ordained a member of the 37th Quorum of Seventies, and in December of 1856 was baptized for the third time. He didn't seem to mind the icy waters.

Henry received his endowments in the Salt Lake City Endowment House in May of 1857. Later the same year he received his patriarchal blessing from John Young, assisted by William Ballard, his father.

By the time July fourth rolled around, Henry had become a member of the Utah Militia. [^1] It was an organization similar to the Nauvoo Legion, but was not connected to it. As early as 1849 it became apparent some organization to provide for the common defense was needed, and so the miltia was formed. Henry was with the militia that year when they paraded the streets of Salt Lake City in celebration of Independence Day.

On July 24, Henry attended a pioneer day celebra-tion in Cottonwood Canyon. [^2] President Brigham Young was in attendance and spoke at the celebration.

(July) 29 A great light was seen in the Heavens which made it almost like day for a short time[.] Word had come to Prest Young that an army was coming against Utah through lyeing reports sent to Washington by our enemies and the mails for Utah was stoped.

For Henry, this declaration was the beginning of the Utah War.

The Utah War, as it is known in some circles, was a conflict between the United States government and the Mormon Church. It came about for the very reasons Henry stated in his journal. An army had been sent West to "scalp old Brigham."

While it is not our purpose here to recount the Utah War, we should mention the part Henry played in it. He kept his journal faithfully from the last of September until December. In these entries he details the events as he saw them. His first entry concerning active duty reads:

Sept 2, (1857) we were called out to get instructions to be ready to take a campain East to meet the army

By September 28 the militia was five miles up Echo Canyon. Two days later they were in Fort Bridger. They used Fort Bridger for their own conve-nience, but planned to burn it if necessary.

Octr 1 (1857) We were Caching up Wagens [^3] and Iron and other things preparitory to burning the place when wisdom would dictate...

The next few days were spent in and around Fort Bridger—in sight of the enemy part of the time. Army wagon trains were set afire, cattle were taken, and the dry fields of grass were burned to make it more difficult for the army. The militia men were shot at, they were hungry, they were without shelter, there was sickness among them, and they were cold. Yet Henry never referred to any of these as hardships.

(Oct.) 2 ...that night Lot Smith passed us on the way down to Green river, which resulted in the burning of a train of Wagons [^4]

(Oct.) 4, We started again for the Soilders camp[,] 40 of us led by Orin Porter Rockwell[.] our plan was to drive off their cattle so as to cripple them in their movements...camped in a large hollow only about one mile from them

(Oct.) 5, We started through the hills to get in above them and passed a picket [^5] gaurd and then came over in plain sight of the camp and watered our horses and commenced burning grass only half a mile from their camp...

Oct. 6 ...we commenced our work of fireing till noon when we heard there cannon fireing so we again re-treated[.] 9 of us went into the mountains a long way with O.P. Rockwell & Milo Andrews[.]...one of our men (Reubin Miles) had taken sick with the Mountain fever hence we had to move very slow by 2 men going one on each side to hold him upon his horse[.]...could not find our other part of the company and they had all our provisions[.]...had to camp on the bottom without any supper...

Octr.7, (1857) It was snowing hard and the man very sick and nothing in camp to eat[.] I was sent to hunt up the lost camp I went 5 miles up the creek and found them at the end of the fire and 15 other men had come from R. T. Burtons camp on Bear river, we finally all got together again and eat about all there was in camp, that night a deserter from the Soilders camp come into ours, and give us the news of their camp, he felt pleased to find friends—different to what he expected

(Oct.) 9 Bro Sudwicks and myself crossed the river both on one horse[.] it mired down and we had to get off in the mud and Ice and water as best we could[.] we was going to hunt an old camp ground to See if we could find any thing to eat but it was a failure, and I caught a very bad cold[.]...that night the provisions came and we all felt very hungery for we had had nothing for over 2 days[.] ... we then got news of Lot Smith burning the Wagons[,] 52[,] and taking their teams

Octr. 10, We were covered with Snow laying in our slim bed on the ground and I very sick with mountain fever...

(Oct.) 14, I was helping to dig potatoes and burring them for future use,...

(Oct.) 16, We was treading our wheat and cleaning it

(Oct.) 17, It snowed all night

(Oct.) 18, (1857) Still snowing we built us some wick-ehups [^6] for shelter

(Oct.) 24, We were again building Wickehups

(Oct.) 25, ...we soon struck the Muddy [river] and followed down it for some time to find a ford which was very bad[.] we finally tried one place and all crossed safe but one, that had our flour upon his horse[.] and as his horse begun to climb up the opposite bank his horses feet stuck fast in the mud and the horse fell backwards upon his rider and wetting him as well as our flour[.] we could not travel very far because it was freezing so hard and the young mans clothes was freezing upon him so we had to stop and make a fire to dry his cloths.

(Oct.) 26, ...we stoped and got our guns free from our saddles...when some of us got within 150 yards of them[.] they raised and fired upon us[.] I was the third nearest to them[.] we each turned as fast as we could making distance as fast as we could but the bullets flew around us like hail plowing in the dust and cutting off the sage brush[.] but through the blessings of the Lord none of us was hit nor none of our horses nor no sign of any bullet in our clothing[.]...Wm Hill lost his hat

Nov 20 ...News came that the Soilders had ventured to take the ruins of Fort Bridger after besieging it all day and finding no one there[.]...some also went up to Fort Supply and captured that empty place[.] So now they thought they had gained a great victory in having what we was willing for them to have...

(Nov.) 30 News came that our release had come...

Decr 1 (1857) We started home having to foot it which made us very foot sore after being on horse back for the last 10 weeks --

Henry made it home. By starting as early as 3:00 a.m. , they made it in about two days. His stay was short lived, however.

On January 27, 1858, his ward, the Mill Creek Ward, was again called upon to furnish forty-five men and sixty horses or mules to form a new company for Orrin Porter Rockwell—the war was not yet over.

Henry was among those called, and he was mustered back into the militia on February 23.

His experiences were similar to those of the last campaign, only this time he mentioned an encounter with Indians.

(Apr) 29 The freindly Indian Weber Tom with his squaw came into our camp and staid all night

Henry was relieved of duty, for the second time, on April 30. When he arrived in Salt Lake City, his family, along with many others including Brigham Young, was moving south into Utah County. This move was made as a temporary precaution for their own protec-tion from the army.

By this time his father had already moved five wagon loads and returned for more. Henry, with his parents and their livestock, headed south again. They left the house empty and talked of burning it to the ground, should it become necessary, leaving it as much like a wilderness as they could.

Travel was slow for them, and Henry's battles were far from over. However, the new battles had more to do with pigs and wagons than soldiers.

May 24, ... we could not travel very far in a day as we had to drive our pigs which was slow Slow indeed, for it took them a day to get to Point of the Mountain and another day before they arrived at what is now Pleasant Grove. The next day found them on the Provo Bench where they camped for the night.

(May) 29 Our pigs give out and we only got 2 miles South of Provo City

(May) 30 Bro Bowketts Wagon wheel broke so we had to borrow another one to get to Spring Creek

May 31 We went to Santiquin and got the wheel mended and brought back some lumber we had left there and built us a small shanty

Their move to Utah Valley was now complete. Still, life was anything but routine. Wood was needed for burning, and cedar posts had to be located for fences and buildings. In early June news came saying Indians had killed three men and a woman in Salt Creek, and so the Saints were forced to move closer together for self protection.

Indians were stealing cattle, and they even stole a little girl. Fortunately, the pioneers were able to get her back. However, the threat of Indians made it necessary for the Saints to be with their cattle day and night.

Gradually, threats by both the Indians and the Army subsided somewhat, and on June 12:

President Young and the Brethern met with a peace commision and agreed the army could come peaceaby if they would go to some valley not less than forty miles of Salt Lake City and molest no one[.] they gladly agreed to this...

Then came this important and much awaited an-nouncement:

(July) 1, 1858 Prest Young sent word that all could have the privilage of returning to their homes...

From that same entry comes this happy note:

...I got tired of driving Pigs going South, so I loaded them up in the Wagon and took them home first [^7]...

Henry may have come to terms with the pigs and the soldiers, but the war with the wagons, if ever won, was won much later in life. Sometime in the future he could be quoted as saying:

...I had quite a time with old wagons

Henry's Utah War had ended.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This was not Halley's comet. The Hansen Planetarium in Salt Lake City was unable to name it.
[^2] The author assumes the wagons were the soldiers' wagons destroyed by the Utah Militia during the Utah War.
[^3] The tabernacle to which Henry refers must not be confused with the present-day Tabernacle built many years later.
[^4] The first U.S. Army wagons were encountered on October 4 and were given the choice of turning back or being destroyed. The army opted to turn back, but as soon as the "Mormon Guerrillas" seemed to be a safe distance away, the U.S. Army returned again. This was more than Lot Smith could abide. In the next few days he, with his troops, burned 74 wagons, destroying the following items: 46 tons of bacon, 1 ton of ham, 84 tons of flour, 9,000 pounds of coffee, 1,400 pounds of sugar, 2,970 gallons of vinegar, 6 tons of soap, 84 gallons of molasses, 4 tons of bread and 1000 pounds of tea. In addition, a thousand head of cattle were driven off. Army Wagon Master Dawson begged, "For God's sake, don't burn the trains." Lot Smith replied, "It is for His sake that I am going to burn them." He then set about his task of doing just that.
[^5] Picket: A detatchment of one or more soldiers on guard against enemy approach.
[^6] Wickiups are crude wood frames covered with brush or other debris.
[^7] 7. Back to Mill Creek.
