Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Chapter Four

Salt Lake After The War

Hauling the pigs back to Mill Creek was the beginning of Henry's one-year Salt Lake City sojourn after the war.

(July) 10 We arrived home safe, and very thankful to again have a house to live in, knowing our troubles had nothing of that pain and anguish that the Saints had had to endure in the past for this was the first time that the Saints had had the privilage of returning to any of their homes[.] the wheat was ready for harvesting[.] we was counciled to hold on to our Breadstuff[.] no Publick meetings was held in any publick parts so as not to create any excitement[.] Prest's Young and Kimball kept themselves in private[.] Cummings our new Govenor seemed to be very friendly to our people

Although army troops departed for California on August 8, the Saints still expected that 2,000 troops would be stationed in the valley. Merchant and government wagon trains were coming in almost daily.

The Utah War had ended, but not the hostilities that so often follow battle. Henry's comment concerning no public meetings, and the Brethren keeping to them-selves, implies peace was not fully assured.

Aug 8 ...the meetings were held in the school house as it was off the main road....

As anticipated, more troops did come, but not 2,000.

1858 Sepr 5 Sunday it was thought wisdom to stop all meetings[.] 13650 more troops came in and camped a little east of the city on their way to camp Floyd[.] the Bretheren would go to their camp and trade with them and work for them,

In the same entry, but on a different vein, he notes:

A very large Commett [^1] appeared in the west with a very long tail to it, it revolved around the north pole to the east, got brighter for a while and then got dimmer, it lasted for weeks very plain

It was not until October 6 that another meeting was held, and even then presidents Young and Kimball did not attend. The meeting was not open to the public, but was for leading officers of the church. D. H. Wells, of the Council of the Twelve Apostles, talked on a very familiar subject. He counseled the Saints to have a two-year supply of provisions on hand and:

those that neglected this council that was able to do so would have to pay a high price to buy back what they needed, also that nothing should be said that Brigham or Heber had said thus and so but every one must be re-sponciple for their own saying as well as their own do-ings

October 31, they were again reminded about the:

saving of Breadstuff.

By December, winter had set in—in earnest.

Dec 1 (1858) A very sever snow storm had prevailed through the night and lasting all day blowing at a fearful rate from the east[.] many cattle where frose[.] and Bro Leaver a tailor from Salt Lake he had come from camp Floyd on the Stage to Cottonwood[.] when he got off to go to the house of Thomas Bullock he fell in a dry ditch filled with snow[.] he was heard by some parties but they thought it was stock and he laid there and froze to death[.] also another man froze to death coming from the West mountain canyon to Wm Hickmans house and several others in different parts, it was said to be the coldest storm in 10 years in Utah

Some progress toward total peace was being made. On December 26, President James Buchanan sent a pardon to all Mormons for "burning their wagons [^2] on the plains," and recommended a land office be set up in Salt Lake City. The pardon came from Washington in only 14 days. Not long, considering it took Henry a little over nine months to make the journey from England.

The pardon made the General Authorities feel they could again use the "Tabernacle." [^3] It was opened to the public for the first time since the Saints returned from Utah County.

Life was more routine for Henry and the Saints for a while.

1859 Jany 22 I went over to the Bishops house and set-tled my Tithing, and on my way home my horse which was a young one shyed off the road as I met 2 others comming in an opposite direction, and in doing so run onto the Ice and fell on my leg and split off the ancle bone of my right foot and badly brused it which layed me up for some time

(Feb.) 13, I went to meeting for the first time since I got hurt[.] Bishop Miller preached to us a good sermon upon the Necesity of keeping on board the ship Zion, for it would bear us through the storm all right[.] I got a letter from my 3 Brothers in England they did not belong to the church and nor no way faverable

Henry must have been disappointed with the news from his brothers—he loved them dearly. He also loved the gospel plan and wanted very much to share it with them.

It was still touch and go with the troops at Camp Floyd. It takes time for peace, and sometimes it just doesn't come easily. Elections, normally held in March, were changed to November. This was probably done to placate the military, as they were still a problem for the Saints.

...also to withdraw the troops from in around Provo to camp Floyd, as the President stated in his messaage to congress that Col Johnstone should not locate any body of troops near to any thickly settlement in the Teritory of Utah, and to make peace but instead they were trying to do all they could to break the peace and put the Govenor at defiance

Mar 25 Howard Spencer son of Orson was brought home to the City from Rush valley, where he had been badly wounded by a U.S. officer[.] a small body of Soilders was camped in that locality[,] and 16 of them with an Officer Ordered Bro Spencer to take his stock away from the ranch which his Uncles and others had received a grant of the legeslation[.] he refused to com-ply with their request[.] they marched up in file to where he was feeding his stock some hay[.] the officer, Sargent Pike commanded his men to take him, but before they had time to do so, Pike raised his gun and struck him over the head with the Breach of it[.] Bro Spencer raised his pitchfork which he was feeding his stock with over his head to save the blow and the handle broke in 2 peices[,] one end striking him on the back of his head and braking his skull so it had to be sawed to get it back into its place[.] but it was then thought that he would re-cover which he did after a good deal of care

And then:

April 3 Sunday Bishop R Miller spoke upon the subject of our enemies coming against us in a national way...[Name in original journal] was cut off for apostacy[.] that the spirit was taking great hold upon the people[.] in the evening we signed a Petition Praying Bishop Brinton of the Cottonwood Ward to have [Name in original journal] stop making Wiskey and selling it, or deal with him accordingly for the salvation of Israel

1859 April 6 The annual conference commenced pub-licly[.] the first Presidents and several of the Twelve were present[.] H. C. Kimball said that the apostates was more hurtful in our midst than the army,...his ur-gent call was to save our breadstuff for time of Famine for it would certinly come

(Apr.) 7 John Taylor represented the Authorities of the church and spoke of the union of this people in casting their votes to sustain their leader, defying the world to produce its equal[.] Prest Young spoke of the weakness of mankind, and the exaltation of the Saints to the difer-ent degrees of Glory

(Apr.) 10 Sunday held a meeting in the new meeting house in the lower part of the Ward for the purpose of Blessing young children and Baptizing those of that age[.] also took action against [Name in original journal] for again making Wiskey after he had promised to stop, but he said that he did not promise that he would not commence again and thus treated the Priesthood with contempt[.] he had been droped by his Quorum in the city, and this day cut off by the Ward for violation of his covenants

(Apr.) 26 A company was called to march to the low mountins to watch[.] the army threatened to come into Salt Lake City and take Prest Young or fight[.] I was called amoung the rest to go to the schoolhouse but the foot men was all released they only needed horse men, so I was releived but could not leave the Ward for a few days to see what may be wanted as I was anticipating going to Cache valley 90 miles North

May 2 (1859) I went and saw John A Smith one of the Bishops councilors and asked him if I could not be re-leased[.] he told me I could go at any time, so I got ready to start next day

This was Henry's final journal entry as a Salt Lake Valley resident, and it marked a new beginning for him—a life in Cache Valley. Cache Valley became his home until the day he died. It was there he became a bishop, and there where he married. There he fathered an Apostle, who in turn became the grandfather of the second Apostle Ballard.

Henry's life in Cache Valley proved to be a blessing to all who lived there.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Mantua is now located in the little valley he refers to. The 'top of the hill' Henry mentions is probably near Dry Lake, at the head of Wellsville and Sardine canyons.
[^2] Maughans Fort has since been renamed Wellsville.
[^3] Now known as Providence.
