Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Chapter Five

The Move To Cache Valley

The move to Cache Valley was a major undertaking in 1859. Towns had been established along the way, but the roads were barely passable. To go around the mountain east of Tremonton added nearly twenty extra miles. With wagons heavily laden and the additional burden of livestock, it could easily entail an extra few days.

(May) 3 I started to Cache Valley Aaron Dewitt going with me[.] it was a new place with the exception of one small settlement in the south end of the valley then known as Maughans Fort, we took 2 yoak of Oxen and some young Stock with plow and tools and seed and Breadstuff nearly all belonging to me, we went 6 miles north of the City and camped near the Brush by the mountains, it was a very cold stormy night and little feed, and the Stock all scattered[.] we hunted for 10 hours on foot for them and still 2 was missing, but we had to move on or we would likly loose them again, so we went on to the north of Centerville

1859 May 5 We took the upper road all the way as the roads was very wet and heavy and feed poor and teams very weak[.] we camped 4 miles South of Weber Bridge

(May) 6 We crossed the Weber and Ogden toal bridges, the streams was very high having such heavy snows in the mountains, A very heavy thunder storm overtook us between Ogden City and north Ogden on the Bottoms and we had to camp there

(May) 7 We reached Brighan City Box Elder Co. and staid there for the night

(May) 8 We learned that it was possable to go through Box Elder Canyon so we started that way but ours was the 3rd loaded wagon going up that Spring, the roads was very bad[.] we often got Stalled, we mired in Box Elder valley and broke our Wagon tounge and then [had] to unload some of our load[.] we then got out and took part of our load to the top of the hill and then took the fore part of the Wagon and brought up the other part of our load and camped on the top of the hill north of the little valley [^1]

(May) 9 We reached the South end of the valley 3 miles south of Maughans Fort and Camped.

Henry and Aaron took seven days going from Salt Lake City to within three miles of Maughans Fort [^2] where they met and talked with Bishop Peter Maughan.

Bishop Maughan had been directing the new settlers in the valley. He advised Henry and Aaron to go on to Spring Creek [^3] and locate there. At Blacksmiths Fork River they camped for the night. A church farm was located there, and had been enclosed for protection from the Indians. Indians were plentiful in Cache Valley.

Arriving at Spring Creek on May 11, Henry and Aaron were happy for a little rest—and little it was. That same day they planted what seed they had because it was getting late in the season. No mention is made of where they planted. The next day they began searching for land to claim as their own. They were told it had all been claimed by the few people already settled there.

The following morning it was so windy it was difficult to keep the cover on the wagon. In spite of the wind, Henry continued to look for ground. He located a piece that looked easy to fence and was located between two branches of a spring. It was not rich ground, but would be easy to break and irrigate if water was routed down an old stream bed from Spring Creek. However:

Some laughed at me for taking it that way but I succeed alright.

(May) 14 We commenced plowing

(May) 18 Heard that the big wind had blew down the court house in Brigham City

The balance of May was spent sowing grain and planting garden seed. They were anxious, for the ground was getting quite dry. Luckily, it did rain toward the end of the month.

The Mormons were still not free from the influence of the federal troops.

(May) 27 Bishop P Maughan came over and held a meeting laying before us our conditions, as the Soilders had been killing some Indians near Fort Bridger east[.] also a report that there was a camp of Soilders on the North of the valley and the Indians was mad with all the whites[.] he thought we had better move our camp over to the church farm where we would be away from the willows [^4] so they could not ambush us

Since the settlers could not farm during this time, they spent the next couple of days getting timbers to make a bridge over Blacksmith Fork River.

Indians were still a concern.

(May) 30 We all moved over to the church farm, the settlers north of us at Summit Creek [^5] 10 miles north, they all moved to Maughans Fort Henry had not yet located a parcel of ground completely to his liking, and the next few days were spent looking for better land.

June 2 I went to Logan with some other Bretheren to look at the county[.] we found some good land there[.] I expected to go some where before locating permanently but I thought it was the best I could do to hurry and get my seed into the ground some where so I could get seed for another year with out having to haul it so far

On June 7, he traveled to Shumway [^6] to look at more land. It was good land, but there wasn't much water for it.

Looking was a time-consuming job, and it kept Henry from planting other land. This must have worried him some, as it was already late in the season. A crop was not only desirable, it was necessary for survival.

The balance of June he spent working on canyon roads, logging, and searching for land.

(June) 20 John H. Clark and myself went over Logan river to look again for some land, we had quite a time getting over the river, we staid all night

(June) 21 We took a claim of 20 acres each, all that was allowed

(June) 25 I went up the Canyon with Brother Lane where we had made the road into, but every body was afraid to go into it[.] after it was made we got a good load of house logs each, the first that had been taken out, it was very rough and rockey[.] next day the place was crowded and continued so for many days

He spent much of July searching for better land, surveying what he had, and moving logs to where he thought he might build a house.

During this time he received a letter from his parents—his first since coming to Cache Valley.

(July) 11 I went over to Maughans fort and answered my letter.

Henry did take a little time for recreation.

(July) 23 Aaron Dewitt and myself went to the mountains on a Pick nick Servise berring [^7] and on the road home we where overtaken by a thunder storm which made us wet through and every thing we had in the Wagon at home was wet

The next day Henry went to Summit Creek in search of some good hay, and from there he traveled to what is now Richmond—still searching. He was invited to settle there permanently, but declined. Instead, he continued to explore the county. He returned to Logan on July 26, and found:

...Servayers laying out the fort in a different shape so we had to move our logs again onto our new lots

By now, Henry was beginning to feel like Logan would be his new home.

(July) 27 We drew our lots[.] I now concluded to stop in Logan for the present at least, not finding a better place where there was any settlers so I got my logs and commenced to build my house

In July of 1859, Henry officially settled in Cache Valley.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Her autobiography will be quoted or referred to on occasion. A slightly abbreviated autobiography can be found as an appendix to this work.
[^2] This version is not found in Margaret's autobiography. It was taken from notes of family members, and is attributed to Margaret.
[^3] There is no mention as to who "he" is. It was likely Bishop Preston, or a militia leader. At that time, the militia leaders were generally Church-appointed leaders.
[^4] What Henry refers to as the tabernacle was really the Logan Hall. The Logan Tabernacle came quite a few years later.
[^5] Summit Creek is now called Smithfield.
[^6] Mendon
[^7] By "Servise berring" Henry refers to the process of picking Service Berries.
