Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Chapter Eight

The Early 1860s

The early 1860s, in Cache Valley, were filled with hardship.

June 15 [1862] Sunday a cloud burst on the mountains between Logan and Green Canyon coming down both canyons and washing out the roads and bridges that we had just built[.] a washing out the road in green canyon and washing lots of gravel down onto the farms below, the streams was very high all over the Teritory washing away nearly all the Bridges, it was said to be the highest waters ever known in the settlement of Utah

(June) 18 We turned and worked upon the road in green canyon til we got it so we could use it again

Again the splinter group, the Morrisites, is mentioned.

(June) 22 An account came in the Deseret News about the Band of Morrisites, they had been imprisoning some of thier men for wanting to leave their camp, and the freinds of the imprisoned entered a complaint to cheif Justice Hinney, whereupon he issued a writ of Habeus Corpus, Directing Morris to liberate the prisoners and give them a fair trial before his honor but they refused and threatened the officers that served the writ, the Judge then Issued another writ and sent a posse of 200 men to serve it and to take Morris and his leaders to S. L. City to be tried for false imprisonment, but they resisted and mustered their men about 100 armed[,] and commenced firing into the posse and killed 2 of their number, Smith and Wahler[.] they kept up their position for 3 days before they would surrender, and during this time Joseph Morris and John [Bank] were killed, the posse took 3 of their other leaders and nintey of others to S. L. City for examination and they were bound...

Henry says little about July 1862, but does mention he helped "fit up the Bowery" for the Fourth of July. They fired guns and had a parade and speeches, followed by a theater group in the evening. The bowery was so crowded the show ran for two nights.

The Pioneer Days celebration seemed more significant to Henry, for he notes:

(July) 24 We killed a beef and 4 sheep in each ward and give to the people to eat at their own homes, we had a good meeting after our long procession with the pioneers, Mormon battalion, and 24 Silver Grays, 24 Mothers in Israel, 24 Young men, and 24 young Ladies, and 24 little Boys, and 24 Girls[.] we had a good time

Little is said of August. September is not so silent. He mentions an early frost "which cut the vines and corn."

September 12 found him in bed with a cold and sore throat. He was administered to by his father and his father-in-law and recovered quickly.

(Sept) 15 I commenced hauling my wheat again

To the Saints the problem of Indians must have seemed an eternal one.

(Sept) 23 We had to again move our young stock and guard them again against the Indians as they were already on horses

(Sept) 28 News came at noon that the Indians had stole a band of horses from the church farm, owned mostly by Thatchers[.] the Horse men that had horses up just [jumped] into their saddles and was soon after them[.] we joined them along the foot of the mountains until we got to Franklin, when they took through the mountain[.] we still followed them bearing east toward Bear Lake[.] 4 of the boys came onto them a little before dark, when the Indians run into the Brush ready to fight, and the boys returned to meet the rest of us, but before we got up they had run on again with the Horses, and it got so dark we had to camp for the night

(Sept) 29 We started again at day light and Picked up some horses that had given out while they were rushing them so fast, we sent 5 of the boys back with these horses, and then followed them through very thick timber till we deemed it not wise to follow them any farther into this thick timber as we had none come close unto them and was now in a basin where we had no chance to take advantage of them but they had every advantage of us, we was also out of Provisions and our horses were given out

Oct 1 News came that the Indians was collecting near Franklin intending to make trouble[.] 25 horse men was sent to look after them

(Oct) 5 We were all called out that had horses to go to Franklin[.] we went and returned the same night

Other things needed to be accomplished along with chasing Indians—things that required a great deal of effort, such as raising and harvesting grain. Grain was needed for barter because cash was so hard to come by. Then, as now, efforts were often made in vain.

(Oct) 6 I started with my wife to S. L. City, we went to Willard City and staid at Bro Wm Brewertons

(Oct) 10 We got through with our business, not being able to trade off our grain for clothing[.] we returned[.] went to Farmington and staid with Robt Camm

They must have needed clothing badly to consider sitting in a wagon for nearly a week in the cool, if not cold, October air. No hint of anger or even disappointment is evident in Henry's journal. This is a lesson in patience and restraint.

President Young traveled to Logan on occasion to instruct the Saints in a variety of things.

(Oct.) 21 I was gathering up oats to feed Prest [Presidents] company horses[.] they came in at sundown all feeling well (Oct.) 22, [1862] The meeting commenced in the Hall but not for more than half the people assembled[.] Prest Young spoke upon classification of labor[.] the rest of the Bretheren that spoke followed in the same strain of remarks....The Prest held another meeting the next day and returned home...

An earlier entry noted that the Saints from Cache Valley were asked to furnish wagons and drivers to help immigrants come West.

Henry's last entry continues:

...our teams commenced to arrive from the east, they took more cattle than before[,] averageing one Ox to each team[.] they left one of my fathers oxen in the mountains, Father and myself started after it the next day,...we hunted in the mountains that evening but could not find it[.] Father staid at the herd house and I went on to Willard

Octr 24, I started back about noon, the Prest had got into Brigham City and the flags was flying as I passed it[.] I overtook my father in Wellsville canyon[.] he had found the Ox, we got it to Wellsville and staid there that night

(Oct.) 25 We got it home but badly used up

Henry's journal speaks for itself for the next year or so. The subjects are of such a variety it is difficult to categorize them. Equally difficult is the process of elimination. Nearly every entry has historical or religious significance, or supplies us with an insight concerning Henry and the lives of his contemporaries. It seems prudent, therefore, to record them in his words with little or no comment.

(Nov.) 23 Some of Col Connors command came to Logan to get a white boy from the Indians that they took from an emigrant train some where out north a few years ago, the Indians learned of their coming and took to the mountains, the Soilders chased one and caught him[.] they afterward caught some more and they then went to fetch the boy

(Nov. 24) They brought the boy into camp

1862 Nov. 25 The Soilders started back to the city, and the Indians came out of the mountains hungery and begging[.] we had to feed them instead of the Soilders, we collected Bread and Beef for them, they then went away feeling well

Dec 4 (1862) Bro's Benson, Maughan and Preston Started to the Legeslature

(Dec.) 10 We had our first snow in the valley for the season

(Dec.) 21 A donation of meat was taken up for the hands working the S. L. City Temple

Jany 7 [1863] The Indians killed an emigrant north of Franklin, he was coming into this valley in company with 8 others to get provisions to take out to the Salmon river Gold mines

(Jan.) 18 My wife Margaret Brought me a little girl about 12 midnight, we named her after her mother and my mother, namely (Margaret Hannah)

(Jan.) 24 Bro's Benson & Maughan came home

(Jan.) 25 Sunday, they give us the account of their work at the Legeslature,...Govenor Harding would not sign any of the bills that they had passed by both houses, it looked like their time had been a failure

Jany 27 Col Connor came into Mendon with about 450 Troops on the road north, above Franklin to hunt the Indians that had been killing emigrants about Salmon river

(Jan.) 28 They passed through Logan a little before daylight making it their buisness to travel by night so that the Indians could not see them on the road

(Jan.) 29 They got to Franklin and went on over Bear river, and surprised the Indians and commenced fighting them, and kept it up for 3 or 4 hours with a loss of 15 Soilders killed and 40 wounded, and about 200 Indians killed and 150 ponies taken from them, this put a quietous upon the Indians, the Lord raised up this foe to punish them without us having to do it[.] we had bore a great deal from them and still had been feeding them, yet some of the wicked spirits amongst them would stir up trouble against us [^1]

(Jan.) 31 They returned and camped in the Tithing yard over night[.] A number of them got their feet badly frozen, they took their dead and wounded back to the City with them

Feby 1, (1863 They left Logan with their booty of Ponies

(Mar,) 1 (1863) Prest Manuhan got a letter from S.L. City stateing that 500 teams would be wanted to go back to Florence again for the poor saints coming to Utah and it was expected they would leave S.L. City about the 25 of April

and the quota for Cache valley would be 53 with their full fitout...

(Mar.) 8 ...Bro Benson came back from the City, and enformed us that our great Govenor Harding had been trying to make trouble for this people, and the Citizians of S. L. City held a mass meeting and they resolved to have him removed and to have good men as Govenors and Judges or not at all,...

April 10 (1863) The ground was covered with 6 inches of snow in places [.] in S. L.valley it had fallen a foot deep

April 12 (1863) Sunday the Bretheren give us the news of the conference[.] it was gathering the poor, Building the Temple, also Building a large Tabernacle in the City, 250 by 150 ft claculated to seat 1200 people and a missionary fund to send the missionaries to their feilds of labor and support their famielies while they were gone, and we was to haul the Tithing wheat to S. L. City this summer

May 1 (1863) News came that a Bro had been shot by the Indians at Franklin wounding him very badly, they were stealing horses all the time

(May) 9 Some of the horse company was called to go to Paradise in the South end of the valley, the Indians had been stealing horses and cattle around there, and the Brethern had taken a few of them prisoners, again news came in the evening that they had driven off all the Horses and Cattle in the little valley [^2] belonging to Brigham City, in open day also killed a man in the mountains who was burning charcoal...

(May) 11 Bro's Benson & Maughan went to Paradise and had a talk with the Indians, they let the prisoners go with a promise that they would bring the horses back

June 9 (1863) I started to S. L. City with my horse team with a load of Tithing Wheat

(June) 14 I returned home, a large emigration was coming into S. L. City from the states going to the Salmon river mines, also to California to get away from the cival war that was going on in the states between the north and the south

(July) 24 While the Bretheren was fireing a salute upon the anvil, it Burst, and Badly injured Bro's Thos Lockyer who was fireing it, also Bro Joseph E. Hyde who was standing near by

Sep 13 (1863) Our teams returned home from Florence

Dec 6 (1863) Bro Musser preached to us on the necesity of paying our Tithing and fulfilling all our oblegations that we may be Blest

(Dec.) 17 I went around the ward and gathered up some old clothing for James Thomas and famiely which was in distress through getting their clothing burnt...

(Dec.) 20 I got a letter from Box Elder telling the where abouts of my Fathers Oxen that was lost last fall[.] Going to S. L. City with Tithing wheat

(Dec.) 28 Bro's Maughan and Preston came home for the hollidays[.] also a special message from Prest Young to stop the selling of any more wheat to the Salmon river and Bannock City miners, as all the surplus was needed in the City[.] Prest Young was paying $3.00 per Bushel in cash for all he could get, for the Calafornia volunteers was out of Bread, and they had called upon the church to furnish them[.] in the evening the Second ward party came off, we had a good time

(Dec.) 31 The Presidents request was brought before the people and they all responded to it

(Jan.) 6 It was a very cold day and we had 3 of the coldest since Dec. 2 1858 when several men was frozen to death

(Jan.) 17 Sunday some home missionaries came to Logan from S. L. City sent by Prest Young to preach throughout the valley to awaken an intrest among the people in regard to their duties[.] Bro Joseph W. Young spoke at some length also Hector C Haight and Bro Shipp[.] in the evening Brigham Young Jr. Spoke upon the virtures of this people and the plans of our enemies to come out here in the Spring by the tens of thousands to search these mountains for gold mines in order to over run us in our elections and lead the young in paths of vice,...

Jany 31 ...Bro Benson was called on a mission to the Sandwich Islands [^3] to go and straiten things up there

Feby 21 (1864) Bro's Musser and Sheets from S. L. City came with a message from Prest Young asking the people here to sell him all the surplus wheat for S. L. City at $2.00 per bushel at our doors for the poor of that City needed it

(Feb.) 28 The teams were again called to gather the poor[.] 300 was called for this season and 30 of that number from Cache Valley and 6 from Logan[.] mules and horse teams were called for this season as well as Ox teams[.] Wm B Preston was again called as captain of the company going from this and ajoining vallies...the teamsters of Logan was called[:] John A. Cowley, Hans Munk, Hans Peterson, and myself as Ox teamsters and Edward Nelson and James Goodwin mule Teamsters

This might sound like a grand adventure for Henry, but consider the following circumstances: Margaret, his wife, was only eighteen years old, and the mother of a new daughter, Margaret Hannah. In addition, she was expecting a second child. Henry was not a wealthy person and this call would tax his limited means, and he was still bishop of the Second Ward. Who would act as bishop in his absence? Henry didn't even have a counselor or ward clerk. Still he never questioned the calling—he just did the best he could.

Now a trek—one that would test the mettle of many men, including Henry—was about to begin.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Henry does not mention whether the training pertained to the trip east or to something local. He says "to any part day or night." It sounds more like any part of the Valley.
[^2] The bad roads would be in either Sardine Canyon or Wellsville Canyon, the present highway. Around the mountain meant going north to what is now called the Valley View Highway. It went through Beaver Dam and Collinston and would take them an extra day of travel.
[^3] The spellings are Henry's. Allocolic was probably Alcoholic. Dear Creek was probably Deer Creek, etc.
