Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Chapter Ten

The Mid-1860s

It is unlikely that Henry rested, even after such a long trip. It was his nature to do the things that needed to be done.

His journal is sparse for the next few weeks, but we do know it snowed for the first time that fall on October 28. We also know he sat in on a bishop's court for an absent high councilman, and he received this word from abroad:

Dec 3, (1864) ...I got a letter from my Brothers in England[.] my Bro George had died on the 22 of Aug not in the church

This must have been sad news for Henry. Even though he had been expelled from George's home, he must have still loved him. He would have wished for his baptism. Henry could only hope George would accept the gospel somewhere beyond the veil.

There was an outbreak of measles in Logan. Both children caught them. Henry blessed Henry William on January 5, 1865. The only other January entry concerns the proposed tabernacle.

(Jan.) 9 I was sliding logs for our new Tabernacle which was in contemplation to be built 60 ft whide and 106 ft Long[.] to be built of Rock

Regardless of the weather, food for hungry mouths was still necessary. Obtaining it was a challenge.

Feby 10 (1865) I started to Brigham City to get me a grist ground[.] all the mills was froze up and had been for some time, [^1] we had very cold weather this winter[.] I had to stop till the 12th for my grist, the snow was 6 ft deep going through the mountains[.] I caught a bad cold

It snowed for an entire week and covered the whole valley "to a depth of knee deep."

Henry continues:

(Feb.) 13 Henry Wm was taken very sick with convulsive fitts[.] I fasted and prayed and kept administering to him with the assistance of his grand fathers, on the 20th they left him and he was then alright and we felt very thankful that the Lord had heard and answered our prayers

Henry keeps us appraised of events concerning the Church as well as national events. He mentions that Brigham Young had purchased one of the Sandwich Islands to raise sugar, and a donation was taken up and money was sent to the States [^2] to buy telegraph wire for a line from Logan to Saint George.

The next two journal entries he records are opposite extremes. For Henry, these events were probably of equal importance.

April 18, News came that Abraham Lincoln Prest of the U.S. had been assasinated in his Box in a theater and Sectry Seward and his son were wounded in their own house, this caused quite an excitement

April 24 I commenced plowing[.] we had a very late spring and a very hard winter before it all through the T eritory[,] and a great amount of stock died in some places

On one of their regular visits from Salt Lake City, brothers Wilford Woodruff and Franklin D. Richards compared the favorable condition of the Saints now to when they were driven out of Nauvoo. George Albert Smith gave a history of the first settlements in the valleys. George Q. Cannon talked about home manufacturing and being prepared. President Young again exhorted the Saints:

to stay at home and not be running to the mines.

Indians are mentioned less often and in more friendly terms. It is nonetheless apparent that some threat remained, for the militia were maintained in readiness; however, grasshoppers would soon replace Indians as the number-one problem.

Returning to Henry's journal, we find that on June 16:

The mountains were covered with snow and snowed in the valley quite fast

Aug 3 Prest Young and company came again to visit us and held a 2 days meeting

(Aug.) 4 We had a grand review of the Military corps of the whole county and organized a Brigade[.] E. T. Benson General,...with other officers

(Aug.) 5 Saturday, meeting commenced[.] the people coming in crowds from the other settlements, H. C. Kimball spoke of our Endownments and covenants that we had made, Said we could not mingle with the wicked and be justified before God, also cleanliness and Obediance[.] Prest Young spoke upon the necessity of having a telegraph line running through this valley, so that we may know the news at any time[.] said the wicked world was still opposed to this church and People[.] John Taylor exhorted the Saints to be faithful and live right before the Lord, and no nation would have power over this people for this Kingdom would not be given to another[.] at 5 P.M. a general inspection of arms was gone through with

Aug 6 ...Prest Young advised the people to keep the spirt of Liquor out of their organizations for that would bring darkness, he invited all the choirs to attend the next fall conference in the City (Nov.) 11 We went through a sham [^3] Battle

(Nov.) 26 (1865) News came that [Name in original journal] had shot David Davidison near Franklin[.] he was brought home to Logan and lived until Dec 6 and then died

Dec 2, A City Police of 100 men was organized to guard the City and be on the look out

A court trial was held and David Davidison's killer was sentenced to ten years in the penitentiary.

A telegraph line became a priority. On December 7, a call came from Brigham Young asking for:

...cash to send back to the states to buy wire to put up a telegraph line to run through the teritory from the North to Dixie [^4].] this county to furnish $2000 and 7 teams

Another priority was to help the poor as they crossed the plains.

1866 Feby 4 We commenced to fit up our teams to go back for the poor[.] 500 was wanted for this season[.] 52 for this county besides the 7 for wire, our portion for Logan was 15[,] mostly mule teams from here...

The next several entries deal with sickness, bad weather, cold, and men who froze to death.

When time permitted, Henry worked on his adobe house. It was to be only 28 by 17 feet, but to him it was a castle.

On April 15, 1866, Henry makes reference to the wagon train heading east. He was not included this time.

Our teams rolled out in fine order

They still had to keep an eye on the Indians.

July 2, (1866) A circler was sent from Prest Young for us in the northern settlements to build forts in the small settlements to guard our stock if the Indians should trouble [us] as they were doing in the south

July, August, and September were busy months, and the events varied considerably.

(Jul) 3 I was on guard riding around the country

(July) 8 I was blessd with another son[.] named him Thos McNeil Ballard[.] my wife got along well

(July) 10 Was hauling for 5 days to build a rock wall on the square for defence

(July) 14 A general training of all the valley at Logan

(July) 16 Commenced cutting my hay

(July) 18 I was on guard at the horse herd

27 Aug Went around the Ward for a donation for the Indians which was now freindly

Sep 2 Our teams got back again to Logan all well [^5]

Sep 3 & 4 Helping to fitt up our Bowery and fence around it for a visit from Prest Young and party

President Young and company came for a two-day conference. He and several of the Brethren spoke on various gospel principles. More pertinent to the local Saints was Brigham Young's remark concerning the Indians:

...be kind to the Indians for the day was not far distant when they would be our freinds[,] but we must guard against them yet...

He also counseled the Saints:

...not to trade with the firm of Gilbert in S. L. City[,] but to encourage our berthern in trade

On October 14, 1866, Ezra T. Benson returned from the October conference to three inches of snow and gave a conference report to the Saints.

The later part of the month Henry spent four days doing military drills, two days setting up telegraph poles, and two days gathering cattle from the west side of Bear River. He then started for Salt Lake City to sell some wheat, but was driven back by rain and had to sell his wheat in Brigham City—and later:

Decr 1 I again started to S. L. City but it soon commenced raining again which made the road very heavy [^6]

Dec. 8 It snowed and blowed all day[.] I got home again

(Dec.) 14 I went with some other Bretheren to explore the Logan Kanyon road that had been worked

(Dec.) 17 Commenced upon the Road in the Kanyon

Brother Benson, a member of the legislature, had just returned from Salt Lake City. He told the Saints:

the time had come for us to stop tradeing with our worst enemies.

In addition to the regular Sunday meetings, church was being held on Thursday evenings as well.

On January 28, 1867, Henry celebrated his birthday with a supper and dance in his new house.

On February 5, 1867:

A Business meeting was called and charter gotten up and company organized for Logan Kanyon Road [^7]

Mar 17 A letter was read in the meeting on Sunday from Prest Young asking the Bishops to see that the people keep one years Breadstuff on hand as the country was full of Grasshoppers eggs laid last fall The subject of grasshoppers was brought up often enough for us to know they were a real menace. The insects had a sobering effect on Henry and his young family, as future entries will confirm.

We return to Henry's journal.

(Apr.) 25 (1867) I commenced to do a little in putting [in] my crops

July 24 We had a good time in celebrating the day[.] we got up a supper for all the poor that would come to it of Logan

Aug 4 A prayer Circle was organized with Bro E T Benson as Prest, it was held in an upper room in Bro Hezekiah Thatcher house[.] I was privelaged to be a member of the same

The grasshoppers had taken their toll on the crops, and money was tight for the Ballards.

(Aug.) 25 I started with [a] load of freight to Echo Kanyon to make a little [money] because the grasshoppers had eaten up the most of my wheat, in some places they had taken everything, it was only through the mercies of the Lord that we had raised any thing as the hoppers was so thick

The Brethren from Salt Lake were again in Cache Valley in early September. Henry, as usual, was helping to fix up the "bowery" for:

the reception of Prest Young and Party.

There were two days of meetings at the bowery, and the subjects taught ranged from testimony bearing to the children of Israel. The often mentioned "home manufacturing" is addressed again. The subject presented by Brigham Young was an interesting one.

(Sept.) 8 W Woodruff spoke upon the follies of many that left the church in an early day...[.] Prest Young spoke upon the order of the Priesthood and the causes of some leaving the church and of Oliver Cowdrey putting in the chapter upon Marriage in the Book of Doctrine & Covenants and not Joseph Smiths wish...

The Brethren from Salt Lake City soon left for meetings in the Bear Lake Valley. By September 15 there was snow on the mountains. That is a little early, even for Cache Valley.

Then on:

Octr 1 I started to S. L. City with my wife and her sister Emily McNeil and her Father to conference

We know from past entries that Henry generally had something planned in addition to conference when he traveled to Salt Lake City this time of the year.

This trip was no exception.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] P. E. Fund refers to the Perpetual Emigration Fund. It was a fund set up through private donations. The money was loaned to immigrants to come to America with the stipulation the money would be replaced so other immigrants could borrow from it. Thus, it became perpetual.
[^2] An instrument similar to a flute, but higher in range.
[^3] This was the completion of the transcontinental railroad connecting the nation, by rail, from coast to coast. The last spike driven was made of gold. A celebration is still held each year in commemoration of that great event.
[^4] Dixie is the general area around St. George, Utah.
[^5] He makes references here to the teams that left for Missouri the previous April to help the poor come west.
[^6] This is an interesting use of the word heavy. Henry uses it several times to describe road conditions.
[^7] You may recall in an earlier entry that a company was to be formed to build a toll road in Logan canyon. For 50Â¢ one could use the road.
