Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Chapter Eleven

A Time Of Trials

Fall conference was to be held on October 6, 1867. Henry and his party arrived in Salt Lake City on October 3, with plans for the next morning.

(Oct.) 4 Emiley McNeil received her Endowments and was sealed to me the same day

George Q. Cannon performed the marriage ceremony in the Salt Lake Endowment House. At Henry's insistance, Margaret witnessed the event.

Two days later they attended conference together on Temple Square.

(Oct.) 6 Conference commenced in the new Tabernacle[.] It was so large it was very hard to hear the speaker[.] the wind and dust blew very hard

(Oct.) 7 It rained the most of the day which made it very disagreeable but the house was mostly filled[.] Prest Young give the Bretheren texts to preach from, he wanted a donation taken up to bring the poor out from old England, he counciled the Young people to get married and about 150 Brethern to go to Dixy and settle[.] [Name in original journal] was cut off from the Quorum of the twelve for preaching false doctrine dening [denying] the power of the redemption. J F Smith son of Hyrum filled his place (Oct) 9 Arrived home again safe

Once in Logan, Margaret shared her home with Emily, giving her a room to herself.

The Saints still felt a need for an active military. According to Henry, the militia engaged in a two-day military training session at the Church farm. It included another sham battle.

There were other real battles to be fought as well: accidents, untimely deaths, family tragedies, privations, and eventually an all-out war with the grasshoppers.

Nov. 5 Bro Joseph Waterson got hurt by a falling tree falling upon him in the Kanyon while cutting logs

(Nov.) 7 I set up with him all night

(Nov.) 10 He died at 3 p.m. after great suffering

(Nov,) 11 He was burried with great respect[,] 35 teams following his remains, also a company of Horse men[.] he was greatly respected by all[.] he was 23 years of age...

President Young was concerned about the poor and:

...requested the saints to pay in their fast day donations to support the poor and not draw so heavy upon the Tithing store

Jany 2, 1868 We met in the different Ward school houses on the fast day and the people donated to the poor.

(Jan.) 20 I was collecting means in my ward for 4 days for the P. E. Fund [^1] to gather the poor from the old countries

The pioneers were not accident-prone people, but accidents did happen—some were very serious.

Feby 19 In coming down the Logan Kanyon my team and load slid off into the River falling over the bank about 29 feet into 6 feet of water, but coming of[f] very lucky in not getting damaged much[.] I escaped alright

(Feb.) 25 I was helping to cut a ditch to turn more water into the north fork of the river from the south fork, and some Bretheren was at work repairing a brake in [the] upper ditch when the bank caved down killing Alexander McNeil and badly hurting James Beverland

(Feb.) 26 He was burried[.] I attended his funeral

By April 3, 1868, Henry was planting his crops. Brother Ezra T. Benson was again reporting to the Valley the messages of general conference.

President Young wanted the Saints to stop using pork and to keep the word of wisdom. Also, sixty teams from Cache Valley were needed to go back for the poor.

Helping the poor come west was now a lot easier for the teamsters. The terminus of the railroad had moved 500 miles west of the Missouri River, and continued to move westward. This was a real blessing for the drivers and animals—it saved 1,000 miles of travel.

A different kind of blessing was in store for Henry. Margaret, it seems, had endured a busy nine months. On May 15, 1868, Henry noted:

I was blessed by my wife Margaret bearing me a pair of twins[,] a Boy and Girl, Charles James and Jennett McNeil Ballard

A month later:

(June) 22 Prest Heber Chase Kimball, Died in Salt Lake City[,] aged 67 years

(June) 24 At 2 p.m. meetings were held althrough the teritory where the news could reach at the same time as the funeral services were being held in Salt Lake City where 8,000 people atttended

July 5 My twins were blessed[.] Charles James by his Gd father Thos McNeil[.] and Jennett McNeil by her Gd father Wm Ballard (July) 6 A special fast meeting was called for the Lord to turn away the Grasshoppers from our crops...

Pioneer Days, on July 24, were always a cause for celebration. The people in the Valley enjoyed lots of good food, as well as the marching and fife [^2] bands.

The Church authorities were on the way to Cache Valley, and, for the first time in years, Henry makes no mention of "working on the Bowery." He usually helped prepare it for their return. When they did arrive they met with local leaders, and organized a "School of the Prophets."

During one of the meetings, George Albert Smith advised the brethren to be sure and obtain their naturalization papers so they could vote and receive the benefits of the land laws. President Young, at the same time, counseled

...the young people to get married that was old enough and keep the laws of God[.] also for the saints to continue to donate to the gathering of the poor from the old countries[.] said if some did apostatize it was alright[.] he blest the saints in the Name of the Lord [and would] the people stop trading with their enemies[.] said he would make it a test of fellowship if they continued...

By mid-November, little Jennett was sick with the "Hoop-in-cough." In turn, all her brothers and sisters came down with it.

As money was scarce, hauling grain to sell in Box Elder County helped fill the near empty family coffers. The harsh winds and biting cold made it miserable for Henry during the three trips he made that November in 1868.

On January 2, 1869, Henry was headed west to the Logan river bottoms in search of livestock, and

...my horse broke through some Ice which was covered with 3 or 4 inches of snow[.] My horse fell down upon my right leg breaking it just above the ankle joint[.] I was 3 miles from home and alone, the small bone was not broken and by seeking the Lord he give me strength to walk nearly home before I got any help, but first I neary fainted and then chilled[.] my horse got away and went home letting my familey know that some thing was the matter[.] Bro David Lamroux set the bone and the Bretheren administered to me and I got along very well

(Jan.) 13 I set up in a chair for 3 hours and felt very thankfull for that privilage

Feb 2 I was so far recovered that I was able to go out doors to the stack yard by the aid of a crutch but not able to bear much weight upon my foot

Still in a little pain, but managing, Henry attended the School of the Prophets on March 20. Later that month he was introduced to what could have led to a whole new enterprise.

(Mar.) 27 Bro George D Watt of Salt Lake City preached to us upon the subject of silk culture in Utah[.] he sh owed us some raised in Utah[.] he had some Mulbery cuttings for sale[.] I bought 100, but I never raised any trees

In early May the fall grain was just turning green, and the grasshoppers were hungry.

May 4 The Grasshoppers commenced eating up my Wheat[.] they where very thick thourghout the valley doing much damage to the crops, in fact nearly taking every thing.

While not in attendance, Henry was well aware of an event of national importance, an event that changed the face of America forever.

May 10 The 2 great Railroads[,] the Union Pacific and Central Pacific reaching from the Missori River to Calafornia connected west of Ogden City[,] but afterward was so devided to have the junction of the road at Ogden, a great celebration was held at the spot where it was finished [^3]

The railroad was of great importance to the Church, and the leaders lost no time in getting it to Salt Lake City.

(May) 17 Prest Young and his councilors broke the ground for the commencement of the Utah Central Railroad from Ogden to Salt Lake City 40 miles.

We don't know whether or not this was a new experience for Henry, but he spent several days shearing sheep at a cooperative sheep herd in Box Elder County. Upon returning home he

found that the Grasshopers had eaten up nearly every green thing

Much of Henry's summer was spent attending meetings with the church officials from Salt Lake as they made a loop through Cache Valley, Bear Lake, and through the mountains to Franklin, Idaho. Bits of wisdom were disseminated, and again the subject of telegraph lines was brought up. President Young wanted the line extended through the mountains to Bear Lake. He also wanted the road through the canyon extended to Bear Lake.

While traveling to Ogden on business, Henry took time to see the trains. During the next few days he worked on the Logan Canyon road, cut what little was left of his hay, and celebrated the 24th of July.

One month later he was in Box Elder County again, trying to earn some much-needed extra cash.

Aug 31 I went to Willard City to work upon a Thrashing machine that I had a share in[,] to work for my bread stuff[,] for the Grasshoppers had eaten up my wheat as they had done in other places[.] Also laying their Eggs for another years increase

Sep 4 While at Willard I heard the news that Apostle E T Benson had Died very suddenly the evening before at Ogden City...

1869 Sep 5 He was burried with great respect

Henry had endured his share of trials during the last year, but there were more in store for him.

(Sept.) 10 I was telegraphed for to come home for my little girl Jennett was very sick

(Sept.) 11 I got home and found her very sick cutting her teeth and canker very bad, we done every thing for her that we could but still grew worse

(Sept.) 18 We was very much pained in having to give her up, she died at 9:30 p.m.

(Sept.) 19 She was burried in the Logan Cemetery at 4 p.m.

(Sept.) 24 (1869) My other little twin son Charles James was taken worse[.] he had been sick but had been getting better[.] he had the same complaint

(Sept.) 28 He Died at 7:30 p.m. 10 days lacking 2 Hours from the time of his Darling twin sister, they were two bright loving little children

(Sept.) 29 He was burried at 4 p.m. by the side of his sister

Octr 4 I was thrown out of my wagon upon the hard street falling upon the back of my head. I was stunned, but knowing that all of my children was in the Wagon I exhurted myself and caught hold of the lines of the horses and stoped them from running away when I then had to again drop to the ground, but through the kind hand of Providence I was not hurt much

In spite of the accident the day before, Henry was on his way to Willard to pick up the little bit of wheat he had worked so hard to harvest. It hadn't been properly stored, and he was concerned about it.

(Oct) 6 Returned home with my bread stuff and was very thankfull for it

By the end of October, 270 men were again working on the Logan canyon road. It had been pushed as far as Ricks Springs, so fine progress had been made.

Good progress was also made on the Logan Hall. By January 1, 1870, it was ready for use.

A month later Henry noted that President Young had wired that:

Trumbull was getting up a bill in congress to divide up the Utah Territory and attach it to Idaho Territory[.] we got up a pertition remonstrating against its passage

While trials were plentiful, there were also good days. February 12, 1870, was good day for Henry.

My Wife Emiley bear me a little Daughter[.] Named her Emiley Elizabeth, she got along well

More bills came before the legislature, bills that called for action on the part of the Saints.

April 5, We held a mass meeting in the Hall to protest against the bill gotten up before Congress by Cullum to punish all those that had entered into Poligamous marriages there by breaking up this people

April 9, 1870, was another one of those good days for Henry.

My Wife Margaret bear me a son, called him George Albert

The war with the grasshoppers was well under way, and the Saints devised a strategy to protect themselves against the insects.

(Apr.) 11 1870 I was helping to lay off a Ditch to enclose a cooperative wheat feild...we had all our wheat in 2 feild[s] so we could protect them from the Grasshoppers

Everyone was involved in the grasshopper war, including Margaret. An excerpt from her autobiography reads:

We also had grasshopper wars. I have seen the heavens darkened with grasshoppers until one would think it was midnight. I have gone out at such times and driven them into a trench with a bunch of willows and buried them alive. [Even] With all that we killed the ground would be left perfectly bare. They destroyed our crops and my husband had to go over into another valley and work on a threshing machine to get bread for the winter

On May 5, George Albert and Emily Elizabeth were blessed at fast meeting. About a week later Emily was ill. Presumably it was just a cold. Henry also had a cold and in mid-June he was ill with a sore throat—something he suffered from all too often.

On June 21, President Young and his party came to Logan—this time from Bear Lake. There were the usual two days of meetings.

One of the speakers, John Taylor, delivered a sermon on the trials of former-day Saints and said it was necessary to be tried. Brother Franklin D. Richards admonished the Saints to make improvements to their properties and to obtain machinery to make things easier and to save time. Apostle Brigham Young Jr. followed up by reminding them to fix up their fences and to get out from under dirt roofs. Brigham Young advised the Saints to keep the Word of Wisdom, as it was for their own good. Build factories, he told them, and take good care of your wheat. He went on to say that had the people been faithful, they would not have had to suffer with grasshoppers destroying crops. Finally, he admonished, if the Saints did not listen to the counsel of the servants of the Lord, the Lord would send other trials to "this people."

Henry knew a lot about trials. They had become a way of life for him. Would there be more?

July 30 My little daughter Emiley Elizabeth died

(July) 31 She was burried by the side of her little Brother and sister

Emily McNeil Ballard, second wife of Henry Ballard

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] A crowd; throng.
[^2] Quinsy is a serious inflammation in the throat, often leading to an abscess. Every joint in the body seems to ache. It is rarely contracted any more.
[^3] This was the completion of the transcontinental railroad connecting the nation, by rail, from coast to coast. The last spike driven was made of gold. A celebration is still held each year in commemoration of that great event.
