Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Chapter Twelve

Railroads To The Valley

A telegram from Brigham Young began the 1871 year for the Saints. He wanted the bishops to stop taking tithing or doing any more tithing settlements until further notice.

In spite of the hardship a tax levy would impose on them, the people of Logan voted on April 1 to build and operate a school for the children. Henry and Margaret's children were definitely school age.

(Apr.) 6 I Baptized and confirmed my little Daughter Margaret Hannah

The ever-enterprising Saints met in the new Logan Hall to organize a cow pasture company. A president, other officers, and a secretary were chosen to solicit shares.

Peter Maughan, an early pioneer and the founder of Maughan's Fort (now Wellsville), had taken ill. A prayer circle was called in his behalf. Brother Maughan died a few days later on April 26, and then:

A very large concourse [^1] of people assembled to pay their last respect to his remains...

Tithing was not always paid in cash. In the 1800s the Saints had little money. They usually paid with produce of some kind, such as hay, grain, or animals.

May 14 I started to Ogden with a load of Tithing

By July 2 Henry was ill with another sore throat, nevertheless, he spent the day

...gathering up lumber in the ward...to build a fence around the Hall...

(July) 17 Prest Young and company came into Logan from Bear Lake valley down through Logan Kanyon[.] they visited the settlements around till Saturday

(July) 22 Sunday, meetings commenced under the Bowery

(July) 23 Our meeting closed with good instructions from Prest Young

While the new Logan Hall was ready for use, they chose the bowery because it was cooler. It may have been too hot for note taking, for this is the first time Henry does not tell us the messages of the visiting General Authorities. The message could very well have pertained to railroads, for one month later:

Aug 23 A company was organized to build a railroad from Ogden to Soda Springs and shares were taken to commence work

(Aug.) 26 Ground was broken at Brigham City to connect there with the Central Pacific road for the present

(Oct.) 22 Sunday F D Richards preached to us in Logan Hall urging the Railroad building...Also telling us of the doings of Judges in Salt Lake City of the aresting of Prest Young[,] D H Wells and Geo Q Cannon and several others in Salt Lake City for Poligamy and other false charges, the 3 Brethern were bailed out under bonds to appear at appointed times, Prest Young telegraphed to F D Richards to be in Salt Lake City in the morning. I took him to Wellsville with my team after the nights meeting, I got back home at 1 in the morning

Octr 24 I started out to work upon the railroad

(Oct.) 25 My horses left me and went home (Oct.) 26 I started back again and commenced work at Packs Springs

(Oct.) 28 It stormed so bad we had to come home

(Oct.) 30 I again started and took out my wife Emiley to cook for our company that we had working together[.] Robt Davidson and myself took a small contract on the other side of the mountain in Box Elder County[.] it was a very hard peice of work and hard to get men to go and work at it long at a time as it was only working for stock in the road[,] hence that was the reason that I took my wife out to cook and make it more comfortable for the men to continue to work

Nov 11 I went home to get more Provisions and feed[,] also to see my familey

1871 Nov 12 I went back again to the camp

(Nov.) 25 I again went home for more supplys, also some other teams with me and it snowed hard during the night[,] also the next day[,] Sunday[,] till it was 2 feet deep

(Nov.) 27 Monday it cleared off, and I started back with a sleigh to brake the road to get my wife and the men home but I could not proceed with it and had to turn back[.] and some of the men that had come home went on, on horse back untill they met them up in the mountains[,] trying to get through[.] They helped them along by braking the road for them as best they could, they all got home safe after dark, but very cold and tired, and I was very thankfull for I could not go on with the men on horse back because it always hurt me in doing so since I had my leg broken

Winter snow and bitter cold made it impossible for the Saints to do any more on the railroad that fall and winter. There were plenty of other things that demanded their attention.

Decr 10 Bishops Sheets of Salt lake City preached to us upon the paying of our Tithing, and to donate to the expences of the court upon the trial of Prest Young and his Brethern which was to come off in Jany 9, following

(Dec.) 11 I was visiting through the ward for Donations for that purpose (Mar 4 ...our city Election came off and the Apostates got up an opposite Ticket but they did not accomplish any good

April 15 A telegram came from Washington D.C. stating that the doings of Judge J B. McKean in arresting Prest Young and the others, had been decided by the supream court of the United States to be illegal and unlawfull and ordered their release but the officers here paid no attention

President Young and the other Brethren must have been arrested for a second time. Henry's note, dated the previous October 22, 1871, stated they "were bailed out under bond."

April 25 Prest Young and the other Bretheren was released from custady on writ of Heabus corpus

May 1 They took an excurtion trip to Brigham City to see the new Railroad which had commenced to run a few miles

1872 May 17 I went down to Salt Lake City with some other Bretheren to prove up on our Government land

Octr 3 I Baptized my Son Henry William and Christian J Larsen Confirmed him, a council of the Bishops was called of Logan, to examian the Tithing Books and we found that a great many came short in paying up thier Tithing as they should

(Oct.) 6 At conference in Salt Lake City Prest Young spoke upon starting a city somewhere in the Territory after the Order of Enock...

Nov 14 It was a very cold bitter day[.] the Winter seemed fairly set in

Henry had made no mention of working on the railroad since November of 1871. He did, however, have a contract to do part of the work, and had been very involved the previous year. It is highly probable he was there working much of the time, and was about to go again, despite the aforementioned cold.

(Nov,) 25 I again went out onto the railroad to work, it was now in the valley[.] I was called home at night as my wife was sick

1872 Nov 26 My wife Emiley bore me a son which we called Willard Russell Ballard...

Dec 2 (1872) I again went out onto the railroad

(Dec.) 9 I again went back to the road on Monday and staid all week camping in tents

(Dec.) 16 Went back to work but came home nights as we was now getting nearer home

(Dec.) 20 My Wife Margaret was taken sick with a cold and sore throat. The Railroad cars got into Mendon[,] the first settlement in the valley[,] 8 miles from Logan

Dec 26 Margarets Quinsay [^2] in her throat broke and she felt much better afterward

(Jan.) 31 The Engine and cars got into Logan in the evening

Feby 1 They give the school children a ride for a short Distance and back again

1873 Feby 3 A celebration of 3 parties for the arrival of the Railroad into Logan was given in the evening

As hard as the Saints had worked to get the railroad into Cache Valley, they certainly deserved a celebration of "3 parties."

Footnotes

Left to right: Margaret, Henry, Emily

---
Notas:
[^1] A full account of this incident was researched by Lucille Randall and published in the Salt Lake Tribune on Sunday, September 7, 1975. The main source of information was a detailed entry in the diary of Nick Crookston, the author's grandfather. He had been an eyewitness along with Henry.
[^2] The apostates.
