Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Chapter Thirteen

Roots Of United Order

The celebrations for the completion of the railroad were now behind the Saints—and the trains provided a valuable service for them. The telegraph lines were in and working well. In the near future, Brigham Young would launch a campaign asking the Saints to look at a new order.

Returning to Henry's journal:

(Feb.) 4 A large number of home missionaries was called to visit the different settlements and preach to the people on Sundays[.] I was called to be one of them

(Feb.) 6 Willard Russell was blessed at fast meeting by Christian J Larsen

(Feb.) 9 My wife Margaret bore me another son which we named Melvin Joseph Ballard

(Feb.) 14 [Name in origional journal] shot and killed David Crockett Junr without Provecation

(Feb.) 18 News started that the murderer [Name in original journal] was around in the City and we was soon on his tracts[,] for he had hid up since the shooting[.] he was followed down onto the River West for about 3 miles when he was surrounded and taken to the court house in Logan by the City Marshal, and the people was so enraged by the foul course that he had taken, as it was known that he had killed 3 persons before this one, some men rushed into the court house and brought him out and Hung him up to the sighn post in front till he was dead [^1]

1873 Feby 19 David Crockett after suffering for a while Died and was burried on this day

Normally most of the snow in Cache Valley is gone by March; however:

March 10, The Bretheren turned out enmass and shoveled snow to open the Railroad track through the great snow drifts which had been blockaded for a week

(Mar.) 11 (1873) We got it opened through to Brigham City from Logan.

Three weeks later Henry blessed his son Melvin Joseph. He started planting his crops during that same time period, and on April 13 he went to Mendon to "preach."

From May 25 until the end of the month, Henry devoted all of his time to Church work. This included taking part of his family to Salt Lake City to do baptisms. The train was running, but Henry chose to travel by buggy. Perhaps the cost of so many train tickets was prohibitive.

May 25 I started to Salt Lake City taking my Wife Margaret and Daughter Margaret H[.] Also my Father and Mother and my Father in law and Mother in law and their son Thomas[.] Taking their team we all were going down to get baptized for our Dead relatives, we went to Willard City and staid over night with Bro McCartheys

(May) 26 Went to Farmington and staid at John Moons

(May) 27 Reached the City and staid at Wm Duncans

(May) 28 We got our Baptizing done for our Dead (May) 29 We got the Sealing done and returned back as far as Farmington

1873 May 31 We arrived home again safe, and felt very thankfull that we had been able to do that work

After so many years in a buggy, the train must have been a blessing for the General Authorities. In late June they arrived by rail for another two days of meetings.

President Young was a busy man, and he wanted the Saints to be busy as well.

On June 28, 1873:

Prest Young said he wanted the saints to build their Tabernacle in Logan, and finish the Railroad to Franklin, and he wanted a Temple built in Logan, there was a Preisthood meeting held in the evening to talk over some matters

(June) 29 Sunday Prest Young spoke upon the office of a Patriarch[.] he said they would Ordain some in every large settlement, they Ordained five in Logan my Father was Ordained one...[he also] spoke upon the follies of the saints following the fashions of the Gentiles, and said he wanted the saints to prepare themselves for the order of Enock and blest the people

Henry spent very little time on recreation, but Independence Day was considered a good reason to celebrate, even though Utah was not yet a state.

1873 July 4 I took my familey up Logan Kanyon to spend the fourth with Prest Brigham Young Jr and the rest of the Logan Bishops, together with a large number of Bretheren and Sisters

Aug 5 Was cutting Hay on the church farm for 3 days for the church on tithing

(Aug) 8 Commenced harvesting my Barley

(Aug.) 11 Sunday went to Wellsville on Preaching mission

The General Authorities came to Logan for three more days of meetings. Again they arrived by train. It is abundantly clear the First Presidency wanted a temple in Logan.

(Aug.) 24 Joseph F. Smith spoke upon the necessity of the Temple being built in order that the work for Dead may be accepted of the Lord[.] said the people were abundantly able to build it...

The General Authorities then made the usual loop, by buggy, this time going up Blacksmiths Fork Canyon and back to Logan by way of Soda Springs.

Henry's journal is silent from September 6 until February 6, 1874. On that date he was invited to travel with Bishop Preston and others to Ogden to celebrate the completion of the Utah Northern Railroad from Brigham City to Ogden.

The railroad continued to grow, and by February 9, 1874:

Track laying was commenced at smithfeild to push it onto Franklin by March[.] We were busy hauling rock for the Tabernacle

Mar 2 Bishop William Hyde of Hyde Park Died[.] the Election of our city officers came off[.] the Apostates were again busy[.] They [^2] only got 106 votes to 421 of ours[.] Governor Wood, appointed John Nelsen[,] an Apostate[,] for Probate Judge in Place of Wm Hyde, we got up a pertition to the Governor to appoint Bishop M D Hammond of Providence for Probate Judge

Mar 11 I got my leg hurt hauling rock for the Tabernacle by getting it caught between the sleigh and a rock after I had got my load off on the Square

(Mar.) 16 The Bretheren started out to shovel snow to get the Railroad track opened which had been blockaded for a month, we had so much snow this winter and drifted so bad, they could not keep it opened, they had opened it several times[.] we had a very hard winter[.] we had to drive the Tithing cattle out of the valley to keep them alive for the Hay was so scarce in the valley, and a great many sheep had already died with the cold without sheding or little feed [^3]

(Mar.) 21 I went to get my sheep home from where I had them out on shares for they were dieing so fast[.] the snow was 2 feet deep on the level, I had to haul them home in sleighs[.] They got so weak one third of them had already died

Margaret was with Henry on that fateful day and remembers it this way:

...we had about one hundred sheep wintering in Clarkston. Since it was a very hard winter and the snow was very deep nearly all of them were dying. A man came and told my husband that if he wanted to save any of the sheep he would have to go at once with a wagon and haul them into shelter.

I told my husband to get another wagon and team and I would drive with him. He did not want me to go but I insisted for I felt so sorry to lose so many sheep and thought we could have double the number with the two wagons. I also thought I could be company for him on such a long drive. It was very cold. We started very early and it was eleven o'clock when we got home that night. We brought twenty sheep back with us but about half of them died on the way home. I never will forget the sight of so many sheep lying around dead and dying. It made my heart ache to see the suffering of these animals.

Referring back to his March 16 entry, Henry notes:

1874 Mar 23 The Bretheren got the Railroad opened

In April Henry helped lay track between Smithfield and Richmond and also got some plowing done.

The Brethren in Salt Lake City asked the Saints in Cache Valley to join the United Order [^4] of Enoch. It was similar to the Order some had entered into in Southern Utah. Apostle Erastus Snow came from Salt Lake City to help organize it, and a president and other officers were elected. When President Young spoke about it, he

[Pointed] out to us very clearly the utility of the United order and said the Lord required obedience of his saints to that order

A committee was appointed to appraise the land for its value, presumably for the United Order. While the order is mentioned frequently for the next few years, it required a little promotion by the General Authorities before it was readily accepted.

Returning to Henry's journal we find that on:

(June) 13 My brother in law Joseph McNeil Died of scarlet fever, which was very bad in some families[.] my children came down with it very bad

July 7 My Son Geroge Albert died with it after being sick with it for some time and had commenced to get better but soon took a turn

July 8 1874 He was burried[.] the weather was very hot and a large commet was to be seen every night for some weeks, and some of my children was very sick[,] especially my Daughter Margaret H[.] my little Boys body was taken into the room for my Girl to see him for the last time, all the faith of us as a familey and many of the Bretheren that came in was exercised for our childen but it seemed that these 2 loving children was not to be parted for very long from each other

(July) 13 My Daughter Margaret Hannah Departed to join her little Brother, it was sad to have to part with them, but they are now gone to their rest in their purity, the other children was now some better

(July) 14 She was burried beside her Brother President Young visited Logan to leave instructions and talk of the United Order. Henry baptized his eight-year-old son Thomas. Thomas E. Ricks was indicted for polygamy and sent to prison to await trial.

Henry's family was growing. Another son was a gift from Emily on November 28, 1874. They named him Franklin Hyrum. He was blessed by his Grandfather Ballard the next day.

Apostle John Taylor traveled to Logan on January 2, 1875, and spoke again on the United Order by

...saying we must come to it in a small way at first

On February 16, 1875, there was another disaster.

Bro Wm K Robinson met with a fatal accident in Logan Canyon by being struct with a log while sliding timber, he was brought home and died in about half an hour afterwards, he was a good man and much respected by every one. Bro George Benson was also much hurt by the same log but he got better....

Thomas E. Ricks was a highly respected man in the valley. Now out of prison, he was being indicted for killing a horse thief fifteen years earlier. The deceased, David Skeens, when caught, had been held in the log schoolhouse. Henry had spent a night guarding him. [^5] On another night, while Thomas E. Ricks was guarding him, he attempted a getaway by overpowering Ricks. Ricks shot him in self defense.

A trial date was set and a number of brethren, including William Ballard, Henry's father, traveled to Salt Lake City as witnesses on behalf of Ricks. Judge McKean, who had shown little sympathy for Mormons, was presiding. He put the trial off for an additional three weeks, then proceeded to arrest Brigham Young, and ...fined [him] $25.00 and 24 hours in prison for not complying with Judge McKeans wims and notions

In the meantime both a new judge and a new governor had been appointed. They seemed much more friendly than the previous two. The trial was continued and on March 23:

We got a Dispatch in the evening stating that T E Ricks was acquitted although his enemies tried hard to have him convicted.

Then on

(Mar.) 25 The Brass band and great numbers of Bretheren and sisters turned out at the Depot to welcome Bro Ricks home again[.] he felt well in body and spirits and we all felt well to greet him

Turning back to March 17, 1875, Henry notes another tragedy.

A very large snow slide came down the mountain in Dry Canyon south side of Logan river, and caught Bro Israel J Clark and 2 of his boys in it, but him and one of his boys got out alright but the other one Israel J Junr could not be found, we got word of it in Logan and about 100 men turned out with shovels and after diging about half an hour we found him under about 2 ft of snow with his face down ward quite dead, a great many had shared the same fate this winter in Different parts of the Territory

It was again time for spring conference in Salt Lake City. With tracks installed and a train depot in Logan, it was much more convenient for Henry to attend. The General Authorities' messages are both interesting and pertinent.

(Apr.) 6 Conference commenced in the new Tabernacle[.] D H Wells was the first speaker[.] he spoke comparing the work of the Anciant saints with this latter day work, advised us to be self supporting as a people[.]...Orson Hyde gave good advice to the children which was assembled to sing some selected peices before the conference[.] he advised the parents to look well to their children[,] to keep them from breaking the sabbath[.] Geo Q Cannon spoke upon the same subject and was not in favor of free schools[,] showing its bad effects

1875 April 7 Prest Young said he was not in favor of free schools, he showed very plainly the need of the children learning the laws of life and how to make a living as well as book learning[.] he said he wanted our Legeslature next winter to spend their time for the people and board themselves and let the Government give their money to the Dogs and Wolves whom they thought the most of, he said this people knew the way to walk and go right ahead, Erastus Snow spoke upon the bad policy of people going into debt withought having the means to pay[.] said it would bring ruin to any people

(Apr.) 9 ...a large number of missionaries were called, the weather had been very cold and stormy nearly the whole conference an it was still continued for 2 days more, but I started home on the 10th

Henry started putting in his crops after conference. Two weeks later one of his horses was gored by a bull, which left him short an animal—it was one of a team.

While it seemed spring had arrived early, it still snowed on May 7.

On June 5, Brigham Young and his party arrived for two days of meetings. Henry makes no further comment about those meetings, but:

Brigham Young Junr spoke in our Preisthood meeting and told us that Prest Young had called upon the saints in Sanpete County to renew their covenents by Baptism by compling with the rules of the united order, and all of the Quorum of the Twelve that was there[,] 7 in all[,] went forth and was Baptized by D H Wells and confirmed by Prest Young, and a vote was taken in the meeting here to see who was willing to comply

Henry was ready to comply—he was baptized and confirmed that same day.

On the following day

there was a great number of the Brethern and sisters Baptized

By July 11, Emily and her son, Thomas, along with Henry William were baptized. The United Order was beginning in Cache Valley.

While not connected with the Order, Henry commenced cutting tithing hay on the church farm in late July. They put up nearly forty tons.

In mid-August President Young was in Logan. He told the Saints to finish the tabernacle and to be prepared to build a temple. He also:

...counciled us to faithfullness in all our duties for the Devil could get us to doubt in any duty or council[.] he would finally overcome that person if possable, as he had many before

Hauling sand for the tabernacle consumed August 17 for Henry. The next day he commenced harvesting his grain.

George Albert Smith died on September 1, 1875. Henry was unable to attend his funeral as it was held in Salt Lake City.

Another visit from the Brethren came on September 12. The main theme centered on parents watching after their children. Of course, the United Order was again mentioned.

The militia was still active:

(Sept.) 16 Our 3 Days Drill commenced

And then:

(Sept.) 19 My Wife Margaret bore me another Daughter[.] we named her Ellen Pheabe

(Nov.) 3 The Teachers visiting Quorom was organized in the second ward of Logan City of Bretheren that had been Baptized into the United Orderd

The Second Ward was Henry's ward, and based on his journal, it was required that one be rebaptized into the United Order. Henry had been baptized on July 3, 1875, for that purpose.

The United Order was now established in Cache Valley. Henry was among the first to accept it.

1875 Dec 2, We held a meeting in our Ward to take into consideration the adviseability of sending to the States for a turning lathe to make Broom handles as there was none in the Territory and to cooperate together as a ward and form a company to do all kinds of Wood work

(Dec.) 8 We held another meeting and Organized by forming a company of all those that took shares and agreed to send for the Broom handle factory and what other machnery was needed to carry on a Home Manufactury in Wood, also took into the company Bro C W Card and sons Saw Mill and lathe and shingle Mills. Bro P N Peterson and sons turned their Planeing Mill in as stock and we made arraingments to attach the Broom handle Lathe to the same Water Power, the Bertheren all felt well in Uniting together

1876 Jan 15 Bros Joseph F Smith and F. M. Lyman came from Salt Lake City and called a Bishops meeting to lay before us the views of Prest Young with regard to calling Missionaries to go and make settlements in Arizona Territory, 200 men was called from Utah and 25 was wanted from Cache County and 10 from Logan City[,] all to be ready to start by the last of the month, in the evening J F Smith give a lecture upon the History of Joseph Smith the Prophet, he said in 15 years the time would be up when the Lord told Joseph that he should see him, but it must be by him going to him in the sprit world

Jany 16 1876 They held another meeting urging us to be united in all things, the Bretheren of Logan was called[.] they all responded [^6]

On January 17:

I was helping the Bretheren to get fitted up for the trip, we had a great deal of snow and cold

Later, on February 1:

They started out upon their journey

It was January 16, 1876, when these Saints were asked to leave their established homes and move again to an unknown place. Within two weeks they had disposed of property, packed wagons and were on their way. What faith. What obedience to a prophet.

On February 3, Henry and several others traveled to Salt Lake City to get their naturalization papers. Henry was now a citizen of the United States of America. It had been 24 years since he had left England.

The winter had been a severe one. It had cost the lives of many cattle throughout the entire valley, but by the third week in April the Saints were able to plant crops.

On May 8:

My wife Margaret was Baptized [^7] by Joseph M Wight and confirmed by her Father[.] she was not able to be Baptized when the rest of the familey was

The problems with Indians were not yet over, but they had taken on an entirely different aspect.

(May) 11 I went with some other Bretheren of the second Ward into Bear River and put in five acres of Wheat for the Indians, it was designed to put in 100 acres by the County

Mid-July brought Lorenzo Snow, Franklin D. Richards, and others to Cache Valley for another two-day conference. They talked more about the United Order, the building of temples, and doing work for the dead. July's end found the Saints again remembering and celebrating the day the Mormons came to Utah.

It was early August when Henry and other ward members put up 30 tons of tithing hay at the Church farm.

The grasshoppers, like the Indians, still remained a problem, but not of the same magnitude as in the past.

(Aug.) 11 I commenced Harvesting my Wheat which was a very good crop, the grasshoppers made their appearance again upon us from the North, they had eaten up the crops in Marsh valley north

Octr 20 My wife Emily bore me another son[.] we named him Ernest Reid Ballard

Ernest was blessed a week later in Henry's home by his Grandfather McNeil.

The Saints' testimony of the United Order and their determination to have a temple are evident in the next few journal entries.

Dec 7 We held meetings in each Ward of Logan to take up a subscription to see what each one would donate towards the building of a Temple in Logan City[,] which this county together with Bear Lake, Malad, and Box Elder counties was called upon last conference to Build it, the people felt well toward it, there was also one to be built in San Pete County[.] [^8] raised $2119.00 for the first years payment

1877 Jany 22 to the 26 was very cold[.] it froze the north fork of Logan River solid turning it out of its channel onto the Island all around some houses [^9]

(Jan) 27 The Basement story of the Logan new Tabernacle was Dedicated by F D Richards[.] it was a very cold day[.] we held a 2 Days meeting in it[.] Bros John Taylor, Lorenzo Snow, F D Richards, Charles W Penrose and Bisop L W Hardy preached to us upon the principles of the United Order[,] saving of our Grain, Building of Temples, Baptism for the Dead, and to respect the Houses Dedicated to the Lord, and the order of the Preisthood and of true Siecence [science] agreeing with the word of the Lord and his servants on earth

Jany 29 Our United Order Manufactering Company that we Organized one year before in the 2nd Ward had proved a success, and we had increased by attaching a Moulding machine to our other machinary and we now felt the need for a Branch Store connected with our Business

(Jan.) 30 The 3rd Ward joined with us and turned in their cooperative Dairy and took stock in our store[.] I was helping to lay off the ground to commence at once to build a store 18 by 24

(Jan.) 31 We commenced to dig the celler, but we had to first scrape the snow away and in about 25 Days we had it built and opened out to sell goods[.] it was a frame building

The St. George Temple had been under construction for some time. Late in February Brigham Young Jr. came to Logan from St. George where he had been with his father. Church authorities, he said, had dedicated a part of the temple on New Year's Day and were using it to give endowments. The rest of the building would be finished and dedicated in time to hold the April 6, 1877, conference in it.

In Cache Valley the vestry rooms of the nearly completed tabernacle were finished. Two more prayer circles were organized for a total of four in Logan. Henry was asked to preside over one of them.

The winter had been a little less severe in Cache Valley.

(1877) (Mar.) 23 I commenced to put my crop in, the winter having broken up sooner this spring, it had been the best Winter with the exception of 4 Days in Jany that we had ever had in this valley since it had been settled in 1859 or since the settlements had been made outside of what had been called Maughans Fort, which had been settled previouss to this date

May 5 I went to our United Order Dairy over on the West side of Bear River [^10]

The United Order is mentioned in Henry's writings only a few more times. He does not say how long it survived.

It was now time to move on to a new and even more exciting project.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] There were no stakes in Cache Valley at the time so there could have been twelve acting bishops, or perhaps Henry meant several bishops and their counselors were set apart.
[^2] The "hanging rock" is twelve miles up Logan Canyon at Right Hand Fork. It is known today as Hanging Rock Cave. Henry's son, William Henry, loved to take his family there years later for family picnics and Dutch-oven cooking. [^6]
[^3] Chinese workers were used in the production of railroad ties for the Utah & Northern Railroad. They built a row of shanties for living quarters about one-half mile above Hanging Rock Cave. It is now called China Row Picnic Area. It is probable these were the shanties Henry refers to. [^7]
[^4] Willard Russell is the son of Emily. Margaret gave birth to Melvin Joseph.
[^5] Most of the rock was quarried in Green Canyon, six miles north and east of the temple. The discarded rock pile is much like it was years ago. The old rock foundations, laid for shanties, are gone. The quarry is referred to as the "Red Rock Quarry."
[^6] The author assumes this refers to the men called to leave Cache Valley and settle in Arizona.
[^7] Margaret was baptized as a child. Henry is probably referring to the family's baptism into the United Order the previous July 11. See p. 113.
[^8] This was to be the Manti Temple.
[^9] In those days, Logan River forked near the mouth of the canyon and reconnected a few miles downstream. The portion of Logan on the inside became known as "the Island." While today this condition no longer exists in the same way, this area is still known as the Island.
[^10] Bear River flows down the west side of Cache Valley. It cuts through the mountains into Box Elder County a little north of Benson. The dairy he refers to was in Cache Valley. This is a reference to the actual Bear River, not to the city of Bear River.
