Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Chapter Fourteen

The Temple Era

The Salt Lake Temple had been under construction for almost as long as the Saints had been in Utah. The St. George Temple was completed in early 1877. A temple in Logan had been talked of for years—then on

(May) 16 Prest Young and a number of the Twelve Apostles came to Logan on the noon train

(May) 18 The ground was Dedicated with Prayer by Orson Pratt for a Temple upon the hill over looking Logan City, Prest Young and John Taylor made some good remarks relating to the Temple and our duties to each other and our Dead friends[.] it was a very cold snowy day and had snowed in the night previous and it was now 4 inches deep, but the time had been set for 12 on that day, and it was attended to

Just a month after the completion of the St. George Temple, the construction of the Logan Temple was officially begun. It was May 18, 1877.

Since President Young and several of the Apostles were in Logan, it was a natural thing to hold a conference.

(May) 19 Our Conference commenced[.] Bro F. D. Richards spoke upon the building of Temples and our duties to the Dead, in the afternoon Prest Young spoke upon many of the first doings of the church and its members, and how the Gospel had made the hearts of many to rejoice, in the evening Erastus Snow give us a good Discourse upon the Order of the Preisthood

(May) 20 Orson Pratt dwelt largely upon the anciant records saying that when the Lord saw fit to reveal them there would be tons of them that we had never seen[,] and we would then understand more with regard to how the Nephites lived the United Order in their day....in the evening the Twelve Apostles called the Bishops together in the Logan Hall and ordained 12 of the Bretheren that had Been acting as such before but had not been ordained, [^1] Apostle John Taylor ordained me a High Preist and set me apart as Bishop of the second Ward of Logan City, and we were to choose 2 councilors each so that we could hold a Bishops court when needed

Henry had been acting as bishop for years. It was April 20, 1861, when he was called to that position. Little did he realize it would be sixteen years and one month before he would be set apart and asked to choose his counselors.

Stakes were not part of the Church in Cache Valley yet, but:

May 21 Monday a meeting was called to organize this stake of Zion according to the pattern given to Joseph Smith[.]...

Mosses Thatcher was appointed and set apart by Prest Young as Prest of this stake of Zion and Wm B Preston his first and with Milton D Hammond as his second councilors, and gave instructions to complete the organization of the stake....

Other things were discussed in that meeting, and President Young also gave the Saints a timetable for completion of the temple.

...He wanted us to go to work at the Logan Temple right away, he said he would give us 3 1/2 years to build it, but said we could build it in 2 1/2 years, he wanted it built as a free will offering to the Lord without mentioning wages[.] he Blessed the saints, and started back to Salt Lake City at 2 PM on the Train

Continuing, Henry notes on May 22:

I was signing a lot of United Order currency as I was President of the same, it was much more conveniant than orders, as we were doing a big business in the employment of a great many men and teams in loging and the Lumber Business.

Ten days after the dedication of the ground for the temple the first physical work was done.

May 28 Myself and other Bretheren commenced to plow and Scrape out for the foundation of the Logan Temple

On June 24, there was a killing frost in Cache Valley. President Young, accompanied by his son John W. Young, made his final trip to the Valley. On June 30, Henry ordained his son, Henry William, into the Aaronic Priesthood and set him apart as a deacon.

Henry returned to temple construction again on July 10. He helped open up a sand bank, and that night brought a load of sand to the temple grounds. It was the first load used on the temple.

The balance of July was spent harvesting Henry's hay and grain.

On August 29, Henry penned this entry.

Prest Brigham Young Died in Salt Lake City at his home after one weeks sickness at 4 P.M. it cast a gloom over the whole people

And then:

Sep 1 Saturday I went to Salt Lake City with a great many others to attend his funeral

(Sep) 2 Great crowds of people went to the New Tabernacle to see him where he had been taken the Day before the services commenced at 12 N. it was a great gathering, it was estimated that 30,000 people assembled on the occation, [occasion] the saints felt to acknowledge the hand of the Lord in taking away their President although it was hard, every thing went off very orderly, the different grades of the Preisthood followed in their order in the great procession, I felt very thankfull that I had the privilage of being one in the number, he was highly esteemed by all of the saints and many of the outside world for he was kind to all that come into his company

On September 12, 1877, Apostles Wilford Woodruff and Brigham Young Jr. came to Logan for an evening meeting. The life of the Prophet Joseph and the labors of President Young were discussed. Brother Woodruff addressed the work for the dead and recounted how the Lord helped him to find names of his kindred dead.

Henry organized the deacons quorum and set apart his son Henry William as president on September 16. The next day:

The corner stones of the Temple was laid, the Twelve Apostles laid the South East, Bishops and Lesser Preisthood laid the South West, High Preists and Presidents of the Stakes laid the North West, and the Prests [Presidents] of the Seventies laid the North East corners, a very large company assembled to witness the imposing ceremonies, 8 of the 12 apostles were present on the occation [occasion]

Late in 1877 the United Order was still intact.

(Nov) 13 I was hauling a load of Doors for our United Order, and while unloading them in the rock building the cellar door was open and in steping backwards I fell down backwards 7 feet, hurting my leg but very fortinatly it did not hurt me worse

As Henry grew older, his journal entries were fewer in number. Many interesting things must have taken place, but Henry elects not to mention all of them. Some that he does mention center around family and Church matters.

His first entry for 1878 mentions "we had a good time" at the quarterly conference.

On January 28, some ward changes were made.

We organized an acting Priests Quorum in our Ward, calling Will[ia]m Ballard my father and [other] bertheren to that position...

And on February 8, 1878:

My Wife Margaret bore another Daughter we called her Rebecca Ann Ballard

(Feby) 17, I Blessed her at the house

April 4, I again Blest her in the fast meeting

Exactly one month later it was time for quarterly conference again, and Henry penned his next entry.

May 4, Our Quarterly conference commenced[.] Bro E Snow said this valley was as a desirable place to live in as any place he had seen in these mountains[.] he said it was necessary for every man that presided over Quorum or Branch or Familey to be a revelator to such at all times, Bro Woodruff...refered to our dead[,] especially our young men that died occasionally[.] he said the Lord had need of them in the spirit world to carry on his work[.]...Prest J Taylor said he was well pleased with the reports of this stake

(1878) May 5, Bro F. D. Richards spoke upon the duties of the saints in attending to their prayers, Bro J F Smith bore a powerful testimony upon the principel of Celestial marriage[.] said it was obligatery upon the saints to fullfill that law for it was revealed from God for the exultation of the latter day saints, but it would damn those that practized it for a lustfull desire, but the Lord would bless those that obeyed it in reightousness[.] Prest J Taylor spoke at great length upon the order of the Preisthood[.] said that men must magnify it or give it up, was well pleased with the labors of the saints upon the Logan Temple and did not wish to oppress the people, but exhorted them to do all that they could and live in kindness in their families, and never do or say any thing before their children that they would be ashamed of, and blessed the people, Bro Woodruff encouraged the Elders to prepare themselve to preach the Gospel or do any other duty in the Kingdom of God

These messages were important to Henry. It appeared, from his past, that he took all of the precepts expounded by General Authorities to heart.

Quarterly conference convened again on August 3.

The upper story of the Logan Tabernacle was opened and our Quraterly Conference was held therein, we had a good time[.] 9 of the apostles were present, they deposited the Church Papers published in Utah, and some of the church works and other records in a stone box in the south East corner of the Logan Temple

Zion continued to grow.

Sep 9, My Wife Emiley bore me another Daughter, we named her Lydia Jane Ballard

Nov 7 I Blessed my Daughter Lydia J

Soon it was 1879, and spring must have been early.

Feby 26, I commenced to put my crop in

And on

April 10, I was taken very sick with severe pains in my Kidneys going to the Bladder[.] it lasted for about 5 hours

During general conference in Salt Lake City, Moses Thatcher, of Logan, was called to fill the vacancy occasioned by the death of Orson Hyde. Cache Valley now had two Apostles among the General Authorities.

A month after general conference, it was again time for quarterly stake conference in Logan. Bishop William Preston was sustained as stake president.

On May 5, 1879, Henry penned the following:

I went to Salt Lake City with some other Bretheren to escohrt Bro D. H. Wells from the Penitentuary where he had been confined for 3 Days because he refused to answer the Judges their questions put to him about the Endowment house[.] there was a large procession upon the occasion

Henry made no further journal entries until October 5, 1880. He had been to Salt Lake City and

...attended one of the best conferences that I ever attended, John Taylor as Prest of the Quorun of the Apostles was sustained as President of the church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints...

The Church had been without a president for three years and one month.

Continuing on:

Nov 4 My wife Emily bore me another Daughter[,] we named her Jenny Lula

Early in December:

The Female releif society was reorganized in the second Ward[.] My wife Margaret was chosen by the sisters as Prest,...

Henry ended 1880 with another attack of kidney stones, or "gravel" as he called them.

Dec 31 I was again taken very sever with pains in my Kidneys also the gravel which lasted for 2 hours

The first Sunday of the new year, 1881, Henry blessed his little girl. Shortly thereafter a four-day ordeal occurred that only Henry himself can describe.

(Jany) 10, I started to Temple saw mill in Logan Canyon for a load of lumber with other bretheren for the Temple[,] a distance of 26 miles, after we started it commenced to snow and blowing the snow very bad[,] drifting the roads full, we had hard work to get through some of the drifts[,] but we got there about 4. P.M., it still snowed and blowed all night, blocking us intirely in

(Jany) 11 We shoveled snow and got our sleighs with a little lumber on them 2 miles down[,] and then took our teams back to the Mill for the Night[,] and about 10 P.M. 2 men came into camp from Logan[.] they had to leave their teams and come on foot wadeing the river in some places for 2 miles to miss the snow slides[.] they sent one man back to Logan to get men to come and help get us out of the snow

(Jany) 12 We started by packing our bedding upon our Horses and leaving our sleighs[.] we had to walk and brake the road for our Horses to travel, and it was still snowing and Blowing badly till noon when it commenced to rain, the snow was sliding which made it very dangerous[.] we had to be very carefull to avoid being caught, and in order to continue our travel we had to climb onto the sides of the mountains in places, we had to drive our Horses for 2 miles down the bed of the river in one place where the snow had slide so deep and too soft to bear them up, but we could walk upon it ourselves, in some places it slid into the river completely daming it and turning it out of its bed for a while before the water cut its way through, afterwards leaving a bridge of snow[.] about 2 P.M. we met the Bretheren from Logan with supplies and to help us brake the road through, we were all very pleased to meet each other, as we were now out of the most dangerous part of the Canyon, we went on down to the Forks and made ourselves as comfortable as possable under a hanging rock [^2] and at some shanties [^3]

(Jany) 13 We all reached home safe, and found our families and freinds and the comunity at large had been very anxious watching and praying for our safe return, we all felt very thankful together that the Lord had so mericalously preserved us from the many dangers that we had been exposed to both seen and unseen, 2 Bretheren had been killed by a snow slide the winter previous on the same road

Henry's dedication and determination, and that of men like him, cannot be questioned.

Henry chronicled little for the rest of the year, but he did mention:

(Feby) 6 Prest J Taylor and J. F. Smith and W. Woodruff gave us some very pointed remarks upon the law of Tithing[,] also the word of wisdom, together with other good instructions

(Feby) 9 I Baptized and confirmed my 2 sons. Willard Russell and Melvin Joseph, they being 8 years old... [^4]

Jun 10, I was kicked by one of my horses very bad in the right side while feeding[.] I was not able to work for a few days

Henry finished the year with this happy note:

Dec 13 My wife Margaret bore me another Daughter[.] we named her Lettie May Ballard, she was very sick with very hard labor[,] but she got along very well after her confinement

Almost three years pass without a single entry from Henry. He finally breaks the silence in May 1884.

(May) 14 Prest J Taylor and party came to Logan for the purpose of Dedicating the Temple

Even though Brigham Young "said he would give us 3 1/2 years to build it," it had taken one day less than seven years from the dedication of the ground to the dedication of the temple. During this same period the Saints of Cache Valley had some commitments to the Salt Lake Temple that had to be met. It is a wonder the temple was completed in so little time.

Like the other temples, the Logan Temple was made from local materials [^5] and stands as a monument to the efforts and sacrifices of those hardy pioneers.

A conference was held just prior to the ceremony, and it was well attended as Saints came from all over for the occasion.

(May) 17 The Temple was dedicated at 10:30 A.M.[.] we had a glorious time[,] the different Preisthood being repersented in their order, Tickets of admission was issued to the various officers in the church for the first day and it was crowded to its utmost capacity

May 18 The Bishops was given the privilage of inviting a certain number of the worthy saints from each Ward[.] and the Dedicatory prayor was again read, as it was written some what after the manner of the one given at Nauhvou Temple[.] it was again crowded and we had another good time, but Prest Taylor thought there was a lot more saints would like to have the privilage of witnessing the cerimonies

(May) 19 The invitations was again extended to enough more worthy saints to again fill the house[,] and the same prayer was again read, and long services held as before on the two previous days, and it was a time long to be remembered by all that had the privilage of attending for truly the spirit and power of God was there, and the Bretheren told us that it had been made manifest to them that God had accepted of the House as built to His name[,] and it would be opened at once to give endowments to the living and the Dead[,] and they wanted the worthy saints to come on and do their own work[,] and also for those of their relatives that had died

May 21, The Temple was opened for ordinances

Henry wasted no time in getting to the temple.

June 4, I commenced to do Temple work for my Dead[.] my Wifes Margaret and Emily went also, My Father and Mother went a few times but they were too feeble to stand it long and they was counciled to turn the balance of the work over to me It had been a long time coming, but the temple was finally dedicated on May 17, 1884. Its completion was a miracle—but not the only one.

Footnotes

A sawmill was constructed about four miles up Temple Fork Canyon (of Logan Canyon) in September of 1877, to supply timber and lumber for the temple. It also supplied ties for the Utah & Northern Railroad.

Sawmill workers, about 30 in number, were paid in mill products and were thus able to build their own homes, granaries, and other buildings.

It is estimated that during the period of operation the mill produced more than two and one half million board feet of lumber, 21,000 railroad ties, 900,000 laths, two million shingles, 50,000 pickets, charcoal and an uncounted number of broom handles. (The broom handles were probably turned on Henry's broom handle lathes: see 1875 Dec 2 entry, page 114.)

The mill ceased operating in December of 1883 and burned to the ground in the winter of 1885-86. (Source: Sons of the Utah Pioneers plaque, site no. 63.)

---
Notas:
[^1] See entries: May 18-19, p. 130.
[^2] According to his daughters this newspaper was held as a sacred gift, and as long as he lived Henry kept it folded and pressed between the pages of his temple record, under lock, in his desk. It was not talked of by him, except on rare occasions, to his own family.
[^3] Chinese workers were used in the production of railroad ties for the Utah & Northern Railroad. They built a row of shanties for living quarters about one-half mile above Hanging Rock Cave. It is now called China Row Picnic Area. It is probable these were the shanties Henry refers to. [^7]
[^4] Willard Russell is the son of Emily. Margaret gave birth to Melvin Joseph.
[^5] Most of the rock was quarried in Green Canyon, six miles north and east of the temple. The discarded rock pile is much like it was years ago. The old rock foundations, laid for shanties, are gone. The quarry is referred to as the "Red Rock Quarry."
