Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Chapter Sixteen

Henry's Mission

Having recounted Henry's miracle, we will now return to his journal. The last previous entry was dated June 4, 1884—about two weeks after the Logan Temple opened for ordinance work.

No additional entries were noted until summer when his old enemy overtook him again in the last part of August, 1884:

I was taken very sick in the feild with my old complaint[,] the gravel and pains in the Kidneys

Henry's mother, now eighty-six, died on September 14, 1884. She was buried in the Logan Cemetery on September 20. Her funeral was held in the Logan Tabernacle.

Henry William was now an elder. Henry ordained him on October 1.

(Octr) 2 He got his Endowments and was married in the Temple to Elvira Davidson, Daughter of Bishop Robert Davidson of the Third Ward...

The new year, 1885, started with another addition to the family.

Jany 13 My wife Emiley bore me another Daughter[.] we named her Amey Eugine

On May 19, Henry notes:

My Father Died aged about 96 years of age

(May) 20 He was burried[.] the funerial services was also held in the Taberncacle[.] many old settler[s] of Logan was in attendance, it was a very unsettled time as the Deputy United marshel was on the track of every one living in Poligamy, I had to be away from home the most of my time, some of my freinds pursuaded me that I had better not attend the funeral in publick, but I told them it was the last thing that I could do for my father and I should attend [even] if I should get arrested, but I was not interupted

Henry's final note for 1885 is another happy one.

Aug 21 My Wife Margaret bore me another Daughter[.] we named her Mary Myrtle

Henry wrote little in 1886 as he was being hounded by the U.S. marshalls for his involvement in polygamy. The first entry he penned was dated simply "1886 Octr."

The most of this year I had to be away from home[.] The fore part of this month it became so hot with the Duputies on my tract till I had to come home to Logan in the night and hide up in some of the saints houses, and as soon as I had left my ranch where my Wife Emily and her familey was living in the summer seasons the Duputies came on the hunt for me, and as they could not find me they arrested her or rather supeaneded her to appear before the Grand Jury, and as the Judges had lately begun to try the segregation business upon the Bretheren, that is to make so many cases against a man what they claime for each offence, so by their infamous acts they could keep a man there in Prison for life, or at least for many years, but some time after this there was a test case made out involving apostle Lorenzo Snow in the case, as he was in the Utah Penitenuary serving out several segragation terms, it was brought before the United States supreme court at Washington and there decided that a man could not be tried for only one offence for the same thing[,] so many of the Bretheren was liberated from the Pen upon this discion [decision] of that the highest court in the Land[.] But as this was not found out till after I had made up my mind to get away from this unjust percicution and take a Mission to England my native home and visit my relatives and gather geneoliges so I could do more good than spend the rest of my days in Prison[.] I therefore consulted with Apostle F. D. Richards about taking such a mission and his advice was for me to go at once, so I only had 2 Days to get ready before starting

Margaret played a significant part in this secret plan for Henry "to come home to Logan in the night and hide up in some of the saints houses," and her part should be noted here. Years later Margaret wrote:

To avoid capture my husband left home and went to Cache Junction. He would change his hiding places for deputies were out to find him.

While he was there I was praying to know what to do for the best. I felt that the Lord could save us more than anyone else. After I had gone to bed, thinking about it, I heard a voice say, "It is time he was moving from where he is." It was repeated again and I said "Where shall he go"?

The same voice replied, "Take him to Aunt Rosina Morrell's." I did not sleep any time that night but wrote a note telling my husband that I felt impressed that he should return home. If he decided to do so, I told him I felt that he should ride in a load of hay as far as the old slaughter house and cut across the fields and that I would meet him below on the railroad track. In the meantime I had made arrangements with Sister Morrell for him to stay with her.

That evening we saw each other for only a few minutes. He hurried through the back yards to Sister Morrell's where he stayed for three weeks.

As was mentioned by Henry, the officers came to the ranch the next morning after he had left Cache Junction. He didn't mention that they ran pitchforks in the wheat bins and haystacks to make sure he was not there.

The decision to go on a mission had been made, and the trick was to get out of town without being detected by the deputies. On Halloween night 1886, Henry, with Henry William's help:

...started after Dark going by team to Salt Lake City[.] my son Henry Wm taking his team...

Henry William remembered that night very well.

We drove all night in the worst storm I have ever seen. Wind was terrible and the rain and hail blinded us until we couldn't see the road. Thunder shook the earth and the lightning nearly blinded us. Then there was a heavy fall of snow. We had to trust our faithful horses to keep the road.

Earlier in the evening officers of the law lined the roads watching for the Polygamists. Father and his companion had shaved off their beards and disguised themselves as foreigners. The storm proved a blessing to us for the roads were now deserted and not a soul molested us. We drove all night to Bountiful without a stop. Here we stopped only long enough to eat breakfast and then drove on to Salt Lake.

Leaving was a difficult choice for Henry. He was nearly fifty-five years old, and he was leaving behind the two women he loved and his children—equally loved. While he was gone, each family had to provide for themselves, as Henry could not assist them.

This note, taken from Henry's journal, was dated and written on Halloween night; the same night Henry William drove him to Salt Lake City to depart for England.

...Now the rest of my Journal will be found in my other Book which I kept while upon my mission in England which will be always very intresting to me if not to any one else to read

Henry's journal, like many missionary journals, is filled with routine entries, most of which will not be addressed here. There are entries, however, that should be included because many readers will relate to them, especially older missionaries. Still other readers will be happy our more modern missionaries are generally spared some of these experiences. Lastly, family members need to know that Henry made contact with many of his relatives left behind when he sailed to America.

After being set apart by Franklin D. Richards [^1] , Henry departed from Salt Lake City on the Denver and Rio Grande Railroad. The trip across the plains was familiar to him, but Niagara Falls and the Susquehanna River were not—nor was New York City.

Henry booked passage on the steamship Alaska, and he was on the high seas by November 12, 1886, when he wrote this comment:

I was taken very sick with my old complaint, the Gravel, and in much pain till after dark...

The Alaska docked at the port of Liverpool on November 17. The trip over the Atlantic Ocean had taken but nine days—much different from the ten weeks Henry spent coming to America thirty-five years earlier.

Henry had been ill on both trips, but on this trip he found himself so weakened physically that he was unable to walk to the Church office, and had to take a cab. Once there he was assigned to labor in the London Conference. The mission, at the time, consisted of several conferences.

After settling in Henry went right to work:

Dec 16 Went to Thatcham and visited my Nephew William's wife's parents, Mr. Joyce[,] and also the work shops that my brothers used to own but all having died a few years before. We then visited the old Church Yard where my Brothers and a number of old aquaintances lay. I gathered quite a few of their names with dates and then went to visit a Mr. Edward Pinnock, his wife was my Bro Charles

Neice [Niece] by his second marriage. We had a good comfortable bed and Bro Schofield [Henry's companion] remarked in the morning that it was too good for a Mormon Elder and told me to ask the woman how much our bill would be[,] but I told him that I did not think that they meant to charge any thing, but when I ask the man he refered me to his wife. When she ask me how much I thought it was worth I told her I had never paid for a bed yet for I had always been with friends so she finally charged us 2 shillings each for our Tea and breakfast so we had nothing to thank them for and they lost our blessing but we gave them tracts.

Dec 17 We visited my old home Cold Ash, where I left 35 years before on going to Utah, I visited the old house and sat down in it for an hour. It looked very much like it was when I left and I felt to thank God for the change and for my Mountain home and family and society of the saints in Zion.

Dec 20 I went again to Thatcham and found some more families and learned the where abouts of a cousin George Russell in Reading where I got a few names of my other relatives. In the evening we went to visit a man by the name of William Osgood who I had met on the road a few days before and [he] invited me to call at his house[,] and on doing so in the evening his wife met me at the door and would not admit me but told me her husband knew more than I did[,] thank God[,] and then slamed the door in my face. I bid her good night and returned back two miles feeling alright.

Henry, through persistence, was able to locate a good many of his relatives. He spent a lot of time with his nephew, George, the son of Henry's deceased brother of the same name. It was the older George who had driven Henry from his home many years before. He received some mail, took a few meals, and on occasion slept at George's home. The younger George seems to have had none of the animosities toward Henry that his father had harbored. On at least one occasion he even accompanied Henry to church. Other family members treated Henry well. Some of them even paid his train fare once in awhile.

Jan 19 I bid my nephew and family adue and started out to hunt new relatives. I went to Weybridge and found my aunt Ann widow of George Ballard [not his brother] from Taplow and my cousin Sarah Gillet wife of David Gillet who my aunt was living with. They treated me very kindly,...

Jan 20 Remained with them and went around the place some and got in conversation with the assistant gardiner that was under her husband and also the coachman of his master[.] he was very stupid to talk to on the Bible.

Jan 21 I bid them good bye my cousin paying for my ticket to go on to my other cousin at Reigate and told me if I ever needed money to let her know and she would help me.

Henry makes no mention of making any progress toward the gospel with any of his relatives. It was nice just to be welcome; however, he was not welcome everywhere.

Feb 15 Went againt to Cold Ash my native home and visited at a farmer Mathews where his lady had invited me to call when I had seen her one day before[,] but on arriving I found a cold reception not asking me in at first and commenced on me about Brigham Young and how many wives he had[.] I told the lady that I was not out to tell how many wives he nor my self had as she accused me of, neither did I wish to know how many kept mistresses they had. She finally ask me into the house when her big over grown son began telling me that we all ought to be kicked out of the country....

Henry had been suffering from an infected foot, and all of the walking he did was painful for him.

Feb 17 My foot was so swollen that I could not get my shoe on and it was so fevered that it made me almost sick. It had been poisened with wearing red socks.

Mar 1 We left Newbury and went around by Midgam and visited an old brother by the name of William Amer and then called on Mrs Buckeridge at Theale and got tea and then walked on to Reading, my foot was very sore we had walked 19 miles.

March 15 Still snowing, we bought a penny cake each and started out walking and carring our satchels and holding our umbrellas and our over coats on[,] and the snow pelting in our face all the way and snow about 6 inches deep, we went through old Windsor and Egham and Stains to Stanwell and at last found a sister by the name of Charlotte Joy[,] and it was a joy to us after walking 12 miles in such weather and then find a warm fire and some dinner...we then walked on to Ashford and took the train to London to my nephew George Ballard.

Henry still hoped to convert some of his relatives, and continued to seek them out.

Mar 19 I again called upon my Bro John's widow and also my neices Sarah Ballard and Annie Ballard Daniels[.] her husband was a minister and very bigoted and unbeleiving denying near every thing of Gospel and a sign seeker. I was with him for over 5 hours.

Henry communicated frequently with his families at home, and many others. He also visited England's historical sights, and other places of interest in the area, but mostly he worked. His efforts did not go unnoticed.

At a priesthood meeting held on April 25, President Teasdale, after a lengthy meeting, released the current London Conference president and reassigned two elders to other areas.

He then sat down saying that the Lord had not yet made it known to him who should be the next President. Every thing was quiet for five minutes. I with the rest were exercising our faith and prayers that the Lord would direct his mind alright in the matter when he seemed lifted to his feet and made the motion that Henry Ballard be appointed President of the Conference and I felt overcome after the motion was put and carried unanimously[.] I was then called upon to state my feelings[,] and [it was] with much difficulty that I could tell my feelings...I said I felt like Moses when called to deliver Isreal, I was slow of speech and [had] a stamering tougue, but was willing to trust in the Lord and my brethren to aid me to try and do my duty to the best of my ability. I then went back to my nephews for the night.

Nephi Schofield, one of Henry's companions, was present at that meeting and recalled it years afterward.

We sat as if in a Quaker meeting, speechless, but all exercising our faith for Brother Teasdale to choose the right man. We were almost overcome by a cloud which produced an atmosphere of great oppressiveness. President Teasdale sat looking at us all and then suddenly with great vigor, as though he was lifted by an unseen power, he jumped to this feet and said, "It is the will of the Lord that Brother Henry Ballard be appointed to fill this office." At this announcement Brother Ballard nearly collapsed in his seat, and when he was called to respond he was almost speechless. Revelation has been restored for truly I have witnessed a revelation. This was a revelation from God.

Returning to Henry's journal:

April 26 I took my things and returned to the office.

Henry was now officially at the helm of the London Conference.

Street meetings were common among proselyters in the late eighteen hundreds. The Mormon missionaries in the London Conference had their share of street meetings, but there were occasional problems.

Henry never felt comfortable speaking at a street meeting and avoided it, if possible. As conference president he relegated the job to the missionaries. However, he hated asking them to do anything that he didn't do. Henry spent a lot of time fasting and praying for strength to overcome the weakness he felt. At times he would eat only one meal a day for weeks. Henry had the ability to speak, and spoke for long periods at almost every meeting he attended. He felt perfectly at ease in this situation. Street meetings were another matter to him. True to his character, Henry made up his mind to correct this area of his behavior. Again, we rely on Brother Nephi Schofield to describe how Henry conquered his fear.

The meeting was held on Portaballa Road. Brother Ballard had experienced a great fear and dread of speaking at a street meeting and had felt that Satan had been holding him from bearing his testimony, and because of this feeling he had not made an effort. He finally felt determined to do so. He apologized to the Elders for not doing what he had ask them to do. He ask the Elders to pray for him and to use their faith in his behalf. He had fasted every day, with but one meal a day for three weeks, to overcome his weakness. His companion was the first speaker and spoke for a short time and then with a very timid voice Brother Ballard started to speak. His voice did not carry well, and the clattering of the horses hoofs over the noisy cobble road during the heavy traffic, drowned [out] his voice completely, and Brother Ballard gained little attention. All at once his voice broke and he became possessed with an unusual voice, deep and loud, and the people all around immediately turned to see what was up, and the travelers on the bus stood up to see what was going on. His voice was as loud as a fog horn on a steamer, and sounded above all the noise of the street. A man in the corner store could not hear what customers ask for because of his speaking. A large crowd soon gathered and the police ask them to move on for they were blockading the traffic. On every successive occasion Brother Ballard began to speak in a low meek modest way and invariably his voice would break into loud thunderous tones as he proceeded in his speaking[,] and at no other time would this happen—only at the street meetings. Surely he was a son of thunder.

Henry had indeed mastered his weakness and spoke at many more outdoor meetings. Most went very well, but some did not.

July 14 ...The Brethren again had opposition at their out door meeting[.] I was not with them again.

Henry's presence, however, didn't necessarily insure success. Consider his August 23 description of a street meeting.

Bro Morris and myself went to the Harrow Road and held a meeting on that road[.] I commenced to speak and very soon gathered a large crowd and they listened for a while when a drunken woman came up and stood before me and commenced to talk as loud as she could to break up the meeting and others joined in with her[,] but I talked to the top of my voice to drown hers untill I had talked 30 or 40 minutes[,] and had gathered a large crowd of over 300 and the rable got too bad to continue any longer[.] many of the more sensible portion was sorry to see how the others acted[.] they took all the tracts we had and wanted more and we gave out about 100[.] as soon as I stopped a crowd gathered around Bro Morris with a mob like feeling and I could not get to him nor him to me till I cried out for them to make a circle larger so we could all hear him[,] and they broke back a little so I could crowd my way to reach him with my arm and called him to come on and broke the road for him when I lost him again and I was surrounded with them and he got me out[.] they threatened us but I told them I did not fear any of them[.] I had given them a testimony that would stand against them and they could please themselves wether they received it. I had borne my testimony to the devine mission of Joseph Smith before they had drowned my voice and through the blessings of the Lord we got away from them all safe but they did not intend for us to get away so safe[.] several ladies begged of me to get Bro Morris out of the crowd that he was surrounded with for fear of danger.

A man named Jarman [^2] was an anti-Mormon group leader. His groups were present and well organized in the London Conference at that time. Henry met them face to face on September 10, 1887.

...Between the meetings some of Jarman's followers came along the street with their printed libellous sheets againts us. Bro's Cannon and Lusty went out to them to try and reason with them till they had gathered quite a crowd, I then went out and listened to him telling the people that the people could not leave Utah without endangering their lives and this was a little more than I could stand and I stepped up to him and told him that he was a Damn liar and I could prove it. I felt ashamed that I had been so plain with him[,] but could not help it for he was so full of lies[.] Jarman had sent his [hand] bills calling the people to come to Hamersmith near where he was going to expose the Mormons by his ludicours pictures and his costume of Temple clothing.

Two days later:

Sep 12 ...Bro's Morris and Schofield went to see Jarmans show and it was wicked and full of the devil. He berated us and told the people where we were stopping.

At the end of September, almost a year into his mission, Henry was still calling on his relatives to present the gospel plan to them. The following entry must have been written with a little bit of sadness in his heart.

Sept 27 ...in the Evening I went to Wansworth and visited my cousin Sophia Chapman and my second cousin Jerimiah August living with her. They did not care to listen to the Gospel.

The Jarman movement continued to escalate. It soon became so abusive and intolerable that Henry was forced to move the office of the London Conference to a new address. Henry described it this way:

Oct 2 ...Bro Burningham returned with me to the office to hold the West London meeting and when we got back we found that Jarman had been having his men parading the streets with big hand bills against us carring them on a board creating an excitement and he held a meeting near by us and a part of them come and rushed up stairs and filled our little room packing it full and nearly 500 out on the street, I commenced to talk but at times I could not keep them quiet but I talked to them for 45 minutes[,] at times very quiet[,] but they commenced to climb upon one anothers shoulders and get in at the [second story] window and before the police came onto the ground they broke down the iron railing and brick work on front of the house damaging about four pounds [^3] of which we had to pay one half[.] they also did some damage in the house, the police kept them back from doing any further damage. In the evening they came back but finding no meeting the police kept them back and none of us got hurt, the LandLord gave us notice to vacate the house within a week as he said the mob would tare his house down.

The first year had been an exciting one for Henry, and ended with the following note:

Oct 31 It was just one year since I left my home. I got a letter from home telling me that my littler girl Myrtle had been again very sick but was now again much better.

At about the halfway point in his mission, Henry was prompted to write the following in a letter to home:

...the work of the Gospel is a grand work and we feel proud to be connected with it. I pray that we may always feel humble and do our duty in the Kingdom of God[,] and O what joy when we have overcome and gained the victory.

In another letter Henry profoundly stated:

...I hope that we may all have strength to endure the trials of life for we are very often a trial to each other.

Journal entries over the next few months refer often to Jarman and his henchmen. Henry finally took one of them to court and obtained a restraining order, but the confrontations still continued. The best approach, it seemed, was to return their mail unopened, and try to ignore them. Of this group no more need be said; however, there were other detractors.

Christmas day, 1887, was enjoyable for Henry. He spent it with his nephew George and his family.

Imagine the flood of memories that must have filled Henry's mind as he penned this entry:

Jan 22 Sunday...I visited the London News London St Tottenham Court Rd where I had once lived with my brother George and turned out of doors by him in the Spring of 1851 because I would not forsake Mormonism but he died in 1864 but I attended to the work in the Temple for him [^4]

His heart must have filled with despair as he pondered these lines.

Mar 15 ...I then called at my niece Annie Daniels the Minister's wife and found my Bro Johns widow there[.] they expressed a feeling of hatred toward me and did not want me [there] but could not but treat me decent[,] but did not ask me to eat anything...She refered to the discussion between me and her husband and she thought he was right but I was wrong, I told her she would learn better some day,...I returned back to the office feeling that I had but very few friends among my relatives and I would have to wait till they died before I could benefit them any for they would not harken to my testimony

It was the same on March 23.

...I then hunted up a young woman by the name of Elizabeth Mason who had a mother in Utah that had asked me to find her daughter[,] but after I had walked a long distance I found her so bitter that she did not want to speak to me as she said her mother had left a blind husband and 5 children behind, but I tried to reason with her but without effect, and she shut the door on me

Henry was not the only one with problems.

April 5 I walked both ways making 6 miles, on the road going I met a respectable woman who stopped me, and commenced telling me her troubles and her want, she seemed to be telling the truth, I gave her a penny to buy her a cake with.

During his mission Henry was often plagued with sickness. There are numerous entries concerning his infected foot, but usually it was his "old complaint, the gravel," meaning kidney stones. These few entries are typical of the many that reflect this malady.

April 10 I visited Bro Gladwins in the evening but I felt sick and had to return to the office early and was quite sick all night with the pain in my kidneys again. I rested very little.

April 11 I still felt very sick but tried to keep up but the pain was very acute[.] between times I got the Brethren to administer to me in the afternoon an I felt some better.

April 12...I was so distressed with the pain at night that I got Bro Schofield to administer to me again and I rested a little better a portion of the night.

April 13 I felt a little easier the forepart of the day but worse again in the afternoon until about 11 in the night when the pain left me and I slept good the first for four nights.

Of course, there were some successes as well.

April 27 ...in the evening sister Emily Robinson the young woman that I baptized came to the office to visit us for a short time[,] she was feeling well in the gospel...

If one were to add up all the time Henry notes he talked in meetings, it would be hundreds of hours. Usually he felt like the Spirit was with him and modestly pointed that out. Some of the meetings were to large congregations, as many as 1,500 souls, and other groups were very small. Henry addressed all of them. Often he spoke several times a day, and sometimes people listened.

May 6 Sunday ...I took up all the time in the evening[,] about 70 minutes to a good sized congregation[.] The Lord blessed me in my testimony. Sister Hull came with me to Mrs Donoghue and four other strangers some of which was well satisfied.

Another time he notes:

...I spoke for 45 minutes and the Lord blessed me with great freedom...

Still later:

...we had 4 non members at our meeting on Mile End[.] I spoke first for 30 minutes and Bro Leiang followed for 40 minutes but an old opponent came and opposed us which brought quite a crowd[,] at least 400[,] but the Elders bore them powerful testimonies and I steped out and told them I would close with prayer when the spirit of the Lord came upon me in such power that I stood forth in the fear of God and bore my testimony in the voice of thunder to that crowd that gave me good attention[.] I then closed with prayer[.] I felt that good had come from intended evil.

Good did come of it.

I met a young lady at Bro Pyes by the name of Miss Beal who had attended our meetings and had requested baptism but I appointed to meet her there to teach her further of our doctrines and see if she understood what she was doing and I was very pleased to learn that she was fully prepared for baptism.

...in the evening we had 8 new members and some never had been to meeting before[.] I spoke one hour[.] I felt very good, at the close 3 women gave in their names for baptism...

Henry's next entry is rather interesting.

Aug 2 ...while I was speaking a man began to oppose me and several tried to get him to keep still but he tried to get me to stop but I took but little notice of him, he finally went around behind me and Bro Wadsworth thought he was going to give me a blow [and] he came close up to defend me, but right then a lad told him to shut up and that annoyed him, so he then struck at the lad but another young man took him a blow on the head and then ran off and him after him so the Lord protected us and we had a good meeting[.] I spoke 25 minutes.

Aug 27 ...in the evening we went onto the Kilburn Rd and held a meeting[,] we had nearly 200 to listen a part of the time, 3 of the Brethren spoke taking up about 60 minutes, the last one had considerable opposition, I steped into the circle and told them I was born and raised among them and returned of my free will, and I wanted them to look at me and listen for a few minutes, the Lord blessed me to speak to them for 15 minutes till they were all quiet and listened very attentive[.] I then closed with prayer.

Nov 17 ...It was just 2 years since I landed in Liverpool.

Nov 20 I visited Bro Robinson and called upon Mrs Enderson but they were not yet ready for baptism, in fact they were not yet a fit subject for it, I then went on to Wallaces and had quite a talk with him in regard to this faith in the gospel, and I found he had none, and he said it was a deception and would send in his request to be cut off the church[.] I told him I thought it was about time if he had been so deceived.

Dec 3 ...with our labors we had baptized 54 during the year and emigrated 70 and still about 600 members in the conference

Henry's mission was quickly drawing to a close.

Dec 18 I got a letter from Pres Teasdale stating that he had received a letter from the Presidency in Salt Lake City dated Nov 28 stating that I should be released to return home at an early date

Then, quoting President Teasdale, Henry wrote:

While I am sorry to loose your valuable assistance I rejoice in your release to go home to your family, I feel persuaded you will prosper and enjoy the Blessings of Almighty God for your faithful labor, and the report of your earnest labors will be sent to the Presidents office, I am sure you will leave with the faith, prayers and blessings of all the saints who know you, who will remember your fatherly counsels and earnest testimony for the truth, you will see the effect of the seed sown, to your perfect satisfaction, with best wishes from all at 42 Islington by George Teasdale.

Returning to Henry:

This was a part of the Kind letter from my beloved President which filled my heart with joy to overflowing.

Dec 23 ...after meeting Bro Leiang presented me as a token of respect from the Elders from Utah a very nice warm Rug or Blanket to keep me warm while traveling home[,] also made a very kind and touching speech and asking Gods blessings upon me which I very much appreciated and [I] made a short speech for their kindness to me[.] I then wished the saints good bye which I did not expect to see again...

Dec 25 "Christmas Day" I spent it with my Nephew George Ballard where I had spent two before I had a very agreeable time with them and wished them good bye for the last time.

Dec 27 Was closing up the books...I had spoken at 212 meetings in the Halls and also spoken at 32 out door meetings while I have been upon my mission.

Dec 28 ...I left at 10:10 A. M. feeling satisfied with my labors that I had done the best I could and had made many warm friends and gained the fellowship of the Elders and saints long to be remembered by me[.] I arrived at Liverpool at 2:30 P.M....In the evening I took a walk with Pres Teasdale and had quite a chat with him, he was well satisfied with my labors in the conference.

Dec 29 ...started on board the steam ship "Wisconsin"...

located in a small room for our births [berths] all to ourselves in the cabin and eating at the same table with the captain and Purser and Doctor.

Dec 30 ...I took a light breakfast...but I soon threw it all up

Dec 31 Was still very sick, I got up and washed but had to lay down again, and could keep nothing upon my stomach but a few grapes and an apple.

Jan 1, 1889 Was getting worse sick as the sea was getting very rough...

Jan 2 ...[Bro Woods and I] were both very sick Jan 3 The sea was so rough it broke in 3 portholes and tons of water rolled over the wheel house...

Jan 6 Sunday was a very fine morning the ship making 260 miles in 24 hours consuming 70 tons of coal during the time. I felt quite well and ate a hearty breakfast...the Captain held church of England service in the Saloon but no sermon, I felt like I would liked to have preached it for him but did not deem it wise to ask for the priviligege...but I thought what a difference to that of the Saviour's teaching...

On December 9, the ships purser, [^5] by tradition, held a lottery costing 2 shillings for each ticket holder. The winner would be whoever drew the number of the pilot boat that ushered them into the harbor. The boat was number nine—the number Henry had selected. He had won the 30-shilling lottery. Of this he said:

...after I paid the Purser my own and Bro Woods back, I felt [it] was a gift from God

Maybe it was a gift from God. Henry didn't even have the money to pay in advance.

Henry chose to go on a mission, but only out of desperation dictated by his unusual circumstances. No doubt he would have preferred to remain at home with his families. But in retrospect, Henry probably would have said, like all other missionaries, "It was the best two years of my life." His final entry in his missionary journal reads:

Jan 16 ...I took the freight train to Logan at 11 P.M.

Henry left in the dark of night, and he returned in the dark of night. The train carried him over the same tracks he had helped to lay fifteen years earlier. He also returned to the persecution he had left two years earlier.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Held for sentencing
[^2] The $900 was borrowed from Emily's brother, Hyrum.
[^3] For the full text of the manifesto see Official Declaration-1, found in the Doctrine and Covenants on pages 291-92.
[^4] This address by Wilford Woodruff was important not only to Henry but to all members of the Church everywhere. Excerpts of it have since become part of LDS scriptures, and can be found in the Doctrine & Covenants on pages 292-93.
[^5] Financial officer.
