Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Chapter Seventeen

From Prison To The Manifesto

The next morning, January 17, 1889, the train pulled into Logan at 5:00 a.m. Henry was met at the station by his son Thomas. Finding all well at home he confined himself to his house trying to decide what to do next.

Jan 19 Was writing letters to quite a few and remained in the house till I could find out what was best to be done, and all that I could learn was for me to give myself up for trial

Henry surrendered to the authorities on January 29, 1889, and was "bound over" [^1] for the sum of $1,500 for himself and an additional $200 for Emily. On February 8, 1889, he was sentenced to two months' imprisonment plus court costs, which amounted to $38.50. The $38.50 was loaned to him by a Brother Dalton, and at eight o'clock that night:

...I was placed in cell no. 25, with Mark Hall from Ogden

The next day Henry noted:

Feb 9 When we were turned out in the yard I found quite a number of Brethren that I knew, they were all enjoying themselves as best they could under the circumstances which was very comfortable for prison life, the most of them had striped clothes on except those who had short terms[.] I was not allowed any but I had to have my beard cut off

Henry was in good company. Apostle George Q. Cannon was among those serving time for "unlawful cohabitation," and based on Henry's brief entries, it appears that Apostle F. M. Lyman and Bishop William Maughan, of Wellsville, may also have served time with him.

Brothers Cannon, Lyman, and Maughan each conducted Sunday services for the Mormons held there. Ministers from other faiths also held services. On the Sundays Henry was on "pump duty," he hired another prisoner to do the work for him so he could attend the meetings.

Henry was visited quite frequently—he was thrilled when President Wilford Woodruff came to them—but the real highlight came on April 8. Henry noted:

My time came for my release and I bid farewell to my Brethern[.] My son Melvin came with the buggie to take me to the City...

The same entry contains less welcome news. Henry continues:

I there got a letter from home stateing that my children were sick with scarlet fever also my grand daughter was also very sick also my wife Margaret. I learned that a special train would go to Logan that night as the [General] Conference would close. I attended the last meeting[.] Bro W Woodruff had been sustained at the Conference as President of the Church...as I was just taking the train I received a telegram from home stateing that my little granddaughter Ada had died at 1 A.M. that morning. I arrived home at 11 P.M. and found my wife still sick also my little girl Amy very low.

April 30 ...A concert was held in the ward meeting house by the Primary to welcome me home[.] it was very good

Henry felt his surrender and term in prison would pay his debt to society and give him his freedom. Such was not the case. He was arrested several times for being seen with his daughter-in-law. Someone unwittingly assumed she was his wife Emily—so the persecution continued.

Aug 24 I was again arrested for unlawful "cohab" by Dep Marshalls Pratt, Westone and Bowman, also my wives and their mother were subpenaed as witness. I had an examination before commissioner C C Goodwin[.] he failed to prove any thing against me but held me over for further witnesses to be brought against me

May 31 [1890] Was again brought before the commissioners[.] Mrs Sarah Birdno [Birdneau] Card and her daughter Jennie testified that they saw me riding in a wagon with my wife Margaret[,] also Emily[,] but they were mistaken for I proved that it was my sons wife Elvira and my first wife in the wagon with me[.] I was then discharged by the court

Henry mentions little more about confrontations with the law concerning plural marriage; however, accusations and ill feelings toward the Church and its members continued for years.

Henry traveled to Salt Lake City to attend the October conference. Here he witnessed the appointment of another Apostle from Logan, Marriner W. Merrill, the Logan Temple president at the time. He also met Saints from the London Conference, along with several missionaries who served with him in London.

He baptized his little girl Jennie Lulu on October 22. The next event Henry recorded is of a tragic nature, but one very familiar to the Ballards.

Dec 7 My daughter Ellen Pheobe was taken sick with a bad cold which set into Membranous croup[.] She continu ed to suffer with it, she was administered to many times[,] also was prayed for in the Temple but in the providences of the Lord she was destined to leave us.

Dec 12 At 9 A.M. she died very peacefully aged 14 years and nearly 3 months, she was a lovely girl and kind to all, full of faith in the gospel and much devoted to the Sabbath school also to her studies in the B Y College and to her primary association.

Dec 14 We held her funeral in the 2nd ward meeting house[.] it was nearly full...each [speaker] made very comforting remarks calcuated to comfort us in our breavement, 18 carriages and wagons went to the grave yard.

Year's end found the Saints very concerned about religious persecution.

Dec 23 As it was the Prophet Joseph Smiths birthday it was decided by the first Presidency to call a general fast day to fast to commence at sundown on the 22nd and continue till the 23rd at sundown to seek the Lord in our behalf as a people[,] that he would soften the hearts of the law makers of our nation toward us so that we may possess our rights as free citizens of our great republic,...I met with the Brethren of the 2nd and 4th Wards in the morning in Prayer Circle[.] we had 26 present, I was mouth, we felt well. I then met with the saints of my Ward at 10 A.M. and 2 P.M. I took up a collection for the poor to buy them some coal[.] all responded very liberally, and we felt that our prayers would be remembered by the Lord.

On January 7, 1890, Henry was in the temple doing work for his kindred dead. Margaret and his daughter Rebecca were with him.

It was a hard winter. Henry noted that the snow "was about 2 1/2 feet on the level in the valley," and it created a few problems.

Jan 22 President M W Merrill of the Temple told us that he was afraid that they would be compelled to close the Temple for the want of coal as the trains were blockaded, but a train got through and a little coal was got so they could continue work. It was very hard to get any coal and nearly every body was out[,] and wood could not be got at any price[,] and much sickness with bad colds and fever.

It appears the Lord had not yet answered the Saints prayers about religious persecution.

Feb 2 ...a Telegram came stating that the supreme court of the U S had decided that the test oath gotten up in Idaho to deprive all Mormons from voting was legal, so it will rob all that believed in Mormonism from voting or holding any office.

Feb 10 Salt Lake City was robbed in their election by the coruption of the voting of the so called Liberals.

Henry's family was growing up. On February 15th, two of his sons were ordained—Willard to the office of priest, and Ernest of the office of deacon. Thomas was ordained to the office of elder on March 30. Three days

later Thomas married Phoebe John Smith in the Logan Temple.

Summer passed without comment, but later Henry noted the following:

Sept 7 We had a very strong frost killing a good deal of vegetation, my crop at the ranch was very light, the rail road going through it[,] which cut it up very much, the station was built making the Junction upon my land.

Nov 30 I commenced hauling lumber to the ranch to build a Boarding house close by the Station[,] my wife Emily living there and attending to it. It was built of lumber at a cost of nearly $900.00. [^2]

Dec 24 They moved into it but not yet finished

Dec 29 I went down to finish rocking up the well.

As the new year rang in, Henry was ill and unable to get out-of-doors for a few days. As a result of his illness tithing settlement was put off until:

Jan.14 [1891] I was able to get out of doors again, and begun settling Tithing with the people of the Ward.

On February 3, Henry was blessed with a new granddaughter. On February 9, Margaret and Emily's father, Thomas McNeil, passed away.

Henry also noted:

...there was a great deal of sickness among the people, in almost every family.

Following in the footsteps of his father, Henry's oldest son was given a significant church calling.

March 8 My son Henry William was called to be Bishop of Benson Ward, and was ordained a High Priest and set apart the next day by Apostle Moses Thatcher in Logan.

Thirty years as bishop had passed when Henry penned the following:

April 14 A committee of Brethren and sisters went to work and got up a reunion of the Ward of all members in the Church[,] and out of all over 16 years of age, by giving a splended supper and presented me with a splended gold watch as a token of respect of the good feeling of the people on the aniversary of my Thirtieth year of my Bishoprick of the Ward, we had a good time. Apostle Moses Thatcher and the Presidency of the stake and Pres C O Card of Canada were in attendance together with the most of the Ward. The next day the children had their day of enjoyment with a dance.

Henry remained silent after his thirtieth-year anniver-sary until the following November.

Nov 1 Our Quarterly conference commenced. Pres Woodruff also Geo Q Cannon and Jos F Smith who had just been pardoned a few weeks before by the Prest of the U. S. after being in exile for over seven years it was a treat to have them again in our midst. They spoke at length upon the Manifesto [^3] that was presented to the saints at the conference in Salt Lake City last April setting forth that it was the will of the Lord that Polygamy should cease among this people for this nation was determined to disfranchise every Mormon and close our Temples if it was not stopped. [^4] Pres Woodruff dedicated our Stake Tabernacle, they made it very plain that there were but two Priesthoods and all the difference there was in each was the calling to fill different positions. We had many good instructions they were satisfied with the saints.

The balance of Henry's notes for the year talk of routine changes in the ward, visitors from London, Melvin J. Ballard's ordination to the office of priest, and his final entry is about the weather.

Dec 30 Was a very snowy day it fell nearly a foot deep[.] we had had very cold stormy weather the most of the month.

It had been a difficult three years for Henry and his family. The persecution he had tried so hard to avoid had, like a mongrel dog, followed him home.

The manifesto, now church doctrine, made it unlawful to practice polygamy. It did not, however, alter the fact that Henry had two wives and two families to sustain.

One way or another, life went on.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The monument was built. It eventually came to rest at its present location-Main Street-just north of South Temple Street, in Salt Lake City.
[^2] The $900 was borrowed from Emily's brother, Hyrum.
[^3] For the full text of the manifesto see Official Declaration-1, found in the Doctrine and Covenants on pages 291-92.
[^4] This address by Wilford Woodruff was important not only to Henry but to all members of the Church everywhere. Excerpts of it have since become part of LDS scriptures, and can be found in the Doctrine & Covenants on pages 292-93.
