Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Chapter Nineteen

On To Statehood

It snowed on April 10, and no plowing had been done yet.

On April 11 Henry:

...spoke at the funeral of David Purdy who had shot himself while still weak recovering from sickness.

The last day of April was again quarterly stake conference. The brethren in attendance spoke at the first session, but some were called back to Salt Lake City as President Willford Woodruff was ill. In spite of the illness the conference was carried on the next day.

The season was late, and plowing didn't get underway until after the first of May. The end of May brought some much-needed rain; it also brought spring commencement exercises:

May 26 I attended the closing term of the B Y College [^1] held in the Thatcher opera house[.] it was crowed to its utmost capacity a good program was rendered While Henry did not say, it is both likely and possible that he had children attending Brigham Young College.

Another quarterly conference had come and gone and:

Aug 4 The case of the Logan Cow Pasture Co and John M Davidson was appealed from the Bishops court by James Quaile the Pres of the High Council, the Bishops decision was reversed after a great deal of questioning back and forth, I was requested to be present[.] they decided in favor of the Company, later it was again reversed by the Council from their first decision

On August 5, Henry reorganized the Primary association in his ward installing his daughter Rebecca as second counselor. On August 6, he was subpoenaed to Ogden to attend court in the defense of F. J. Keisel. The trial was deferred until August 9. Not wanting to waste time, Henry traveled on to Salt Lake City to attend General conference where, again, the Saints were admonished to have more home industry for themselves.

Upon returning to Ogden, Henry was involved in a rather interesting case.

Oct 9 I returned to Ogden and attended court and gave my testimony stating that Mr Keizel only promised Cache Co $1000.00 provided they put in an Iron Bridge across Bear River at Cache Junction, but the County let the Bridge contract for $1650.00 to be built of wood and then sued Kiezel and Post his partner for the full amount they promised for the Iron, the jury decided that they should pay $500.00 and the Judge throwed the case out for a new trial or to be settled by arbitration. I returned to Cache Junction and finished putting in my crop, as we had had some fine rains, but my crop the past season had been very small only about 4 [^2] bushels to the acre taking it all for Bread and seed after expenses for cutting [and] thrashing but very thankful for that as some were much worse off.

Normally such a light crop would not be worth cutting, but Henry had no choice if he wanted to feed his family.

The October quarterly conference was well attended. Several of the Apostles were present, including the two from Logan: Moses Thatcher and Marriner W. Merrill. Henry notes:

Oct 29 ...Pres G Q Cannon said it was a great sin for the saints to send for Doctors when our families were sick instead of calling for the Elders of the Church in which we should have faith that we may be healed. The Brethren urged it upon the Saints to keep the word of Wisdom also to establish home manufactures in our midst and to stop going into debt, also said we were free with regard to our politics only not to get up ill feelings toward each other, said much of the ill feeling of the world was being removed...toward us, the church property that had been taken from us had now been returned, the Brethren all felt well in their attendance at our conference which lasted two days.

The government and the people of the Utah Territory had applied for statehood as early as 1849. Finally, after years of trying, the results of their continuing efforts were beginning to bear fruit.

Dec 13 News came over the wires that Utah was accepted in the House by a very large majority to become a State, it now only had to wait for the Senate to give the right which was very favorable.

The year 1893 ended on a happy note.

Dec 23 Saturday, I was very busy distributing donations to the poor for Christmans that had been brought in for that purpose, the people had been very liberal under the circumstances that [we] were in as a people.

Dec 27 Our Ward Sunday school had a good time in a dance, and giving them [the children] candy and the Parents [candy] in the evening.

On Henry's birthday on January 27, 1894, he joined with the Primary children in a sleigh ride, and:

we had a good time

Characteristically, Henry noted the comments made in the January quarterly conference.

Jan 28 Our Stake Conference commenced, Pres Joseph F Smith and Apostles F M Lyman and M W Merrill and several of the Presidents of the Seventies were in attendance, and the house was filled to overflowing and in the afternoon an oveflow meeting was held in the East Basement. In the morning Elder Seymore B Young spoke at great length upon the faith that had been exhibited by the Prophet Joseph Smith and other early Elders of the Church in proclaiming this Gospel, and the faith that it took to establish this people in these vallies of the Mountains and the Saints needed to be very careful lest at this date, of the outside world getting an influence for evil over the youth. Elder John Morgan following upon the same subjects also advising the Brethren to stay at home and cultivate the soil and raise produce instead of importing so much and take care of our machinery[.] Elder Feildstead followed with good advice. In the afternoon Elder J G Kimball spoke for a short time upon us as people paying our tithing that we may escape the judgments of God that will be poured out upon Babylon. Pres J F Smith followed upon the same also spoke with great force upon the sins of imorallity that was creeping into the church, especially among the young, and said unless this evil was hunted out and the offender brought to justice it would bring the displeasure of our God upon us, yet we must labor with patience and kindness. At the evening meeting Apostle F M Lyman spoke at great length upon the duties of the priesthood said men should not be ordained to the higher when they had not done their duty in the lesser, and said all the Quorums should be kept busy at work. Pres. J F Smith followed upon the same strain also said when a young couple was not worthy to go to the Temple to get married[.] the Bishop should counsel them to get married by the Bishop and let them prove themselves as worthy first.

Only two more comments were noted for the year 1894.

Feb 21 I was voted in by the City Council as Street Supervisor for the city.

Mar 1 I was qualified for the office.

Quarterly conference was convened on January 27, 1895. The Saints were again counseled to keep the Word of Wisdom and to pay their tithing, notwithstanding money was scarce and the price of grain low.

On January 30:

I closed up my Ward tithing books the people had paid a very fair tithing[,] the most of them[,] considering the close time with every body.

Then on:

Feb 5 I ordained my son Willard R[ussell] an Elder and William Worley ordained my son Melvin J after they had both been presented before the ward also before the priesthood meeting of the Stake as was now the order.

It is easy for us, in our day, to look back to the "good old days" and think of them as a time free of our current problems. Not so.

Feb 6 I was subpenoed before the court held in Logan on the Mrs (name in original journal) case of man slaughter[,] she stateing that she had never received any aid from the Ward when she had continuesly for two years past and she had had a illegetimate child and it was believed she had killed it as it was found dead and buried in the lot.

Accidents once more plagued the Ballards.

April 21 Sunday I took my wife Margaret and two of my children, Lettie and Myrtle, to Benson Ward to visit my son and Family Henry Wm, we attended Sunday School in the morning at which I spoke a few minutes, we again attended the afternoon meeting at which I again spoke, we had a good time we started home in time to get to our own Ward meeting in the evening, we got home alright, my wife got out of the buggie and the little girls remained in till I intended to take the buggie to where I had borrowed [it], but before I got fully turned around the Horse ran away and tiped the buggie over throwing me with great force to the ground upon the hard street bruising my face very badly and stunning me for over an hour that I knew nothing and was very badly shaken up, my youngest girl Myrtle was also badly bruised in the face, Lettie was not hurt much, they carried me into the house and soon administered to me when my senses came to me, in the evening a number of the Brethern come from the meeting and again administered to me and I rested a little through the blessings of the Lord, It was through His mercies I was not hurt worse and also my children.

April 24 I sat up for a short time.

April 25 I walked out doors for a short time when the train came up from the Cache Junction my little girl Amy came up bringing the word that my son Franklin had been kicked very badly in the face with [a] horse[,] cuting his tounge and spliting his lip and knocking out one of his teeth and a few days after my little grand son Henry Wm at Benson Ward got kicked with a horse and thrown some distance but did not hurt him very bad thank the Lord.

Apostle Heber J. Grant was the only visiting General Authority from Salt Lake City for the May quarterly conference. The two Apostles from Logan were too ill to attend, and so Heber J. Grant:

...spoke nearly all the time for both days.

Among other things, he urged the practice of the Word of Wisdom, and he also said:

...our little children would grow after death to their full stature, he earnestly pleaded with the saints to keep the commandments of the Lord and He would deliver us out of our indebtedness as a people...we had a good time, we had also had a good rain for nearly a week.

June 19 We had a very severe frost which killed a great many things[,] some wheat in places.

In August sickness came calling again—an all-too-frequent and unwanted visitor.

Aug 25 My daughter Rebecca had had the Quinsy for 10 days but it broke and was a great deal better, my son H W at Benson Ward had also been sick with the same for several days and also broke which gave his ease[.] Melvin also came down with it.

Sept 15 My wife Margaret came down with it.

Winter came early to Cache Valley in 1895.

Sept 20 We had quite a snow storm[.] it snowed all the afternoon and through the night and still again in the morning till it was 8 or 9 inches deep, it broke down a great many shade trees and fruit trees, and very cold with it.

Christmas day, 1895, Henry was with his family, and they:

...spent a very agreable time together.

The year 1896 was an exciting one for all of Utah, and the excitement started right after New Year's Day. Henry notes:

Jan 4 The President of the United States signed the Bill to give unto Utah statehood[.] as it was Saturday we held a grand Holiday on the following Monday[,] in fact it was held in nearly every city and town in Utah with great rejoicing....

The goal of statehood, sought after for so many years, had finally come to pass. What a celebration [^3] it must have been.

Footnotes

Certain influential men suspected that Utah's pioneer leaders were disloyal and were attempting to set up their own government. It was nearly half a century before suspicion and disagreements were finally ironed out.

When the news of statehood was telegraphed to Salt Lake City, a great celebration broke loose. Guns, bells, and whistles joined in a wave of joy and happiness that swept over the State.

Little towns-unlike Salt Lake City-had no factory or train whistles, but there were plenty of tin pans, cowbells, and "six-guns." One man hung an iron pipe in front of the general store and hammered it with a steel bar, the noise echoing across the valley. Though it was winter, the weather was warm and mild. Most of the people drove to the nearby foothills where they had a community picnic around great bonfires.

Truly, this was a red-letter day in Utah's history. (Source: Church News, December 7, 1957.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Aaron DeWitt and Henry had been close friends from the time they entered Cache Valley together. Aaron chose to leave the Church about 1868, and he became the first member of St. John's Episcopal Church, in Logan. They were still close friends at the time of Henry's death. (Source: Logan Herald Journal, February 1, 1982.)
[^2] Through the years, it has been a practice of the Reorganized Church of Latter Day Saints to refer to themselves as Josephites, and to the Mormon Church as the Brighamites.
[^3] The area for which they had originally applied for statehood would have included Utah and all, or part of, eight states surround-ing Utah-it was to be called "Deseret." Although qualified to be a state according to population, the petitions were always denied.
