Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Chapter Twenty

Marriages And Family Missionaries

With the celebration for statehood over it was back to business as usual, and part of that business included politics. They played a small part in Henry's life, and his January 4, 1896, entry noted:

Our City Council that had been elected last Nov now came into power and they made great changes in various officers. John Dahle was appointed in my stead as street supervisor.

Statehood apparently opened new avenues for the women that in the past had been closed to them.

Jan 17 The Ladies of Logan had a great Banquet and Ball in the event of their first receiving their franchise in connection of Statehood for Utah, we had a good time at the Banquet[.] nearly all of Logan was out.

Two days later Apostle John W. Taylor talked in one of the Logan wards.

...and admonished the Saints to become one with their leaders and to acknowlege the hand of the Lord in removing the ill feeling from our outside friends...

During quarterly stake conference on February 2, the visiting General Authorities, which included Heber J. Grant, again reminded the Saints of living the Word of Wisdom and paying a generous fast offering. The Saints of Logan were asked to participate in a special fast on behalf of the Logan Apostle, Moses Thatcher, who was very ill.

Then in compliance:

Feb 6 Our Fast meeting commenced in each Ward to fast and pray for Bro Thatcher and many others that were sick in the different Wards, my daughter Rebecca was also very sick with Quinsy...

Margaret was also remembered—by another group.

April 14 Several of the Ward got together and got up a surprise upon my wife, Margaret on account of her 50th birthday[.] we had a good time together long to be remembed by all and a complete surprise to her...

The Manifesto had been presented, and a vote taken, before the congregation at the last April general conference, and:

...the first Presidency and the 12 Apostles had signed it with the exception of Bro Lund who was presiding in England,... and to the sorrow of the most of the saints Moses Thatcher had refused to sign it and thus was not sustained in his position at the conference, the other leading Elders signed it....the Manifesto was read and almost all voted for it[.] when the contrary vote was called there was only 3 or 4 voted against it, The Brethren spoke very feelingly for Bro Thatcher...

Henry was probably surprised to realize how quickly the years had passed. His and Emily's son, Willard Russell, was again baptized before marrying Bessie I. Griffin on June 10, 1896. A week later, on June 17, Melvin J. married Martha A. Jones. It was actually a double wedding as his daughter, Rebecca, married Louis S. Cardon at the same time. All three couples were married in the Logan Temple that Henry had so diligently labored to help complete. The fruits of his labors were now paying dividends.

Melvin J. had received a mission call prior to being married. A month later, on July 7, he departed for Kansas City, Missouri, leaving his bride behind.

July 24 was celebrated at Henry William's in Benson Ward. Mary Myrtle fell off a horse and pulled her arm out of its socket and:

we had to come right home with her and we got Dr O C Ormsby to put it right.

The August quarterly conference came and went with little comment, but Henry spoke of an interesting November conference.

Nov 19 Apostle Moses Thatcher was at last droped from his Quorum, he had not been sustained as an Apostle since April conference[.] he was opposed to his Quorum in matters pertaining to the Church and he failed to make it right and his priesthood was all taken from him leaving him as a member only. It was a very trying time with many on account of the way things turned out, but it was a lesson to all to take heed where we each stood....

Christmas Eve of 1896 Henry spent in Cache Junction with Emily and her children—he ended the year with a Sunday School party in Logan. Two General Authorities, Elders J. Golden Kimball and B. H. Roberts, were in attendance.

Quarterly stake conference is the subject of Henry's first entry for the year—it was January 30, 1897. The General Authorities were still concerned about the recent stand taken by one of the Apostles.

...in the morning Brigham Young Jr. spoke the most time upon obedience refering to the trouble that the Church was passing through by the opposite course that Moses Thatcher was taking against the Church and that many were taking sides with him, he proved that much kindness had been shown him.

The latter part of the conference ended on a different and interesting note.

...and further there was no necessity of ordaining children to the Priesthood until after they had been Baptized at 8 years[,] and where any had[,] they should be again [ordained] after they become of age.

Melvin J., though still on a mission, was greeted with an early surprise.

Feb 5 Melvin J's wife Mattie was confined bringing him a fine son she had a very hard time[.] we had to get Dr O C Ormsby as it was before its time.

Feb 12 I blessed it giving him the name of Melvin Russell, they were each doing well.

Just two weeks had passed when the subject of Moses Thatcher came up again—Henry was directly involved.

Feb 14 Sunday evening we had a Sunday School review of two of the small classes and they did well, but soon after it commenced Moses Thatcher came in and the house was full in every part of it, Superintendant Joseph Quinney had charge of it and after the school was through he called upon Moses Thatcher to speak which he had no right to do without first asking me but he went on and talked for 35 minutes bringing up several grievances in the Church, said he was now thrown away like an old shoe, when he got through Bro Quinney gave out the hymn to close when I got up and demanded the privilege of speaking as Moses had brought up a great deal of his trouble in the Church with his Quorum. I spoke for a short time feeling very free as I felt it my duty to speak very plain upon his case without being excited or causing ill feeling I tried to show him wherein he should humble himself and be willing to leave his case in the hands of that noble time honored servant of God Wilford Woodruff before he should pass away. I testified in Plainess that he, Moses had been raised from his sickness by the faith and prayers and fasting of the little children together with many of their parents in the past and he should feel very humble, but afterward he wanted to speak and did try to justify himself[.] quite a number of the Brethren and sisters felt that I only did my duty.

Feb 15 I layed the matter before Pres Orson Smith and he said I did barely my duty and said I must get my counselors and Sunday School Superintendant together and find out how we stood before another Sunday to partake of the sacrament.

Feb 19 I met the above Brethren in council my first councilor N W Kimball was with me in sustaining the authorities of the Church but we had to labor very earnestly with my second councilor Lucian C Farr before he could bring his mind to it which he finnally agreed to submit to, also Superintendant Jos Quinney had to be labored with for some time before he would submit to our views which he finally did[,] his assistants felt as we did, we were together for nearly 3 hours but the time was well spent, and I felt that I had thrown a big load off my shoulders.

The Moses Thatcher business was now behind him, so Henry turned to other things.

Feb 20 John Irvines funeral was held in the meeting house[.] he was aged [and] he was a good quiet man but had withdrawn himself from the church some years ago upon very trifaling affairs but never turned against the church in any manner.

From what Henry writes, it appears that firesides have been around for a long time.

Feb 23 Pres J F Smith came up from Salt Lake City and gave a very intresting lecture before the Y.M.M.I.A. upon the origin of Mormonism showing very clearly the devine mission of Joseph Smith...

Mar 1 Mdm Mountford held four or five lectures in the Tabernacle upon village and city life in Palestine making the parables of our Saviour and His Apostlels and the Prophets very plain [—] like our every day scenes of life

A variety of things were mentioned by Henry in the next few entries: Sister Toombs died of cancer, a ward conference was held on March 28. Brother Charles O. Card was down from Canada and spoke at the conference. The various officers of the Church, stake, and ward were sustained.

Referring to the conference, Henry thought:

...the people turned out very good considering the weather which was very stormy with snow and mud upon the streets as it was a very late spring...

The last of March, Henry's grandson, Melvin Russell, was taken quite ill with "cramp colic."

...I administered to him and he got easier right away...

On April 2, 1897, Rebecca gave birth to a fine son. They named him Louis Ballard Cardon.

Quarterly conference commenced on April 17, and:

...We had very full meetings as spring had come and the roads had somewhat dried up,...

Three Apostles were in attendance, including Marriner W. Merrill, from Logan. They talked of the unity in the Quorum of the Twelve, and how a change had come over "the people as a nation." They talked about the ease the Elders had in preaching the gospel in areas previously prohibited. They advised the young to get married, and pay their tithes and offerings. They also asked for donations to help enlarge the forerunner of BYU, the Brigham Young Academy, and:

...a vote was put and carried to that effect...

The visiting Apostles were also concerned about:

...the carless habit which many of our returned missionaries got into in a short time after returning home...

Rebecca's new son was a month old on May 2, and Henry, assisted by Louis S. Cardon, the boy's father, blessed him in sacrament meeting. Melvin Russell was blessed the same day. Within a few days, however, Melvin Russell caught pneumonia. There was much illness in the area and the Ballards were concerned. Henry noted:

May 8 He was very sick at night but a little better in the morning[.] we all fasted for him during the day, Bro John H Davis's little girls funeral was held in the Ward house on Sunday 9th.

May 15 Little Melvin Russell was very greatly improved.

Time has a way of slipping by, and on June 9, 1897, Henry and Emily's daughter, Lydia Jane, was married in the Logan Temple to William Henry Griffin. Henry and Emily were with them.

An unwelcome guest, so familiar to the Ballards, visited again before year's end.

Aug 11 Willard's wife bore him a fine daughter weighing 9 lbs.

Sept 27 She [Vivian Imogene] died after being very sick for three weeks, she suffered a great deal of pain and had been kept alive only through faith being exercised for her[.] she was a lovely sweet little darling, it was a great trial to her parents to give her up. Early in the morning Henry Wm's wife Elvira bore him a fine son and got along well. Rebecca's little boy was very sick with summer complaint.

Sept 29 Willards little girl was buried[.] there was quite a large turn out of the friends and people of Newton where it was held in the meeting house.

Henry turned sixty-six on January 27, 1898. He remembered it this way.

It was my sixty-sixth birthday and my two councilors N W Kimball and Lucian C Farr acted as a comittee and extended an invitation to all the married people of the Ward both saints and non members to attend a social gathering of the Ward in the evening at the meeting house and they nearly all turned out and all very much enjoyed themselves, and councilor Kimball presented me with a beautiful leather covered arm rocking chair which cost nearly forty dollars whereupon I made a short speech, the most of the people congratulated me upon the event of my life, the next night all the young people of the Ward over twelve years had another party, and the following day the children had a lovely time in the dance and all the Ward seemed to enjoy themselves very much for which I felt very thankful to the Lord for the respect shown to me and as I expressed myself I hoped to be still able to retain that love and affection of the Ward,

The following lines was composed by a freind Aaron Dewitt which had left the church years ago [^1]

To Bishop Henry Ballard, on the anniversary of his sixty-sixth Birth day Jany 27, 1898

Another year has rolled around and added to thy age,

Thy record on the book of life has filled another page.

No line upon that register thy peace can ever mar;

Because thy life throughout, has been as stainless as a star.

We know thou art no polished gem, but natural and free;

And love the truth for its own sake, without hypocrisy.

A firm believer in the good, a helper of the race;

A comforter of every soul, of beauty and of grace.

This is the reason we are here to try our best to make;

This evening pleasant for ourselves, and for our Bishops sake.

We ask God as thy sun goes down beneath the Crimson west,

That through thy fading sight may shine the glories of the best.

That youth be given back to thee, with all its inward fire;

And kindle in thy bosom, life that never can expire.

May Heavenly mansions be revealed to thy enraptured sight;

And all thy future birthdays be as glorious as the light.

We know but few remain for thee, but as they each decay;

May friends around with living hands, strew flowers along the way.

And if the Boatman take thee first, through deaths cold flowing tide;

We will try to live that we may meet thee, on the other side.

We want thy days here, lengthened out: Thy years too, multiplied;

Until thou say it is enough, and I am satisfied.

And when thy body's laid to rest in peace beneath the sod;

May thy pure spirit take its flight back to the throne of God.

Henry's birthday party even attracted the attention of the local newspaper. It was a memorable event for him, but life held less surprises for the next few months. The weather, which was always of interest to him, was mentioned several times, and he speaks of a bad cold he had—so bad he nearly missed ward conference.

Melvin J. was still serving a succesful mission when Henry's son-in-law, Louis S. Cardon, also left for a mission in Switzerland.

Quarterly conference commenced on July 30, and the usual sage advice about payment of tithing and keeping the Word of Wisdom was disseminated, and:

...Also showed up the beauty of our young people selecting good companions and going to the temple...Bro Lyman promised the saints prosperity for 12 years and for them to be wise and economical and free themselves from debt...

Another son-in-law, Lydia's husband, William H. Griffin, left for a mission to England on August 19. On September 2, Church President Wilford Woodruff died in San Francisco. He was ninety-one years of age.

Decembers brought happy times for the Ballards, but this year it was special.

Dec 9 Melvin J arrived home from his mission to the US

Dec 11 He gave a fine discourse in the afternoon in the Tabernacle and in the evening in the Ward upon the Godhead

Henry noted on December 23, 1898, that Apostle Brigham Young, Jr., dedicated the new addition to the Brigham Young College, and Henry closed his notes for 1898 with this December 25 entry:

Sunday was Christmas day we held meeting in the Ward in the afternoon, Melvin J gave us a fine discourse upon the birth of the Saviour and His life and labors and His Crucifiction, also of the restoration of the Gospel and the sufferings of the saints and Martrydom of the Prophet Joseph Smith and Patriach Hyrum Smith.

Henry and Margaret's son, Melvin J., was different than the average returned missionary, for on January 16, 1899, he took on the Josephites. [^2]

My son Melvin J met the Josephites according to arrangements in the Second Ward meeting house[,] he taking the stand that Brigham Young as the President of the Quorum of the twelve Apostles at the death of the prophet Joseph Smith was the authorized authority to lead the Church, he took one hour the first three nights to prove the standing to the church as it now is, while Mr Condett followed one hour for the first three [nights] to prove the stand of young Joseph. Mr Clemmonson acted as chairman, the following two nights Mr. Condett took the stand first for one [hour] each night to build up his claim while Melvin showed the folly of that stand. The sixth night it was adjourned to the Thatcher Oprea House as the second Ward hall was altogether too small to hold the people, many had to go away every night and the last Hall was too small also, Melvin was greatly blessed of the Lord in defending the true order of the Church and the saints felt well paid for following up the discussion, they came in from many of the settlements around Logan.

The first of February brought another stake conference. Apostle Lyman urged the Saints to trace their ordinations back as far as they could. Henry complied immediately.

...I hunted up mine and found that Apostle John Taylor had ordained me a High Priest and apostle Brigham Young ordained him on Dec 19, 1838 and the Prophet Joseph ordained him and apostles Peter[,] James and John ordained him.

Henry followed up by ordaining sixteen priests and seven deacons in the next eleven days.

Children continued to leave Henry's nest:

Feb 22 My Daughter Lettie May was married to George Washington Squires in the Logan Temple[.] I went with my wife Margaret and son Melvin J...In the evening both families...met at my home and held a fine Wedding reception....President Isaac Smith made a fine little speech also myself and Bro John F Squires and my councilor N W Kimball.

Unpleasant things sometimes happened to the early Church members, just as they do now. Henry makes mention of another such case.

Feb 27 I held Bishops court upon the case of Fornication by [name in original journal] with [Name in original journal] we had a number of witnesses and it is proven that he had had Intercourse with her quite a few times and she was near her confinment but he refused to do anything.

(Feb) 28 we met again and give further advise and rendered our dicision which was for him to marry her or he would be cut off from the church[,] we give him two weeks to consider the matter[.] his father President [name in original journal] was satisfied with our decision and tried to reason with him and get him to marry the girl[.] we requested [name in original journal] when she got through her confinement to come before the Ward and ask their forgiveness[.] it had been a very bad case to settle and he had acted very stubern and said he would do nothing but we hoped for the best for the sake of his Parents especially his father as he wished to do right in the matter

Mar 30 I married [name in original journal] and [name in original journal] at her mothers house and his Father [name in original journal] blest their little son which was near a month old[.] he said he would not live with her

Aprl 2 Sunday afternoon [name in original journal] came before the Ward and asked forgivness of the Saints for her sin and they all forgave her except his mother and sister

Trouble, like grapes, often comes in bunches.

(Apr.) 22 Joseph Kedd cut his throat while in the Jail for stealing

(Apr.) 24 His funeral was held at his brothers house in the second Ward there was a very large turnout

(Apr.) We had quite a snow storm May 4 Katie Jones daughter of Cyrus Jones funeral was held in the second Ward meeting house[.] she had been sick for a long time, she was a good young woman there was a house full of kind sympathizers

May 14 I was taken very sick[.] after going to bed I did not know anything for over half an hour.

May 24 I was a good deal better I went to the Temple with my son Ernest who was going upon a Mission[,] also my wives went with me[.]...I was called upon to speak to the saints that were going through, I felt well

June 14 My son Ernest started at 6 A. M. I went down to the Junction and visited with the family for a few days and we saw him off. He was also going with my son in law [George Washington Squires] to Calafornia on a Mission[.] they both went off cheerfully the saints were all kind to them both in Second Ward and at Newton.

As these marriages and missions were taking place, Church President Lorenzo Snow was preparing to remind the Saints of another important, somewhat neglected, principle of the Church. It is a principle he wanted reinstated and practiced.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Mormon Battalion was used in the war against Mexico, and later Utah was asked to furnish troops for the Civil War.
[^2] Through the years, it has been a practice of the Reorganized Church of Latter Day Saints to refer to themselves as Josephites, and to the Mormon Church as the Brighamites.
