Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Chapter Twenty-One

President Snow—Tithing

President Lorenzo Snow, while in Saint George, had a revelation concerning the payment of tithing to help fund the debt-ridden Church. A solemn assembly was the vehicle used to announce it to the body of the Church.

Henry was invited, along with all bishops, stake presidents, and others, to attend the meeting in the Salt Lake Temple on July 2, 1899.

July 1 I started to Salt Lake City and arrived there in the evening and had the glorious privilege of attending next day [the] 2nd[,] on fast day[,] in the Temple a Solemn Assembly of all the General Church Authorities together with the Pres of Stakes and their counselors and the Bishops of all the Wards...had been called by President Lorenzo Snow. It was the greatest event in the Church [—] there were 518 Stakes and Wards represented.

Henry must have been very impressed, for his entry concerning the meeting is long and detailed, and even includes the scriptural references made by the speakers. It will not be fully referenced here—only a few key points will be quoted.

July 2 Every Stake in the Church was represented[.] The gates were opened at 9 A. M. and only those called were admitted. The meeting commenced at 10, President Snow Presiding...Pres Snow then stated the object of the meeting namely the law of Tithing which had been so much neglected in the past by this people which the Lord now required them to observe but was willing to forgive the past neglect...

President Snow went on to read and comment on various sections of the Doctrine & Covenants of the Church, and then said:

...that in 12 years we had robbed the Lord of $10,000,000.00...

He returned to the D & C momentarily before pressing the notion that non-tithe payers' names should not be found on the records of the Church. This law, he said, must be adhered to before a temple recommend could be given, and:

...The Holy City will be built by the law of Consecration[,] prepare yourselves for the Redemption of Zion and the coming of the Son of Man....

President George Q. Cannon then spoke, lamenting the fact that:

...the Railroads were made in this state and owned by us and we ought to have held them...

The tithing theme was then picked up again by President Snow.

...[he] said the Lord would not forgive us any more for not paying our Tithing neither should the Bishops give any more recommends to the Temples neither would such be called to go to Jackson Co[.] the Lord will not send Hornetts this time to drive the enemy but will send siclones [cyclones] Pestilence Fire and Famine to destroy them...

Apostle George Teasdale and President Joseph F. Smith followed suit with remarks such as:

...if we pay our Tithing and offerings we comply with a law of [the] Celestial Kingdom but if we fail to do so we cannot attain to Thrones and Kingdoms...if we do not pay our Tithing we have no assurance that our enemies will not drive us from our homes...When we are judged by God it will not be by what is heard[.] there are other books kept that show [not only] what we should do but what we have done[.] we should be honest with God then we are honest with ourselves...we cannot be His children and disobey him...it is a blessing to those that pay[,] and a curse to those that disobey...Children should pay thiting when they earn anything...

In the same entry Henry noted:

...we had a good time long to be remembered[.] The meeting was dismissed a little after 7 P. M. I went to Cache Junction that night and went to Logan next day

The General Authorities of the Church left little doubt—after more than nine hours—that while the law of tithing had been in effect since biblical times, it was time to do something about it.

A month later, on August 6, stake conference was held in Logan. President Lorenzo Snow, along with other Apostles, addressed the subject again.

...the law of Tithing was spoken upon very strongly urgeing it very strongly as the mind and will of the Lord to this people and we must comply with it or the Lord would reject us but if we would do our duty from now on He would forgive us for our past neglect...

Once again the Mormons responded [^1] to a call from the United States government.

Aug 21 Was a general Holiday in Logan in honor of the return of the Utah Volunteers in the Phillpine War[.] they held one in Salt Lake City on Saturday the 19th it was a grand event long to be remembered

Oct 17 I attended Hyrum Spillmans sons funeral in the second ward[.] he had died in California on his way home from the War in the Phillpines...

In spite of the distance, the body was transported from California to Logan. Henry had known the family in London while on his mission there, and they wished to have the boy's funeral in Henry's Second Ward.

It was October 29—time for stake conference again. President Snow, along with several Apostles, was in attendance. The importance of paying tithing flowed naturally from their lips, and they said paying it would:

...increase our faith and the things of this world...

The Brethren then spoke:

...upon our enemies accusing us of immoral and dishonest lives together with many other things that we were not guilty of but said we should live above these things and keep the laws of the Gospel

Lending some credibility to what "our enemies [were] accusing us of," Henry's stake president returned from an extended absence to explain to the Saints about a failed business venture that involved some of the Church members.

...in the afternoon Orson Smith our [Stake] Pres who had left the country six months before because he had taken wheat of many Brethren on deposit and had failed in business and not able to meet his obligations to them just returned the day before was called upon to make a statement[.] he said he was sorry for the course that he had taken and asked those that he owed to wait upon him and he would pay every cent as soon as he could and offered his resignation as Pres[.] Pres Snow spoke for some time upon the case and said he was sorry for him but thought it was the best thing to be done for his good and the good of the Stake...

The meeting was concluded with remarks from President Snow commending the Saints for their willingness to pay an increased tithing as the General Authorities had asked.

...Pres Snow...said that July of this year compared to last was 4 times more and Aug[,] 3 times more and Sept[,] 6 times more and Oct[,] 14 times more and yet our crops were only about one fourth of what they were last year[.] he said the Lord would abundantly bless us for us fulfilling that law[.] he said it exceided any other Stake in its increase...

The following day, October 30, 1899, a new stake presidency was formed.

Late fall found Henry doing the routine things: listening to lectures, going to meetings, and attending the temple for the marriage of his daughter, Jennie Lulu, who married Frank Griffin.

A December 23 entry tells of the funeral services of Robert Davidson. Robert, like Henry, had been a bishop for many years. He had suffered a great deal before he died from cancer. The funeral was held in the Logan Tabernacle.

The year ended with another funeral. This one was for the son of Apostle Marriner W. Merrill. No mention is made of the usual Christmas festivities, but he was impressed by the generosity of the members of his ward in "bringing in their offerings to the poor for Christmas."

A new century was ushered in as January 1, 1900, rolled around—it was not chronicled by Henry. Later, however, on January 16, he mentioned:

We got up an old folks party in the afternoon with dinner for all over 60 years of age in the Ward and in the evening for all married folks with a picknick and songs and dancing and speeches,...I was called [to speak] for all that had been in the church 50 years[,] there were 13 beside myself

Jan 19 ...The Logan temple and all the others were closed as the smallpox was spreading in parts of Utah

Henry's birthday, always remembered, came on January 27—he was sixty-eight. His daughter-in-law, Mattie:

...got up a family sociable with a number of friends...

Quarterly stake conference convened on January 28, and the theme from the Brethren was, again, the payment of tithing and keeping out of debt. Also mentioned was:

...[to] not follow after the fashion's of the world as we had been called out of the World to build up the Kingdom of God upon the earth...

On February 2, Henry was seriously injured when he was thrown off his wagon and landed on his head:

...which very much hurt it and the cords of my neck as I could do nothing for some time[,] and a week afterwards I took a very bad Dizzy spell for an hour

A month later a prayer circle, consisting of the high priests of the stake, was organized to administer to Henry.

Henry felt well enough to attend priesthood meeting on March 3, where President Joseph F. Smith was to speak. He spoke of:

...the carelessness of many parents in not teaching their children to principles of the Gospel...

The campaign for more tithing money was still going on—Apostle Merrill said:

...he was surprised to find so many non Tithe payers in the Stake although the Tithing had increased very much over the year before[.] there were 18 non tithe payers in our Ward still there was about $400.00 more paid this year.

In spite of the huge increase in the payment of tithes there were other financial needs that tithing money did not provide for.

Mar 16 A special Priesthood meeting was called to consider the debts of the Stake[,] namely the B Y Monument and B Y College Building[,] also the debt upon the Logan Tabernacle which the Bishops all agreed to collect as soon as they could

The balance of the March entries are routine: ward conference, the funeral of Emma Jenks, and on April 12, Melvin J.'s son Russell fell and broke his arm.

Margaret's birthday was April 14—two days later a small party was held for her at her home in Logan.

Tithing would be mentioned again, even though the Saints had responded very generously. Henry and other bishops did all they could to further full tithe payment. Readers may recall Henry's previous entries referring to how faithfully the Saints, "the most of them," had paid tithing "considering the close time with every body," or the times when they "came up short."

The years had taken their toll on Henry. Life had been wonderful—and not so wonderful—at the same time. The combined debilitating effects of his old complaints "the gravel," the numerous sore throats, the accidents, the trials of grasshoppers, Indians, and federal agents through the years had made it more difficult for Henry to do all the things he wanted to do.

Maybe it was time for a change.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] No charge was made for a blessing, but a small fee could be made to cover the cost of having the blessing recorded in shorthand and then written, or typed, for the recipient.
