Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Chapter Twenty-Two

Patriarch Henry Ballard

It is reasonable to assume that Henry had given a great deal of thought, in advance, to what he was about to do; no one can tell it better than Henry.

April 22 I sent in my resignation as Bishop of the Ward on account of failing health[,] which position I had occupied 39 years 8 days

April 26 Apostle F M Lyman and the Presidency of the Stake called a meeting of the Priesthood of the Ward in the meeting house and presented my resignation and I was honorably released by all the Brethren and they were well satisfied with my labors and a ballot was passed [as to] who should be the Bishop of the Ward and it fell upon Anton Anderson [my] former 2nd councilor[,] and Bro Lyman said it was the choice of the Presidency of the Stake as well as himself and he asked me if he was a worthy man for Bishop[.] I said he was my choice and he got a full vote of the House. Bro Lyman gave us some good council on our duties and appointed a general meeting of all the Ward to be held at 10 A. M. the following morning.

April 27 The General meeting of the Ward commenced at 10 A. M. Apostles Merrill and Lyman and the Presidency of the stake were in attendance and Anton Anderson's choice of Councilors was William Worley and Melvin J Ballard and they were each one set apart to their several offices. Bro Lyman ordained my son a High Priest and ordained him a counselor[.] my release was presented before the people the Brethren stating their satisfaction of my long labors in the Bishopric and I was honorably released and fully sustained by the saints and Apostle Lyman said they intended to ordain me a patriarch, they each gave us words of council stating that Pres Lorenzo Snow wished the people labored with to stir up the slothful ones more to their duties and encourage those who had been faithful to be more energetic for the Lord would cut His work short, but if the non tithe payers would wake up to their duties the Lord would forgive the past, but they themselves would suffer the loss to what blessings they might have enjoyed[.] there was a good spirit and feeling in the meeting[,] many cried when I was released[.] it would be a time long to be remembered by me and my family also of the Ward

Two days later on, April 29, 1900, quarterly stake conference started. Three Apostles were in attendance, including Apostle Merrill of Logan. The theme was, as had been for some time, the payment of tithing. The bishops were asked to:

...stir up the people to their duties hoping there would be less non tithe payers at the close of the year...He presented George W Ferrell and Henry Hughs who had been released as being Bishops to be ordained Patriarchs and to travel and give Blessings[.] he also presented me to be ordained one but not expected to travel unless the Lord improved my health, we were each sustained with a full vote to be ordained the following day after being presented before the conference...

April 30 Apostle Lyman...presented the above Brethren and myself as Patriarchs in the church, at the close of the forenoon meeting we were each one ordained, Apostle M W Merrill ordained me, giving me a good Blessing said if I would seek the Lord my tounge should become as a ready writer and should enjoy the spirit of that calling[.] Wilford Woodruff ordained him and Brigham Young ordained him and he was ordained under the hands of Oliver Cowdery and he was ordained by Peter, James and John...Brother Lyman then spoke to us very plainly upon our various duties said we should all keep the word of wisdom[.] he asked me if I kept the word of wisdom[,] I told him Yes I had been trying to for a great many years[,] he then put the question to see how many had not kept it[,] 3 or 4 said they had not kept it he said they must now keep it from now on or they should have but little influence[.] he said the Patriarchs must have their Blessings well written and recorded and not to seek to give some wonderful Blessing more that what the spirit of the

Lord would manifest in plainess and calmness and that spirit would prompt what to say and not to make a charge [^1] but whatever the saints could aford to give to pay expencess it was alright...

Decoration Day, May 30, 1900, found Henry at the gravesites of his parents and deceased children.

Then on:

June 19 The Bishopric of the Ward got up a very pleasant sociable for the retiring Bishopric[,] there were about 300 of the Ward in attendance and [we had] a very agreable time[.] there were a great many exercises and they made me a present of a fine silk gold mounted umbrella costing about $15.00...it was a time long to be remembered

Though no longer a bishop, Henry still participated in many funerals and was called upon to speak on a regular basis—often at the request of the deceased prior to their death.

Wm Nelson who used to live in this Ward died and his funeral was held in the meeting house[.] I was called upon to speak[.] there was a mixed congregation of non saints

C J Larsen's first wife's funeral was held in the Tabernacle[.] I was called upon to speak as it was her request

The funeral of Cyrus W Card was held in the Tabernacle I was called upon to speak first Henry noted the events of the quarterly stake conference that commenced on July 29; he also noted the same day:

My wife Emily brought my daughter Amy up sick from the Junction late at night we got a Doctor and he thought it was pentocietus [appendicitis] we administered to her she was very sick

July 30 We got Apostles Clawson and Smoot to come down to my house and administer to her[.] we administered to her several times ourselves

Aug 3 Amy commenced to get a little better but she had been very sick[.] we administered to her very often and tried to exercise all the faith we could for her

Aug 25 Amy and her mother returned to the Junction[.] She was now much improved through the Blessings of the Lord

William H. Griffin, Henry's son-in-law, returned home from his mission in England. He had:

...visited my Nephew George Ballard and family in London they treated him very kind

It appears, however, William had no more success converting his relatives in England than Henry, and probably felt a little like Henry did when Henry was prompted to write in London on March 15, 1887:

I returned back to the office feeling that I had but very few friends among my relatives

The last entry Henry made in the year 1900 concerned the death of another family member.

Dec 6 My Mother in Law Janet McNeil died after being sick for 2 years[,] she bore it very patiently during that length of time[.] she requested her son James R and my son Melvin J to speak at her funeral which they did. It was held the following Sunday on the 9th in the Logan Tabernacle[.] It was a very large congregation she was a very faithful Latter Day Saint of about 50 years. She left now living[,] 6 living children 37 grandchildren and 19 great grandchildren for whom she set a good example for them to follow An epidemic of smallpox ushered in the new year, 1901. Willard R.'s wife contracted and recovered from the disease.

Most of Henry's entries, until the next quarterly stake conference, concerned the funerals of his contemporaries. As in the past, Henry was often asked to speak on such occasions.

Among those contemporaries was President George Q. Cannon who died in California where he had gone for his health. President Cannon was seventy-five years old at the time of his death.

Until 1901 nearly all, if not all, of Cache Valley consisted of but one stake—the Cache Stake—but on:

April 28 Our conference was held [and] we had a very large turn out[.] the Stake was divided into three[,] ours was the center still called the Cache [Stake][,]...and the North part of the Stake was named Benson Stake [^2]...and the South part was named Hyrum Stake...it was a time long to be remembered

About three weeks later, Henry penned this note:

May 5 Sunday was forty years since I was married to Margaret and we got part of the family and a few of our friends together and enjoyed ourselves and our sons and daughters presented their mother with a gold watch and myself a Gold ring which was very kind of them. Sister Lucy L Cook presented us with the following poetry.

To Brother and sister Ballard on their Fortieth Wedding Day

Hail Patriarch Father, honored mother

We meet you this auispicious day,

And with heartfelt kindly greetings,

For your happiness we pray.

We celebrate the anniversary

Of your Fortieth Wedding Day

In each others love rejoicing,

God had been with you all the way

Long ago a man and maiden,

With no gaudy outward show,

Heart and hand by Heaven united

Started out through life to go.

But a child in years the maiden,

Still a woman's heart was there,

And th e man was brave and noble,

Well might she trust to his fond care.

They had naught, the world called riches,

But their hopes, their lives were one,

Rich in faith they lived the Gospel,

Of the Lord and His dear Son.

Trials they meet and sacrifices,

Hardships, toils and many cares;

But they have been true and faithful,

Still life to them is very fair.

Age comes on with silver tresses

But the Heavens peace is with them still,

Patiently they yet are struggling

To serve, and do the Father's will.

They now are rich, priceless jewels

In their crown of life they wear

Bright immortal souls were given them

Which they've reared and trained with care.

No dark sorrow in their bosoms

For a jewel lost through sin

They have bravely fought life's battle

And the victory they'll win.

Brother Ballard, Sister Ballard

Take your friends best wishes now

May your happiness continue

May the years with garlands deck your brow.

Time passed quickly. Henry's son, Ernest Russell, was home from his mission by late May. A few days later Henry's son-in-law, George W. Squires, returned from his mission. Both had served in California.

Weather, often noted by Henry, is mentioned again:

May 23 We had a very heavy wind storm that blew down hundreds of trees in Logan and 10 barns and a great deal of damage also in numerous of the other settlements doing the same.

Amy, Henry and Emily's daughter who had been ill earlier, was thought to be healed; apparently she was not.

July 2 My wife Emily brought my daughter Amy up sick from the Junction with Pentocietus [appendicitis] she was very sick

(July 5) Dr Parkinson and Dr Budge performed an opperation upon her she took it very good

Later in July during quarterly stake conference, Henry was asked to bear his testimony after which Apostle Marriner W. Merrill noted that he and Henry had came into the Church about the same time—fifty-two years ago.

Henry's journal lay silent until October 10, 1901. He then noted:

President Lorenzo Snow died in Salt Lake City he was at the conference at one meeting on the 6th and spoke[.] his funeral was held on Sunday and his body was brought to Brigham City to be burried where he had lived so long...

A few days later Henry's thoughts turned again to Amy.

Oct 15 My daughter Amy died at Cache Junction after being sick so long[.] we had exercised all the faith we could for her, but it seemed like it was the will of the Lord for her to pass from us although it was a hard trial for us especially for her mother as she was the youngest

Oct 17 The funeral was held at Newton all the family was in attendance and many of the saints of that settlement[.] there was a very kind feeling she was loved by all who knew her and she had filled her mission on earth The same day as Amy's funeral the First Presidency of the Church was reorganized. Uncharacteristically, Henry made a separate entry dated that same day.

Oct 17 The First Presidency was reorganized Joseph F Smith was chosen and set apart as President and John R Winder as first and Anthon H Lund as second councilors was each sustained by the Quorum of Apostles and a general confrence was called to be held on the 10th of Nov to sustain the selection of the Twelve Apostles

During the balance of the year Henry mentions only the stake conference and ends the year 1901 with this special note:

Dec 27 A dinner and entertainment was gotten up in our Ward by the Relief Society for the Old Folks over 60 years of age[.] there was a good social time with all[.] several were called upon for a song and some for a speech[.] I was called for one which I gave

Although not mentioned, poor health must have been a problem for Henry. Nothing else could have kept him from his regular visits to his journal. From this point on, there are few entries, and nearly all of them are printed here without comment.

Jan 8, 1902 My son Franklin went to the Temple and was married to Sarah Stevens of Newton

April 21 We had quite a snow storm

Aug 12 We had a good time on the [Tabernacle] square of the old folks over 60[.] I was called upon as Chaplin

Sept 10 My daughter Lydia went to the Temple and got Endowments for my daughter Amy who died and she [Amy] was sealed to Ezra Cardon [^3] a son of Paul who had died some time ago

May 7, 1903 My wife Emily died after being sick for a long time at Cache Junction

May 10 The funeral was held at Newton there was a very large meeting and 32 teams followed her[.] there was a very kind feeling at the meeting with good teaching[,] and exhortation showing great respect to the family

Jan 27, 1904 Was my 72nd birthday we had all of my family together in Logan[.] there were 11 children and my wife Margaret and 22 grandchildren 4 son in laws and 5 daughter in laws We had a good time of socialability

Jan 29 We had an old folks entertainment in the Ward I was called to ask a blessing and to give a speech we had a good time altogether

June 22 Ernest Reid Ballard was married in the Logan Temple to Amandia [Amanda] Miller of Newton

Nov 24 We had an old folks entertainment in the Ward we had a good time I was called to ask a blessing and to give a speech which I enjoyed

Henry's journal entries ended abruptly and appropri-ately, with a good time, a blessing, and a speech. Henry himself continued on for a few more years.

Little is written of Henry's activities during his remaining four years, except in retrospect. One event did occur, however, not of Henry's making, but rather by way of tribute to a worthy pioneer.

A large portrait of Henry had been prepared for display in the Logan Second Ward where he labored as bishop for 39 years and eight days. The unveiling was set for his 74th birthday, January 27, 1906, and a beautiful program was prepared to accompany the unveiling of the painting.

A sketch of Henry's life was read, and his son, Melvin J., noted for his beautiful voice, sang. Tributes were paid, and poetry was written and recited to celebrate the occasion. Commenting on the event the Logan Journal said:

Seldom has a citizen of Logan been paid a finer tribute than the one bestowed upon Bishop Ballard yesterday.

As was often the case, Henry was called upon to speak, and in part of his speech he said:

It is a great pleasure to me to meet with you and see so many familiar faces that have fought the fight of life with me.

It is fifty-seven years next month since I embraced the truth, and how thankful I am that I have kept the faith, and still have an abiding testimony concerning it. I have passed through many hardships but in them all I have witnessed the hand of the Lord and kept the faith. It is the faithful, everyday life that we lead that counts in the end and meets the demands of justice. I am grateful for the kindly feeling manifested toward me here today. I am grateful for my family, and hope whatever may come in their pathway, they will prove true to the faith, and be worthy of eternal life.

Brethren and Sisters, do not stumble on the faults of others, and fall by the wayside, keep straight on, in the path of truth and duty, even if you have to sacrifice your lives as others have done, for the Gospel, and great will be your reward.

May the Lord ever bless you and help you through life, is my prayer for you all, in the name of Jesus, Amen.

Nothing more is mentioned about Henry until his death on February 26, 1908, at his home, in his beloved Logan.

Henry's passing was chronicled in several leading news papers including the Deseret News. The tributes paid to his memory are legendary. A Logan paper had this to say:

Patriarch Henry Ballard, of the Second ward, died at his home Wednesday night at 11 o'clock, the result of general debility due to old age and cessation from a very active life. For about five years the gentleman had awaited the final summons, and it came to him peacefully. He was unconscious some time before his death but in the last moments aroused himself, recognized the relatives about him and passed away gently.

In this passing a man widely known for his genuine worth has gone. Bishop Ballard was unassuming and one of the kind of men who would prefer to be wronged than to do a wrong. He was a very energetic man while in good health and was identified with most of the progress of the valley. He was kindly and considerate with a heart full of love for every man, and throughout his life enjoyed the respect and esteem of his fellows.

The following tribute to Henry was penned by his daughter, Myrtle Ballard Shurtliff.

He was not a hero, as we estimate men nowadays, just a plain, honest man, one of the noblest, grandest characters the writer ever knew, at once an inspiration and an ideal. He was one of those magnificent men who had the rare courage to suffer in silence for the right and never wince, being content to do the right as he saw it, without reward other than the approval of his own conscience and without fear of the consequences. If honesty, love of human kind, loyalty, courage and consistency count for aught in the Master's realm, then Henry Ballard will have abounding wealth in the regions beyond.

May his sleep be as peaceful as his life was worthy, and his memory live to strengthen and inspire those he reluctantly left.

It was a leap year when Henry was quietly laid to rest in the Logan cemetery on Sunday, March 1, 1908. His wife Margaret now rests beside him, and they are surrounded by many of their loved ones—just the way Henry would have wanted it.

Whatever tributes and eulogies were made in Henry's behalf, and they were legion in number, were well deserved. They might have even fallen a little short—it is difficult to find the words necessary to describe such a gentle giant of a man.

Henry Ballard was one of the most revered men ever to grace Cache Valley with his presence. His journal is widely quoted, even to this day, and it is considered to be one of the best histories available of his time.

Henry's time was "a time long to be remembered." Certainly Henry's passing "put a quietus upon" the people of Cache Valley.

May the legacy of Henry Ballard never die.

Ever.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The following was taken from the Church history of Genoa. "In passing it may here be stated that sister Margaret McNeil, a girl of twelve years of age, arrived on the present site of Genoa ahead of the main company in 1857, and was the first female in camp. The company consisted of ninety-seven men, twenty-five women, forty children, forty-two yoke of oxen, twenty cows, six horses, twenty-four chickens, twenty hogs, two cats, and dogs a plenty."
[^2] Named after Ezra T. Benson, not Benson Ward, which was also named to honor him.
[^3] Amy came to Emily in a dream with Ezra Cardon by her side. He had died shortly after Amy passed away. This dream came to Emily three different times, and Ezra was always with her. A similar manifestation came to Ezra's father. Emily and Brother Cardon felt impressed that it was the desire of these young people to be sealed to each other as man and wife for eternity.
