Douglas O. Crookston, Henry Ballard: The Story of a Courageous Pioneer, 1832-1908 ( 1994)

Margaret's Autobiography

My birthplace, Tranent, was a small village located near the sea shore on the banks of the mouth of the Firth of Forth not many miles from Edinburgh. From the village one may view the beautiful scenes of grasses and hills and waters so typical of picturesque Scotland.

When I was five years old my little baby brother Peter Reid McNeil died. He was only one year old. His death made me very sad and I cried over it many times. He was buried in the church yard at Tranent

When I was eight years old my father baptized me a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—it was May 28, 1854. He had joined the Church and was baptized when I was about a year old. He was a coal miner and had to be at work every morning at four o'clock. Therefore, when I was baptized, I had to go early in the morning. It was a beautiful May morning when I walked to the sea shore. We carried a lantern to light our way. As I came up out of the water, the day was just beginning to dawn, and the light was beginning to creep over the eastern hills. It was a very beautiful sight—one that I shall never forget. At this time I was filled with a sweet heavenly spirit which has remained with me to this day.

That night all of the saints met at our home and I was confirmed a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I was given my choice to either sing, pray or bear my testimony. I offered up a simple prayer, for my heart was filled with great joy and thanks to God for the privilege of becoming a member of His Church, and this gratitude has remained in my heart and has increased as the years have gone by.

The first ten years of my childhood was spent in Tranent, but because of being a "Mormon" I was not permitted to attend the schools, and so I was entirely deprived of schooling while in the old country, and in pioneering there was little opportunity for education. During those ten years our family enjoyed the association of the Elders and Saints. My father was President of the Edinburgh Conference for a number of years. Therefore, the Elders visited our home often, and we were always glad to receive them, although many times I went to bed hungry in order to give my meal to the visiting Elders.

We had waited a long time to come to Zion, but my father was called by the Church to stay in Scotland and preside over the Saints in that Branch. When Father was finally given the chance to leave Scotland he tried to persuade my mother to wait awhile—Mother was about to give birth to her sixth child. Mother insisted upon coming for she had faith that the Lord would take care of her.

Before we left, my mother took us to say good-bye to our grandmother, my mother's mother, Margaret (Martin) Reid, but she would not come to the door or let us in. My aunt came to the door and said Grandmother didn't want to see us for we had broken her heart because we had joined the Mormon Church. Mother took us by the hand and we went home. Mother cried all the way home.

On April 27, 1856 we left Liverpool for America. There was a large company leaving. My mother was not well and was taken on board ship before the time of sailing while the sailors were still disinfecting and renovating the ship. Here my brother Charles was born with only one woman on board the ship to attend my mother. When the Captain and doctor came on board the ship and found that a baby had been born, they were delighted and thought it would bring good luck to the company. They asked for the privilege of naming him. Brother Willie, President of the company, thought it best to let the Captain name him as there were eight hundred passengers and nearly all of them were "Mormons." He was named Charles Collins Thornton McNeil—Charles Collins after the Captain and Thornton after the boat .

We were on the ocean for nearly six weeks, and at the end of this long tiresome journey, we landed at Castle Gardens, New York.

During this time we had many hardships to endure, but through it all we were greatly blessed. Because of my mother's condition, and my being the oldest member of the family and being blessed with health, I had to share the responsibility with my father of taking care of the rest of the family who suffered greatly with sea sickness. On board ship we had to prepare our own food and were permitted to take our turn using a stove which was provided for the company. I was the cook for the family and sometimes experienced trouble in preparing our porridge which was about all we had to eat. I was but ten years old and somewhat of a venturesome spirit, and through this perhaps met many more difficulties than I would have done otherwise. However I was protected from accident and blessed with health the entire trip.

After landing we planned to go west to Utah with the handcart company, but President Franklin D. Richards counseled my father not to go in that company. Afterwards, we were very thankful because of the great suffering, privation, and cold weather to which these people were subjected. There were many of the company who were frozen that year on their journey.

My father was then advised to go to St. Louis, spend the winter there and then prepare to go through to Utah the next year. While we were in St. Louis my little brother John Reid died. He was three and one half years old and was buried there. During the winter my father worked and saved his money, but when spring came he was called on a mission to help make a new settlement 100 miles west of civilization. It would be called Genoa, and was to be a temporary settlement for the benefit of the immigrating Saints.

We left St. Louis on the steam boat and came up the Missouri River. The measles broke out while we were on the boat and all of my mother's children except me took them and were very sick. When we landed we camped on the bank of the river until our teams and wagons came.

When we were all ready to start on our journey westward, my father's team of five-year old unbroken oxen ran away, and we were delayed. We had never seen oxen before, and the animals allotted to us had to be roped and tied in order to yoke and fasten them to the wagon. When they were released from the ropes they became unmanageable and difficult to catch.

The company had gone on ahead, and as my mother was anxious for me to go with them she strapped my little brother, James, on my back with a shawl. He was only four years old and still quite sick with the measles, but I took him since mother had all she could do to care for the other children. I hurried and caught up with the company traveling with them all day. That night a kind lady helped me take my brother off my back. I sat up and held him on my lap with the shawl wrapped around him, alone, all night. He was a little better in the morning. The people in the camp were very good to us and gave us a little fried bacon and some bread for breakfast.

We traveled this way for about a week, my brother and I not seeing our mother during this time. Each morning one of the men would write a note and put it in the slit of a willow stuck into the ground to tell how we were getting along. In this way mother knew that we were all right.

We crossed the Elkhorn River. The ferry took the wagons across, but the animals had to swim.

I arrived in the place which was called Genoa ahead of the company, thus becoming the first female resident of the present city of Genoa. [^1]

We stayed in Genoa about two years during which time we had very little to eat as the people were all very poor. We raised corn but the frost came early and it did not ripen well. We had to dry it in the oven and it was so nearly spoiled that we had to open the door while it was drying because the smell was so offensive, but it was all we had to eat. We had only one hand grinder for the whole company to use which belonged to Brother Sleight. Of course it kept us very busy grinding. During the settlement of Genoa we also suffered much from hostile Indians. They were very troublesome, and we were always in danger.

After we had made this settlement my father was called to another place called Woodriver. It was about one hundred miles west of Genoa which made it about two hundred miles from civilization. This was a very pretty place surrounded by elm trees. While at Genoa my brother, Joseph McNeil was born on January 14, 1859, so when we left for Woodriver, Mother had a very young baby to care for making travel difficult.

When we left Genoa, we had to cross the Loup Fork River. A ferry was built for the wagons, but the animals had to swim across. We traveled down the north side of the Platte River and reached the new settlement. Woodriver was a general stopping place on the immigrant route through the Platte Valley.

One day while we were at Woodriver, our cow ran away from us, and when father found that she was lost, he sent my brother Thomas and me to hunt for her. We looked all day but were unable to find her. Starting out early the next morning we continued the hunt and looked all that day. Toward evening we were going down along the Platte River, and as we looked down the river we saw three large Sioux Indians coming towards us on horses. They seemed very war-like, and I was afraid they were going to carry us away with them. So I said to my brother, "Let us pray". We were running as fast as we could and still praying all the time although we were unable to get down on our knees.

The Indians soon came right up to us and wanted us to go with them. We were trying to be brave and told them we were on our way home and pointed toward our house for we could see the smoke coming out of our chimney. One of the Indians tried to pull my brother up on his horse, but Thomas was heavier than the Indian expected and slipped from his grasp and dodged right under the horse's belly, between fore and hind legs, and we ran until overtaken again. The Indians laughed and had a good time at our efforts to elude them, but in our maneuvers we were getting nearer home. I asked them to go home with us and promised that my mother would give them coffee and biscuits. I was shaking all over with fright and could hardly speak, but pointed to where the men were working. The Indians left us and went over to the men who were working. Then later they came to our house and mother gave them a nice warm supper, and they went away peaceable. Our Heavenly Father surely blessed and protected us on this occasion, for which we were very grateful.

We did not stay at Woodriver very long because the Indians were so troublesome. My father began to make preparations to go on to Utah, and when the next company came, we were ready. Woodriver was abandoned along with the splendid growing crops. The Captain of the company was pleased to have us travel with him and was very kind to us.

We had to cross the Platte River in which there were so many sand bars that it made crossing very dangerous. The men were helping the women over, but my mother was so anxious to get started that she waded in with a baby in her arms, thinking she could go through alone. She had gone but a little way when she began sinking into the quicksand and was going down very fast. Some of the men saw her and ran to her assistance. It was a difficult task to get her out and we felt that she had a very narrow escape. We had many such experiences while crossing the rivers.

One night our cow ran away from camp and I was sent out to bring her back. I was barefooted and not watching where I was going. All of sudden I began to feel that I was walking on something soft and looked down to see what it could be. I found to my horror that I was standing in a bed of snakes, large ones and small ones. At the sight of them I became so weak that I could scarcely move. All I could think of was to pray. The Lord blessed and watched out for me so that I was protected from many similar experiences.

While crossing the plains my mother's health was very poor so I tried to assist her as much as I could. Every morning I would get up early and get breakfast for the family and milk the cow so that I could hurry and drive her ahead of the company and let her eat in the grassy places until they passed on ahead, and then I would hurry and catch up with them. The cow furnished us our chief source of food, and it was, therefore, important to see that she was fed as well as circumstances allowed. In this way, the cow gave plenty of good rich milk, and we felt that had it not been for her we would have surely starved.

Being alone much of the time I had to get across the rivers as best as I could. Our cow was a Jersey and had a long tail. When it became necessary to cross the rivers I would wind the end of her tail around my hand and swim across with her.

I was always very careful to watch for every bit of wood I could find on the way. Our fuel consisted mostly of "buffalo chips," and each morning I would gather a large apron full of them for the camp fires on which we cooked our meals. At the end of each day's journey I milked my cow and helped prepare our supper after which I gladly fell asleep wherever my bed happened to be.

We traveled very slowly until we reached "Sweet Water." Here there was a terrible storm. The Captain got on his horse and scouted around to see if he could find a place of safety. It was snowing and the wind was blowing a terrific gale and we despaired for our lives. The Captain found shelter down at the bottom of a hollow. We camped here for several days until the storm abated. I was very brave and wanted to go out and explore this new camping ground. I had not gone far when I saw a large ox grazing a little way from where camp was. I ran and told my father and he and some of the men went out and killed it for the company. The discovery of this ox, I thought, was wonderful, and I felt it very providential, as we were almost starving.

In leaving this camp we had not gone far when we met Patriarch John Smith and Brother John P. Green who were going on missions and were traveling with a mule team. Father went to them for advice and told them of our circumstances. Brother Smith blessed my father and gave him ten dollars, and Brother Green gave him five dollars. Brother Smith told father to leave the Company and go on as fast as possible for it was getting cold and we were short of food. He told us to go through Weber Canyon into Ogden as it was much quicker. With the money that was given him, father bought fifty pounds of flour, it being $20.00 a hundred at Fort Laramie. We also got a little meat. Brother Smith advised my father to stay in Ogden until he earned enough food to put us through the winter, and then to go on to Cache Valley and take up land there.

We started on our journey alone and had a very hard time of it. Our food gave out and we had nothing but milk and wild rose berries to eat. However we did have a good team and could travel fast. We arrived in Ogden on the 4th day of October, 1859 after a journey of 1,035 miles from Woodriver. Although each day was filled with hardship and hunger, we thanked our Heavenly Father for His protecting care—care that made our trip easier to endure. I walked every step of the way across the plains, drove my cow and a large part of the way carried my little brother, James, on my back.

We camped on the outskirts of town, and father left us and went on into Ogden to find work. While camping here many people passed us on their way to attend the General Conference of the Church held in Salt Lake City.

Across the field from where we were was a little home and out in the yard was a big pile of squash. We were so famished that my mother sent me over to beg for squash, for we did not have a cent of money, and some of the children were very weak for want of food. I knocked at the door and an old lady came and said, "Come in, come in. I knew you were coming and have been told to give you food." She gave me a large loaf of fresh bread and said to tell my mother that she would come over soon. It was not long until she did come and brought us a nicely cooked dinner, something we had not had for a long time. This woman was surely inspired of the Lord to help us and we were grateful for her kindness. Bread never tasted so good before or since.

When father came back to us, he had found a man whom he had known in Scotland. This man took us into his home, and we stayed there until we were ready to go to Cache Valley. We all worked. Mother took the smaller children and husked corn. I herded cattle, and father and my brother worked on the threshing machine. When we had a sufficient supply of food we left Ogden and had not gone far when we met Henry Ballard and Aaron DeWitt who had been to conference, and were returning to their homes in Cache Valley. This was my first meeting with my husband. At the time of this meeting I was a barefooted, sun-burned little girl, driving my cow along the dusty country road, but it was impressed on my mother and to my husband at that time that I would some day be his wife. Brother Ballard and Aaron DeWitt helped us greatly during our journey as we traveled together to Cache Valley. When we got to the Logan River the water was so high that it lifted the box right off the wheels and we had some difficulty in getting across. We arrived in Logan October 21, 1859.

We camped in a fort made for protection from the Indians. We were in the last fort which extended from the corner of Main and Center Streets to what is known as 3rd West Street now. My father worked to get enough hay for the cattle and then went to the canyon and hauled logs to make a house. We had no lumber nor glass, so for the doors and windows we wove willows together and plastered them with clay. We used bulrushes and willows for the roof and carpet. We were very comfortable until spring. My father and brother worked in the canyon all winter gathering logs which they exchanged for bran or bacon or anything else we could eat.

At one time we ran right out of everything to eat and father had a few logs he could spare, so he went to a man and asked him if he would not give him some bran for them. This is all we had to eat for some time. This man found that we were in dire need of help and told the Presiding Elder that we needed assistance. A meeting was held and the people were told that they should pay fast offerings, which they did. The first fast offerings paid in Logan were then given to my father.

Father soon got work building a bridge, and after this we did not have it so hard. I carried water for the family all that winter from the north branch of Logan River which was about three blocks away. I had very little clothing on my body, and my feet were bare, often leaving blood stains on the snow. Sometimes I would wrap them in old rags but this was worse than ever because the rags froze to my feet.

We stayed in the fort until spring. Then we moved to a lot on Fifth West between Third and Fourth South streets. My parents lived on this lot the rest of their lives. Father built a two room adobe house, later adding three more rooms to it. I helped make the brick by tromping straw into the clay.

Early in the spring I went to work for Thomas E. Ricks for one dollar a week. I was working to get seed wheat for us to plant. The wheat was $5.00 a bushel. Brother Ricks needed a man to plow and asked father if he could spare one of his boys. Father said he would let him know that night. When I got home, he asked me if I would help him plow so my brother could work for Mr. Ricks. He would be paid two dollars a week, and this would help pay for the seed wheat much more quickly.

While my brother went to work for Mr. Ricks, I drove the cattle while father held the plow. Thus we broke the ground for the first crops that we planted in Logan. After the ploughing was finished, I went back to Brother Ricks and worked there until fall. I returned home to glean wheat, so that we would have enough bread for winter, and then went back to the Ricks' home where I worked all winter.

Next spring Grandma Thatcher offered me $1.25 a week, and as the work was easier, I went to her place and worked all summer. It was at the Thatcher home that I learned refinement and culture. I was fresh from the plains and wild as a "March Hare." It was part of my work to wait on tables, and I was so frightened I said I couldn't do it, but Grandma Thatcher would say. "Yes you can, go in there, and act like a lady." With her patience and instruction I became more confident and naturally absorbed lady-like manners that have stayed with me throughout my life.

The first grist mill was being built in Logan, and since the builders were living with Thatchers, she needed me during this time. In the fall the workman left, and her sons went to Salt Lake to school so I went again to work for Mrs. Ricks and stayed there until spring.

In January Brother Ballard asked me to go to a dance with him at Providence, a little village several miles from Logan. We had a yoke of oxen and a heavy sleigh. It was very cold and snowed a three foot wall while we were at the dance. We were unable to come home so we sat up all the rest of the night for there was not room for so many of us to go to bed in one little log house. We had a very hard time in getting home the next day. So you see, even courting had its hardships in the Pioneer days.

I had been keeping company with Brother Ballard for some time, and although I was but fifteen years old, he wanted to marry me. He felt that he could take care of and provide for me without my having to work as hard as I had been doing. We were married on Sunday, May 5, 1861, by Bishop William B. Preston. I was fifteen and Henry was twenty-nine years old. He had been put in as Bishop of Logan Second Ward a month before our marriage. Thus at the age of fifteen I became a Bishop's wife.

The following summer we had a great deal of trouble with the Indians. They were very hostile, and often the people had to seek shelter in a large cellar. I have seen the Indians ride on their horses into the yard and tramp the gardens to pieces and even go into the houses on horse back. They did an enormous amount of damage in the fields. This was the worst time we had with them and the men had to take their guns with them to work. While one guarded the cattle the others would plow. The Indians only took one child from our settlement and we never got her back.

Once the Indians stole a great many horses from Brother Thatcher, and since my husband was a minute man, he had to go many times without even saying good-bye to look for stolen cattle. We tried to keep a good supply of bread on hand to encourage the Indians to be more friendly towards us. One year they killed a number of settlers north of Logan and the soldiers from Fort Douglas were called and a real battle ensued, the place now being called Battle Creek. Nearly all the Indians were killed and some of the soldiers but we never had any more trouble after this. The soldiers camped on Tabernacle Square, and I sent bread, butter and eggs to eat.

We also had grasshopper wars. I have seen the heavens darkened with grasshoppers until one would think it was midnight. I have gone out at such times and driven them into a trench with a bunch of willows and buried them alive. Even with all we killed the ground would be left perfectly bare of vegetation. They destroyed our crops and my husband had to go over into another valley and work on a threshing machine to get bread for the winter.

On October 18, 1861, my husband took me and his mother and started to Salt Lake City, and on October the 26, 1861 I went to the Endowment House and received my endowments and was sealed to my husband for time and eternity.

A short time before the birth of my first baby I also had my first experience in sewing. My husband had a fine young steer that he was saving to sell in order to get enough money for us to buy material to make clothing for the new little baby we were expecting. One of the prominent brethren of Logan at this time suffered a great financial loss and was destitute. The people were called upon to give what they could for the support of this unfortunate family. We had our winter supply of food in the house, but no money, the steer being held for such a purpose. My husband came home feeling very badly and said, "Margaret, I am very sorry and disappointed but I have been called upon to raise some money to help out one of our brethren, and the only thing I have that I can give is that steer. What shall I do?" My husband's gratitude for my willingness brought him to tears. It was a big sacrifice for us, but we both knew it was right.

After my husband left the house, I hunted out two of his old homespun woolen shirts and pulled down the blinds and locked the doors so that no one would see me try my hand at a new art. I spread the shirts on the floor and, without a pattern, cut out two little dresses and sewed them up by hand. This was practically all the clothes I had for my first child. However, she was most welcome to us and given as much love as two loving parents were capable of bestowing. She was born January 18, 1863. We named her Margaret Hannah, and my husband was the proudest father in the valley.

By 1864 my husband had prospered, and we were able to live very comfortably. In that year, he went with his team in Captain Preston's company to help gather in the poor from the plains before the winter weather came. During his absence I spun and wove a nice big piece of cloth to make our winter clothing. He returned on September 19. On the 20th our first son was born who we named Henry William after his father and grandfather.

My husband had started to build us an adobe house on the corner of our lot. We had been living in a little log house which was later to be our granary. I helped him make the adobes and we were so happy when we were able to move into it just before our next child was born. On Sunday, July, 8, 1866 our son and third child was born. He was named Thomas McNeil Ballard, after my father.

The law of plural marriage had now been made manifest by revelation to the servants of God. My husband being a Bishop had been counseled by the authorities to set the example of obedience by entering in this law. The compliance of this was a greater trial to my husband than it was to me. He would say to me, "Margaret, you are the only woman in the world I ever want. I am satisfied with only you." While this was a trial for us both, we knew that the Lord expected us to be obedient to this law as in all laws as revealed in these latter days.

After many weeks of pondering and praying for guidance, I persuaded my husband to enter into this law and suggested to him my sister, Emily, who was three years younger than myself, as his second wife. This was agreeable to him for she was a beautiful and lovable girl of eighteen years.

During their courtship my husband was manly, dignified, honorable and upright toward me and my sister. Never once did he neglect me or leave me alone during this time. Many times he took me to my mother's with my babies to spend the evening while he took Emily to a dance, and at all times he showed me every consideration and courtesy.

After he had won her love and after he had given her his, he and Emily decided to be married in October. They went to Salt Lake and were married in the Endowment House. Henry asked me to go with them on this trip. I made protest as I was in a delicate condition and thought the trip would be too hard. Henry was grieved and said to me, "Margaret, unless you go with me and give your consent to this marriage and stand as a witness, I will not go." I went and made the trip in a covered wagon over a hundred miles of rough road and gave my consent and blessing to this union.

On October 4, 1867, my husband married my sister Emily as his second wife. Although I loved my sister dearly and we knew it was a commandment of God that we should live in the Celestial Marriage, it was a great trial and sacrifice for me. But the Lord blessed and comforted me and we lived happily in this principle of the Gospel. I have thanked the Lord every day of my life that I have had the privilege of living that law.

After my husband's marriage to Emily, one morning as I awoke, I turned my face to the wall and wept a little and felt very lonely, alone in my condition. I heard a sound and thought someone had come into my room. I turned in my bed and I saw a most beautiful young woman dressed in white. She said to me, "Be of good cheer, I have just brought you two choice spirits." At that moment I felt "life quickening" for the first time of my unborn twins. This was a great comfort to me and I felt that I had been somewhat rewarded for my sacrifice by being blessed with a promise of not one but two more children.

On May 15, 1868, I gave birth to twin babies, a little girl and boy. We named them Janet and Charles. They were two beautiful babies but did not stay long with us on this earth. The little girl died on September 18, 1869, and ten days later the little boy died. This was a very sore trial for me.

During the winter of 1869 we had about one hundred sheep wintering in Clarkston. Since it was a very hard winter, and the snow was very deep, nearly all of them were dying. A man came and told my husband that if he wanted to save any of the sheep, he would have to go at once with a wagon and haul them into shelter.

I told my husband to get another wagon and team and I would drive with him. He did not want me to go, but I insisted for I felt so sorry to lose so many sheep and thought we could have double the number with the two wagons. I also thought I could be company for him on such a long drive. It was very cold. We started very early and it was eleven o'clock when we got home that night. We brought twenty sheep back with us, but about half of them died on the way home. I never will forget the sight of so many sheep lying around dead and dying. It made my heart ache to see the suffering of these animals.

On April 9, 1870, my son George Albert was born. He was a fine, big, healthy boy and brought great happiness to our home. The following September I received a Patriarchal blessing from Brother Charles H. Hyde. This was a very great comfort to me. It promised me many privileges and blessings which have nearly all been fulfilled.

On February 9, 1873, I gave birth to another son whom we named Melvin Joseph. Prior to his birth I had lost my twins in death, and my health was broken. I had the misfortune of having several miscarriages, and during the early stages of pregnancy, I was in danger of losing him also. My heart was broken. I had encouraged my husband to go into polygamy, and by so doing he might rear a large posterity to strengthen Zion. Melvin was carried during a period of great trial in my life; a period of poverty, during a national depression, a season of crop failures, a very severe winter, and during the "underground." I had given birth to six children. Two had been taken in death in their infancy, just ten days apart. Sorrow and sickness had weakened my physical strength. My heart was sore, my arms were empty, for again the life of my unborn child was threatened.

For days and weeks I was bedfast, and I felt in my anguish that the "fruit of my womb was cursed." Like Rachel of old, my heart yearned for a child, and I cried unto the Lord, "Give me children or else I die." My husband had taken the children a block way to see a parade, and while he was gone I raised my trembling body from the bed and crawled and locked the door so that I might pour out my soul to God on my knees in prayer. I called to his remembrance my willingness to bear children; my approval of my husband's marriage to my sister that a greater posterity build up his kingdom in Zion. I supplicated the Lord for his help. I felt that I had done all that was in my power, and I asked to know my standing in his sight.

God hearkened unto my prayer and a comfort was given to me. I saw no person but I heard a voice speak plainly to me saying, "Be of good cheer—your life is acceptable, and you will bear a son who will become an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ."

In due time my child was born; I did bear a son, my last son. We named him Melvin Joseph, and I know he is a chosen son of God.

His life was ever precious to us, and we both recognized in him a choice spirit. He was also honored by his brothers and sisters, although they did not know of the promise given him, nor did I ever tell him. Melvin was not a robust child and his early life was shielded and protected. Neither was his young life a carefree happy life, for again death entered our home and saddened our lives.

During the summer of 1874, there was an epidemic of scarlet fever in Logan. Many families were severely afflicted with it. My brother, Joseph McNeil, contracted the disease and died on Saturday June 13, 1874, at the age of fourteen and one-half years old. My children all came down with it and were very sick. Our little son George Albert died of it on Tuesday, July 7, 1874. Our daughter Margaret Hannah was sick with the same disease when her little brother died. The day after his death his little body was taken to her bedside for a last farewell on earth. This parting was not for long for she too died six days later. He [George Albert] was buried Wednesday, 8th of July, and Margaret [Hannah] died Monday, July 13, 1874 at the age of nearly twelve years. She was buried the next day, Tuesday, July 14th by her brother.

Thus I had been the mother of seven children with but three remaining—three boys; Henry, Thomas and my baby Melvin. Within ten days we had buried our twins, in less than five years later, within six days we buried our other two dear children. How lonely and empty our home was and sad were our hearts.

Not long after we had buried our children, my son, Henry, was helping his father haul peas from the field. In some way he fell on the pitchfork which ran through his bowels. His father prayed over him at the time and asked the Lord to spare his life until he could get him home. When they brought him in he looked like he was dead. I hurried and made an herb plaster and put his whole body in it. We also offered up a mighty prayer for him. He was again restored to health and we know that is was the power of the Lord that saved him, for at that time we had no doctors to help us.

Just two weeks after this on September 19, 1875, I gave birth to another daughter whom we named Ellen Phoebe. She too was taken from us in her young womanhood. A month later my husband was brought home from the Canyon very sick, suffering with kidney trouble.

The brethren had been in and administered to him, but he was very bad, and we felt he would surely die. I was standing at the foot of his bed and greatly grieved to see him in such agony. Looking at me he said he knew he could die if I would only give him up. A voice came to me and said, "Administer to him," but I was very timid about doing this for the elders had just blessed him. The voice came again and I felt with the priesthood in the house I could not do it. I thought they would think me bold and I was very weak. The voice came to me the third time. Heeding its prompting I put my hands upon his head. The spirit of the Holy Ghost was with me and I was filled with a Divine strength in performing this ordinance. When I finished, my husband had fallen asleep and slept quietly for two hours or more. There are still a number of the brethren living who were in the house at the time and they often speak of this miraculous healing.

On February 8th, 1878, another daughter was born to us. We named her Rebecca Ann. Soon after this my husband's father and mother came to live with us. They were with us for about eight years before their deaths, at which time his father was ninety-six and his mother eighty-six. They were both very feeble and required a great deal of care and attention. I was ever willing to care for them and bestow my affection on them in order to make their lives happy. And I know that they both died blessing me. This has always been a comfort to me.

From the first organization of Relief Society in Cache Valley until 1880, I labored as a teacher, and on December eleventh of that year I was put in as President of this organization in the Second Ward with Sister Barbara Larsen as First Counselor and Sister Susan J. Smith as Second Counselor. Sister Emmeline James was Secretary. I served in this capacity for over thirty years. During these years I tried to do my duty in caring for the sick and comforting the needy.

I have walked for blocks through the deep snow. I have been out in rain and wind in the darkest of nights and in the earliest hours of the morning administering to those who were afflicted, sick, suffering and dying. I have sat up all night time after time with the ill. I have laid out the dead and made their burial clothes. I have mothered orphans, comforted widows and striven to be a peace maker to those in trouble and through it all the Lord has directed me and I have enjoyed His Spirit as my companion in these labors. It comforts me to have done some good to those less fortunate than myself. Many, many times I have neglected my own family and home, but the Lord always came to my rescue.

On December 13, 1881, I gave birth to another daughter and we named her Lettie May. Shortly after this a family by the name of Phister, who lived in our ward, were left orphans. The father had died leaving a wife and six small children. Seven months later the mother gave birth to another baby and died while the baby was very young. After her death, the seven children were brought into my home and stayed until after their mother's funeral. Bishop Hardy of Salt Lake distributed them among different people. I adopted one of the little girls, her name was Lana, and raised her as my own until she was married.

Shortly after the Logan Temple had been dedicated, my father was called to be an officiator there and while in this capacity was taken ill with pneumonia, his life being despaired of. One morning early they sent for me and I hurried down lest I should never see my father alive again. I was not well myself, for I had been suffering with erysipelas and had not been out of the house for a week. I wrapped up sufficiently and was taken in a sleigh. When I arrived, Mother was feeling very bad and could not be comforted. When I looked at Father and saw his condition, I was sorrowful myself for you could hear him breathe all over the house. The Spirit of the Lord was with me and I had a desire to administer to him. I asked mother if he had been blessed as yet, and she said that he had that morning. I was timid again about going ahead and doing anything of this sort, but I knew that I should so I asked mother if she did not want to assist me but, she declined because she felt it would be of little use. If the Priesthood had not helped, then she deemed it useless for us to try. I hesitated, but something said to me. "Administer to him," so I went and closed the door and asked mother if she would not pray with me. She consented, and we knelt by the bed and prayed, and I then anointed my father and administered to him. The power of the Lord was with me for while my hands were still on his head, his breathing became much easier. When I finished father opened his eyes and said, "Thank God for this blessing. I knew this power was in the church and I thank Him for it." This was most wonderful to me and surely the Lord did bless us all. Father was still very weak but that night he sat up in his chair with his clothes on. It was not long after that until he had fully recovered from his sickness. I have told you these experiences so show how perfectly my patriarchal blessing had been fulfilled. I had been promised that I should heal the sick through the Power of the Lord.

I gave birth to another daughter, Mary Myrtle, on August 21, 1885.

It was not until I received my husband's first letter [from London] that I learned to read and write. Up to this time I could do neither, but I was determined to learn to read his letters and to answer them. After many difficulties and obstacles I was able to do both.

While my husband was away, my family had worked very hard, but we were blessed and got along very well. The boys hauled logs from the canyon and sold them, thus helping to support us. Every Sunday we fasted and prayed to the Lord to prosper Brother Ballard in his labors. Through all my trials I was thankful that the Lord did not forget us.

There was a brother who had a plural wife. She was about to be confined. As polygamists we were watched very closely. He feared that the coming of the child would be the cause of his arrest. He went to Apostle Merrill for advice and was told, "You are as near to the Lord as I, go to Him." This man fasted and prayed. When he was in one of the upper rooms of the Temple he heard a voice say, "Take her to Margaret Ballard's" He came to me and told me that he had been sent but did not tell me who sent him. Neither did he tell me whose wife he was asking me to take. We were all willing to help those in trouble so I told him I would do my best to take care of her. She was with me one week before her baby was born. The midwife and I were alone with her, but she got along well and I kept her and her baby for six months and no one molested us. When the man told me how he happened to come to me, it made my heart rejoice to know that my Father in Heaven had such confidence in me.

Because of my husband's being away the deputies did not bother my home and I sheltered a number of the polygamist brethren under my roof and gave them women's clothes to dress in so they might visit their families after dark. I also drove them in my buggy, dressed in disguise to visit their loved ones. They felt safe and the Lord preserved them from attack. It was a laughable sight, sometimes, to see the men dressed in my clothes. We had to pull and push to get them in and leave part unbuttoned then put a shawl around their shoulders to cover up the gapping spaces. Brother Larson was quite stout, and Brother Amuson was a tall thin man, but I would do the best I could and put a hat on their heads, a heavy veil over their faces and tuck them in the buggy with a robe over their lap and drive them after dark to their homes to see their families.

While my husband was in London, he met a sister that was in the under-ground. She had a baby girl and wanted to come back to Utah. My husband wrote and asked me if I would take her in my home. I did so and she stayed with me for a long time and was not molested, so I felt blessed once more.

My husband secured a great deal of genealogy while he was in England and sent these records home to me. My son Henry and I did the work for these names in the Temple. When my husband came back he was very pleased to know that all of the work was done. It gave me great joy to be an instrument in the hands of the Lord in working out the salvation for those who had died in darkness. Again I felt I had fulfilled, in part, another blessing which was promised me by one of God's patriarchs.

In 1887, while my husband was away, my dear father was summoned to serve a sentence of six months in the penitentiary and was fined $100.00. He was at this time counselor to the bishop of the third ward, and all the Saints grieved for him. This was a great trial to me to have my noble father thus abused. They shaved off his long beard and put him in stripes. He took a severe cold and was very sick and was never strong again. He entered January 3, 1887, and was released July 7, 1887.

Brother Ballard was away on his mission for over two years. He arrived home in Logan January of 1889. In order that he might not be detected, he took a freight train from Salt Lake City and traveled in the night, arriving home in the early morning. I did not know just when to expect him, but I felt impressed that he would come in this manner and sat up all night waiting for him. When I heard the train whistling into Mendon, I awakened my son Thomas and sent him to the station to meet his father. He arrived safely but did not know Thomas because he had grown so much during the separation. Although our meeting was held in secrecy, it was a joyful one. We were thankful for the work my husband had been able to accomplish, for his protection, and for the health we had all been granted during his absence.

After Brother Ballard had been home for a few days, he thought it best to go to the officers and tell them he was ready to serve his term for polygamy. The officers granted him a day to rest and visit his families. Then he went to Ogden and was tried before a court, fined fifty dollars and sentenced to two months imprisonment. He paid the fine and served his term and then returned to us feeling free from this obligation.

The following December my little daughter Ellen took sick with membranous croup. She suffered terribly for several days and then died, the date being December 13, 1889. She was fourteen years old and a great comfort to me and such a companion during her father's absence. Of course it was another severe blow to us. the Lord gave me strength so that I came to know that it was best that she should be taken.

Ten days before her death I had a dream which troubled me greatly for I knew it concerned the children whom I had buried. After her death I went to the Temple to get endowments for her and was feeling very badly. I prayed that I might understand the meaning of my dream. I was sitting wondering why I had been called to go through this sacrifice once more when the interpretation of my dream went before my eyes. With great plainness I saw that which would have come upon my children if they had lived. They would have been lost to me. I saw my five beautiful children saved for me and knew that they would be mine again. I had this vision, for which I feel thankful, and this is as true as the sun ever shines upon the earth.

On March 8, 1891, my son Henry was called to be Bishop of the Benson Ward. He was set apart by Apostle Moses Thatcher and he held this position for over twenty years.

In the fall of 1891 my father took sick and died suddenly. This was another sorrow for me for I loved him dearly and felt his loss keenly. I relied upon him in trouble and sickness and felt that I had truly lost a good friend and loving father. His life had always been an inspiration to me as well as a guiding star.

On April 6, 1893, I attended the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple. My soul was filled with joy for the privilege of being a partaker of such a Heavenly feast as was manifested at that dedication

A few weeks after his marriage Melvin went upon his first mission. During his absence I gave his wife a home with me and did everything I could for her welfare and comfort. While she was with me she gave birth to their son Melvin Russell. He was a very delicate child and we had many serious times to pass through with him. The Lord was good to us and answered our prayers and restored him many times to health. Day after day I fasted and prayed for him. Surely the Lord was good to spare his life.

My mother died December 6, 1900, after an illness that had lasted over two years. During her sickness I endeavored to render willing service for her benefit. She lived with my sister Jeannette about three blocks from my home. Every day during those two years I walked back and forth two or three times a day to assist my sister, who had very poor health herself, to care for my mother. It grieved me to see my mother afflicted for such a long time. I did everything I could to comfort her, and in turn I received her gratitude and blessing.

March 13, 1901, my sister Jeannette died leaving five orphan children, three boys and two girls. Her husband had died two years previously. Upon her death bed she pleaded with me to take her two little girls and raise them as my own. After the funeral I brought the two little girls, Edna, aged six, and Jeannette, aged ten to my home. I have done my duty by them as well as I have known how, and I know my Heavenly Father is satisfied with my efforts. Now they are raised I am proud to have had a part in their upbringing. I love them and know that they love me.

My sister Emily took sick about this time and suffered severely for months. This was another trial for me for, although we had many misunderstandings and differences of opinion, she was very dear to me. We had traveled the road together for many years and passed through trials and hardships together. We had stood by each other in all experiences of life. While we had our difficulties, living the law of plural marriage, I believe we lived it and got along as well as human beings could be expected to live it. I know we will have cause for great rejoicing in the Hereafter for having done so well.

After her death I tried to do justice to her children in all of our dealings. I have endeavored to give motherly counsel and advice to them all, both sons and daughters, sons-in-law and daughters-in-law. I love them every one next to my very own, and I know they love me for they always have shown me affection and respect.

My husband died February 26, 1908, after a brief illness. He had been suffering for a number of years and I was thankful that he was released. My life was more lonely without him than anyone can imagine without having experienced it themselves. He was a kind and loving husband, an affectionate father, a man of honor and justice, filled with faith in God and exercised great power in his Priesthood. I have been a widow for nine years and yet each day I miss him more and know that I will be filled with joy when I am once more associated with him.

Five months after their marriage D. Ray went on a mission to England. During his absence my daughter made her home with me for the greater part of the time. In this way I have assisted the spread of the Gospel by providing a home and food for my three daughters and one daughter-in-law while their husbands have taken the Gospel to the nations of the world. I have given what material aid I could to help along with this work so near and dear to my heart. A number of my grandsons have also filled missions and for this I am thankful.

My son Melvin was called to preside over the Northwestern States Mission shortly after his father's death. He left in April 1909 and is still laboring in this capacity. He has been an instrument in performing a great work. I have visited him a number of times in Portland Oregon during his mission. It has been my happy lot to minister unto several of the Elders in this part of the Lord's field. I learned to love them all because of the work which they represent. I have gone out to their street meetings and raised my voice in defense of the truth and have borne my testimony of the truthfulness of this work to throngs of people crowded in the streets of Portland. My heart rejoices for this great privilege and I thank God for the testimony which I was able to bear on such occasions. In my weak way I feel that I have assisted in the spread of truth and am grateful for this opportunity.

I am thankful for my family, for their love and respect and for the honor they have always shown to their father and me. I appreciate their obedience and am happy in their desire to follow their parents example, concerning the things of the Lord. I feel blessed that they have all had the privilege of having been married in the Temple by the Priesthood of God and sealed for time and eternity—not just my family but all of my husband's children, and also those whom I have raised as my own.

My life has been one of varied experiences. I have had a great deal of sickness to pass through, both with my children and grandchildren, but I have always relied upon the Lord and He has never failed me. I have stood by my husband through sickness, trials, poverty and prosperity. I have labored by his side in the fields. I have done various types of work such as soap making, weaving, spinning, reaping, sowing, plowing and gleaning. From the very first day I entered this valley until this day I have never ceased my labors to up build and beautify this city.

Although my life has been one of sacrifice and service I feel that I have lived it the best I could with the knowledge I have had. My testimony of the truthfulness of the Gospel grows stronger each day, and the work grows dearer and sweeter to my soul. I know that God lives and that He lives and answers prayers, that Jesus is the Son of The Living God and that Joseph Smith was His Prophet. I thank God for this knowledge and leave this as my testimony to my children and grandchildren and all who may come after me. I plead of you all to heed the Spirit of God that you may also have this testimony burning in your hearts that you may have his Spirit as your daily companion.

Epilogue by family members

The foregoing autobiography was written about one year before her death. Her last year, like all other years of her full life was spent in service and devotion to her religion, her country and her family.

Shortly after her return to Logan from the April conference of 1918 she was afflicted with high blood pressure which resulted in slow hemorrhages of the brain. During the ten weeks which it lasted, she suffered intensely without complaint or murmur. From the day she was forced to take to her bed until the last breath of life she accepted whatever came as the will of the Father with such resignation as is rarely found.

Because she had a strong constitution, her family felt that there was no reason that she should not survive this illness and live many more years. But she was firm in her conviction that she was not to remain. She would say, "I am satisfied with my life as I have lived it and I am ready to go back."

Those who were privileged to be with her during her last sickness received the benefit of the golden hours of her well-spent life. Her mind was keen and bright to the last, sensitive to her appearance and to her surroundings.

It has been said that some people walk and talk with God. Her faith was such and her belief so personal that surely she was among these people whose sincerity is thus rewarded with the certainty that there is a definite plan for all things and a definite place in that plan for each.

To those who knew and remember her, one of the outstanding attributes of her character they believe should be emphasized was her love for her husband. He was a large lovable man, sincere and deliberate. She was energetic, a noble little soul. Their characters complimented each other. He protected her and was her refuge. She inspired and companioned his every activity. Typical of his devotion and dependence upon her was the crisis they both met when he was asked to take another wife. When he felt he should do as suggested, he came to her and said, "Margaret, I do not want any other woman but you. If I must, you will have to find her for me." She did.

Her determination was second only to her faith, and an integral part of her. Typical of its expression was the remodeling of her house which was done when she was approaching seventy. She had asked her sons to help her remove a very bothersome partition in a closet in order to make a sitting room more spacious. Her sons agreed to do it for her, and as busy people will, put off doing so. Surprised at the change in her house some time later when her oldest son came to see her he asked if the other brother had done it. "No," she firmly replied. "Well, who did it then?" was the rejoinder. "I did it myself." When her son asked her why she hadn't let him help, she grew ruffled and replied, "I did ask you, you know."

The patriarchal blessing that she refers to during her life was given to her at the time she was carrying her youngest son, Melvin. She was sad and somewhat depressed at the time. She has repeated most of it in her story, but one part that was omitted was denied her at the time of her death. She was promised that the child she was bearing would grow to become one of the leaders of the Church and that his power of good would be felt by many. Perhaps she hesitated to insert this promise until it had been fulfilled. The joy that she would have known had she lived but a few months to realize that her unbounded faith would find its outlet in her youngest son, Melvin, who was inspired not only from himself, but from her too.

She died on a beautiful Sunday morning July 21, 1918, at seventy-two years of age. She was the mother of eleven children, six of whom she raised. She had numerous grandchildren and great grandchildren. Her funeral was held in the Logan Tabernacle and was one of simplicity and peace, so typical of her life. She was buried beside her husband in the Logan Cemetery, one spot on earth very dear to her heart.

Henry and Margaret's Family

Margaret Hannah died at age eleven.

Henry William married Elvira Day Davidson.

Thomas McNeil married Phoebe John Smith.

Charles James died age sixteen months.

Janet McNeil died age sixteen months.

Geroge Albert died at age four.

Melvin Joseph married Martha Annabele Jones.

Ellen Pheobe died at age fourteen.

Rebecca Ann married Louis Samuel Cardon.

Lettie May married George Washington Squires.

Mary Myrtle married Daniel Ray Shurtliff.

Henry and Emily's Family

Emily Elizabeth died age six months.

Willard Russell married Bessie Griffin.

Franklin Hyrum married Sarah Stevens.

Ernest Reid married Amanda Miller.

Lydia Jane married William Henry Griffin.

Jennie Lulu married Franklin Thomas Griffin.

Amy Eugine died at age sixteen.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The following was taken from the Church history of Genoa. "In passing it may here be stated that sister Margaret McNeil, a girl of twelve years of age, arrived on the present site of Genoa ahead of the main company in 1857, and was the first female in camp. The company consisted of ninety-seven men, twenty-five women, forty children, forty-two yoke of oxen, twenty cows, six horses, twenty-four chickens, twenty hogs, two cats, and dogs a plenty."
