Various authors, Regional Studies in LDS History: Arizona ( 1989)

Subduing a Desert-Securing a Destiny

by James R. Christianson

Introduction

For most Latter-day Saints, the study of LDS history in North America has amounted to an introduction to mainstream Mormonism. Beginning in New England, New York, and Pennsylvania, they have followed the Church to Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois; journeyed with Sam Brannan on a 24,000-mile voyage to California; shared in the struggles of the Mormon Battalion on its circuitous route to the Great Basin; and accompanied the pioneer wagons and handcarts from the Missouri River to Fort Laramie, South Pass, and the Valley of the Great Salt Lake.

To those who view their Mormon heritage with more than passing interest, however, a fascination has developed with such windows of history as Cardston, Santa Clara, Fort Lemhi, Franklin, Snowflake, Orderville, and the colonies on the Little Colorado. These and numerous other ventures and events represent significant developments in the adjustment and expansion of the kingdom tent as it not only came to embrace the whole of the great interior basin of the American West, but also spilled over its rim, embracing a variety of habitation sites scattered northward into Oregon, Idaho, and Canada and south and east into Nevada, Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona, and Mexico.

From the vantage point of contemporary members, early Mormon settlements beyond the limits of Salt Lake City and the Wasatch Front are little-known places from which people escaped in order to make history or to which they were sent or fled into obscurity. A more accurate appraisal of these outlying, at times painfully distant, settlements distinguishes them as being at the heart of the Mormon success story during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.

Among the goals set by Brigham Young and those who joined him in their mass migration to the West was an overwhelming determination to gather out of and away from Babylon. Initially, the communities established throughout Salt Lake, Utah, and Weber Valley served this purpose. As the migration of the Saints from the Midwest, the South, and the East was further amplified by immigrants from Great Britain and increasingly large numbers from Europe, the settlement plan expanded to the full range of the compass.

The eventual unplanned intrusion of gentile influences into Salt Lake City and neighboring communities coincided with the planned expansion of Mormon settlements throughout the West. The hoped-for and much-sought-after isolation which accompanied early beginnings in the valleys of the mountains was gradually compromised as the United States Army, federal appointees, non-Mormon merchants and miners, and the railroad caused the once-distant East and West to meet in the streets of Salt Lake City.

What the central communities of the Church lost as the veil of isolation withdrew and the confrontation with Babylon resumed, the hundreds of scattered settlements throughout and beyond the Great Basin retained for decades. In these settlements, generation after generation, commitment ran deepest, and values were least compromised.

As time passed and radio, movies, commerce, education, literature, and improved means of transportation violated the buffer thrust up by isolation around far-flung Mormon settlements, their inhabitants did what faithful Latter-day Saints in Salt Lake City and other Mormon communities had done years before. They recognized that their original frontier, the whole of the West, was, in time, reduced to a valley, then to a community, and finally to the walls of a house and to the individual lives of those who called it home. The Zion which Brigham Young sought to establish, first as a city and then as an empire, was successfully anchored after the turn of the century, as it was in 1847, in the hearts and homes of Mormon men and women.

The Gathering: Fuel for the Mormon Colonizing Effort

There was much in the message of nineteenth-century Mormonism that was unique and excited the minds of many "seekers of truth." The various doctrines taught, whether virtually new or simply more lucid and authoritative restatements of teachings long proclaimed, were in one way or another instrumental in the conversion process experienced by thousands of individuals. For many, it was the Restoration; for some, the priesthood and a prophet; still others were drawn into the gospel net by the solid evidence of The Book of Mormon as a second witness for Christ. For most, however, the single most compelling doctrine of the Restoration during the first five or six decades of Mormon history was the gathering. [^1]

Though all that was taught was vital and of significance to this latter-day restoration of all things, as a worldwide message it was the concept of coming out of Babylon and joining together at a specific location prior to the second coming of Christ that captured the imagination and won the allegiance of peoples throughout North America and the countries of Western Europe. From New York, to Ohio, to Missouri, to Illinois, to the Valley of the Great Salt Lake, it was the call to gather, the sacrifice it required, and the vision it instilled that eventually rooted the kingdom solidly and successfully in the soil of Zion. It was the gathering, as long as it lasted, that fueled the Mormons' colonizing process.

The concept of gathering was a well-established canon in the body of LDS doctrine by the early 1830s. Kirtland, Ohio; Independence (Jackson County) and Far West, Missouri; and Nauvoo, Illinois, were all designated as places of refuge and centers to which the faithful were to gravitate. It was not until the Church was forced to abandon the civilized East and remove to the arid valleys of the great interior basin of the Far West, however, that the real story of the Latter-day Saint gathering began to unfold.

The proselyting success which followed the introduction of the gospel into Great Britain in 1837 was paralleled but not equaled a few years later in continental Europe. Beginning in 1850, Mormon missionaries declared their message in Switzerland, the Netherlands, Scandinavia, Germany, and in parts of Italy, France, Gibraltar, Malta, and Austria. As with Great Britain, those countries where the Protestant Reformation left its mark and where political stability and religious freedom existed as something of a reality were the most receptive to the seeds of truth cast abroad by a handful of courageous elders.

Between 1850 and 1900, 80,000 Latter-day Saints emigrated from Great Britain and Scandinavia. Thousands more emigrated from Switzerland, Holland, and Germany. Europe was literally the marketplace for the gathering. Except for the Deep South, where missionaries continued to labor and find nominal success, the once fruitful missions of the United States and Canada were mostly abandoned during the latter half of the nineteenth century.

Following the unsettling events in Nauvoo and the resettlement of the Church in the West, out of the way of the thoroughly hostile and unsympathetic American public, the arrival of hundreds followed by many thousands of new, eager, able converts from across the Atlantic was to the Church what a transfusion is to a needy patient. Moved by the spirit of gathering, these converts came to build the kingdom. Arriving first in Salt Lake City, they gradually populated the valleys at increasing distances from the headquarters of the church. In quiet, established communities and in rustic frontier settlements, they performed their greatest service. In their homes and personal lives the restored gospel found expression, and Zion became a reality. In the isolation of their communities, their lives took on a soundness and depth that helped prepare them and their posterity for the time when the world of the twentieth century would seek them out.

A very small percentage of the thousands who came were well educated. A few, such as Karl G. Maeser and Jacob Spori, were educators; others were trained in medicine, in fine arts, and in music. More than one-half of all Mormon hymns were either written or had the music composed by British immigrants. Some were fairly wealthy, and even more possessed the skills that eventually brought them affluence. Most, however, were just what the territory needed: capable, motivated individuals who were experienced in a wide variety of crafts. They were men and women who could construct a temple or tabernacle in a wilderness, design an organ, perfect an irrigation system, or from one day to the next establish a functioning community.

The aesthetic or cultural impact of the gathering is difficult to measure. Perhaps it is sufficient to say that the coming together and mixing of the nations of the earth in the unique community we call Mormonism produced a kind of hybrid vigor which accounts for at least some of those traits that characterize and distinguish Latter-day Saints of the twentieth century.

Answering the Call

You recognize as word of God What Brigham bids you do; To stay or go-at home, abroad, Is all the same to you (Eliza R. Snow, Millennial Star, July 1, 1854)

Establishing independent, viable colonies was what early Mormonism and the gathering were all about. The opportunity to be part of the colonizing process was a call to build the kingdom and was, therefore, a mission experience not unlike traveling to distant lands, teaching the gospel, baptizing, and being willing to suffer afflictions for the sake of truth. Benjamin Johnson' s reaction to the first of several requests for him to colonize a wilderness area typified the readiness to sacrifice evidenced in the lives of most early Mormon Proselytes. When the call came, Benjamin recorded:

I felt a little taken back, for I had never thought of leaving the city. I was getting a good run in the saddlery business, and had the best chug store in the Territory and was doing well. I owned the half block on which the Utah central depot now stands, besides many other valuable lots in the city and a number of 5-and-10-acre lots in the fields adjoining the city. Yet the cull had come, and I could see Providence in it. The more I thought upon the subject the more I became enthused with joy and pride, that I had been deemed worthy of so important a call. [^2]

Like Benjamin Johnson, most Latter-day Saints viewed their assignment to colonize as a divine call. So identified, the whole of the Mormon colonizing experience zooms more sharply and understandably into focus. It explains why people who made immeasurable sacrifices to gather to Zion were willing and even eager to sacrifice anew and scatter to every nook and cranny of the West in order to further expand Zion.

Though correct, the simplicity of this explanation does not do credit to the true nature of the challenge facing prospective colonists, whether they were newly arrived Europeans or seasoned, well-established settlers who had successfully logged a span of years in their desert home. Unlike a preaching mission, which regularly lasted one, two, or three years, after which one was free to return to home and family, the colonist missionary left behind all that he could not carry in a wagon or on a draft animal, turning his back on civilization for an often ill-defined destination from which he would only return as a visitor, as a failure, or as a corpse. Given the nature of such an unusual commitment, one must look beyond the obvious to a difficult-to-define but very real force that moved Mormon men and women to reach beyond their grasp and act in an uncompromising but convincing fashion as they gave themselves over to the building of the kingdom of God, whether it was on the rim of a desert, the slope of a mountain, or the heart of a vast but waterless plain. As with many aspects of the nineteenth and early twentieth-century Mormon experience, there was a sense of destiny associated with the effort to colonize the American West. It was an awareness born, in pan, of a response to the relentless challenges faced on a near day-to-day basis; but even more, it was the fruit of a deeply held commitment to the belief that each was doing only that which he or she by foreordination had entered mortality to accomplish. If asked to explain one's selflessness and willingness to persist despite the many trials exacted by the colonizing experience, many would respond that they could not explain why but knew with certainty that each must carry on until the Lord through his prophet declared, "Enough!" Simply stated, of all his many children, the Lord had selected Latter-day Saints to lay the foundations of his kingdom, and that knowledge was sufficient to cement their wills at times when bodies and minds, drained of all strength and resilience, might otherwise have capitulated.

Immigrant colonists had less a financial sacrifice to make, but they faced a greater cultural adjustment than did their sedentary brethren. Having learned of and lived the gospel in their homeland, they had undertaken a difficult but sheltered journey to the New World under the leadership of people who knew their language and understood their problems. As colonists, these immigrants were thrust into a totally alien environment and society, where the only common denominators were the restored gospel and, for some, the English language. Remarkably, they made the necessary adjustments and became successful Latter-day Saints.

The charge has been made that the colonists came primarily from two classes; the well-to-do who would provide a financial foundation upon which a successful effort could be launched, and the ne'er-do-wells whom the frontier would hopefully chasten and reform. Contrary to this view, most colonies were spiced with the necessary number of in-betweens who, though neither rich nor idle, were equipped with the faith and skills required to make a success of otherwise impossible ventures.

This said, it was the call that came to subdue the desert, bring the gospel to the Indians, and create a buffer between Zion and Babylon that drove the colonists to accomplish the miraculous and thereby secure their own destiny and that of the kingdom. Only those who actually experienced it can know just how difficult their task was. But even they could not assess the true nature of what they had wrought, being limited in their understanding of the present and their vision of the future. Still, there was sufficient awareness to inspire a level of strength and perseverance that caused a desert to blossom as slowly civilization replaced a wilderness, and the kingdom emerged where alkali, dust, drought, sagebrush, and sand once prevailed.

The call to settle the Intermountain West produced many heroes. People excelled despite the disasters and the repeated disappointments that competed with the good times when a harvest was sufficient, the fruit did not freeze, the rains came when prayed for, or when, against all odds at a crucial hour within a season, the dam held. At times the hero was an individual. On other occasions and in another place, it was a whole community. One such community was Santa Clara, a colony established by Swiss immigrants in 1861 along Santa Clara Creek a few miles from Saint George in southern Utah.

Though restricted in terms of large-scale agricultural potential, the soil adjacent to Santa Clara Creek was suited to limited production of alfalfa, cotton, and grains but was ideal for row crops, fruit trees, and grapes. The latter crop was thought to be the most significant, and because of it the Swiss were selected to settle the area. Though some years were good, most of the early seasons were hauntingly bad, challenging the endurance of even the most faithful. After a series of off years during the first decade of the settlement, some of the Santa Clara Swiss found themselves so desperate for food that they sent their children into nearby St. George to beg for a place to live and work in exchange for food, literally placing themselves in a position of servitude in order to sustain life.

John S. Stucki, one of the original settlers, wrote of this time:

There were some spring seasons when we did not have a thing to eat except pig-weeds cooked in a little water without anything more nourishing to go with them as we had no cow, no flour, and no seasoning of any kind, not even a bit of bread for the little children. When they would cry for some bread it seemed awfully hard for mother, suffering from the pangs of hunger herself, to have to hear her little children cry for bread and have none to give them. Every day when I had to gather the pig weeds it seemed to me I could not stand it much longer and live. [^3]

Despite such humiliation and hardship, the Swiss Saints held on, renewed their efforts following each crop, dam, or weather failure and conquered the elements and themselves, thus becoming an indispensible cornerstone of the kingdom in what was then a wilderness.

Early one day during the first difficult decade in Santa Clara, a member of the community, whose grape crop repeatedly failed because of too much sun, too little water, and too many grasshoppers, made his way through town en-route to Cedar City, where he had been led to believe potatoes might be obtained on credit. Weak and staggering for want of food, he was observed by a fellow member of the Church who invited him in for a serving of fresh bread and a gift of the remainder of the loaf when he continued his journey.

With the help of a ride in a wagon for part of the fifty-mile distance to Cedar City, he arrived at his destination, made arrangements to acquire a load of potatoes by committing his next year's crop, and made his way back to St. George, where he hoped to obtain the loan of a wagon and a team of horses. The arrangements made, he returned to Cedar City, loaded the potatoes, and began his homeward journey. The first night out, before he reached a lower, warmer altitude, the temperature dropped well below freezing. By the time he reached Santa Clara, his load had turned into a soft, putrifying mass in the warm Dixie sun. Brokenhearted and devastated, he nonetheless stuck it out for the rest of that year and the next and for each succeeding year. In time he emerged as one of the nameless heroes of Mormonism whose life became a foundation upon which later generations successfully built, their accomplishments going far beyond what he ever thought possible. In the end, they were successful because he heeded the call and dreamed a dream. [^4]

Interpersonal Relationships-An Obstacle Course in Survival

I feel so weak and hungry now, There's nothing here to cheer, Except prophetic sermons, Which we very often hear. They will hand them out by dozens, And prove them by the Book- I'd rather have some roasting ears, To stay at home and cook. [^5]

Traditionally, Mormons have depicted the westward trek of the pioneers as the epic phase of their history. To have survived that long journey from East to West was to wear a badge symbolizing faith, courage, and commitment. Like a stairway to heaven, those who braved it and breached it were made equal to any and all trials or troubles by which time or fate might entreat them.

Though persuasively presented in printed works, family traditions, and community folklore, this view of Latter-day Saint history during the post-Nauvoo era pales in comparison to the clubbing, numbing reality that was characteristically a part of the colonizing experience. Except for the incomparable tragedy associated with the first year at Winter Quarters and the unfortunate outcome of the Willie and Martin handcart ventures, there is nothing in the tale of Mormon migration to compare with the era of settlement which it spawned.

Given the variety and the kinds of individuals thrown together during this phase of Mormon history, it is not surprising that the personal and collective physical hardships faced by the not-unwilling colonists were, if anything, equalled by the seating crises which emerged and multiplied as a product of countless interpersonal relationships gone awry.

Sources of conflict were about as numerous as there were numbers of colonists. Had it not been for the gospel, acting both as a catalyst to draw settlers together and as oil on troubled waters as it served to ameliorate differences, there is little chance this unique kingdom-building experiment would have succeeded. But even with the influence of the gospel, some differences could only be channeled, rather than solved, and allowed to run their course. Fortunately, the Kingdom and the Cause were usually greater than the crisis, and most communities survived.

A situation characteristic of those faced by countless other settlers was that of William Butler, who made his way to Utah, where he was baptized in September of 1850. After serving a mission to Ireland and experiencing the Utah War, William became pan of a Mormon settlement in northern Utah Territory where he took up farming. His journal reveals the following account of what his life was like before he moved to another location:

From time to time we had losses of stock, crosses and disappointments and some enemies to contend with, which caused us to think we might do better somewhere else. About the fall of fifty nine, Allen Taylor, the bishop of Kays ward, had a farm on the Weber bottoms which he represented to be something wonderful, but it proved to be anything else but what he represented. It was a place unfit for anyone with a family to live on, subject to be overflowed with high water, and the river since that time has washed the most of it awayÂ�. Bishop Alan Taylor from the time I was appointed a home missionary, became my enemy without any just cause or provocation. Before I sold, or traded, my farm to him he was continually threatening not to allow me any water for my farm. Finally I traded it to him. After I moved [to the Taylor farm] I found myself placed right in the midst of Taylor's relations who were no better than a band of bloodhounds.

The Taylor family were continually quarreling and fighting among themselves, and when they could not find anything to quarrel about among themselves, they would club together and go among their neighbors to fight. If their neighbor would not lend them anything they would play some mean trick on him. On one ocasion one of their nearest neighbors refused to loan his wagon to them. That night there was the tongues of five of his cattle cut out. I never in all my travels saw such a brutal trick practiced on the brute creation. [^6]

A further development of community rather than individual proportions occurred in the southern half of the San Luis valley in Colorado, the site of several early colonies. Unlike most other Mormon ventures, the area was first settled by converts from the Southern States who did not travel to the Mormon heartland before their arrival at the site designated for settlement. It was perhaps the absence of prior contact and the intermingling of people and resources before the actual selection of land and the erection of a community that subsequently resulted in serious divisions within the LDS population of San Luis Valley.

After wintering in Pueblo, a handful of southern Saints from Georgia and Alabama entered the valley during the spring and summer of 1878. Members from Utah, sent to help in the adjustment to the new environment, joined them. During the next few years, a steady stream of settlers from both the South and the West were added to the expanding Colorado colonies.

Right from the beginning, as Church organizations developed, Utah Mormons held all prominent positions. The growing perception that those in authority were slighting southerners was made even more painful by the latter's economic and technological dependence on the more experienced Utahns. This situation was further aggravated by the tendency of both groups to settle among and with their own kind. The community development pattern which resulted was either exclusively western, with nearly all the settlers Scandinavians, or totally southern. This tendency resulted in social barriers made all the more viable by the exclusive practice of plural marriage within the Utah communities and the total rejection of the practice, if not the principle, by the Saints from the South.

By the first decade of the twentieth century, many southern settlers had either left the Church or had been excommunicated. Though there were numerous reasons for such widespread disharmony, disunity within the Latter-day Saint community was a root cause. The overall impact of this and related problems was as devastating to the economy as it was to the spiritual well-being of the members. Of the several colonies established during the nineteenth century, all but two have either disappeared or have been absorbed by other communities. Sanford, the center of Utah Mormon activity, and Manassa, the stronghold of the southern Saints, are both active and alive, but neither is prosperous. [^7]

In spite of these difficulties, the history of Mormonism in San Luis Valley, Colorado, is a success story. Though some of the early pioneers and their posterity gave up and left the area or drifted away from the Church, many did not and, as was the case with Mormon colonies everywhere, problems within, like problems without, were there to be overcome. Those who survived in Utah, Colorado, Idaho, Nevada, Arizona, New Mexico and elsewhere expressed grief for those of their number who fell by the wayside, but they also felt gratitude for the strength derived from a battle fought and a victory won. As they turned the soil of America's great western desert and faced down its sun and wind and insects, as they dug ditches and canals and built and rebuilt dams and dreams, they secured their own destiny and bequeathed the strength of their loins to all their posterity, both those who stayed on the land and the many who found their place and secured their destiny elsewhere.
