Various authors, Regional Studies in LDS History: Arizona ( 1989)

The March of the Mormon Battalion in its Greater American Historical Setting

by Bruce A. Van Orden

To the Latter-day Saints, the march of the Mormon Battalion is a major historical event, illustrating the courage and stamina of the Mormon people. By contrast, the march rates no mention at all in American history survey texts. Even in annals of the Mexican-American War, the march receives only peripheral attention amid the discussion of Stephen W. Kearny's Army of the West. This paper attempts to place the march of the Mormon Battalion in its appropriate position in western American history.

Background to the Mexican War

By the mid-1840s the United States was caught up in an emotional upsurge known as Manifest Destiny. Countless citizens, feeling a sense of mission, believed that Almighty God had "manifestly" destined the American people for a hemispheric career. America would irresistibly spread its uplifting and ennobling democratic institutions over the entire continent. Land-hungry and restless westerners, together with many expansionist politicians, successfully united greed and democratic ideals into a popular philosophy.

James K. Polk, dark-horse Democratic presidential candidate in 1844, ran on the expansionist platform, which called for the annexation of Texas and the occupation of all of Oregon, all the way to 54° 40'. Even though Polk narrowly outpolled Henry Clay in the election, he and his fellow land-hungry Democrats claimed the victory was a "mandate" to take Texas. Lame-duck President John Tyler signed a joint resolution to annex Texas three days before he left the White House in March 1845. This move deeply offended Mexico, which had never recognized Texas' independence since it had been declared in 1836 and which still considered Texas to be one of its provinces.

Once in authority, President Polk was willing to compromise on the Oregon issue and asked only for territory to the forty-ninth parallel. Negotiators with Britain were able to achieve a settlement by June 1846, a month after the beginning of the Mexican War. This was fortunate, since had the United States been forced into a costly war with Great Britain, disaster might have followed in its conflict with Mexico.

Meanwhile, early in his administration, Polk and the disciples of Manifest Destiny were eager to obtain the verdant valleys of California and the harbor at San Francisco for the United States. Polk was willing to pay Mexico handsomely for California, but negotiations with the Mexican government became seriously endangered mostly because of Texas, but also because of claims against Mexicans for some $3 million in damages to American citizens and their property. Furthermore, the Mexican government was riddled by revolution. So Polk was worried when he heard disquieting rumors that the British intended to buy or seize California from Mexico.

Frustrated, President Polk prepared to force a showdown. He ordered General Zachary Taylor to march from the Nueces River, recognized by Mexico as the southwestern boundary of Texas, to the Rio Grande, claimed by Texas and the United States to be the border. Polk clearly believed that this would lead to a clash. Sure enough, on 25 April 1846, Mexican troops crossed the Rio Grande and attacked General Taylor's command. As soon as Polk heard of the encounter, he sent a vigorous war message to Congress. War was formally declared on 13 May.

Polk and his advisers, aware that a protracted war would be costly and would further disrupt the American populace, developed a four-pronged attack: (1) General Taylor was to cross the Rio Grande with a much enlarged volunteer army to invade northern Mexico and capture Monterey and other cities; (2) the navy was to blockade the Mexican ports on the Gulf of Mexico; (3) the navy was to seize San Francisco and blockade other California ports; and (4) Colonel Stephen W. Kearny of the Army of the West was to occupy Santa Fe in New Mexico and then traverse the desert to California and there overpower all Mexican garrisons and occupy California for the United States. It was with the fourth provision of this plan that the Mormon Battalion was to play its role in the War.

Authorization of the Mormon Battalion

The Latter-day Saints began leaving Nauvoo in February and March of 1846, the year of the beginning of the conflict between the United States and Mexico, for a new home in the West. Before leaving, Brigham Young had authorized Jesse C. Little to go to Washington, D.C., to embrace whatever facilities for emigrating to the Western Coast the federal government might offer. [^1] On his way to Washington, and on the same day the United States declared war on Mexico, 13 May 1846, Elder Little preached at a special conference of the Church at Philadelphia. In attendance was a twenty-four-year-old non-Mormon lawyer who would play a leading role in Mormon relations with Washington for years to come-Thomas L. Kane. Kane was the son of the Pennsylvania state attorney general and close friend of President Polk. Kane, who had been sympathetically following newspaper reports of persecutions against the Mormons, introduced himself to Elder Little after the meeting, and the two spent the rest of the day in earnest conversation. By the end of the day they had exchanged favors with each other. Kane obtained a letter of introduction to Brigham Young, since he was eager to travel to the Missouri River and then travel with the Mormons to California. In return Elder Little obtained from Kane a letter of introduction to the vice-president of the United States, George M. Dallas, and to other highly placed officials.

Elder Little arrived in Washington on 21 May in the midst of the war fever that was gripping the nation's capital. He met President Polk at a reception the following day, but it was his meeting a day later with Amos Kendall, long a member of the inner circle of the Democratic Party in Washington, that began to produce some fruit. Kendall offered hope that approximately one thousand Mormons could be enlisted into the army to help defend California for the United States. But Little, unable to meet with Polk for a week and a half, sent a letter on 1 June to the President, threatening that if the Mormons were not successful in getting support from Washington, they might seek for it from another source. The British were the implied other source. It will be remembered that at that very time delicate negotiations were proceeding with the British over the Oregon question.

On 2 June, the Cabinet approved President Polk' s plan to have Colonel Stephen W. Kearny, the commander of the U.S. Army of the West, receive into the service a few hundred Mormons who were on their way to California. Polk admitted in his diary that his move was to conciliate the Mormons and to prevent them from taking pan in any conflict against America. In subsequent days Elder Little was able to meet twice with President Polk about the enlistment of a Mormon Battalion. Thomas Kane also conferred with Polk and the secretary of war, William L. Marcy, on the same subject.

On 3 June 1846, the secretary of war sent orders to Colonel Stephen W. Kearny, who was setting up the Army of the West. After recruiting sufficient personnel from the state of Missouri, Kearny was charged with conquering Santa Fe and establishing a civil government in New Mexico; then he was to press forward to California in order to bring all of Upper California (a loose term referring to the vast, largely uninhabited territory now comprising the states of Arizona, California, Nevada, Utah, and pans of Idaho, Wyoming, Colorado, and New Mexico) into the possession of the United States. Marcy told Kearny that as soon as he began his expedition, he would be promoted to the rank of brevet brigadier general. Kearny's orders contained the following instruction regarding the Mormons and their recruitment:

It is known that a large body of Mormon emigrants are en route to California for the purpose of settling in that country. You are desired to use all proper means to have a good understanding with them, to the end that the United States may have their cooperation in taking Possession of, and holding that country. It has been suggested here [a reference to the visits of Elder Little and Thomas L. Kane], that many of these Mormons would willingly enter into the service of the United States, and aid us in our expedition against California. You are hereby authorized to muster into service such as can be induced to volunteer; not, however, to a number exceeding one-third of your entire force. Should they enter the service, they will be paid as other volunteers, and you can allow them to designate, so far as it can be properly done, the persons to act as officers thereof. [^2]

The Army of the West

Stephen Watts Kearny, born of Irish parents in 1794 in New Jersey, was a veteran of War of 1812. He had served with distinction on the American frontier ever since and was one of the United States Army's most highly regarded and experienced officers. Before General Kearny was to leave Fort Leavenworth on the Missouri for Santa Fe, he needed to muster into the service approximately one thousand recruits from Missouri to go along with his vaunted First Dragoons (dragoons are heavily armed mounted troops). When Congress declared war on 13 May, it had called for 50,000 volunteers to serve for twelve months in the various theaters of the war. Most of Kearny's Army of the West would consist of volunteers, including two thousand Missourians (another thousand would come in after Kearny left Fort Leavenworth) and five hundred Mormons.

Volunteers began to file into Fort Leavenworth on 5 June and were assigned to companies of the First Missouri Mounted Volunteers. These men hailed from the Missouri River valley, and many of them had known and opposed the Mormons during the Saints' sojourn in Missouri in the 1830s. The enlistees selected their own officers, choosing as their colonel a veteran lawyer from Liberty, known well to the Mormons as a friend-Alexander W. Doniphan, whose actions in 1838 saved the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Doniphan earned an important niche in military history during the Mexican War, but to the Latter-day Saints he will always be held in honorable remembrance for his acts of charity toward them during a most trying period of persecution.

On 30 June General Kearny left Fort Leavenworth for Santa Fe with 1,658 armed troops. En route the army obtained more supplies at Bent's Fort and then pushed on as rapidly as possible to Santa Fe, arriving there 18 August. A potential Mexican resistance did not materialize, and Kearny's force entered the New Mexican capital as conquerors who were not required to fire a single shot. For the next month Kearny graciously obtained the loyalty of the New Mexicans to the United States and established a civil territorial government (whose laws were mostly drawn up by Colonel Doniphan). On 25 September Kearny struck out for the Pacific with three hundred men, leaving the army in Santa Fe under the jurisdiction of Colonel Doniphan.

On 6 October Kearny encountered the famous scout Kit Carson, who informed him that California had already been conquered by Americans. So Kearny decided to send two hundred men back to Santa Fe and press on more quickly to California in order to establish a civil government according to his orders. His army completed their difficult journey to California in December and suffered many of the same privations that the Mormon Battalion endured a month or so behind them. Before Kearny's troops reached the Pacific, however, they learned that the Californios (residents of Mexican descent in California) had revolted and had regained control over pans of California. Kearny's men engaged some of the Califomios at San Pascual, some twenty-nine miles from San Diego, between 6 and 10 December. Several Americans were killed or injured. Kearny himself was seriously wounded. His men were rescued by a contingent of the American navy in San Diego. In early January 1847, just two and a half weeks before the Mormon Battalion arrived in San Diego, Kearny and Commodore Stockton invaded Los Angeles and helped win back all of California for the United States.

Returning to Fort Leavenworth in June 1846, Kearny ordered Captain James Allen of his dragoons to recruit five hundred Mormons into the Army of the West. Most of the career of the thirty-year-old Allen had been spent on the frontier. "You will have the Mormons distinctly to understand that I wish to have them as volunteers for twelve months," Kearny's orders to Allen read.

They will be marched to California, receiving pay and allowances during the above time, and at its expiration they will be discharged, and allowed to retain, as their private property, the guns and accoutrements furnished to them at this post.

Kearny also indicated that each of five companies would be allowed four women as laundresses, who would travel with the army. Captain Allen was also told that as soon as five companies of one hundred apiece were recruited among the Mormons, he would be considered the lieutenant colonel of the battalion. [^3]

Captain Allen immediately proceeded to the camps of the Mormons in Iowa, arriving first at Mt. Pisgah on 26 June, 1846. Church leaders there, fearing a plot to harm the Saints, sent Allen to see Brigham Young, who had arrived at Council Bluffs on the Missouri River. Messengers were sent ahead of Allen to inform President Young, who recognized the recruiting effort to be a result of Elder Jesse Little's assignment in the East. Effectively using his influence as the spiritual leader of the Saints, Brigham Young convinced a number of young men who were otherwise suspicious of the designs of the United States to enlist. He also selected the officers for the battalion. Leaving Council Bluffs on 16 July, Colonel Allen marched his new Mormon soldiers to Fort Leavenworth, where they received equipment and arms, but drew a money allowance for their uniforms, which they sent back to their Church leaders. In contrast to most of the Missouri volunteers who preceded them to Fort Leavenworth, the Mormons to a man could all sign their own name to receive their money.

Many soldiers at Fort Leavenworth suffered that summer from malaria, some of them quite severely, including Colonel Allen. Still sick when the battalion was ready to march to Santa Fe on 13 August, Allen sent the men ahead, promising to catch up with them when he became well. Unfortunately, on 23 August, Allen died. Upon orders of Lieutenant Colonel Clifton Wharton, then commanding officer of Fort Leavenworth, First Lieutenant Andrew Jackson Smith of the First Dragoons took over temporary command of the battalion and joined them en route to Santa Fe. Mormon Battalion lore speaks of the harsh disciplinarian measures of Lt. Smith and his extremely demanding forced marches, but in truth the battalion members were still by and large an undisciplined lot, militarily speaking, and were encumbered by many women and children who at first accompanied them. Furthermore, Smith, a West Point graduate, was trying to get the battalion to Santa Fe before Kearny left the city. Before arriving at Santa Fe on October 9, Smith sent a sick detachment to spend the winter in Pueblo. Colonel Doniphan sent another sick detachment from Santa Fe. Still another sick group would go to Pueblo after the battalion left for the Pacific. Smith's attempts to see Kearny in Santa Fe were in vain, for Kearny had embarked on his journey across the desert more than two weeks earlier.

Cooke's Wagon Road

On the evening of October 2, while encamped near La Joya in New Mexico, General Kearny obtained his first official news about the Mormon Battalion: it had been appropriately recruited and was approaching Santa Fe, but Colonel James Allen had died. The general, fearing that the Mormons would elect one of their own who was not part of the regular army to command, decided to send his best officer, the hawk-nosed disciplinarian Captain Phillip St. George Cooke, back to Santa Fe to command the Mormon Battalion. Kearny also realized that the rigorous journey to California would require a strict disciplinarian to assure the safe arrival of the battalion. To Kearny, the Mormon Battalion was his strategic reserve to be held for unexpected problems along the Pacific shore. Furthermore, he intended to honor his pledge to transport the Mormons to new homes in California.

This new appointment for Cooke, which also promoted him to voluntary colonel, came as a shattering blow to one who was eager for the glory of combat on the field of battle. As late as 1859, Cooke still complained that the appointment to command the Mormon Battalion robbed him of greater military recognition. But the obedient Cooke reluctantly returned to Santa Fe to meet his new charges. Before commanding the Mormon Battalion, Cooke, also a West Point graduate, had served the army primarily on the Great Plains frontier. One of Cooke's major contributions to his country was his detailed descriptions in his military journal of his campaigns. Cooke's similar daily and detailed descriptions of the march of the Mormon Battalion augments our understanding of the epic march.

Upon assuming command of the Battalion on 13 October, Cooke found the Mormons in Santa Fe to be in two basic categories: the fit and the unfit. He ordered all the women, children, and infirm to go to Pueblo, where they would spend the winter; then in the spring they would be transported at government expense to their projected home in California, where everyone in the United States army expected them to settle. Though Colonel Cooke found the Mormons generally obedient to authority, he also noted their obstinacy in being forced to be separated from their families and from each other. By 19 October, Cooke was ready to march with his aggregate strength of 397 men. (The force would soon be further reduced to 350, a third contingent being sent to Pueblo.)

Before beginning the march, Cooke had received orders from General Kearny that he was to blaze a wagon route to the Pacific with his battalion. Of all the accomplishments of the Mormon Battalion, there is hardly any more significant than the establishment of what is known in history as Cooke 's Wagon Road. Whereas Kearny's route to the Pacific was practical for mules, it was not serviceable for wagons. A previously forged Spanish trail linking El Paso with Janos, Fronteras, Santa Cruz, and Tucson not only ran too far south, but also entered the fortified garrison towns in Northern Mexico. And since Colonel Cooke did not consider the Mormon Battalion strong enough to conquer and hold these garrisons, nor was that their primary task, he realized that he had to blaze a new route from the Rio Grande to the Pacific.

The Mormon Battalion forged a new road generally north of Mexico's northern frontier towns, yet the route lay south of the Apache strongholds. It avoided the treacherous Gila Canyon, but it also crossed the most difficult seventy-mile desert between the Santa Cruz River to the Gila River. Cooke had inadequate maps to chart his course, and his guides often made serious mistakes. Nevertheless, Cooke and his men blazed a new wagon road through a vast and unmarked wilderness and successfully completed the road. With limited knowledge of the region initially, the battalion performed an admirable job. Henceforth any well-equipped wagon train could successfully travel Cooke's Wagon Road. It became a vital link in east-west communications, joining the major Mexican routes uniting Mexico City with Santa Fe and Tucson. John F. Yurtinus described the significance of this accomplishment:

In later years, portions of this mad were used by gold seekers, soldiers, mail contractors, settlers, boundary commissioners, and railroads. While the Latter-day Saint soldiers perceived California as a haven of refuge and were too busy building a road to contemplate the long-term implications of their work, nevertheless, the achievements of these hardy soldiers not only increased man's geographical knowledge of the borderlands, but eventually contributed to the political debate over the proposed transcontinental railroad and diplomatic acquisition of the Gadsden Purchase. [^4]

The Treaty of Guadalupe-Hildalgo in 1848 officially ended the Mexican-American War and set the border between the two nations at the Gila River. Much of Cooke's Wagon Road was south of the new frontier. Even so, the Butterfield Stage Trail followed Cooke' s route from the Gila River to the Pacific. The existence of Cooke's Wagon Road was a major factor in the Gadsden Purchase of 1853, in which the United States bought a large chunk of present-day Arizona south of the Gila River for $10,000,000 from Mexico. Cooke himself described his military memoirs the importance of his road to the Gadsden Purchase:

A new administration [the Pierce Democratic administration of 1853-57], in which southern interest prevailed, with the great problem of the practicability and best location of a Pacific Railroad under investigation, had the map of this wagon route before them, with its continuance to the west, and perceived that it gave exactly the solution of its unknown element; that a southern route would avoid both the Rocky Mountains and Sierra Nevada, with their snows, and would meet no obstacle in this great interval. The new "Gadsden Treaty" with Mexico was the result. [^5]

Although the sectional controversy preceding the American Civil War prevented the actual construction of a railroad for several years, the Southern Pacific Railroad eventually joined Texas and California in 1882. Neither the Southern Pacific nor any other line actually followed the trail forged by the Mormon Battalion, but all lines went through the Gadsden Purchase territory, which might never have been obtained by the United States if the Mormon Battalion had not marched there.

A significant Mexican village south of the Gila, destined to become an Arizona metropolis, Tucson, was on the route of the Mormon Battalion. It was also the strongest Mexican garrison between Santa Fe and California. Cooke prepared his Mormon army to engage the Mexicans at Tucson, but the Mexican soldiers, fearing that they might be routed, fled the city and took many of the inhabitants with them. The battalion consequently marched through Tucson without major incident. But as any student of Mormon history knows, the rest of the journey to the Pacific, though not encumbered with battles of any kind, was a perilous journey over most difficult terrain.

Upon arriving at the Mission of San Diego on 30 January 1847, Colonel Phillip St. George Cooke commended his men, who by then had become a loyal and disciplined force:

History may be searched in vain for an equal march of infantry. Half of it has been through a wilderness where nothing but savages and wild beasts are found, or deserts where, for want of water, there is no living creature. There, with almost hopeless labor we have dug deep wells, which the future traveler will enjoy. Without a guide who had traversed them, we have ventured into trackless table-lands where water was not found for several marches. With crowbar and pick and axe in hand, we have worked our way over mountains, which seemed to defy aught save the wild goat, and hewed a passage through a chasm of living rock more narrow than our wagons. To bring these first wagons to the Pacific, we have preserved the strength of our mules by herding them over large tracts, which you have laboriously guarded without loss. The garrison of four presidios of Sonora concentrated within the walls of Tucson, gave us no pause. We drove them out, with their artillery, but our intercourse with the citizens was unmarked by a single act of injustice. Thus, marching half naked and half fed, and living upon wild animals, we have discovered and made a road of great value to our country. [^6]

Garrison Duty in Southern California

Before arriving in San Diego, Colonel Cooke received word that General Stephen W. Kearny had defeated the Californios and that the latter were fleeing across the Mormon Battalion's path toward the Mexican state of Sonora. Thus were Cooke' s hopes for glorious combat duty revived. The colonel then decided to march toward Los Angeles in hope of intercepting the escaping Califomios. The Mormon soldiers, having been promised by Brigham Young that they would not have to fight, were distraught. But when a messenger reached the battalion with news that the war in California was over and that they should meet Gen. Kearny at San Diego, the Mormons rejoiced.

Gen. Kearny, after reviewing the Mormon Battalion and becoming assured of their loyalty to him (this was of great concern to Kearny, because he was then embroiled in a struggle with John C. Fremont for military and civilian authority in California), ordered them to the mission of San Luis Rey to await further instructions. San Luis Rey was fifty-three miles north of San Diego on the road to Los Angeles. Colonel Cooke instituted a vigorous twenty-day program of basic infantry training, because "up to that time the Battalion had never had opportunity to receive instruction in arms." [^7] Cooke was fully cognizant that the California insurgents recognized the divided nature of the American forces in Southern California and awaited reinforcements from Mexico to renew the war. Cooke wanted his Mormon Battalion ready to do battle in the event Mexican soldiers arrived from Sonora. The battalion remained on battle alert in San Luis Rey until the middle of March.

Gen. Kearny had gone to Monterey in northern California to establish an American capital and to obtain reinforcements in his argument against Fremont. Kearny sent instructions to Cooke placing him in command of the Southern Military District and ordering him to take most of his battalion north to Los Angeles to deal with Fremont's California Volunteers (who were almost all recent immigrants from Missouri and therefore natural opponents of the Mormons). One company of the battalion was sent to San Diego to guard the presidio there.

In Los Angeles, Colonel Cooke and the Mormon soldiers successfully warded off Fremont's challenges to the authority of General Kearny in California. Tempers often flared between Fremont's Missourians and the Mormons. One evening Cooke even ordered his soldiers to load their guns and fix their bayonets to prepare for an incipient attack by Fremont's men. In reaction to the problems, Cooke ordered the Mormon troops to a small hill just south of Los Angeles, where they built Fort Moore. The fort not only kept the Mormon Battalion in military control of Los Angeles, it also afforded protection in case Fremont's men attacked. [^8]

While in the Los Angeles vicinity, many Mormons became disgusted with the bars, gambling houses, and houses of prostitution that were so numerous in the pueblo. One evening the Californios hosted a festival, including a bull-fight. The Mormons were invited but refused to attend, for they considered the invitation a ruse to draw them into town while California conspirators captured Fort Moore. Instead of enjoying the celebration, the Saints remained in their fort with guns and cannon loaded for an expected attack. [^9]

Twice during April 1847, Colonel Cooke ordered parties of the Mormon Battalion to guard Cajon Pass (near present day San Bernardino) to prevent hostile Indians from sweeping down from the high desert to steal cattle and horses in the Los Angeles basin. Later in May Cooke ordered another patrol to prevent Indian raids in the countryside surrounding Isaac Williams' ranch (at present-day Chino.) They surprised a small band of Indians in a mountain cave and killed five or six. Two Mormons received slight wounds in this first and only battle which battalion members had with other humans. [^10]

Meanwhile, Company B of the battalion guarded San Diego against the possibility of a counterattack. Though fighting never ensued, there was always the possibility of it. At first the San Diegans were afraid of the Mormons, but the fear wore off as the Saints proved to be quiet and industrious, a boon to the local economy. Many soldiers helped dig wells, build streets, and construct bricks for the growing community. [^11]

On 16 July 1847, the one-year enlistment of the Mormon Battalion came to an end. All but eighty-one were mustered out of the service and made arrangements to join their families and the Mormon people wherever they might be. Those who reenlisted made up a company called the Mormon Volunteers. The enlistment of so many Saints was unexpected by the military authorities in Los Angeles. Most of the Mormon Volunteers went to San Diego to continue garrison duty. Others guarded the route between Los Angeles and San Diego. Captain Jesse D. Hunter became the American government's Indian agent for the Southern Military District. Hunter secured an inventory of farms, horses, cattle and property belonging to the mission of San Luis Rey and encouraged the Indians to return to the mission and to stop quarreling with local residents. [^12]

While the Mormon Volunteers were stationed in San Diego, there were recurring threats of insurrection and counterrevoluntionary activity led by former Mexican leaders. The volunteers were on constant alert and admirably thwarted all plans of counterrevolutionaries. On being discharged on 14 March 1848, these men were guided by Orrin Porter Rockwell and others to Salt Lake City, where the Mormon people had since settled. They brought the first wagons through Cajon Pass, thus linking a southern route from Salt Lake City to Los Angeles. [^13]

Other Contributions

After March 1847, the Mormon Battalion no longer remained in one unit. Other varied contributions were made by battalion members thereafter. One often-overlooked group of fifteen were chosen by Colonel Cooke to accompany Gen. Kearny and Cooke across the California Trail to Fort Leavenworth. They helped guard John C. Fremont before the latter was officially arrested for insubordination by Gen. Kearny at Fort Leavenworth.

A number of Mormons, upon reading a letter from Brigham Young brought by Captain James Brown, decided to remain and work in northern California during the winter of 1847-48. Some men worked as carpenters and roofers on various structures, including the town hall in the capital Monterey. A larger number of men obtained odd jobs at Sutter's Fort in the Sacramento Valley. About halfway between Sutter's Fort and the sawmill, two Mormons, Sidney Willis and Wilford Hudson, discovered gold in the South Fork of the American River near contemporary Folsom, California. They called the site Mormon Diggins, and the nearby sandbar Mormon Island. Sam Brannan joined the gold-digging corporation and soon was publicizing the discovery of gold, which contributed to the ensuing gold rush to California. Some of the precious metal was brought to Deseret by the battalion boys.

The Mormon Holmes party, consisting of many of those who wintered at Sutter's Fort, built a wagon road over the Carson Pass in the Sierra Nevadas (contemporary California 88 follows this road) and provided an alternative to the frequently snowed-in Donner Pass route on the California Trail.

Captain Jefferson Hunt of the battalion helped with several exploring parties of the Saints along the southern route. With the considerable understanding of California he had obtained, and use of the contacts he had made as a soldier, Hunt also helped head the company of Latter-day Saints who colonized San Bernardino for the Church in 1851.

Summary

As wars go, the Mexican-American War was a small one. It cost some 13,000 American lives, most of them taken by disease. (The three Mormon Battalion deaths were all due to sickness.) America's total expanse, already vast, was increase by about one-third (counting the contested Texas)-an addition even greater than that of the Louisiana Purchase. A sharp stimulus was given to the spirit of Manifest Destiny.

The Mormons' contributions to the war were relatively minimal, although not to be totally discounted. The Mexican War offered a chance for the United States government and the Latter-day Saints to strike a bargain beneficial to both. The Mormons would remain loyal and provide troops to President James K. Polk; the government would provide the opportunity for the Saints to acquire much-needed cash while transporting a large body of Mormons to the West at government expense and allowing the Mormon Battalion to retain their arms and acoutrements.

The battalion provided exceedingly useful backup to General Kearny in California during his dispute with the insubordinate John C. Fremont. The Mormon soldiers guarded various crucial spots in southern California against potential insurgency by the Mexicans and Californios.

Through the efforts of the Mormon Battalion, California became more accessible to American immigrants from the eastern part of the United States. Although the soldiers often followed previously established trails used by Indians, mountain men, and explorers, they added a new dimension by bringing wagons over the trail. And they made notable contributions to road construction in three distinct areas: Cooke's Wagon Road, the wagon road over Carson Pass in the Sierra Nevadas, and the first wagons from Los Angeles to Salt Lake City through the Cajon Pass.

The notable gold rush to California and the obtaining of the Gadsden Purchase by the United States are two other major events in American history indelibly affected by members of the Mormon Battalion.

Thus we see that the march of the Mormon Battalion, though not of major importance in military history, is nevertheless significant to American and as well as to Latter-day Saint history.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. The Mormon Battalion passed through southern Arizona stopping at San Bernardino Ranch (now Slaughter Runch) and at Tucson. Charles S. Peterson, John F. Yurtinus, David E. Atldnson und A. Kent Powell, Mormon Battallion Trail Guide (Salt Lake City: Utah State Historical Society, 1972), p. 42, 44. Also a group of Mormons, enticed by the Mexican commandant, temporarily settled at Tubac in 1851. The Mexican commander offered them land in the rich fertile valley. Unfortunately as a result of a severe drought they abandoned their efforts and they continued on to California the following year settling at Santa Isabel. James H. McClintock, Mormon Settlement in Arizona (Phoenix: James H. McClintock, Arizona Historiun, 1921), pp. 6, 56.
[^2] 1. Daniel W. Jones, Forty Years Among the Indians (Salt Lake City: Juvenile Instructor Office, 1890), p. 243.
[^3] 2. Charles S. Peterson, Take Up Your Mission: Mormon Colonizing Along the Little Colorado River 1870-1900 (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1973), p. 13.
[^4] 3. Jones, Forty Years, p. 304.
[^5] 4. Ibid., 305.
[^6] 5. Ibid., 306.
[^7] 6. Ibid., pp. 307-8.
[^8] 7. W. Earl Merrill, One Hundred Steps Down Mesa's Past (Mesa, Arizona: W. Earl Merrill, 1970), pp. 27.
[^9] 8. Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Publishing Company, 1941), p. 426.
[^10] 9. Jones, Forty Years, p. 312.
[^11] 10. Merrill, One Hundred Steps, p. 38.
[^12] 11. B. H. Roberts, ed., History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1952), 7:626.
[^13] 12. Hi-Lights from the Jesse N. Perkins, Sr. Family Organization, Volume I Number 3 (September 1956), p. 10.
