The Gathering Saints--Increase in the Number of Stakes Contemplated--Councils in Zion and Kirtland--Close of the Volume.

Bishop's Agent Appointed.

The Church Recorder.

The Bishop's Memorial.

The Prophet on the Gathering.

Other Stakes of Zion to be Appointed.

Arrangements for Preaching the Gospel.

{XX} Greeting from Bishop of Kirtland and Counselors to Saints Scattered Abroad.

The Voice of Warning.

The Prophet's Departure for Missouri.

President of the High Council Elected.

Death of Hyrum Smith's Wife.

Minutes of High Council.

Twenty-two Disfellowshiped.

Minutes of High Council.

Confessions.

Norris Brewster.

More Confessions.

Action Against Loungers.

The Egyptian Records.

Arrival of the Prophet at Far West.

The Settlement of Difficulties.

Minutes of High Council at Kirtland.

Minutes of Conference at Far West, Mo., Nov. 7, 1837.

Minutes of High Council at Kirtland.

Reuben Hedlock Chosen President of Elders.

Excommunication of Roger Orton.

A Question of Compensation.

Various Appointments.

Bishop Partridge's Report.

Apostasy in Kirtland.

Last Paper Printed in Kirtland.

The Work in England.

Progress of the British Mission.

Flight of Brigham Young from Kirtland.

Close of the Year 1837.

Footnotes

[1] By typographical error there are two chapters numbered xiii.

{XXI}

INTRODUCTION TO VOLUME II

Summary Review of Volume One.

The events which make up the first volume of the History of the Church moved forward from the back ground of successive dispensations of the Gospel which preceded the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times. That volume covered the period from the birth of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 1805, to the close of the year 1833, and included as its chief events: the birth of the Prophet; his first vision of the father and the Son; the coming forth of the Book of Mormon; the organization of the Church, April 6th, 1830; the mission to the Lamanites; the gathering of the people from the state of New York, first to Kirtland, Ohio, and subsequently the gathering of many of them to Jackson county, Missouri; the location of the site of the future city of Zion and its temple; the introduction of the doctrine of consecration and stewardship; the experience of the Elders of Israel in their movements back and forth between Kirtland and Zion; the spread of the work throughout the states of the American Union and Canada; the Prophet's own mission to the latter place; the founding of the first Church periodical, The Evening and Morning Star; the selection of a number of the revelations of God for publication under the title, "The Book of Commandments;" the establishment of the Mercantile and Literary firms of Zion and Kirtland; the laying of the corner stones of the Kirtland Temple; the planting of a number of settlements in Jackson county, Missouri; the awakening jealousy of the old settlers against the more progressive Saints; the fanning of these flames of jealousy by sectarian priests; the rise of that religio-political persecution which culminated in the terrible suffering of the Saints--the destruction of their printing establishment, the burning of their homes, their final expulsion from Jackson county; also the negotiations between the Saints and the civil authorities of the state of Missouri for reinstatement of the exiles upon their lands. The first volume closed with the narration of these circumstances of discouragement which befell the Saints in their efforts to establish Zion in Missouri.

Summary of Volume Two.

In this second volume is recorded the arrival of a delegation from the exiled Saints in Missouri, seeking advice and the word of the Lord from the Prophet; the organizations of Zion's Camp for the deliverance {XXII} of Zion; its march from Kirtland to Missouri; its rich educational experiences; its disbandment and the return of many of the brethren to Ohio; the establishment of a school for the Elders at Kirtland, the first educational movement in the Church; the discovery of the Book of Abraham; the organization of the first, or Kirtland High Council; the organization of the quorums of the foreign ministry; the Twelve and the Seventy; the publication of the Doctrine and Covenants; the completion and dedication of the Kirtland Temple; the purification and spiritual endowment of the Elders of the Church; the appearance of Messiah in the Temple declaring His acceptance of it; the appearance of Moses, Elias and Elijah, on the same occasion, delivering the keys of their respective dispensations to the Prophet of the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times; the commencement of the ministry of the Twelve among the branches of the Church in the eastern States of the American Union; the misunderstandings that arose between them and the Presidency of the Church; the revelations of God which came in consequence of their misunderstandings, more clearly defining the rights, powers, and relations of the respective quorums of the Priesthood; the peaceful exodus of the Saints from Clay county, Missouri, and the founding of Far West; the opening of the first foreign mission by sending two of the Twelve and several Elders to England; the attempt to mass the several industrial pursuits and temporal interests of the Saints under one general concern, the "Kirtland Safety Society Company;" the failure of that concern in the general financial maelstrom that swept over the country in 1837, hastened also--sad to relate--by the unwise management and dishonesty of some of the incorporators and directors; the manifestation of excessive pride and worldliness on the part of some of the Saints at Kirtland; the disaffection of many hitherto leading Elders of the Church against the Prophet Joseph; the extensive apostasy of many Elders and Saints in Kirtland; with the account of which calamitous events this volume closes.

The Expedition of Zion's Camp.

The time covered by this volume may properly be called the Kirtland period of the Church History, since that city is the chief center of activity. The four years which comprise the period are marked, on the one hand, by rapid doctrinal development, institutional growth, outward enlargement and internal spiritual progress; and, on the other hand, are marked by internal dissensions, abundant manifestations of human weakness and wickedness, resulting in bitterness and apostasy. The period is one in which the Church is manifestly militant, and not always, from surface appearances, triumphant. Yet removed from {XXIII} that period by well nigh three-quarters of a century, one may see now that it was a glorious period, notwithstanding sombre shadows are now and then cast athwart the pathway of the Church's progress. Who can rightly estimate the value of the experiences of that movement for the redemption of Zion, called Zion's Camp? Nothing so completely reveals the worth or worthlessness of human character as expeditions of this description. Men are thrown into such relations with each other that all that is in them, good or bad, comes to the surface. As opportunities in time of war reveal noble or debased natures, so in expeditions such as Zion's Camp the base or exalted phases of human nature are forced to the surface, and are known and read of men. God, it appears was about to choose His foreign ministry, His Especial Witnesses to the world, the Twelve and the Seventy. After the expedition of Zion's Camp He could choose them from among men who had offered their all in sacrifice--even to life itself--for the work's sake. Are not such manifestly fitter witnesses than those who are untried? Will it be argued that to the All-knowing the untried are as well know as the tried, and that God needed no such demonstration of fidelity as was afforded by the expedition of Zion's Camp in order to guide Him in the choice of His Witnesses to the nations of the earth? If so, my answer would be an acquiescence--God needs no such expedition in order to reveal to Him the worthiness of those who shall be His special Witnesses. But what of the world--what of men? Do not they need some such evidence back of those who shall testify of a new dispensation of the Gospel? Will not men have more regard for the testimony of Witnesses who have offered their all in sacrifice for any given work, than for the testimony of witnesses who have made no such sacrifice? Undoubtedly. Not for God's guidance, then, but for the qualification of the Witnesses in the eyes of men was the expedition of Zion's Camp in part conceived and executed. Also that those men who, under God--the Prophet Joseph Smith and the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon--were to make choice of especial Witnesses might know whom to select because of actually demonstrated fitness and worthiness.

Moreover there were men in that expedition who later will be called upon to conduct larger expeditions much of the same character--an exodus of thousands from Missouri; an exodus of tens of thousands from the confines of the United States, a thousand miles into the wilderness of the Rocky Mountains. May not the Lord have designed in part this expedition of Zion's Camp for their instruction, for their training? The leaders of these later movements are all there--Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, Parley P. Pratt, Charles C. Rich, George A. Smith, Wilford Woodruff and many more. It is significant, too, that Brigham Young at least sensed the true importance {XXIV} of the Zion's Camp expedition. That expedition for the redemption of Zion was regarded by many weak-faithed Saints as a sad failure, a humiliation of a presumptuous prophet. One of these attempted to ridicule it in the presence of Brigham Young, as a case of marching men up a hill to march them down again. "Well," said the scoffer, "what did you gain on this useless journey to Missouri with Joseph Smith?" "All we went for," promptly replied Brigham Young. "I would not exchange the experience gained in that expedition for all the wealth of Geauga county." A remark which proves that Brigham Young had a keen insight into the purpose of the Zion's Camp movement.

First Educational Movement of the Church.

The value of the educational movement in the Church by the establishment of a school for the Elders in Kirtland, cannot be fully appreciated even yet. It stands as a direct contradiction to the oft-repeated charges that Mormonism seeks to thrive through the ignorance of its devotees. "Seek ye diligently, and teach one another words of wisdom," was an admonition the Church in the Kirtland period of its history sought earnestly to carry into effect. "Yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom: seek learning even by study, and also by faith." To the sphere of their learning there were no limitations set. "Teach ye diligently," said the Lord, "and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the Gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand; of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land, and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms." I know of nothing that lies outside this boundless field of research into which the Elders of the church especially were invited--nay, commanded, to enter. It comprehends the whole possible sphere of human investigation; and furnishes all necessary contradiction to the theory that the Church at any time contemplated an ignorant ministry. By intelligence, not stupidity; by knowledge, not ignorance, has the Church from the very beginning hoped to succeed in her mission.

The Organization of the Foreign Ministry.

It is during the Kirtland period of her history also that the Church raised her eyes and for the first time gazed out upon the world-wide sphere of her future activities. Until now she had confined her missions and labors to the United States and Canada. But lo! a foreign {XXV} ministry had been organized, a quorum of Twelve Apostles and two quorums of Seventy had been called into existence and ordained. Was that without significance? Undoubtedly there is power in ordinances, in divine appointments: "Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands upon him and the children of Israel hearkened unto him and did as the Lord commanded Moses." While Timothy, the young Christian evangelist, was admonished by Paul to stir up the gift of God which was in him by the putting on of the Apostle's hands. Since, then, there is virtue in ordinations of divine appointing, it is but to be expected that the Church of Christ in this last dispensation would be influenced by the appointment and ordination of her foreign ministry. It was but a proper sequence of the appointment of this ministry that Apostles and their associates should be sent to England. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints was never intended to be merely an American sect of religion. It is a new and the last dispensation of the Christian religion--the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times, the dispensation into which will be gathered all former dispensations of the Gospel of Christ; all keys of authority, all powers, all gifts, all graces essential to the welfare and salvation of man--all that is essential to the completion of the mission of the Christian religion. The mission of the Church in such a dispensation is general not local, world-embracing. Had it been less than one of the world's great movements, Mormonism had been inadequate to the world's needs--less than sufficient for a world's redemption. There was marked, therefore, a mighty bound forward in the progress of the work when the foreign ministry of the Church was organized, and a mission appointed to England. The work would have perished had it not taken this step forward. The Church had reached that stage of development when there must be a forward movement. Things do not stand inert in this world. Inertia is death. In progress only is there life. The thing that does not grow dies. The very rocks increase or decay. For the time being the elements on which the Church lived were exhausted in the land where it came forth. The material which had been gathered into it was passing through the crucible. There was need of an enlargement of action, a necessity for new elements being brought into the body religious. That enlargement of action was found in opening the British mission. The new elements essential to the preservation of the work were found in the English people; for among them were given the evidences of the existence of the spiritual light and life which had characterized the work at its coming forth: and as that mission had been directly appointed by the Prophet Joseph Smith, it supplied the proofs that God was still with him, honored the {XXVI} authority which had been given him, and still directed his movements in the administration of the affairs of the Church; for it was the prompting of the Spirit of God in the Prophet, that led to the appointment of this first foreign mission. These considerations made the opening of the British mission an epoch in the history of the Church.

The Restoration of the Keys for the Gathering of Israel.

The work of God was also greatly enlarged during this Kirtland period, by the appearance of Moses and Elias and Elijah, and bestowing upon the Prophet the keys of their respective dispensations. Let us contemplate the event. "Moses appeared before us," says the Prophet, "and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel, from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north." Who, at the time comprehended the full import of this incident? Who comprehends it now? From the beginning of the great Latter-Day work men had their attention directed to the gathering of Israel and the establishment of Zion and Jerusalem as a part of the purposes of God to be accomplished in the work. The angel Moroni on the occasion of his first visit to the Prophet Joseph, quoted a number of Old Testament scriptures referring to the Lord's promises concerning the redemption of Judah and Jerusalem; [1] also concerning the gathering of Israel from all the lands whither they had been driven. [2] Numerous are the prophecies relating to the return of Israel from the land of the north, and other parts of the earth, into which they were driven in the day of their rebellion and apostasy; [3] but it occurred to no one that before these prophecies could be fulfilled Israel's great prophet, Moses, who held the keys of the dispensation pertaining to the gathering of Israel, must come and give to men the authority to proceed with that work. The moment he appears, however, and gives such authority, the propriety of it, the fitness of it is apparent. The appearance of Moses was also in proper sequence of events in the development of the great Latter-Day work. Although, as already stated, the gathering of Israel in the last days had been made a prominent feature in the communication of Moroni to the Prophet Joseph, and the subject also of some other early revelations to the Church [4] not until the foreign ministry had been organized--the Twelve and the Seventy--the quorums of Priesthood on which rests the {XXVII} responsibility to travel in all the world and preach the Gospel and gather Israel--not until this ministry was organized did Moses appear and commit the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth. What order is here? The organization of the foreign ministry to go into all the nations of earth, and then the coming of Moses to commit the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north. In this incident as in a thousand others in the great work of God in the last days, the evidence of a divine wisdom having regard for the eternal fitness of things, for the proper sequence in the order of events in the development of the Lord's purposes, is apparent. Note, too, the spiritual effect upon the Saints of the restoration of these keys of the gathering of Israel. Before the mission for England under Elders Kimball and Hyde departed, the prophet enjoined them to adhere strictly to the first principles of the Gospel, and say nothing for the present in relation to the gathering; this, doubtless on account of the unsettled condition of the Church at the time. Similar instructions, and for the same reason, were given to the Twelve Apostles in 1839 when they went on their mission to England. But the Saints could not be kept in ignorance of these matters. No sooner were the people baptized than they were seized with a desire to gather with the main body of the Church. "I find it is difficult to keep anything from the Saints," writes Elder Taylor in his journal of this period, "for the Spirit of God reveals it to them. * * * * Some time ago Sister Mitchell dreamed the she, her husband and a number of others were on board a vessel, and that there were other vessels, loaded with Saints, going somewhere. She felt very happy and was rejoicing in the Lord." Another sister, Elder Taylor informs us, had a similar dream, and was informed that all the Saints were going. Neither of these sisters nor any of the Saints at that time, knew anything about the principle of gathering, yet all were anxious to leave their homes, their kindred and the associations of a lifetime, to join the main body of the Church in a distant land, the members of which were total strangers to them. [5] The same spirit has rested upon the people in every nation where the Gospel has been received. There has been little need of preaching the gathering, the people as a rule have had to be restrained rather than encouraged in the matter of gathering to Zion and her stakes.

The Spirit of Gathering on the Jews.

During the last ten years the world has witnessed a remarkable change of spirit come over the Jewish race. We hear of Jewish aspirations for national existence; for the perpetuation of the Jewish customs {XXVIII} and Jewish ideals. After saying so long, "May we celebrate the next Passover in Jerusalem," the thought at last seems to have occurred to some Jewish minds that if that expressed wish is ever realized, some practical steps must be taken looking to the actual achievement of that possibility--which has given rise among the Jews to what is called the "Zionite Movement." The keynotes of that movement are heard in the following utterances of some of the leaders in explanation of it: "We want to resume the broken thread of our national existence; we want to show to the world the moral strength, the intellectual power of the Jewish people. We want a place where the race can be centralized." [6] "It is for these Jews [of Russia, Romania and Galicia] that the name of their country [Palestine] spells 'Hope.' I should not be a man if I did not realize that for these persecuted Jews, Jerusalem spells reason, justice, manhood and integrity." [7] "Jewish nationalism on a modern basis in Palestine, the old home of the people." [8] "Palestine needs a people, Israel needs a country. Give the country without a people, to the people without a country." [9] In a word, it is the purpose of "Zionism" to redeem Palestine and give it back to Jewish control-- create, in fact, a Jewish state in the land promised to their fathers.

Of course, for hundreds of years there has been talk of the Jews returning to Jerusalem, and from time to time societies have been formed to keep alive that hope, and keep the Jew's face turned toward the chief city and land of his forefathers; but little was achieved by those societies, however, except to foster the hope of Israel's return in the heart of a widely dispersed, persecuted and discouraged race, who have waited long for the realization of the promises made to their fathers. I say but "little" was accomplished by the various Jewish societies existing before the Zionite movement began beyond fostering the hope of Israel based on the predictions of their prophets; but that "little" was much. It was nourishing in secret and through ages of darkness that spark of fire which when touched with the breath of God should burst forth into a flame that not all the world could stay. They made possible this larger movement, now attracting the attention of the world, and know as the "Zionite Movement;" which, in reality, is but the federation of all Jewish societies which have had for their purpose the realization of the hopes of scattered Israel.

"Zionism" is considered to have grown out of the persecution of the Jews during the last eighteen years in such European countries as Russia, France, Germany, and Romania. It held its first general {XXIX} conference in August, 1897, in Basle, Switzerland; and since then has continued to hold annual conferences that have steadily increased both in interest and the number of delegates representing various Jewish societies, until now it takes on the appearance of one of the world's great movements. It is not so much a religious movement as a racial one: for prominent Jews of all shades of both political and religious opinions have participated in it under the statesmanlike leadership of Doctor Herzel of Austria. Not to persecution alone, however, is due this strange awakening desire on the part of the Jews to return to the city and the land of their fathers; but to the fact of the restoration of the keys of the gathering of Israel by Moses to the Prophet of the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times. Under the divine authority restored by Moses, Joseph Smith sent an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ to the land of Palestine to bless it and dedicate it once more to the Lord for the return of His people. This Apostle was Orson Hyde, and he performed his mission in 1840-2. In 1872 an Apostolic delegation consisting of the late Presidents George A. Smith and Lorenzo Snow were sent to Palestine. The purpose of their mission, in part, is thus stated in President Young's letter of appointment to George A. Smith: "When you get to the land of Palestine, we wish you to dedicate and consecrate that land to the Lord, that it may be blessed with fruitfulness, preparatory to the return of the Jews, in fulfillment of prophecy and the accomplishment of the purposes of our heavenly Father." [10]

Acting, then, under the divine authority restored to earth by the Prophet Moses, this Apostolic delegation--as well as the Apostle first sent--from the summit of Mount Olivet blessed the land, and again dedicated it for the return of the Jews. It is not strange, therefore, to those who look upon such a movement as Zionism in connection with faith in God's great latter-day work, to see this spirit now moving upon the minds of the Jewish people prompting their return to the land of their fathers. It is but the breath of God upon their souls turning their hearts to the promises made to the fathers. It is but the fulfillment in part of one of the many prophecies of the Book of Mormon relating to the gathering of Israel, viz: "It shall come to pass that the Lord God shall commence His work among all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, to bring about the restoration of the keys of His people upon the earth." The spirit attendant upon the restoration of the keys of authority to gather Israel from the four quarters of the earth, and the exercise of that divine authority, though unrecognized as yet by the world, is the real cause of this movement Palestine-ward by the Jews.

Elijah's Mission.

The work accomplished by Elijah in giving to the Prophet Joseph the particular dispensation of the Priesthood which should plant in the {XXX} hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers--lest the whole earth should be utterly wasted at His coming [11]--is attended by evidences of virtue and power of God no less palpable than those which bear witness to the virtue and power of God in the work accomplished by Moses in giving to the Prophet the keys of authority for the gathering of Israel. The work done by Elijah was to open the door of salvation for the dead. From that event comes the knowledge of the principles by which the saving power of the Gospel may be applied to men who have died without receiving its benefits in this life. From of old men had read in the scriptures that Messiah would bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house; [12] that in addition to being given as a restorer of the tribes of Jacob and a light to the gentiles, the Messiah should have power to say to the prisoners, "Go forth; to them that sit in darkness, show yourselves;" [13] "to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound." [14] From the beginning of Christianity men had read in the New Testament how Jesus had once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust; and how that being put to death in the flesh He was quickened by the Spirit by which He went and preached to the spirits in prison which were disobedient when the long suffering of God waited in the days of Noah. [15] Also they read how for this cause was the Gospel preached to them that are dead that they might be judged as men are in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit; [16] also the reasoning of Paul to the effect that if there was no resurrection of the dead, why, then, were the Saints baptized for the dead; [17] also how the fathers without those of later generations cannot be made perfect. [18] All of which passages, however, have been regarded as among the mysteries of the word of God, incomprehensible, dark. But touched by the Prophet Elijah's hand, imparting to them their true import, how bright they glow with spiritual light and life! and what a sense of largeness and power is given to the Gospel of Jesus Christ when from this mission of Elijah's there comes the power to apply the principles and ordinances of salvation to all the children of men (save the sons of perdition; and these, thank God! are but few) in all ages of the world, and whether living or dead! How the horizon of things respecting the Gospel of Christ is pushed back from the walled-in limits of that pseudo-Christianity current among men, by this spirit and power of Elijah that has come into the {XXXI} world! The fact that such a spirit has come into the world is sustained by palpable evidences. The truth of my statement will be recognized when I say that within the last fifty years there has arisen throughout the world an increased spirit of interest among men concerning their ancestors that scarcely stops this side of the marvelous. In all lands men are earnestly seeking for their genealogies, and many volumes are issued from the press annually in which the pedigrees of men of all sorts and conditions are given. Some may be said to be possessed almost of a mania, on this subject so ardent are they in seeking for a knowledge of their fore-fathers, and this all quite apart from any direct work that is being done along the same lines by the Latter-Day Saints; though the work of the Saints in the temples for their dead is greatly helped by this outside circumstance to which I call attention. Why and whence this spirit in the hearts of the children which turns the attention of men to the fathers of former generations, if it is not a consequence of the fulfillment of Elijah's predicted mission that before the great and dreadful day of the Lord should come he [Elijah] would be sent to turn the heart of the children to the fathers, and the heart of the fathers to the children? [19]

Of the work done by the Latter-Day Saints in consequence of the restoration of these special keys of the Priesthood by the hand of Elijah I need scarcely speak. That the spirit which came into the world by reason of Elijah's special dispensation of authority to Joseph Smith is working upon the hearts of the Latter-Day Saints is evidenced by the building of the beautiful temple at Nauvoo, and by the erection of the world-famed temple in Salt Lake City; also by the erection of magnificent temples in Logan, Manti, and St. George--all in Utah. These temples have all been erected in response to the diffusion of that spirit that attended upon Elijah's mission; and are evidences in stone that the Saints have partaken of that spirit which turns the hearts of the children to the fathers. Another palpable evidence to the same great truth is seen in the throngs which daily visit these temples to perform the ordinances of salvation for the dead; not only baptism for the dead, but also the confirmations, ordinations and sealings by which the fathers shall be prepared for the kingdom of God, and all the families of men be set in order, united together by bonds, covenants and established relations that shall be in harmony with that heavenly kingdom which the redeemed of God shall inherit. The full importance of this work--its height and depth--is not yet appreciated by the children of men; but so great it is that the period of our Church History which witnesses its beginning--even if it were the only achievement--must ever be regarded as an important period.

{XXXII} Calamitous Events.

As for the calamitous events of the Church during the Kirtland period, what shall we say of them? Are they to be accounted wholly deplorable, or as part of that experience of the Church which makes for advancement? Unquestionably every experience is of value to an individual or an organization. Some experiences may be sad, and accounted at the time as disastrous; but are they really so? The rough wind which shakes it helps the young and slow-growing oak; for by reason of this very shaking the tree takes firmer hold of the earth; wider spread the roots; deeper down into the soil are they thrust, until the sapling, once so easily shaken, becomes a monarch in the forest, mocks the howling tempest, until its height and frame become worthy of the land and atmosphere in which it grows a giant tree. So may grow a government--civil or ecclesiastical--so may grow the Church, helped by the adverse circumstances which shake it to the very foundations on which it rests. Profitable if not sweet are the uses of adversity. As the winter's wind when it bites and blows upon man's body is no flatterer, but feelingly persuades him what he is, so the adverse circumstances which overtake an organization, such as the Church of Christ, may be very profitable to it. Such rebellions and apostasies as occurred in this Kirtland period of the Church's history but test and exhibit the strength of the fabric. Such circumstances force a review of the work as far as accomplished. The whole is re-examined to see if in it there is any flaw or defect; if any worthless material is being worked into its structure. Hence periods usually considered calamitous are accompanied by corrections of what may be wrong; and the body religious is purified by the expulsion of those whose rebellion and apostasy but prove them unworthy of the Lord's work. Let me be rightly understood here. I am not contending that adverse circumstances, rebellions and apostasies are in themselves good. Whatever may be the over-ruled results to the body religious, rebellion and apostasy spell condemnation and the destruction of spiritual life for the individuals overtaken by such calamities. But so long as human nature is what it now is--weak and sinful--just so long as out of that intractable material the Church of Christ has the mission to prepare men for the Father's kingdom, just so long will there be occasional calamities periods in the history of the Church such as was the year 1837 at Kirtland. But what after all are such periods but times of purification, of cleansing? During the previous years of success in the ministry, there had been gathered into the Church all classes of men. As in former dispensations of the Gospel, so in this last dispensation; the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net cast into the sea, that gathers of every kind of fish; and when it is full, they draw it to shore, and sit down, and gather the good into vessels, and cast the bad away. The first step in the process of correcting human nature is to discover its defects. It may not always follow that when the defects are made known they will be corrected. But it is true that no correction will be made until the necessity of correction is manifest, until the defects are pointed out. Hence God has said: "If men will come unto me, I will show unto them their weaknesses." But, unhappily, it sometimes is the case that men resist God, they love their sins, they become hardened in their iniquity, they resist the Spirit, and prove themselves unworthy of the Father's kingdom. What then? Shall they pollute that kingdom, or shall they be cast out as material unfitted for the Master's use, and of their own volition choose to remain so? There can be but one reasonable answer to the question. They refuse to go peaceably, however. They are boisterous, they accuse the innocent, they justify their own course, they seek to wreck the Church, to bring to pass chaos; and in the midst of this disorder they are cast out; and although this may not always end their power to work mischief, or create annoyance for the body--religious--for the power to work evil is still with them--yet the Church is rid of them, and in no way can be regarded as responsible for their wickedness. It is our custom to enumerate such scenes as among the calamitous events of the Church; and they are so, in some aspects of the case. As already remarked it is a calamitous time for those who are cast out, for they are overcome of the evil one; and as the heavens wept when the Son of the Morning and his following were cast out of heaven, so it is to be expected that the Saints will be sad, and sorrow over those who are overcome of the adversary. But for the Church herself it is well that this intractable material is gotten rid of; that the body religious is purged of those who can only be a source of weakness and of shame to her. She is helped by the event; purified by it; strengthened; made more acceptable with God and pleasing to reasonable men. It is only in a modified sense, then, that this latter part of the Kirtland period of the Church's history can be regarded as a calamitous time. There is more adversity yet to follow in the experience of the Saints; much distress and many sore trials; and so shall there continue to be such times of trial as long as the Church remains the Church militant. Not until she becomes the Church triumphant, and is glorified by the presence of her Great Head, the Lord Jesus Christ, can the Saints hope for an absolute discontinuance of the occasional recurrence of what are generally considered trying or calamitous events.

Footnotes

1. See Mal. 3:1-7.

2. Isaiah 11:11-16; also History of the Church, vol. I, pp. 12, 13.

3. Following are a few of the most prominent of these prophecies: Deut. 30:1-6; Isaiah 2:1-4; Jeremiah 3, 12-18. Also 16:4-18; 23:1-8, and 31:7-14.

4. See Doc. & Cov. sec. 45:1-71, this revelation was given in 1831; also Doc. & Cov. sec. 133. This is the revelation called the appendix and was given November 3, 1831.

5. Life of John Taylor, p. 96.

6. Leon Zeltekoff.

7. Rabbi Emil G. Hirsch.

8. Max Nordau.

9. Israel Zangwill.

10. Biography of Lorenzo Snow, p. 496.

11. Church History Vol. I p. 12, also Mal. 4:5, 6.

12. Isaiah 42:7.

13. Ibid. 49:6-9.

14. Ibid. 61:1.

15. I Peter 3:18-20.

16. Ibid. 4:6.

17. I Cor. 15:29.

18. Heb. 11.

19. Mal. 4:5, 6.

CHAPTER I.

The Year Eighteen Hundred and Thirty-four--Affairs in Zion and Kirtland.

[Sidenote: Condition of the Saints in Missouri.]

January 1, 1834.--The scattered Saints in Missouri commenced the year eighteen hundred and thirty-four, with a conference, which they held in Clay county, on the first day of January, at which Bishop Partridge presided. After transacting much business relative to comforting and strengthening the scattered members of the Church, it was

    Resolved, That Lyman Wight and Parley P. Pratt be sent as special
    messengers, to represent the situation of the scattered brethren in
    Missouri, to the Presidency and Church in Kirtland, and ask their
    advice.

[Sidenote: Excommunication of Wesley Hurlburt.]

On the evening of the 2nd of January, a Bishop's court assembled in Kirtland to investigate the case of Wesley Hurlburt, against whom charges had been preferred by Harriet Howe and others to the effect "that Hurlburt had denied the faith, spoken reproachfully of the Church, did not believe Joseph was a true Prophet," etc. Hurlburt was in the place, but did not appear before the court, consequently was cut off.

[Sidenote: Mob Threats at Kirtland.]

The threats of the mob about Kirtland through the fall and winter had been such as to cause the brethren to be constantly on the lookout, and those who labored on the temple were engaged at night watching to protect the walls they had laid during the day, from threatened violence. On the morning of the 8th of January, about 1 o'clock, the inhabitants of Kirtland were alarmed by the firing of about thirteen rounds of cannon, by the mob, on the hill about half a mile northwest of the village. [1]

[Sidenote: A Prayer.]

On the evening of the 11th of January, Joseph Smith, Jun., Frederick G. Williams, Newel K. Whitney, John Johnson, Oliver Cowdery, and Orson Hyde united in prayer, and asked the Lord to grant the following petitions:

1.--That the Lord would grant that our lives might be precious in His sight; that He would watch over our persons, and give His angels charge concerning us and our families, that no evil nor unseen hand might be permitted to harm us.

2.--That the Lord would also hold the lives of all the United Order as sacred, and not suffer that any of them should be taken.

3.--That the Lord would grant that Brother Joseph might prevail over his enemy, even Dr. Hurlburt, who has threatened his life, whom Joseph has caused to be taken with a precept; that the Lord would fill the heart of the court with a spirit to do justice, and cause that the law of the land may be magnified in bringing Hurlburt to justice.

4.--That the Lord in the order of His providence, would provide the Bishop of this Church [at Kirtland] with means sufficient to discharge every debt, in due season, that the Order owes, that the Church may not be brought into disrepute, and the Saints be afflicted by the hands of their enemies.

5.--That the Lord would protect our printing press from the hands of evil men, and give us means to send forth His record, even His Gospel, that the ears of all may hear it; and also that we may print His Scriptures; and also that He would give those who were appointed to conduct the press, wisdom sufficient that the cause may not be hindered, but that men's eyes may thereby be opened to see the truth,

6.--That the Lord would deliver Zion, and gather in His scattered people to possess it in peace; and also, while in their dispersion, that He would provide for them that they perish not from hunger or cold; and finally, that God, in the name of Jesus, would gather His elect speedily, and unveil His face, that His Saints might behold His glory, and dwell with Him. Amen.

[Sidenote: Efforts of Sectarian Priests Against Restoration of Exiles.]

As soon as the Governor of Missouri intimated, or the news began to circulate, that the "Mormons" (as the people called the members of the Church), would be restored to their possessions in Jackson county (if they desired to be), the priests of all denominations, as the men behind the scene, with the mob, began to set their springs in motion, and by their secret councils, and false publications and insinuations, soured the public mind, and prevented the administration  of the laws, so that anything like a return to their houses and lands, or recovery of damages for losses sustained, seemed as distant as the day of judgment. The powers of wickedness and darkness walked hand in hand together, and the Saints mourned.

January 16.--I visited Brother Jenkins Salisbury, and spent the night. O Lord! keep us and my family safe, until I return unto them; O my God, have mercy on my brethren in Zion, for Christ's sake. Amen.

January 22.--The Presidency of the High Priesthood wrote from Kirtland to the brethren in Christ Jesus, scattered from Zion-- scattered abroad from the land of their inheritance:

    THE ELDERS OF THE CHURCH TO THEIR BRETHERN ABROAD. [2]

    Dear Brethren in Christ, and Companions in Tribulation:

    When we call to remembrance the ties with which we are bound to
    those who embrace the everlasting covenant, and the fellowship and
    love with which the hearts of the children of our Lord's kingdom
    should be united, we cherish a belief that you will bear with us,
    when we take this course to communicate to you some of the many
    thoughts which occupy our minds, and press with continued weight
    upon our hearts, as we reflect upon the vast importance and
    responsibility of your callings, in the sight of the Master of the
    vineyard. And though our communications to you may be frequent,
    yet we believe they will be received on your part with brotherly
    feelings; and that from us your unworthy brethren, you will suffer
    a word of exhortation to have place in your hearts, as you see the
    great extent of the power and dominion of the prince of darkness,
    and realize how vast the numbers are who are crowding the road to
    death without ever giving heed to the cheering sound of the Gospel
    of our Lord Jesus Christ.

    Consider for a moment, brethren, the fulfillment of the words of
    the prophet; for we behold that darkness covers the earth, and
    gross darkness the minds of the inhabitants thereof--that crimes
    of every description are increasing among men--vices of great
    enormity are practiced--the rising generation growing up in the
    fullness of pride and arrogance--the aged losing every sense of
    conviction, and seemingly banishing every thought of a day of
    retribution,--intemperance, immorality, extravagance, pride,
    blindness of heart, idolatry, the loss of natural affection; the
    love of this world, and indifference toward the things of eternity
    increasing among those who profess a belief in the religion of
    heaven, and infidelity spreading itself in consequence of the
    same--men giving themselves up to commit acts of the foulest
    kind, and deeds of the blackest dye, blaspheming, defrauding,
    blasting the reputation of neighbors, stealing, robbing, murdering;
    advocating error and opposing the truth, forsaking the covenant of
    heaven, and denying the faith of Jesus--and in the midst of all
    this, the day of the Lord fast approaching when none except those
    who have won the wedding garment will be permitted to eat and drink
    in the presence of the Bridegroom, the Prince of Peace!

    Impressed with the truth of these facts what can be the feelings of
    those who have been partakers of the heavenly gift and have tasted
    the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come? Who
    but those who can see the awful precipice upon which the world of
    mankind stands in this generation, can labor in the vineyard of the
    Lord without feeling a sense of the world's deplorable situation?
    Who but those who have duly considered the condescension of the
    Father of our spirits, in providing a sacrifice for His creatures,
    a plan of redemption, a power of atonement, a scheme of salvation,
    having as its great objects, the bringing of men back into the
    presence of the King of heaven, crowning them in the celestial
    glory and making them heirs with the Son to that inheritance which
    is incorruptible, undefiled, and which fadeth not away--who but
    such can realize the importance of a perfect walk before all men,
    and a  diligence in calling upon all men to partake of these
    blessings? How indescribably glorious are these things to mankind!
    Of a truth they may be considered tidings of great joy to all
    people; and tidings, too, that ought to fill the earth and cheer
    the hearts of every one when sounded in his ears. The reflection
    that everyone is to receive according to his own diligence and
    perseverance while in the vineyard, ought to inspire everyone who
    is called to be a minister of the glad tidings, to so improve his
    talent that he may gain other talents, that when the Master sits
    down to take an account of the conduct of His servants, it may be
    said, Well done, good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful
    over a few things; I will now make thee ruler over many things;
    enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

    Some may pretend to say that the world in this age is fast
    increasing in righteousness; that the dark ages of superstition
    and blindness have passed, when the faith of Christ was known and
    held only by a few, when ecclesiastic power had an almost universal
    control over Christendom, and the consciences of men were bound by
    the strong chains of priestly power: but now, the gloomy cloud is
    burst, and the Gospel is shining with all the resplendent glory of
    an apostolic day; and that the kingdom of the Messiah is greatly
    spreading, that the Gospel of our Lord is carried to divers nations
    of the earth, the Scriptures translating into different tongues;
    the ministers of truth crossing the vast deep to proclaim to men
    in darkness a risen Savior, and to erect the standard of Emanuel
    where light has never shone; and that the idol is destroyed, the
    temple of images forsaken; and those who but a short time previous
    followed the traditions of their fathers and sacrificed their own
    flesh to appease the wrath of some imaginary god, are now raising
    their voices in the worship of the Most High, and are lifting their
    thoughts up to Him with the full expectation that one day they will
    meet with a joyful reception in His everlasting kingdom!

    But a moment's candid reflection upon the principles of these
    systems, the manner in which they are conducted, the individuals
    employed, the apparent object held out as an inducement to cause
    them to act, we think, is sufficient for every candid man to draw
    a conclusion in his own mind whether this is the order of heaven
    or not. We deem it a just principle, and it is one the force of
    which we believe ought to be duly considered by every individual,
    that all men are created equal, and that all have the privilege of
    thinking for themselves upon all matters relative to conscience.
    Consequently, then, we are not disposed, had we the power, to
    deprive any one of exercising that free independence of mind which
    heaven has so graciously bestowed upon the human  family as one
    of its choicest gifts; but we take the liberty (and this we have
    a right to do) of looking at this order of things a few moments,
    and contrasting it with the order of God as we find it in the
    sacred Scriptures. In this review, however, we shall present the
    points as we consider they were really designed by the great Giver
    to be understood, and the happy result arising from a performance
    of the requirements of heaven as revealed to every one who obeys
    them; and the consequence attending a false construction, a
    misrepresentation, or a forced meaning that was never designed in
    the mind of the Lord when He condescended to speak from the heavens
    to men for their salvation.

    Previous to entering upon a subject of so great moment to the
    human family there is a prominent item which suggests itself to
    our minds which, here, in few words, we wish to discuss: All
    regularly organized and well established governments have certain
    laws by which, more or less, the innocent are protected and the
    guilty punished. The fact admitted, that certain laws are good,
    equitable and just, ought to be binding upon the individual who
    admits this, and lead him to observe in the strictest manner an
    obedience to those laws. These laws when violated, or broken by the
    individual, must, in justice, convict his mind with a double force,
    if possible, of the extent and magnitude of his crime; because
    he could have no plea of ignorance to produce; and his act of
    transgression was openly committed against light and knowledge. But
    the individual who may be ignorant and imperceptibly transgresses
    or violates laws, though the voice of the country requires that he
    should suffer, yet he will never feel that remorse of conscience
    that the other will, and that keen, cutting reflection will never
    rise in his breast that otherwise would, had he done the deed, or
    committed the offense in full conviction that he was breaking the
    law of his country, and having previously acknowledged the same
    to be just. It is not our intention by these remarks, to attempt
    to place the law of man on a parallel with the law of heaven;
    because we do not consider that it is formed in the same wisdom and
    propriety; neither do we consider that it is sufficient in itself
    to bestow anything on man in comparison with the law of heaven,
    even should it promise it. The laws of men may guarantee to a
    people protection in the honorable pursuits of this life, and the
    temporal happiness arising from a protection against unjust insults
    and injuries and when this is said, all is said, that can be in
    truth, of the power, extent, and influence of the laws of men,
    exclusive of the law of God. The law of heaven is presented to man,
    and as such guarantees to all who obey it a reward far beyond any
    earthly consideration; though it does not promise that the believer
    in every age should be exempt from the afflictions and troubles
    arising from different sources in consequence of the acts of wicked
    men on earth. Still in the midst of all this  there is a promise
    predicated upon the fact that it is the law of heaven, which
    transcends the law of man, as far as eternal life the temporal; and
    as the blessings which God is able to give, are greater than those
    which can be given by man. Then, certainly, if the law of man is
    binding upon man when acknowledged, how much more must the law of
    heaven be! And as much as the law of heaven is more perfect than
    the law of man, so much greater must be the reward if obeyed. The
    law of man premises safety in temporal life; but the law of God
    promises that life which is eternal, even an inheritance at God's
    own right hand, secure from all the powers of the wicked one.

    We consider that God has created man with a mind capable of
    instruction, and a faculty which may be enlarged in proportion to
    the heed and diligence given to the light communicated from heaven
    to the intellect; and that the nearer man approaches perfection,
    the clearer are his views, and the greater his enjoyments, till
    he has overcome the evils of his life and lost every desire for
    sin; and like the ancients, arrives at that point of faith where
    he is wrapped in the power and glory of his Maker, and is caught
    up to dwell with Him. But we consider that this is a station to
    which no man ever arrived in a moment: he must have been instructed
    in the government and laws of that kingdom by proper degrees,
    until his mind is capable in some measure of comprehending the
    propriety, justice, equality, and consistency of the same. For
    further instruction we refer you to Deut. 32, where the Lord says,
    that Jacob is the lot of his inheritance. He found him in a desert
    land, and in the waste, howling wilderness; He led him about, He
    instructed him, He kept him as the apple of His eye, etc.; which
    will show the force of the last item advanced, that it is necessary
    for men to receive an understanding concerning the laws of the
    heavenly kingdom, before they are permitted to enter it: we mean
    the celestial glory. So dissimilar are the governments of men,
    and so divers are their laws, from the government and laws of
    heaven, that a man, for instance, hearing that there was a country
    on this globe called the United States of North America, could
    take his journey to this place without first learning the laws of
    government; but the conditions of God's kingdom are such, that all
    who are made partakers of that glory, are under the necessity of
    learning something respecting it previous to their entering into
    it. But the foreigner can come to this country without knowing a
    syllable of its laws, or even subscribing to obey them after he
    arrives. Why? Because the government of the United States does not
    require it: it only requires an obedience to its laws after the
    individual has arrived within its jurisdiction.

    As we previously remarked, we do not attempt to place the law
    of man on a parallel with the law of heaven; but we will bring
    forward  another item, to further urge the propriety of yielding
    obedience to the law of heaven, after the fact is admitted, that
    the laws of man are binding upon man. Were a king to extend his
    dominion over the habitable earth, and send forth his laws which
    were of the most perfect kind, and command his subjects one and
    all to yield obedience to the same, and add as a reward to those
    who obeyed them, that at a certain period they should be called
    to attend the marriage of his son, who in due time was to receive
    the kingdom, and they should be made equal with him in the same;
    and fix as a penalty for disobedience that every individual
    guilty of it should be cast out at the marriage feast, and have
    no part nor portion with his government, what rational mind could
    for a moment accuse the king with injustice for punishing such
    rebellious subjects? In the first place his laws were just, easy to
    be complied with, and perfect: nothing of a tyrannical nature was
    required of them; but the very construction of the laws was equity
    and beauty; and when obeyed would produce the happiest condition
    possible to all who adhered to them, beside the last great benefit
    of sitting down with a royal robe in the presence of the king at
    the great, grand marriage supper of his son, and be made equal with
    him in all the affairs of the kingdom.

    When these royal laws were issued, and promulgated throughout
    the vast dominion, every subject, when interrogated whether he
    believed them to be from his sovereign or not, answered, Yes; I
    know they are, I am acquainted with the signature, for it is as
    usual. Thus saith the King! This admitted, the subject is bound
    by every consideration of honor to his country, his king, and his
    own personal character, to observe in the strictest sense every
    requisition in the royal edict. Should any escape the search of
    the ambassadors of the king and never hear these last laws, giving
    his subjects such exalted privileges, an excuse might be urged
    in their behalf, and they escape the censure of the king. But
    for those who had heard, who had admitted, and who had promised
    obedience to these just laws no excuse could be urged; and when
    brought into the presence of the king, certainly, justice would
    require that they should suffer a penalty. Could that king be just
    in admitting these rebellious individuals into the full enjoyment
    and privileges with his son, and those who had been obedient to his
    commandments? Certainly not. Because they disregarded the voice
    of their lawful king; they had no regard for his virtuous laws,
    for his dignity, nor for the honor of his name; neither for the
    honor of their country, nor their private virtue. They regarded
    not his authority enough to obey him, neither did they regard the
    immediate advantages and blessings arising from these laws if kept,
    so destitute were they of virtue and goodness; and above all, they
    regarded so  little the joy and satisfaction of a legal seat
    in the presence of the king's only son, and to be made equal with
    him in all the blessings, honors, comforts, and felicities of his
    kingdom, that they turned away from a participation in them, and
    considered that they were beneath their present notice though they
    had no doubt as to the real authenticity of the royal edict.

    We ask, again, would the king be just in admitting these rebels to
    all the privileges of the kingdom, with those who had served him
    with the perfect integrity? We again answer, No. Such individuals
    would be dangerous characters in any government: good and wholesome
    laws they despise; just and perfect principles they trample under
    their feet as something beneath their notice; and the commands of
    their sovereign which they had once acknowledged to be equitable
    they entirely disregard. How could a government be conducted with
    harmony if its administrators were possessed with such different
    dispositions and different principles? Could it prosper? Could it
    flourish? Would harmony prevail? Would order be established, and
    could justice be executed in righteousness in all branches of its
    departments? No! In it were two classes of men as dissimilar as
    light and darkness, virtue and vice, justice and injustice, truth
    and falsehood, holiness and sin. One class were perfectly harmless
    and virtuous: they knew what virtue was for they had lived in the
    fullest enjoyment of it, and their fidelity to truth had been
    fairly tested by a series of years of faithful obedience to all
    its heavenly precepts. They knew what good order was, for they had
    been orderly and obedient to the laws imposed on them by their wise
    sovereign, and had experienced the benefits arising from a life
    spent in his government till he has now seen proper to make them
    equal with his son. Such individuals would indeed adorn any court
    where perfection was one of its main springs of action, and shine
    far more fair than the richest gem in the diadem of the prince.

    The other class were a set of individuals who disregarded every
    principle of justice and equity; and this is demonstrated from
    the fact, that when just laws were issued by the king, which were
    perfectly equitable, they were so lost to a sense of righteousness
    that they disregarded those laws, notwithstanding an obedience to
    them would have produced at the time, as regards their own personal
    comfort and advantage, the happiest result possible. They were
    entirely destitute of harmony and virtue, so much so that virtuous
    laws they despised. They had proven themselves unworthy a place
    in the joys of the prince, because they had for a series of years
    lived in open violation of his government. Certainly, then, those
    two classes of men could not hold the reins of the same government
    at the same time in peace; for internal jars, broils, and discords
    would rack it to the center, were such a form  of government
    to exist under such a system. The virtuous could not enjoy peace
    in the constant and unceasing schemes and evil plans of the
    wicked; neither could the wicked have enjoyment in the constant
    perseverance of the righteous to do justly. That there must be
    an agreement in this government, or it could not stand, must be
    admitted by all. Should the king convey the reins into the hands of
    the rebellious the government must soon fall; for every government,
    from the creation to the present, when it ceased to be virtuous,
    and failed to execute justice, sooner or later has been overthrown.
    And without virtuous principles to actuate a government all care
    for justice is soon lost, and the only motive which prompts it
    to act is ambition and selfishness. Should the king admit these
    rebels into his house to make them equal with the others, he would
    condescend beneath his dignity, because he once issued virtuous
    laws which were received by a part of his subjects, and the reward
    affixed was a seat at the marriage feast, and an adoption into his
    own family as lawful heirs. So that should he now offer any thing
    different he would destroy forever that government which he once so
    diligently labored to establish and preserve and which he once had
    wisdom to organize. Such individuals as the last named, would be
    a bane to a virtuous government, and would prove its overthrow if
    suffered to hold a part in conducting it.

    We take the sacred writings into our hands, and admit that they
    were given by direct inspiration for the good of man. We believe
    that God condescended to speak from the heavens and declare His
    will concerning the human family, to give them just and holy laws,
    to regulate their conduct, and guide them in a direct way, that in
    due time He might take them to Himself, and make them joint heirs
    with His Son. But when this fact is admitted, that the immediate
    will of heaven is contained in the scriptures, are we not bound as
    rational creatures to live in accordance to all its precepts? Will
    the mere admission, that this is the will of heaven ever benefit us
    if we do not comply with all his teachings? Do we offer violence to
    the Supreme Intelligence of heaven, when we admit the truth of its
    teachings, and do not obey them? Do we not descend below our own
    knowledge, and the better wisdom which heaven has endowed us with,
    by such a course of conduct? For these reasons, if we have direct
    revelations given us from heaven, surely those revelations were
    never given to be trifled with, without the trifler's incurring
    displeasure and vengence upon his own head, if there is any justice
    in heaven; and that there is must be admitted by every individual
    who admits the truth and force of God's teachings, His blessings
    and cursings, as contained in the sacred volume.

    Here, then, we have this part of our subject immediately before
    us  for consideration: God has in reserve a time, or period
    appointed in His own bosom, when He will bring all His subjects,
    who have obeyed His voice and kept His commandments, into His
    celestial rest. This rest is of such perfection and glory, that
    man has need of a preparation before he can, according to the laws
    of that kingdom, enter it and enjoy its blessings. This being the
    fact, God has given certain laws to the human family, which, if
    observed, are sufficient to prepare them to inherit this rest.
    This, then, we conclude, was the purpose of God in giving His laws
    to us: if not, why, or for what were they given? If the whole
    family of man were as well off without them as they might be with
    them, for what purpose or intent were they ever given? Was it that
    God wanted to merely show that He could talk? It would be nonsense
    to suppose that He would condescend to talk in vain: for it would
    be in vain, and to no purpose whatever [if the law of God were of
    no benefit to man]: because, all the commandments contained in
    the law of the Lord, have the sure promise annexed of a reward to
    all who obey, predicated upon the fact that they are really the
    promises of a Being who cannot lie, One who is abundantly able to
    fulfill every tittle of His word: and if man were as well prepared,
    or could be as well prepared, to meet God without their ever having
    been given in the first instance, why were they ever given? for
    certainly, in that case they can now do him no good.

    As we previously remarked, all well established and properly
    organized governments have certain fixed and prominent laws for
    the regulation and management of the same. If man has grown to
    wisdom and is capable of discerning the propriety of laws to govern
    nations, what less can be expected from the Ruler and Upholder of
    the universe? Can we suppose that He has a kingdom without laws?
    Or do we believe that it is composed of an innumerable company of
    beings who are entirely beyond all law? Consequently have need
    of nothing to govern or regulate them? Would not such ideas be a
    reproach to our Great Parent, and at variance with His glorious
    intelligence? Would it not be asserting that man had found out a
    secret beyond Deity? That he had learned that it was good to have
    laws, while God after existing from eternity and having power to
    create man, had not found out that it was proper to have laws for
    his government? We admit that God is the great source and fountain
    from whence proceeds all good; that He is perfect intelligence,
    and that His wisdom is alone sufficient to govern and regulate
    the mighty creations and worlds which shine and blaze with such
    magnificence and splendor over our heads, as though touched with
    His anger and moved by His Almighty word. And if so, it is done
    and regulated by law; for without law all must certainly fall into
    chaos. If, then, we admit that God is the source of all wisdom and
    understanding, we must admit that by His direct inspiration He
    has  taught man that law is necessary in order to govern and
    regulate His own immediate interest and welfare: for this reason,
    that law is beneficial to promote peace and happiness among men.
    And as before remarked, God is the source from whence proceeds all
    good; and if man is benefitted by law, then certainly, law is good;
    and if law is good then law, or the principle of it emanated from
    God; for God is the source of all good; consequently, then, he was
    the first Author of law, or the principle of it, to mankind.

    We would remind you, brethren, of the fatigues, trials, privations,
    and persecutions, which the ancient saints endured for the sole
    purpose of persuading men of the excellence and propriety of the
    faith of Christ, were it in our opinion necessary, or if it would
    serve in any respect to stimulate you to labor in the vineyard of
    the Lord with any more diligence. But we have reason to believe (if
    you make the holy Scriptures a sufficient part of your studies),
    that their perseverance is known to you all; as also that they
    were willing to sacrifice the present honors and pleasures of
    this world, that they might obtain an assurance of a crown of
    life from the hand of our Lord; and their excellent example in
    labor, which manifests their zeal to us in the cause which they
    embraced, you are daily striving to pattern. And not only these
    examples of the Saints, but the commandments of our Lord, we hope
    are constantly revolving in your hearts, teaching you, not only His
    will in proclaiming His Gospel, but His meekness and perfect walk
    before all, even in those times of severe persecutions and abuse
    which were heaped upon him by a wicked and adulterous generation.
    Remember, brethren, that He has called you unto holiness; and need
    we say, to be like Him in purity? How wise, how holy; how chaste,
    and how perfect, then, you ought to conduct yourselves in His
    sight; and remember, too, that His eyes are continually upon you.
    Viewing these facts in a proper light, you cannot be insensible,
    that without a strict observance of all His divine requirements,
    you may, at least, be found wanting; and if so, you will admit,
    that your lot will be cast among the unprofitable servants. We
    beseech you, therefore, brethren, to improve upon all things
    committed to your charge, that you lose not your reward.

    No doubt, the course which we pursued in our last communication to
    you, is yet familiar to your minds; that we there endeavored to
    show, as far as possible, the propriety, in part, of adhering to
    the law of heaven; and also, the consistency in looking to heaven
    for a law or rule to serve as a guide in this present state of
    existence, that we may be prepared to meet that which inevitably
    awaits us, as well as all mankind. There is an importance, perhaps,
    attached to this subject, which the world has not so fully examined
    as it requires. Think for a moment, of the greatness of the Being
    who created the Universe; and  ask, could He be so inconsistent
    with his own character, as to leave man without a law or rule by
    which to regulate his conduct, after placing him here, where,
    according to the formation of his nature he must in a short period
    sink into the dust? Is there nothing further; is there no existence
    beyond this vail of death which is so suddenly to be cast over
    all of us? If there is, why not that Being who had power to place
    us here, inform us something of the hereafter? If we had power to
    place ourselves in this present existence, why not have power to
    know what shall follow when that dark veil is cast over our bodies?
    If in this life we receive our all; if when we crumble back to
    dust we are no more, from what source did we emanate, and what was
    the purpose of our existence? If this life were all, we should be
    led to query, whether or not there was really any substance in
    existence, and we might with propriety say, "Let us eat, drink,
    and be merry, for tomorrow we die!" But if this life is all, then
    why this constant toiling, why this continual warfare, and why
    this unceasing trouble? But this life is not all, the voice of
    reason, the language of inspiration, and the Spirit of the
    living God, our Creator, teaches us, as we hold the record of
    truth in our hands, that this is not the case, that this is not
    so; for, the heavens declare the glory of a God, and the firmament
    showeth His handiwork; and a moment's reflection is sufficient to
    teach every man of common intelligence, that all these are not the
    mere productions of chance, nor could they be supported by any
    power less than an Almighty hand; and He that can mark the power
    of Omnipotence, inscribed upon the heavens, can also see God's own
    handwriting in the sacred volume: and he who reads it oftenest will
    like it best, and he who is acquainted with it, will know the hand
    wherever he can see it; and when once discovered, it will not only
    receive an acknowledgment, but an obedience to all his heavenly
    precepts. For a moment reflect: what could have been the purpose of
    our Father in giving to us a law? Was it that it might be obeyed,
    or disobeyed? And think further, too, not only of the propriety,
    but of the importance of attending to His laws in every particular.
    If, then, there is an importance in this respect, is there not a
    responsibility of great weight resting upon those who are called to
    declare these truths to men? Were we capable of laying any thing
    before you as a just comparison, we would cheerfully do it; but
    in this our ability fails, and we are inclined to think that man
    is unable, without assistance beyond what has been given to those
    before, of expressing in words the greatness of this important
    subject. We can only say, that if an anticipation of the joys of
    the celestial glory, as witnessed to the hearts of the humble is
    not sufficient, we will leave to yourselves the result of your
    own diligence; for God ere long, will call  all His servants
    before Him, and there from His own hand they will receive a just
    recompense and a righteous reward for all their labors. * * * * * *
    * * * * * * *

    It is reasonable to suppose, that man departed from the first
    teachings, or instructions which he received from heaven in the
    first age, and refused by his disobedience to be governed by them.
    Consequently, he formed such laws as best suited his own mind, or
    as he supposed, were best adapted to his situation. But that God
    had influenced man more or less since that time in the formation
    of law for His benefit we have no hesitancy in believing; for,
    as before remarked, being the source of all good, every just
    and equitable law was in a greater or less degree influenced by
    Him. And though man in his own supposed wisdom would not admit
    the influence of a power superior to his own, yet for wise and
    great purposes, for the good and happiness of His creatures, God
    has instructed man to form wise and wholesome laws, since he had
    departed from Him and refused to governed by those laws which God
    had given by His own voice from on high in the beginning. But
    notwithstanding the transgression, by which man had cut himself off
    from an immediate intercourse with his Masker without a Mediator,
    it appears that the great and glorious plan of His redemption was
    previously provided; the sacrifice prepared; the atonement wrought
    out in the mind and purpose of God, even in the person of the Son,
    through whom man was now to look for acceptance, and through whose
    merits he was now taught that he alone could find redemption, since
    the word had been pronounced, Unto dust thou shalt return.

    But that man was not able himself to erect a system, or plan with
    power sufficient to free him from a destruction which awaited him,
    is evident from the fact that God, as before remarked, prepared
    a sacrifice in the gift of His own Son who should be sent in due
    time, to prepare a way, or open a door through which man might
    enter into the Lord's presence, whence he had been cast out for
    disobedience. From time to time these glad tidings were sounded in
    the ears of men in different ages of the world down to the time of
    Messiah's coming. By faith in this atonement or plan of redemption,
    Abel offered to God a sacrifice that was accepted, which was the
    firstlings of the flock. Cain offered of the fruit of the ground,
    and was not accepted, because he could not do it in faith, he could
    have no faith, or could not exercise faith contrary to the plan
    of heaven. It must be shedding the blood of the only Begotten to
    atone for man; for this was the plan of redemption, and without
    the shedding of blood was no remission; and as the sacrifice was
    instituted for a type, by which man was to discern the great
    Sacrifice which God had prepared; to offer a sacrifice contrary
    to that, no faith could be exercised, because redemption was not
    purchased in that way, nor the  power of atonement instituted
    after that order; consequently Cain could have no faith; and
    whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. But Abel offered an acceptable
    sacrifice, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous,
    God Himself testifying of his gifts. Certainly, the shedding of
    the blood of a beast could be beneficial to no man, except it was
    done in imitation, or as a type, or explanation of what was to
    be offered through the gift of God Himself; and this performance
    done with an eye looking forward in faith on the power of that
    great Sacrifice for a remission of sins. But however various may
    have been, and may be at the present time, the opinions of men
    respecting the conduct of Abel, and the knowledge which he had on
    the subject of atonement, it is evident in our minds, that he was
    instructed more fully in the plan than what the Bible speaks of,
    for how could he offer a sacrifice in faith, looking to God for a
    remission of his sins in the power of the great atonement, without
    having been previously instructed in that plan? And further, if he
    was accepted of God, what were the ordinances performed further
    than the offering of the firstlings of the flock?

    It is said by Paul in his letter to the Hebrew brethren, that Abel
    obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his
    gifts. To whom did God testify of the gifts of Abel, was it to
    Paul? We have very little on this important subject in the forepart
    of the Bible. But it is said that Abel himself obtained witness
    that he was righteous. Then certainly God spoke to him: indeed,
    it is said that God talked with him; and if He did, would He not,
    seeing that Abel was righteous, deliver to him the whole plan of
    the Gospel. And is not the Gospel the news of the redemption? How
    could Abel offer a sacrifice and look forward with faith on the Son
    of God for a remission of his sins and not understand the Gospel?
    The mere shedding of the blood of beasts or offering anything
    else in sacrifice, could not procure a remission of sins, except
    it were performed in faith of something to come; if it could,
    Cain's offering must have been as good as Abel's. And if Abel was
    taught of the coming of the Son of God, was he not taught also of
    His ordinances? We all admit that the Gospel has ordinances, and
    if so, had it not always ordinances, and were not its ordinances
    always the same? Perhaps our friends will say that the Gospel and
    its ordinances were not known till the days of John, the son of
    Zacharias, in the days of Herod, the king of Judea. But we will
    here look at this point: For our own part we cannot believe that
    the ancients in all ages were so ignorant of the system of heaven
    as many suppose, since all that were ever saved, were saved through
    the power of this great plan of redemption, as much before the
    coming of Christ as since; if not, God has had different plans in
    operation (if we may so express it), to bring men back to dwell
    with Himself; and this we cannot believe,  since there has
    been no change in the constitution of man since he fell; and the
    ordinance or institution of offering blood in sacrifice, was only
    designed to be performed till Christ was offered up and shed His
    blood--as said before--that man might look forward in faith to that
    time. It will be noticed that, according to Paul, (see Gal. 3:8)
    the Gospel was preached to Abraham. We would like to be informed
    in what name the Gospel was then preached, whether it was in the
    name of Christ or some other name. If in any other name, was it the
    Gospel? And if it was the Gospel, and that preached in the name of
    Christ, had it any ordinances? If not, was it the Gospel? And if it
    had ordinances what were they? Our friends may say, perhaps, that
    there were never any ordinances except those of offering sacrifices
    before the coming of Christ, and that it could not be possible for
    the Gospel to have been administered while the law of sacrifices
    of blood was in force. But we will recollect that Abraham offered
    sacrifice, and notwithstanding this, had the Gospel preached to
    him. That the offering of sacrifice was only to point the mind
    forward to Christ, we infer from these remarkable words of Jesus
    to the Jews: "Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he
    saw it, and was glad" (John 8:56.) So, then, because the ancients
    offered sacrifice it did not hinder their hearing the Gospel; but
    served, as we said before, to open their eyes, and enable them to
    look forward to the time of the coming of the Savior, and rejoice
    in His redemption. We find also, that when the Israelites came out
    of Egypt they had the Gospel preached to them, according to Paul in
    his letter to the Hebrews, which says: "For unto us was the Gospel
    preached, as well as unto them: but the word preached did not
    profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it" (see
    Heb. 4:2). It is said again, in Gal. 3:19, that the law (of Moses,
    or the Levitical law) was "added" because of transgression. What,
    we ask, was this law added to, if it was not added to the Gospel?
    It must be plain that it was added to the Gospel, since we learn
    that they had the Gospel preached to them. From these few facts,
    we conclude that whenever the Lord revealed Himself to men in
    ancient days, and commanded them to offer sacrifice to Him, that it
    was done that they might look forward in faith to the time of His
    coming, and rely upon the power of that atonement for a remission
    of their sins. And this they have done, thousands who have gone
    before us, whose garments are spotless, and who are, like Job,
    waiting with an assurance like his, that they will see Him in the
    latter day upon the earth, even in their flesh,

    We may conclude, that though there were different dispensations,
    yet all things which God communicated to His people were calculated
    to draw their minds to the great object, and to teach them to rely
    upon God alone as the author of their salvation, as contained in
    His law.

     From what we can draw from the Scriptures relative to the
    teachings of heaven, we are induced to think that much instruction
    has been given to man since the beginning which we do not possess
    now. This may not agree with the opinions of some of our friends
    who are bold to say that we have everything written in the Bible
    which God ever spoke to man since the world began, and that if he
    had ever said anything more we should certainly have received it.
    But we ask, does it remain for a people who never had faith enough
    to call down one scrap of revelation from heaven, and for all they
    have now are indebted to the faith of another people who lived
    hundreds and thousands of years before them, does it remain for
    them to say how much God has spoken and how much he has not spoken?
    We have what we have, and the Bible contains what it does contain:
    but to say that God never said anything more to man than is there
    recorded, would be saying at once that we have at last received a
    revelation; for it must require one to advance thus far, because it
    is nowhere said in that volume by the mouth of God, that He would
    not, after giving, what is there contained, speak again; and if
    any man has found out for a fact that the Bible contains all that
    God ever revealed to man he has ascertained it by an immediate
    revelation, other than has been previously written by the prophets
    and apostles. But through the kind providence of our Father a
    portion of His word which He delivered to His ancient saints, has
    fallen into our hands, is presented to us with a promise of a
    reward if obeyed, and with a penalty if disobeyed. That all are
    deeply interested in these laws or teachings, must be admitted by
    all who acknowledge their divine authenticity.

    It may be proper for us to notice in this place a few of the many
    blessings held out in this law of heaven as a reward to those who
    obey its teachings. God has appointed a day in which He will judge
    the world, and this He has given an assurance of in that He raised
    up His Son Jesus Christ from the dead--the point on which the
    hope of all who believe the inspired record is founded for their
    future happiness and enjoyment; because, "If Christ be not risen,"
    said Paul to the Corinthians, "your faith is vain, ye are yet in
    your sins. Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ have
    perished" (see 1 Cor. 15). If the resurrection from the dead be
    not an important point, or item in our faith, we must confess that
    we know nothing about it; for if there be no resurrection from the
    dead, then Christ has not risen; and if Christ has not risen He
    was not the Son of God; and if He was not the Son of God, there
    is not nor cannot be a Son of God, if the present book called the
    Scriptures is true; because the time has gone by when, according to
    that book, He was to make His appearance. On this subject, however,
    we are reminded of the words of Peter to the Jewish Sanhedrim, when
     speaking of Christ, he says that God raised Him from the dead,
    and we (the apostles) are His witnesses of these things, and so is
    the Holy Ghost, whom God had given to them that obey Him (see Acts
    5). So that after the testimony of the Scriptures on this point,
    the assurance is given by the Holy Ghost, bearing witness to those
    who obey Him, that Christ Himself has assuredly risen from the
    dead; and if He has risen from the dead. He will, by His power,
    bring all men to stand before Him: for if He is risen from the
    dead the bands of the temporal death are broken that the grave has
    no victory, If then, the grave has no victory, those who keep the
    sayings of Jesus and obey His teachings have not only a promise of
    a resurrection from the dead, but an assurance of being admitted
    into His glorious kingdom; for, He himself says, "Where I am, there
    also shall my servant be" (see John 11).

    In the 22nd chapter of Luke's account of the Messiah, we find
    the kingdom of heaven likened unto a king who made a marriage
    for his son. That this son was the Messiah will not be disputed,
    since it was the kingdom of heaven that was represented in the
    parable; and that the Saints, or those who are found faithful to
    the Lord, are the individuals who will be found worthy to merit a
    seat at the marriage supper, is evident from the sayings of John
    in the Revelation where he represents the sound which he heard in
    heaven to be like a great multitude, or like the voice of mighty
    thunderings, saying, the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth. Let us be
    glad and rejoice, and give honor to Him; for the marriage of the
    Lamb is come, and His wife hath made herself ready. And to her was
    granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white:
    For the fine linen is the righteousness of Saints (Rev. 19).

    That those who keep the commandments of the Lord and walk in His
    statutes to the end, are the only individuals permitted to sit at
    this glorious feast, is evident from the following items in Paul's
    last letter to Timothy, which was written just previous to his
    death,--he says: "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
    course, I have kept the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me
    a crown of righteousness which the Lord, the righteous Judge shall
    give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also
    that love His appearing." No one who believes the account, will
    doubt for a moment this assertion of Paul which was made, as he
    knew, just before he was to take his leave of this world. Though he
    once, according to his own word, persecuted the Church of God and
    wasted it, yet after embracing the faith, his labors were unceasing
    to spread the glorious news: and like a faithful soldier, when
    called to give his life in the cause which he had espoused, he
    laid it down, as he says, with an assurance of an eternal crown.
    Follow the labors of this Apostle from the time of his conversion
    to the time of his death, and you will have a fair  sample
    of industry and patience in promulgating the Gospel of Christ.
    Derided, whipped, and stoned, the moment he escaped the hands of
    his persecutors he as zealously as ever proclaimed the doctrine of
    the Savior. And all may know that he did not embrace the faith for
    honor in this life, nor for the gain of earthly goods. What, then,
    could have induced him to undergo all this toil? It was, as he
    said, that he might obtain the crown of righteousness from the hand
    of God. No one, we presume, will doubt the faithfulness of Paul to
    the end. None will say that he did not keep the faith, that he did
    not fight the good fight, that he did not preach and persuade to
    the last. And what was he to receive? A crown of righteousness. And
    what shall others receive who do not labor faithfully, and continue
    to the end? We leave such to search out their own promises if any
    they have; and if they have any they are welcome to them, on our
    part, for the Lord says that every man is to receive according to
    his works. Reflect for a moment, brethren, and enquire, whether
    you would consider yourselves worthy a seat at the marriage feast
    with Paul and others like him, if you had been unfaithful? Had you
    not fought the good fight, and kept the faith, could you expect to
    receive? Have you a promise of receiving a crown of righteousness
    from the hand of the Lord, with the Church of the First Born? Here
    then, we understand, that Paul rested his hope in Christ, because
    he had kept the faith, and loved his appearing and from His hand
    he had a promise of receiving a crown of righteousness. If the
    Saints are not to reign, for what purpose are they crowned? In an
    exhortation of the Lord to a certain church in Asia, which was
    built up in the days of the Apostles, unto whom He communicated
    His word on that occasion by His servant John, He says, "Behold,
    I come quickly: hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take
    thy crown." And again, "To him that overcometh will I grant to sit
    with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with
    my Father in His throne" (see Rev. 3). And again, it is written,
    "Behold, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear
    what we shall be: but we know that, when He shall appear, we shall
    be like Him; for we shall see Him as He is. And every man that hath
    this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as He is pure" (I John
    3:2, 3). How is it that these old Apostles should say so much on
    the subject of the coming of Christ? He certainly had once come;
    but Paul says, To all who love His appearing, shall be given the
    crown: and John says, When He shall appear, we shall be like Him;
    for we shall see Him as He is. Can we mistake such language as
    this? Do we not offer violence to our own good judgment when we
    deny the second coming of the Messiah? When has He partaken of the
    fruit of the vine new with His ancient Apostles in His Father's
    kingdom, as He promised He would just before He was crucified? In
    Paul's epistle to the  Philippians, (3:20, 21), he says: "For
    our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for the
    Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ; who shall change our vile body, that
    it may be fashioned like unto His glorious body, according to the
    working whereby He is able even to subdue all things unto Himself."
    We find another promise to individuals living in the church at
    Sardis who had not defiled their garments: "And they shall walk
    with me in white: for they are worthy. He that overcometh, the same
    shall be clothed in white raiment; and I will not blot out his name
    out of the book of life, but I will confess his name before my
    Father, and before His angels." John represents the sound which he
    heard from heaven, as giving thanks and glory to God, saying that
    the Lamb was worthy to take the book and to open its seals; because
    He was slain, and had made them kings and priests unto God: and
    they should reign on the earth (see Rev. 5). In the 20th chapter
    we find a length of time specified, during which Satan is to be
    confined in his own place, and the Saints reign in peace, all these
    promises and blessings we find contained in the law of the Lord,
    which the righteous are to enjoy; and we might enumerate many more
    places where the same or similar promises are made to the faithful,
    but we do not deem it of importance to rehearse them here, as this
    epistle is now lengthy; and our brethren, no doubt, are familiar
    with them all.

    Most assuredly it is, however, that the ancients, though persecuted
    and afflicted by men, obtained from God promises of such weight and
    glory, that our hearts are often filled with gratitude that we are
    even permitted to look upon them while we contemplate that there
    is no respect of persons in His sight, and that in every nation,
    he that feareth God and worketh righteousness, is acceptable with
    Him. But from the few items previously quoted we can draw the
    conclusion that there is to be a day when all will be judged of
    their works, and rewarded according to the same; that those who
    have kept the faith will be crowned with a crown of righteousness;
    be clothed in white raiment; be admitted to the marriage feast; be
    free from every affliction, and reign with Christ on the earth,
    where, according to the ancient promise, they will partake of
    the fruit of the vine new in the glorious kingdom with Him; at
    least we find that such promises were made to the ancient Saints.
    And though we cannot claim these promises which were made to the
    ancients for they are not our property, merely because they were
    made to the ancient Saints, yet if we are the children of the Most
    High, and are called with the same calling with which they were
    called, and embrace the same covenant that they embraced, and are
    faithful to the testimony of our Lord as they were, we can approach
    the Father in the name of Christ as they approached Him and for
    ourselves obtain the same promises. These promises, when obtained,
    if ever by  us, will not be because Peter, John, and the other
    Apostles, with the churches at Sardis, Pergamos, Philadelphia,
    and elsewhere, walked in the fear of God and had power and faith
    to prevail and obtain them; but it will be because we, ourselves,
    have faith and approach God in the name of His Son Jesus Christ,
    even as they did; and when these promises are obtained, they will
    be promises directly to us, or they will do us no good. They will
    be communicated for our benefit, being our own property (through
    the gift of God), earned by our own diligence in keeping His
    commandments, and walking uprightly before Him. If not, to what end
    serves the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and why was it ever
    communicated to us?

    Previous to commencing this letter we designed giving you some
    instruction upon the regulation of the Church; but that will be
    given hereafter.

    In our own country, surrounded with blessings innumerable, to which
    thousands of our fellow men are strangers, enjoying unspeakable
    benefits and inexpressible comforts, when once our situation is
    compared with the ancient Saints, as followers of the Lamb of
    God who has taken away our sins by His own blood, we are bound
    to rejoice and give thanks to Him always. Since the organization
    of the Church of Christ, or the Church of the Latter-day Saints,
    on the 6th of April, 1830, we have had the satisfaction of
    witnessing the spread of the truth into various parts of our land,
    notwithstanding its enemies have exerted their unceasing diligence
    to stop its course and prevent its progress; though evil and
    designing men have combined to destroy the innocent, because their
    own craft was in danger; and these have been assisted in raising
    mobs and circulating falsehoods by a miserable set of apostates who
    have for wicked and unbecoming conduct been expelled from the body
    of which they were once members, yet the glorious Gospel in its
    fullness is spreading and daily gaining converts; and our prayer to
    God is, that it may continue, and numbers be added of such as shall
    be eternally saved.

    The Messiah's kingdom on earth is of that kind of government, that
    there has always been numerous apostates, for the reason that it
    admits of no sins unrepented of without excluding the individual
    from its fellowship. Our Lord said, "Strive to enter in at the
    straight gate; for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and
    shall not be able." And again, many are called, but few are chosen.
    Paul said to the elders of the  Church at Ephesus, after he
    had labored three years with them, that he knew that some of their
    own number would turn away from the faith, and seek to lead away
    disciples after them. None, we presume, in this generation will
    pretend that he has the experience of Paul in building up the
    Church of Christ; and yet, after his departure from the Church at
    Ephesus, many, even of the elders, turned away from the truth;
    and what is almost always the case, sought to lead away disciples
    after them. Strange as it may appear at first thought, yet it is
    no less strange than true, that notwithstanding all the professed
    determination to live godly, apostates after turning from the faith
    of Christ, unless they have speedily repented, have sooner or
    later fallen into the snares of the wicked one, and have been left
    destitute of the Spirit of God, to manifest their wickedness in the
    eyes of multitudes. From apostates the faithful have received the
    severest persecutions. Judas was rebuked and immediately betrayed
    his Lord into the hands of His enemies, because Satan entered into
    him. There is a superior intelligence bestowed upon such as obeyed
    the Gospel with full purpose of heart, which, if sinned against,
    the apostate is left naked and destitute of the Spirit of God, and
    he is, in truth, nigh unto cursing, and his end is to be burned.
    When once that light which was in them is taken from them they
    become as much darkened as they were previously enlightened, and
    then, no marvel, if all their power should be enlisted against
    the truth, and they, Judas like, seek the destruction of those
    who were their greatest benefactors. What nearer friend on earth,
    or in heaven, had Judas than the Savior? And his first object was
    to destroy Him. Who, among all the Saints in these last days, can
    consider himself as good as our Lord? Who is as perfect? Who is
    as pure? Who is as holy as He was? Are they to be found? He never
    transgressed or broke a commandment or law of heaven--no deceit was
    in His mouth, neither was guile found in His heart. And yet one
    that ate with Him, who had often drunk of the same cup, was the
    first to lift up his heel against Him. Where is one like Christ? He
    cannot be found on earth. Then why should His followers complain,
    if from those whom they once called brethren, and considered as
    standing in the nearest relation in the everlasting covenant they
    should receive persecution? From what source emanated the principle
    which has ever been manifested by apostates from the true Church to
    persecute with double diligence, and seek with double perseverance,
    to destroy those whom they once professed to love, with whom they
    once communed, and with whom they once covenanted to strive with
    every power in righteousness to obtain the rest of God? Perhaps our
    brethren will say the same that caused Satan to seek to overthrow
    the kingdom of God, because he himself was evil, and God's kingdom
    is holy. * * * * * * * * * *

    The great plan of salvation is a theme which ought to occupy our
    strict attention, and be regarded as one of heaven's best gifts to
    mankind. No consideration whatever ought to deter us from showing
    ourselves approved in the sight of God, according to His divine
    requirement. Men not unfrequently forget that they are dependent
    upon  heaven for every blessing which they are permitted to
    enjoy, and that for every opportunity granted them they are to
    give an account. You know, brethren, that when the Master in the
    Savior's parable of the stewards called his servants before him
    he gave them several talents to improve on while he should tarry
    abroad for a little season, and when he returned he called for
    an accounting. So it is now. Our Master is absent only for a
    little season, and at the end of it He will call each to render
    an account; and where the five talents were bestowed, ten will be
    required; and he that has made no improvement will be cast out as
    an unprofitable servant, while the faithful will enjoy everlasting
    honors. Therefore we earnestly implore the grace of our Father
    to rest upon you, through Jesus Christ His Son, that you may not
    faint in the hour of temptation, nor be overcome in the time of
    persecution.

[Sidenote: Prayer of the First Presidency.]

On the evening of the 28th of January, Brothers Oliver Cowdery, Frederick G. Williams, and myself, being agreed, bowed before the Lord, and united in prayer, that God would continue to deliver me and my brethren from "Doctor" Hurlburt, [3]that he may not prevail against us in the law-suit that is pending; and also that God would soften the hearts of Eden Smith,--- Jones, ----- Lowd,--- Lyman, and also Mr. Bardsley, that they might obey the Gospel; or if they would not repent, that the Lord would send faithful Saints to purchase their farms, that this Stake may be strengthened, and its borders enlarged. O Lord, grant it for Christ's sake. Amen.

January 31.--It is my prayer to the Lord that three thousand subscribers may be added to the Star in the time of three years.

[Sidenote: Preparations for Returning Exiles to Zion.]

February 1.--Every expedient preparation was making by the Church in Kirtland, and Clay county, to have those who have been driven from their possessions in Jackson county, returned.

[Sidenote: Conference of High Priests and Elders at New Portage.]

February 9.--A conference of High Priests, Elders and officers of the Church of Christ in New Portage, Medina county, Ohio, was called at the house of Brother  Kirlins, which I attended. It had been suggested that Elder Rigdon might remove from Kirtland to New Portage; but after listening to the proceedings of a previous conference in Portage, from Brothers Palmer and Bosworth, it was decided that Elder Rigdon should not remove; and that the brethren in New Portage should assist all in their power to build the Lord's House in Kirtland; and that the brethren erect only a temporary or cheap place for meeting in Portage, as that was not to be established as a Stake of Zion at present; and that course would enable them to do more for the House in Kirtland.

At a council of the High Priests and Elders, (Orson Hyde, clerk,) at my house in Kirtland, on the evening of the 12th of February, I remarked that I should endeavor to set before the council the dignity of the office which had been conferred on me by the ministering of the angel of God, by His own voice, and by the voice of this Church; that I had never set before any council in all the order in which it ought to be conducted, which, perhaps, has deprived the councils of some or many blessings.

And I continued and said, no man is capable of judging a matter, in council, unless his own heart is pure; and that we are frequently so filled with prejudice, or have a beam in our own eye, that we are not capable of passing right decisions.

[Sidenote: Order in Ancient Councils.]

But to return to the subject of order; in ancient days councils were conducted with such strict propriety, that no one was allowed to whisper, be weary, leave the room, or get uneasy in the least, until the voice of the Lord, by revelation, or the voice of the council by the Spirit, was obtained, which has not been observed in this Church to the present time. It was understood in ancient days, that if one man could stay in council, another could; and if the president could spend his time, the members could also; but in our councils, generally, one will be uneasy, another asleep; one praying,  another not; one's mind on the business of the council, and another thinking on something else.

[Sidenote: Responsibility of Those who sit in Judgment.]

Our acts are recorded, and at a future day they will be laid before us, and if we should fail to judge right and injure our fellow-beings, they may there, perhaps, condemn us; there they are of great consequence, and to me the consequence appears to be of force, beyond anything which I am able to express. Ask yourselves, brethren, how much you have exercised yourselves in prayer since you heard of this council; and if you are now prepared to sit in council upon the soul of your brother.

[Sidenote: The Prophet's Predicted Triumph.]

I then gave a relation of my situation at the time I obtained the record (Book of Mormon), the persecutions I met with, and prophesied that I would stand and shine like the sun in the firmament, when my enemies and the gainsayers of my testimony shall be put down and cut off, and their names blotted out from among men.

[Sidenote: Trial of Martin Harris.]

The council proceeded to investigate certain charges presented by Elder Rigdon against Martin Harris; one was, that he told A. C. Russell, Esq., that Joseph drank too much liquor when he was translating the Book of Mormon; and that he wrestled with many men and threw them; and that he (Harris) exalted himself above Joseph, in that he said, "Brother Joseph knew not the contents of the Book of Mormon, until it was translated, but that he himself knew all about it before it was translated."

Brother Harris did not tell Esq. Russell that Brother Joseph drank too much liquor while translating the Book of Mormon, but this thing occurred previous to the translating of the Book; he confessed that his mind was darkened, and that he had said many things inadvertently, calculated to wound the feelings of his brethren, and promised to do better. The council forgave him, with much good advice.

[Sidenote: Trial of Leonard Rich.]

Brother Leonard Rich was called in question for transgressing the Word of Wisdom, and for selling the revelations at an extortionate price, while he was journeying east with Father Lyons, Brother Rich confessed, and the council forgave him upon his promising to do better and reform his life.

Footnotes

1. Of these days in Kirtland Elder Heber C. Kimball in his Journal says, "The Church was in a state of poverty and distress, a consequence of which it appeared almost impossible that the commandments could be fulfilled [relative to the Kirtland Temple]; at the same time our enemies were raging and threatening destruction upon us, and we had to guard ourselves night after night, and for weeks were not permitted to take off our clothes, and were obliged to lay with our fire locks in our arms."--Times and Seasons, vol. 6, p. 771.

2. The use of "abroad" here does not have reference to foreign lands, but means those who were scattered from their homes in Missouri.

This communication of the Elders of the Church at Kirtland, to their brethren scattered abroad, does not appear in the History of the Prophet, but is found in the Evening and Morning Star, vol. 2, Nos. 17, 18, 19. The document is evidently dictated by the Prophet and is of such doctrinal importance that it is thought proper to give it place in the body of the Church History. It treats of the origin of law, human and divine, and man's relations thereto; the antiquity of the Gospel; the virtue of the atonement of Christ; the importance of men in this age being in communication with God through the means of revelation; the bitterness and fate of apostates. The document is a complete refutation of the charges of bad motives behind the conduct of the saints. No man, I believe, can read this document and then believe that those who issued it were evil disposed men bent on deceiving mankind.

The late President Daniel H. Wells was wont to say that some time previous to his joining the Church he was satisfied that Joseph Smith was an inspired man because of his intuitive knowledge of the fundamental principles of law--a view that will be confirmed by a perusal of the parts of this communication which deal with the origin, force, and relations of law.

3. The case of Joseph Smith vs. "Doctor" Hurlburt did not come to trial until the 4th of April, 1834, when the "Doctor" was bound over to keep the peace.
