The Lectures on Faith--Twelve Apostles Chosen and Ordained.

[Sidenote: The Lectures on Theology.]

January, 1835.--During the month of January, I was engaged in the school of the Elders, and in preparing the lectures on theology for publication in the book of Doctrine and Covenants, which the committee appointed last September were now compiling.

[Sidenote: Brethren Moving West Halted at Kirtland.]

Certain brethren from Bolton, New York, came for counsel, relative to their proceeding to the West; and the High Council assembled on the 18th. After a long investigation I decided that Elder Tanner assist with his might to build up the cause by tarrying in Kirtland; which decision received the unanimous vote of the council.

The school of the Elders will continue, and arrangements were also made, according to the revelation of June, 1829, [1] for choosing "the Twelve Apostles" to be especial messengers to bear the Gospel among the nations.

On the Sabbath previous to the 14th of February, (February 8th) Brothers Joseph and Brigham Young came to my house after meeting, and sung for me; the Spirit of the Lord was poured out upon us, and I told them I wanted to see those brethren together, who went up to Zion in the camp, the previous summer, for I had a  blessing for them; and a meeting was appointed of which the following are the minutes: [2].

    Minutes of the Meetings at which the Twelve Apostles were Chosen,
    Ordained and Instructed.

    Kirtland, February 14, 1835.--This day, a meeting was called of
    those who journeyed last season to Zion for the purpose of laying
    the foundation of its redemption, together with as many other of
    the brethren and sisters as were disposed to attend.

    President Joseph Smith, Jun., presiding, read the 15th chapter of
    John, and said: Let us endeavor to solemnize our minds that we may
    receive a blessing, by calling on the Lord. After an appropriate
    and  affecting prayer, the brethren who went to Zion [in
    Zion's camp] were requested to take their seats together in a part
    of the house by themselves.

    President Smith then stated that the meeting had been called,
    because God had commanded it; and it was made known to him by
    vision [3] and by the Holy Spirit. He then gave a relation of
    some of the circumstances attending while journeying to Zion--our
    trials, sufferings; and said God had not designed all this for
    nothing, but He had it in remembrance yet; [4] and it was the will
    of God that those who went Zion, with a determination to lay down
    their lives, if necessary, should be ordained to the ministry, and
    go forth to prune the vineyard for the last time, or the coming of
    the Lord, which was nigh--even fifty-six years should wind up the
    scene.

    The president also said many things; such as the weak things, even
    the smallest and weakest among us, shall be powerful and mighty,
    and great things shall be accomplished by you from this hour; and
    you shall begin to feel the whisperings of the Spirit of God; and
    the work of God shall begin to break forth from this time; and you
    shall be endowed with power from on high.

    President then called up all those who went to Zion, if they were
    agreed with him in the statement which he had made, to arise; and
    they all arose and stood upon their feet.

    He then called upon the remainder of the congregation, to know if
    they also sanctioned the move, and they all raised their right hand.

     The names of those who went to Zion in the camp are as
    follows: [5]

    Hazen Aldrich, Alonzo Champlin, Joseph S. Allen, Jacob Chapman,
    Isaac Allred, William Cherry, James Allred, John M. Chidester,
    Martin Allred, Alden Childs, Milo Andrus, Nathaniel Childs, Solomon
    Angel, Stephen Childs, Allen A. Avery, Albert Clements, Almon W.
    Babbitt, Thomas Colborn, Alexander Badlam, Alanson Colby, Samuel
    Baker, Zera S. Cole, Nathan Bennett Baldwin, Zebedee Coltrin, Elam
    Barber, Libeus T. Coon, Israel Barlow, Horace Cowan, Lorenzo D.
    Barnes, Lyman Curtis, Edson Barney, Mecham Curtis, Royal Barney,
    Solomon W. Denton, Henry Benner, Peter Doff, Samuel Bent, David
    D. Dort, Hiram Backman, John Duncan, Lorenzo Booth, James Dunn,
    George W. Brooks, Philemon Duzette, Albert Brown, Philip Ettleman,
    Harry Brown, Bradford W. Elliot, Samuel Brown, David Elliot, John
    Brownell, David Evans, Peter Buchanan, Asa Field, Alden Burdick,
    Edmund Fisher, Harrison Burgess, Alfred Fisk, David Byur, Hezekiah
    Fisk, William F. Cahoon, Elijah Fordham, John Carpenter, George
    Fordham, John S. Carter, Frederick Forney, Daniel Cathcart,
    John Fossett, Solon Foster, James Foster, Jacob Gates, William
    S. Ivie, Benjamin Gifford, William Jessop,  Levi Gifford,
    Luke S. Johnson, Sherman Gilbert, Lyman E. Johnson, Tru Glidden,
    Noah Johnson, Dean C. Gould, Seth Johnson, Jedediah M. Grant,
    Isaac Jones, Addison Green, Levi Jones, Michael Griffith, Charles
    Kelley, Everett Griswold, Heber C. Kimball, Elisha Groves, Samuel
    Kingsley, Joseph Hancock, Dennis Lake, Levi W. Hancock, Jesse
    B. Lawson, Joseph Harmon, L. S. Lewis, Henry Herriman, Josiah
    Littlefield, Martin Harris, Lyman O. Littlefield, Joseph Hartshorn,
    Waldo Littlefield, Thomas Hayes, Amasa M. Lyman, Nelson Higgins,
    Moses Martin, Seth Hitchcock, Edward W. Marvin, Amos Hogers,
    Reuben McBride, Chandler Holbrook, Robert McCord, Joseph Holbrook,
    Eleazer Miller, Milton Holmes, John Miller, Osmon Houghton, Justin
    Morse, Marshal Hubbard, John Murdock, Solomon Humphrey, Freeman
    Nickerson, Joseph Huntsman, Levi S. Nickerson, John Hustin, Uriah
    C. Nickerson, Elias Hutchins, Joseph Nicholas, Heman T. Hyde,
    Joseph B. Noble, Orson Hyde, Ur. North, Warren S. Ingalls, Roger
    Orton, Edward Ivie, John D. Parker, James R. Ivie, Warren Parrish,
    John A. Ivie, Orson Pratt, William D. Pratt, Charles C. Rich,
    Leonard Rich, Samuel Thompson, Darwin Richardson, Wm. P. Tippetts,
    Burr Riggs, Tinney Thomas, Harpin Riggs, Nelson Tribbs, Nathaniel
    Riggs, Joel Vaughn, Milcher Riley, Salmon Warner, Alanson Ripley,
    William Weden,  Lewis Robbins, Elias Strong, Erastus Rudd,
    John Joshua Tanner, William Henry Sagers, Ezra Thayer, Wilkins
    Jenkins Salisbury, Nathan Tanner, Henry Sherman, James L. Thompson,
    Lyman Sherman, Elias Wells, Henry Shibley, Alexander Whitesides,
    Cyrus Smalling, Andrew W. Whitlock, Avery Smith, Lyman Wight,
    George A. Smith, Eber Wilcox, Hyrum Smith, Sylvester B. Wilkinson,
    Jackson Smith, Frederick G. Williams, Zechariah B. Smith, Alonzo
    Winchester, Joseph Smith, Benjamin Winchester, Lyman Smith,
    Lupton Winchester, Sylvester Smith, Alvin Winegar, William Smith,
    Samuel Winegar, Willard Snow, Hiram Winter, Harvey Stanley, Henry
    Wissmiller, Hyrum Stratton, Wilford Woodruff, Zerubbabel Snow,
    Brigham Young, Daniel Stephens, Joseph Young.

    Women in Zion's Camp.

    Charlotte Alvord, Mary Chidester, Sophronia Curtis, Diana Drake,
    Mary Snow Gates, Eunice Holbrook, Nancy Lambson Holbrook, Mrs.
    Houghton, Betsy Parrish, --------Ripley, Ada Clements.

    Children in Zion's Camp.

    Diana Holbrook, daughter of Chandler Holbrook, Sarah Lucretia
    Holbrook, daughter of Joseph Holbrook, Charlotte Holbrook, daughter
    of Joseph Holbrook, --------------------, daughter of Alvin
    Winegar, Sarah Pulsipher, daughter of Zera Pulsipher, John P.
    Chidester, son of John M. Chidester, Eunice Chidester, daughter of
    John M. Chidester.

    President Joseph Smith, Jun., after making many remarks on the
    subject of choosing the Twelve, wanted an expression from the
    brethren, if they would be satisfied to have the Spirit of the Lord
    dictate in the  choice of the Elders to be Apostles; whereupon
    all the Elders present expressed their anxious desire to have it so.

    A hymn was then sung, "Hark, listen to the trumpeters." [6]
    President Hyrum Smith prayed, and meeting was dismissed for one
    hour.

    Assembled pursuant to adjournment, and commenced with prayer.

    President Joseph Smith, Jun., said that the first business of the
    meeting was, for the Three Witnesses [7] of the Book of Mormon, to
    pray each  one, and then proceed to choose twelve men from the
    Church, as Apostles, to go to all nations, kindreds, tongues, and
    people.

    The Three Witnesses, viz., Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and
    Martin Harris, united in prayer.

    These Three Witnesses were then blessed by the laying on of the
    hands of the Presidency.

    The Witnesses then, according to a former commandment, proceeded to
    make choice of the Twelve. Their names are as follows:

    1. Lyman E. Johnson, 2. Brigham Young, 3. Heber C. Kimball 4.
    Orson Hyde, 5. David W. Patten, 6. Luke S. Johnson, 7. William E.
    M'Lellin, 8. John F. Boynton, 9. Orson Pratt,10. William Smith, 11.
    Thomas P. Marsh, 12. Parley P. Pratt.

    Lyman E. Johnson, Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball came forward;
    and the Three Witnesses laid their hands upon each one's head and
    prayed, separately. [8]

     The blessing of Lyman E. Johnson was, in the name of Jesus
    Christ, that he should bear the tidings of salvation to nations,
    tongues, and people, until the utmost corners of the earth shall
    hear the tidings; and that he shall be a witness of the things of
    God to nations and tongues, and that holy angels shall administer
    to him occasionally; and that no power of the enemy shall prevent
    him from going forth and doing the work of the Lord; and that he
    shall live until the gathering is accomplished, according to the
    holy prophets; and he shall be like unto Enoch; and his faith
    shall be like unto his; and he shall be called great among all the
    living; and Satan shall tremble before him; and he shall see the
    Savior come and stand upon the earth with power and great glory.

    The blessing of Brigham Young was that he should be strong in
    body, that he might go forth and gather the elect, preparatory
    to the great day of the coming of the Lord; and that he might be
    strong and mighty, declaring the tidings to nations that know not
    God; that he may add ten talents; that he may come to Zion with
    many sheaves. He shall go forth from land and from sea to sea; and
    shall behold heavenly messengers going forth; and his life shall
    be prolonged; and the Holy  Priesthood is conferred on him,
    that he may do wonders in the name of Jesus; that he may cast out
    devils, heal the sick, raise the dead, open the eyes of the blind,
    go forth from land to land and from sea to sea; and that heathen
    nations shall even call him God himself, if he do not rebuke them.

    Heber C. Kimball's blessing was, in substance, that he shall be
    made like unto those who have been blessed before him; and be
    favored with the same blessing. That he might receive visions; the
    ministration of angels, and hear their voice; and even come into
    the presence of God; that many millions may be converted by his
    instrumentality; that angels may waft him from place to place, and
    that he may stand unto the coming of our Lord, and receive a crown
    in the Kingdom of our God; that he be made acquainted with the day
    when Christ shall come; that he shall be made perfect in faith;
    and that the deaf shall hear, the lame shall walk, the blind shall
    see, and greater things than these shall he do; that he shall have
    boldness of speech before the nations, and great power.

    A hymn was then sung, "Glorious things of thee are spoken," etc.;
    and the congregation was dismissed by President Joseph Smith, Jun.

Sunday, February 15.--The congregation again assembled.

President Cowdery made some observations upon the nature of the meeting, calling upon the Lord for his assistance; after which a number of certificates from brethren that had recently returned from Zion were read and accepted.

President Cowdery then called forward Orson Hyde, David W. Patten and Luke Johnson, and proceeded to their ordinations and blessings.

    Orson Hyde's Blessing:--Oliver Cowdery called upon the Lord to
    smile upon him; that his faith be made perfect, and that the
    blessings pronounced may be realized; that he be made mighty, and
    be endued with powers from on high, and go forth to the nations
    of the earth to proclaim the Gospel, that he may escape all the
    pollutions of the world; that the angels shall uphold him; and
    that he shall go forth according to the commandment, both to Jew
    and Gentile, and to all nations, kingdoms and tongues; that all
    who hear his voice shall acknowledge him to be a servant of God;
    that he shall be equal with his brethren in holding the keys of the
    kingdom; that he may stand on the earth and bring souls till Christ
    comes. We know that he loves Thee, O, Lord, and may this Thy
    servant be able to walk through pestilence and not be harmed; and
    the powers of darkness have no ascendency over him; may he have
    power to smite the earth with pestilence; to divide waters, and
    lead through the Saints; may he go from land to land and from sea
    to sea, and may he be like one of the three Nephites.

    David W. Patten's blessing:--O God, give this Thy servant, a
    knowledge of Thy will; may he be like one of old, who bore
    testimony of Jesus; may he be a new man from this day forth.
    He shall be equal with his brethren, the Twelve, and have the
    qualifications of the prophets before him. May his body be strong
    and never be weary; may he walk and not faint. May he have power
    over all diseases, and faith according to his desires; may the
    heavens be opened upon him speedily; that he may bear testimony
    from knowledge; that he may go to nations and isles afar off.
    May he have a knowledge of the things of the Kingdom, from the
    beginning, and be able to tear down priestcraft like a lion. May he
    have power to smite his enemies before him, with utter destruction.
    May he continue till the Lord comes. O Father, we seal these
    blessings upon him. Even so. Amen.

    Luke S. Johnson's Blessing:--Our Father in heaven, look down in
    mercy upon us, and upon this Thy servant, whom we ordain to the
    ministry of the Twelve. He shall be prepared and preserved, and be
    like those we have blessed before him. The nations shall tremble
    before him. He shall hear the voice of God; he shall comfort the
    hearts of the Saints always. The angels shall bear him up till
    he shall finish his ministry. He shall be delivered, and come
    forth with Israel. He shall bear testimony to the kings of the
    earth, and hold communion with the Father, with the Son, and with
    the general assembly and Church of the first-born. If cast into
    prison, he shall be able to comfort the hearts of his comrades. His
    tongue shall be loosed, and he shall have power to lead many to
    Zion, and sit down with them; the Ancient of Days shall pronounce
    this blessing, that he has been faithful; he shall have strength,
    wisdom, and power; he shall go among the covenant people and speak
    all their tongues where he shall go. All these blessings we confirm
    upon him in the name of Jesus. Amen.

    William E. M'Lellin's Blessing:--In the name of the Lord, wisdom
    and intelligence shall be poured out upon him, to enable him to
    perform the great work that is incumbent upon him: that he may be
    spared until the Saints are gathered; that he may stand before
    kings and rulers to bear testimony, and be upheld by holy angels;
    and the nations of the earth shall acknowledge that God has sent
    him; he shall have power to overcome his enemies; and his life
    shall be spared in the midst of pestilence and destruction, and in
    the midst of his enemies. He shall be a  prince and savior to
    God's people. The tempter shall not overcome him, nor his enemies
    prevail against him; the heavens shall be opened unto him, as unto
    men in days of old. He shall be mighty in the hands of God, and
    shall convince thousands that God has sent him; and his days may be
    prolonged until the coming of the Son of Man. He shall be wafted
    as on eagles' wings, from country to country, and from people to
    people; and be able to do wonders in the midst of this generation.
    Even so. Amen.

    John F. Boynton's Blessing:--Thou hast prevailed and thou shalt
    prevail, and thou shalt declare the Gospel unto many nations. Thou
    shalt be made mighty before God; and although thou shalt be cast
    out from the face of men, yet thou shalt have power to prevail.
    Thou shalt lead the elect triumphantly to the places of refuge;
    thou shalt be like the brethren who have been blessed before thee.
    Thou shalt stand in that day of calamity when the wicked shall be
    consumed, and present unto the Father, spotless, the fruits of thy
    labor. Thou shalt overcome all the evils that are in the world;
    thou shalt have wisdom to put to silence all the wisdom of the
    wise; and thou shalt see the face of thy Redeemer in the flesh.
    These blessings are pronounced and sealed upon thee. Even so. Amen.

    William Smith's Blessing:--We pray that he may be purified in
    heart; that he may have communion with God; that he may be equal
    with his brethren in holding the keys of this ministry; that he may
    be kept and be instrumental in leading Israel forth, that he may be
    delivered from the hands of those who seek to destroy him; that he
    may be enabled to bear testimony to the nations that Jesus lives;
    that he may stand in the midst of pestilence and destruction.
    He shall be mighty in the hands of God, in bringing about the
    restoration of Israel. The nations shall rejoice at the greatness
    of the gifts which God has bestowed upon him: that his tongue shall
    be loosed; he shall have power to do great things in the name of
    Jesus. He shall be preserved and remain on the earth, until Christ
    shall come to take vengeance on the wicked. Adjourned.

    Kirtland, February 21st, 1835: Pursuant to adjournment, a meeting
    of the Church was held; and after prayer by President Oliver
    Cowdery to the congregation, Elder Parley P. Pratt was called to
    the stand, and ordained one of the Twelve, by President Joseph
    Smith, Jun., David Whitmer, and Oliver Cowdery. O Lord, smile from
    heaven upon this thy servant; forgive his sins, sanctify his heart,
    and prepare him to receive the blessing. Increase his love for
    Thee and for Thy cause; increase his intelligence; communicate to
    him all that wisdom, that prudence, and that understanding, which
    he needs as a minister of righteousness and to magnify  the
    Apostleship whereunto he is called. May a double portion of that
    Spirit which was communicated to the disciples of our Lord and
    Savior to lead them unto all truth, rest down upon him, and go with
    him where he goes, that nothing shall prevail against him, that he
    may be delivered from prisons, from the power of his enemies, and
    from the adversary of all righteousness. May he be able to mount up
    on wings as an eagle, to run and be weary, to walk and not faint;
    may he have great wisdom and intelligence, and be able to lead
    thine elect through this thorny maze. Let sickness and death have
    no power over him; let him be equal with his brethren in bringing
    many sons and daughters to glory, and many nations to a knowledge
    of the truth. Great blessings shall rest upon thee; thy faith
    shall increase; thou shalt have great power to prevail. The veil
    of the heavens shall be rolled up; thou shalt be permitted to gaze
    within it, and receive thee instructions from on high. No arm that
    is formed and lifted against thee shall prosper; no power shall
    prevail; for thou shalt have power with God, and shall proclaim His
    Gospel. Thou wilt be afflicted, but thou shalt be delivered, and
    conquer all thy foes. Thine office shall never be taken from thee;
    thou shalt be called great; angels shall carry thee from place to
    place. Thy sins are forgiven, and thy name written in the Lamb's
    Book of Life. Even so. Amen.

    Apostolic Charge given by Oliver Cowdery to Parley P. Pratt.

    I am aware, dear Brother, that the mind naturally claims something
    new; but the same thing rehearsed frequently profits us. You
    will have the same difficulties to encounter in fulfilling this
    ministry, that the ancient Apostle had. You have enlisted in a
    cause that requires your whole attention; you ought, therefore,
    to count the cost; and to become a polished shaft, you must be
    sensible, requires the labor of years; and your station requires a
    perfect polish. It is required of you not merely to travel a few
    miles in the country, but in distant countries: you must endure
    much labor, much toil, and many privations, to become perfectly
    polished. Your calling is not like that of the husbandman, to
    cultivate a stinted portion of the planet on which we dwell, and
    when heaven has given the former and the latter rain, and mellow
    autumn ripened his fruit, gathers it in, and congratulates himself
    for a season in the intermission of his toils, while he anticipates
    his winter evenings of relaxation and fire-side enjoyments. But,
    dear Brother, it is far otherwise with you. Your labor must be
    incessant, and your toil great; you must go forth and labor till
    the great work is done. It will require a series of years to
    accomplish it; but you will have this pleasing consolation, that
    your heavenly Father requires it; the field is His; the work is
    His; and He will not  only cheer you, animate you, and buoy
    you up in your pilgrimage, in your arduous toils; but when your
    work is done, and your labor over, He will take you unto Himself.
    But before this consummation of your felicity, bring your mind to
    bear upon what will be imperiously required of you to accomplish,
    viz., the great work that lies before you. Count well the cost. You
    have read of the persecutions and trials of ancient days. Has not
    bitter experience taught you that they are the same now? You will
    be dragged before the authorities for the religion you profess;
    and it were better not to set out, than to start and look back,
    or shrink when dangers thicken around you, or appalling death
    stares you in the face. I have spoken these things, dear brother,
    because I have seen them in visions. There are strong dungeons and
    gloomy prisons for you. These should not appall you. You must be
    called a good or a bad man. The ancients passed through the same
    experience. They had this testimony--that they had seen the Savior
    after He rose from the dead. You must bear the same testimony; or
    your mission, your labor, your toil, will be in vain. You must
    bear the same testimony, that there is but one God, one Mediator;
    he that hath seen Him, will know Him, and testify of Him. Beware
    of pride; beware of evil; shun the very appearance of it; for the
    time is coming when, if you do not give heed to these things, you
    will have a fall. Among your many afflictions, you will have many
    blessings also; but you must pass through many afflictions, in
    order to receive the glory that is in reserve for you. You will
    meet thousands, who, when they first see you, will know nothing
    about salvation by Jesus Christ; you shall see a nation born in a
    day. A great work lies before you, and the time is near when you
    must bid farewell to your native land, cross the mighty deep, and
    sound the tocsin of alarm to other nations, kindreds, tongues, and
    people. Remember that all your hopes of deliverance from danger and
    from death, will rest upon your faithfulness to God; in His cause,
    you must necessarily serve Him with a perfect heart and a willing
    mind. Avoid strife and vain glory; think not yourself better than
    your brethren, but pray for them, as well as for yourself; and if
    you are faithful, great will be your blessings; but if you are not,
    your stewardship will be taken from you, and another appointed in
    your stead.

    Elder Pratt gave his hand to President Oliver Cowdrey, and said he
    had received ordination, and should fulfill the ministry according
    to the grace given him; to which the President replied, Go forth,
    and angels shall bear thee up; and thou shalt come forth at the
    last day, bringing many with thee.

    Tomas B. Marsh and Orson Pratt were absent on a mission.

    Elder Marsh returned to Kirtland on the 25th of April, and Elder
    Orson Pratt on the 26th, and received their ordinations and
    blessings,  which are recorded in this place, in connection
    with the ordinations and blessings of their brethren. [9]

    Thomas B. Marsh's Blessing by President Oliver Cowdery.--Dear
    Brother--You are to be a minister of righteousness, and to this
    ministry and apostleship you are now to be ordained; and may all
    temporal and spiritual blessings attend you. Your sins are forgiven
    you, and you are to go forth and preach the everlasting Gospel. You
    shall travel from kingdom to kingdom and from nation to nation.
    Angels shall bear thee up, and thou shalt be instrumental in
    bringing thousands of the redeemed of the Lord to Zion. Sealed by
    President David Whitmer. Even so. Amen

    Orson Pratt's Blessing.--Dear Brother--You are chosen and set
    apart, to be ordained to this apostleship and this ministry; you
    shall go forth and preach the Gospel, and do a mighty work. You
    shall be sustained; the Holy Spirit shall enlighten thy mind; thou
    shalt travel from nation to nation; the Lord God shall preserve
    thee, and return thee safe, with songs of everlasting joy upon thy
    head. Confirmed by President David Whitmer.

    General Charge to the Twelve.

    The following general charge was given to the Twelve by President
    Oliver Cowdery:--Dear Brethren--Previous to delivering the charge,
    I shall read a part of a revelation. It is known to you, that
    previous to the organization of this Church in 1830, the Lord
    gave revelations, or the Church could not have been organized.
    The people of this Church were weak in faith compared with the
    ancients. Those who embarked in this cause were desirous to know
    how the work was to be conducted.  They read many things in
    the Book of Mormon concerning their duty, and the way the great
    work ought to be done; but the mind of men are so constructed
    that they will not believe, without a testimony of seeing or
    hearing. The Lord gave us a revelation that, in process of time,
    there should be twelve men chosen to preach His Gospel to Jew and
    Gentile. Our minds have been on a constant stretch, to find who
    these twelve were; when the time should come we could not tell;
    but we sought the Lord by fasting and prayer to have our lives
    prolonged to see this day, to see you, and to take a retrospect
    of the difficulties through which we have passed; but having seen
    the day, it becomes my duty to deliver to you a charge; and first,
    a few remarks respecting your ministry. You have many revelations
    put into your hands--revelation to make you acquainted with the
    nature of your mission; you will have difficulties by reason of
    your visiting all the nations of the world. You will need wisdom in
    a tenfold proportion to what you have ever had; you will have to
    combat all the prejudices of all nations.

    He then read the revelation, [10] and said: Have you desired this
    ministry with all our hearts? If you have desired it you are called
    of God, not of man, to go into the world.

    He then read again, from the revelation, what the Lord said unto
    the Twelve. Brethren, you have had your duty presented in this
    revelation. You have been ordained to this holy Priesthood, you
    have received it from those who have the power and authority from
    an angel; you are to preach the Gospel to every nation. Should
    you in the least degree come short of your duty, great will be
    your condemnation; for the greater the calling the greater the
    transgression. I therefore warn you to cultivate great humility;
    for I know the pride of the human heart. Beware, lest the
    flatterers of the world lift you up; beware, lest your affections
    be captivated by worldly objects. Let your ministry be first.
    Remember, the souls of men are committed to your charge; and if you
    mind your calling, you shall always prosper.

    You have been indebted to other men, in the first instance, for
    evidence; on that you have acted; but it is necessary that you
    receive a testimony from heaven for yourselves; so that you can
    bear testimony to the truth of the Book of Mormon, and that you
    have seen the face of God. That is more than the testimony of an
    angel. When the proper time arrives, you shall be able to bear this
    testimony to the world. When you bear testimony that you have seen
    God, this testimony God will never suffer to fall, but will bear
    you out; although many will not give heed, yet others will. You
    will therefore see the necessity of getting this testimony from
    heaven.

    Never cease striving until you have seen God face to face.
    Strengthen your faith; cast off you doubts, your sins, and all your
    unbelief; and  nothing can prevent you from coming to God.
    Your ordination is not full and complete till God has laid His hand
    upon you. We require as much to qualify us as did those who have
    gone before us; God is the same. If the Savior in former days laid
    His hands upon His disciples, why not in latter days?

    With regard to superiority, I must make a few remarks. The ancient
    apostles sought to be great; but lest the seeds of discord be sown
    in this matter; understand particularly the voice of the Spirit on
    this occasion. God does not love you better or more than others.
    You are to contend for the faith once delivered to the saints.
    Jacob, you know, wrestled till he had obtained. It was by fervent
    prayer and diligent search that you have obtained the testimony you
    are now able to bear. You are as one; you are equal in bearing the
    keys of the Kingdom to all nations. You are called to preach the
    Gospel of the Son of God to the nations of the earth; it is the
    will of your heavenly Father, that you proclaim His Gospel to the
    ends of the earth and the islands of the sea.

    Be zealous to save souls. The soul of one man is as precious as
    the soul of another. You are to bear this message to those who
    consider themselves wise; and such may persecute you--they may
    seek your life. The adversary has always sought the life of the
    servants of God; you are therefore to be prepared at all times to
    make a sacrifice of your lives, should God require them in the
    advancement and building up of His cause. Murmur not at God. Be
    always prayerful; be always watchful. You will bear with me while I
    relieve the feelings of my heart. We shall not see another day like
    this; the time has fully come--the voice of the Spirit has come--to
    set these men apart.

    You will see the time when you will desire to see such a day as
    this, and you will not see it. Every heart wishes you peace and
    prosperity, but the scene with you will inevitably change. Let no
    man take your bishopric, and beware that you lose not your crowns.
    It will require your whole souls, it will require courage like
    Enoch's.

    The time is near when you will be in the midst of congregations who
    will gnash their teeth upon you. The Gospel must roll forth, and
    it will until it fills the whole earth. Did I say congregations
    would gnash their teeth at you? Yea, I say, nations will oppose
    you--you will be considered the worst of men. Be not discouraged at
    this. When God pours out His Spirit, the enemy will rage; but God,
    remember, is on your right hand, and on your left. A man, though he
    be considered the worst, has joy, who is conscious that he pleases
    God.

    The lives of those who proclaim the true Gospel will be in danger;
    this has been the case ever since the days of righteous Abel.
    The same opposition has been manifest whenever man came forward
    to publish  the Gospel. The time is coming when you will be
    considered the worst of men by many, and by some the best. The
    time is coming when you will be perfectly familiar with the things
    of God. This testimony will make those who do not believe your
    testimony, seek your lives; but there are whole nations who will
    receive your testimony. They will call you good men. Be not lifted
    up when ye are called good men. Remember you are young men, and ye
    shall be spared. I include the other three. Bear them in mind in
    your prayers--carry their cases to the throne of grace; although
    they are not present, yet you and they are equal. This appointment
    is calculated to create for you an affection for each other,
    stronger than death. You will travel to other nations; bear each
    other in mind. If one or more be cast into prisons, let the others
    pray for them, and deliver them by their prayers. Your lives shall
    be in great jeopardy; but the promise of God is, that you shall be
    delivered.

    Remember, you are not to go to their nations till you receive your
    endowments. Tarry at Kirtland until you are endowed with power from
    on high. You need a fountain of wisdom, knowledge and intelligence
    such as you never had. Relative to the endowment, I make a remark
    or two, that there may be no mistake. The world cannot receive
    the things of God. He can endow you without worldly pomp or
    great parade. He can give you that wisdom, that intelligence,
    and that power, which characterized the ancient saints, and now
    characterizes the inhabitants of the upper world.

    The greatness of your commission consists in this: you are to
    hold the keys of this ministry; your are to go to the nations
    afar off--nations that sit in darkness. The day is coming when
    the work of God must be done. Israel shall be gathered: the seed
    of Jacob shall be gathered from their long dispersion. There will
    be a feast to Israel, the elect of God. It is a sorrowful tale,
    but the Gospel must be preached, and God's ministers rejected:
    but where can Israel be found and receive your testimony, and not
    rejoice? Nowhere! The prophecies are full of great things that
    are to take place in the last days. After the elect are gathered
    out, destructions shall come on the inhabitants of the earth; all
    nations shall feel the wrath of God, after they have been warned
    by the Saints of the Most High. If you will not warn them, others
    will, and you will lose your crowns.

    You must prepare your minds to bid a long farewell to Kirtland,
    even till the great day come. You will see what you never expected
    to see; you will need the mind of Enoch or Elijah, and the faith
    of the brother of Jared; you must be prepared to walk by faith,
    however appalling the prospect to human view; you, and each of
    you, should feel the force of the imperious mandate, Son, go labor
    in my vineyard, and cheerfully receive what comes; but in the end
    you will stand while  others will fall. You have read in the
    revelation concerning ordination: Beware how you ordain, for all
    nations are not like this nation; they will willingly receive the
    ordinances at your hands to put you out of the way. There will be
    times when nothing but the angels of God can deliver you out of
    their hands.

    We appeal to your intelligence, we appeal to your understanding,
    that we have so far discharged our duty to you. We consider it one
    of the greatest condescensions of our heavenly Father, in pointing
    you out to us; you will be stewards over this ministry; you have a
    work to do that no other men can do; you must proclaim the Gospel
    in its simplicity and purity; and we commend you to God and the
    word of His grace. You have our best wishes, you have our most
    fervent prayers, that you may be able to bear this testimony, that
    you have seen the face of God. Therefore call upon Him in faith
    in mighty prayer till you prevail, for it is your duty and your
    privilege to bear such testimony for yourselves. We now exhort
    you to be faithful to fulfill your calling; there must be no lack
    here; you must fulfill in all things; and permit us to repeat, all
    nations have a claim on you; you are bound together as the Three
    Witnesses were; notwithstanding you can part and meet, and meet and
    part again, till your heads are silvered over with age.

    He then took them separately by the hand, and said, "Do you with
    full purpose of heart take part in this ministry, to proclaim the
    Gospel with all diligence, with these your brethren, according to
    the tenor and intent of the charge you have received?" Each of them
    answered in the affirmative. [11]

    Important Items of Instructions to the Twelve.

    Kirtland, February 27.

    This evening, nine of the Twelve, viz., Lyman Johnson, Brigham
    Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, David W. Patten, Luke Johnson,
    William E. M'Lellin, John F. Boynton, and William Smith, assembled
    at the house of President Joseph Smith, Jun., who was present, with
    Frederick G. Williams, Sidney Rigdon, Bishop Whitney, and three
    elders. Parley P. Pratt had gone to New Portage, and Orson Pratt
    and Thomas B. Marsh had not yet arrived to receive their ordination.

    After prayer by President Joseph Smith, Jun., he said, if we heard
    patiently, he could lay before the council an item which would be
    of importance. He had for himself, learned a fact by experience,
    which, on recollection, always gave him deep sorrow. It is a fact,
    if I now had in my possession, every decision which had been
    had upon  important items of doctrine and duties since the
    commencement of this work, I would not part with them for any sum
    of money; but we have neglected to take minutes of such things,
    thinking, perhaps, that they would never benefit us afterwards;
    which, if we had them now, would decide almost every point of
    doctrine which might be agitated. But this has been neglected, and
    now we cannot bear record to the Church and to the world, of the
    great and glorious manifestations which have been made to us with
    that degree of power and authority we otherwise could, if we now
    had these things to publish abroad.

    Since the Twelve are now chosen, I wish to tell them a course which
    they may pursue, and be benefited thereafter, in a point of light
    of which they are not now aware. If they will, every time they
    assemble, appoint a person to preside over them during the meeting,
    and one or more to keep a record of their proceedings, and on the
    decision of every question or item, be it what it may, let such
    decision be written, and such decision will forever remain upon
    record, and appear an item of covenant or doctrine. An item thus
    decided may appear, at the time, of little or no worth, but should
    it be published, and one of you lay hands on it after, you will
    find it of infinite worth, not only to your brethren, but it will
    be a feast to your own souls.

    Here is another important item. If you assemble from time to time,
    and proceed to discuss important questions, and pass decisions upon
    the same, and fail to note them down, by and by you will be driven
    to straits from which you will not be able to extricate yourselves,
    because you may be in a situation not to bring your faith to
    bear with sufficient perfection or power to obtain the desired
    information; or, perhaps, for neglecting to write these things when
    God had revealed them, not esteeming them of sufficient worth, the
    Spirit may withdraw and God may be angry; and there is, or was, a
    vast knowledge, of infinite importance, which is now lost. What
    was the cause of this? It came in consequence of slothfulness, or
    a neglect to appoint a man to occupy a few moments in writing all
    these decisions.

    Here let me prophesy. The time will come, when, if you neglect
    to do this thing, you will fall by the hands of unrighteous men.
    Were you to be brought before the authorities, and be accused of
    any crime or misdemeanor, and be as innocent as the angels of God,
    unless you can prove yourselves to have been somewhere else, your
    enemies will prevail against you; but if you can bring twelve men
    to testify that you were in a certain place, at that time, you will
    escape their hand. Now, if you will be careful to keep minutes of
    these things, as I have said, it will be one of the most important
    records ever seen; for all such decisions will ever after remain as
    items of doctrine and covenants.

    The council then expressed their approbation concerning the
    foregoing remarks of President Smith, and appointed Orson Hyde and
    William E. M'Lellin clerks of the meeting.

    President Smith proposed the following question: What importance is
    there attached to the calling of these Twelve Apostles, different
    from the other callings or officers of the Church?

    After the question was discussed by Councilors Patten, Young,
    Smith, and M'Lellin, President Joseph Smith, Jun., gave the
    following decision:

    They are the Twelve Apostles, who are called to the office of
    the Traveling High Council, who are to preside over the churches
    of the Saints, among the Gentiles, where there is a presidency
    established; and they are to travel and preach among the Gentiles,
    until the Lord shall command them to go to the Jews. They are
    to hold the keys of this ministry, to unlock the door of the
    Kingdom of heaven unto all nations, and to preach the Gospel to
    every creature. This is the power, authority, and virtue of their
    apostleship.

    Oliver Cowdery, Clerk.

    Report of the Kirtland School.

    Kirtland, Ohio, February 27, 1835.

    Having been requested by the trustees of the "Kirtland School"
    to give a sketch of the number of students who have attended the
    institution, and of their progress in the different sciences, I
    cheerfully comply with the request, having been an instructor
    therein from its commencement in December last.

    The school has been conducted under the immediate care and
    inspection of Joseph Smith, Jun., Frederick G. Williams, Sidney
    Rigdon, and Oliver Cowdery, trustees. When the school first
    commenced, we received into it both large and small, but in
    about three weeks the classes became so large and the house so
    crowded, that it was thought advisable to dismiss all the small
    students, and continue those only who wished to study penmanship,
    arithmetic, English grammar, and geography. Before we dismissed
    the small pupils, there were in all about one hundred and thirty
    who attended; since that time there have been upon an average
    about one hundred; the most of whom have received lectures upon
    English grammar; and for the last four weeks about seventy have
    been studying geography one-half the day, and grammar and writing
    the other part. Burdick's Arithmetic, Kirkham's Grammar, and
    Olney's Geography have been used, and Noah Webster's Dictionary
    as standard. Since the year 1827, I have taught school in five
    different states, and visited many schools in which I was not
    engaged as teacher; in none, I can say, with certainty, I have seen
    students make more rapid progress than in this.

    William E. M'Lellin.

Footnotes

1. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. 18.

2. Elder Joseph Young gives the following interesting account of the above meeting mentioned by the Prophet: "On the 8th day of February, in the year of our Lord 1835, the Prophet Joseph Smith called Elders Brigham and Joseph Young to the chamber of his residence, in Kirtland, Ohio, it being on the Sabbath day. After they were seated and he had made some preliminaries, he proceeded to relate a vision to these brethren, of the state and condition of those men who died in Zion's Camp, in Missouri. He said, 'Brethren, I have seen those men who died of the cholera in our camp; and the Lord knows, if I get a mansion as bright as theirs, I ask no more.' At this relation he wept, and for some time could not speak. When he had relieved himself of his feelings, in describing the vision, he resumed the conversation, and addressed himself to Brother Brigham Young. He said to him, 'I wish you to notify all the brethren living in the branches, within a reasonable distance from this place, to meet at a general conference on Saturday next. I shall then and there appoint twelve Special Witnesses, to open the door of the Gospel to foreign nations, and you,' said he (speaking to Brother Brigham), 'will be one of them.' He then proceeded to enlarge upon the duties of their calling. The interest that was taken on the occasion of this announcement, produced in the minds of the two Elders present a great sensation and many reflections; having previously notified Brother Brigham Young that he would be one of the Witnesses, but said nothing to Joseph, until he had exhausted much of his feelings in regard to the Twelve, which took up some little time. He then turned to Elder Joseph Young with quite an earnestness, as though the vision of his mind was extended still further, and addressing him, said, 'Brother Joseph, the Lord has made you President of the Seventies.' They had heard of Moses and seventy Elders of Israel, and of Jesus appointing 'other Seventies,' but had never heard of Twelve Apostles and of Seventies being called in this Church before. It was strange saying, 'The Lord has made you President of the Seventies,' as though it had already taken place, and it caused these brethren to marvel. The Prophet did not say that any others would be called to be the bearers of this message abroad, but the inference might be clearly drawn, that this was his meaning, from the language he used at the time. Agreeable to his request to Elder Brigham Young, the branches were all notified, and a meeting of the brethren in general conference was held in Kirtland, in the new school house under the printing office, on the following Saturday, February 14th, when the Twelve were appointed and ordained, and the conference adjourned for two weeks."--"History of the organization of the Seventies," by Joseph Young, Sen. (1878) pp. 1, 2.

3. This vision, in which the Prophet evidently saw the order of the Church organization, is several times alluded to by him. By reference to the note on page 181 it will be observed that President Smith there refers to the vision in such a manner as to lead one to believe that he saw that Brigham Young would be one of the Twelve, and Joseph Young President of the Seventies. He also refers to this vision in the revelation which appears in chapter 14; (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. 107, 93). Describing the order of the Seventies, he says: "And it is according to the vision, showing the order of the Seventy, that there shall be seven Presidents to preside over them, chosen out of the number of the Seventy." It was doubtless in this vision also that the Prophet saw the manner in which the Twelve should be chosen.

4. Elder Joseph Young in his "History of the Organization of the Seventies," (page 14) says that the following sentiment was delivered by the prophet Joseph Smith in an address to the Elders assembled in Kirtland soon after the Seventies were organized: "Brethren, some of you are angry with me, because you did not fight in Missouri; but let me tell you, God did not want you to fight. He could not organize His kingdom with twelve men to open the Gospel door to the nations of the earth, and with seventy men under their direction to follow in their tracks, unless He took them from a body of men who had offered their lives, and who had made as great a sacrifice as did Abraham. Now the Lord has got His Twelve and His Seventy, and there will be other quorums of Seventies called, who will make the sacrifice, and those who have not made their sacrifices and their offerings now, will make them hereafter."

5. A full list of those who sent up to Zion, including women and children, is here published in place of the partial list heretofore published in the History of Joseph Smith in the Millennial Star, volume 15, page 205.

6. The hymn was peculiarly suited to the occasion. Some of the stanzas follow: "Hark! listen to the trumpeters! They sound for volunteers; On Zion's bright and flowery mount Behold the officers. 'Their horses white, their armor bright, With courage bold they stand, Enlisting soldiers for their king, To march to Zion's land. We want no cowards in our bands, Who will our colors fly: We call for valiant-hearted men, Who're not afraid to die.' To see our armies on parade, How martial they appear! All armed and dressed in uniform, They look like men of war." They follow their great General. The great Eternal Lamb--His garments stained in his own blood--King Jesus is His name.

7. It was made known to the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery as early as June, 1829, that there would be Twelve Apostles chosen in this dispensation. In that revelation (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. 18:37) the Lord, addressing Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer, said: "And now, behold, I give unto you Oliver Cowdery, and also unto David Whitmer, that you shall search out the Twelve, who shall have the desires of which I have spoken." That is, desires to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ with full purpose of heart. It will be observed that in this revelation only two of the Three Witnesses are named, yet Martin Harris was associated with his fellow Witnesses in choosing and ordaining the Twelve Apostles. I think it was designed from the first that the Three Witnesses should choose the Twelve Special Witnesses of the name and mission of the Lord Jesus Christ--the Twelve Apostles; but at the time the revelation of June, 1829, was given, making known that Twelve Apostles would be called, and designating Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer as the ones to choose them, Martin Harris was out of favor with the Lord, and I suggest that it was for that reason doubtless that his name was omitted at that time. The evidence that Martin Harris was wavering about that time in his adherence to the Prophet and the work of God is found in Doctrine and Covenants, sec. 19, given in the month of June, 1829; in which revelation Martin Harris is sharply reproved for such wavering; for his covetousness; for hesitating to dispose of his land to meet the obligations entered into with the printer. He is commanded to repent of all these things, which, happily he did; but evidently not before the revelation concerning the choosing of the Twelve (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. 17) was given, for which reason doubtless his name is not there associated with those of his fellow Witnesses when they were designated to choose the Twelve Apostles. As already stated, however, in the vision in which the Prophet Joseph saw more perfectly the organization of the Church, and the manner in which the Twelve were to be chosen, he undoubtedly learned that it was in harmony with the order of things that the Three Witnesses should choose the Twelve Special Witnesses, and hence appointed Martin Harris to assist Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer in choosing the Apostles."

A word, by the way, in relation to the appropriateness of the Three Witnesses choosing the Twelve. In the revelation defining the special calling of the Twelve Apostles it is written: "The Twelve traveling counselors are called to be the Twelve Apostles, or special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world; thus differing from other officers in the Church in the duties of their calling. (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. 107:23). From this it appears that the special calling of the Twelve is to be Witnesses for the Lord Jesus Christ in all the world; hence it was preeminently proper that these Twelve Witnesses should be chosen by the Three very special Witnesses--witnesses of the Book of Mormon in particular, and of God's marvelous work in general.

8. Much interest has been manifested in the Church concerning who was mouth in ordaining respectively the brethren of the first Twelve. Most likely the Three Witnesses who ordained the Apostles were mouth in the order in which they have always stood as Witnesses, viz., Oliver Cowdery first, David Whitmer second, and Martin Harris third. If they officiated in this order then Oliver Cowdery ordained Lyman E. Johnson; David Whitmer, Brigham Young; and Martin Harris, Heber C. Kimball. It has been suggested by some that the Prophet Joseph may have joined the Three Witnesses in ordaining the Twelve, and in that event would be mouth first, and therefore ordained Lyman E. Johnson, leaving Oliver Cowdery to ordain Brigham Young, David Whitmer, Heber
C. Kimball. This, however, is not likely since but three of those who
had been chosen were called up at the above meeting to be ordained, one for each Witness. Besides, the express language of the minutes of the proceedings is, "The Three Witnesses laid their hands upon each one's head and prayed separately;" that is each ordained his man. The statement of Heber C. Kimball in the published extracts of his journal, also confirms this view of the matter. After giving the names of the Twelve men chosen he says: "After having expressed our feeling on this occasion, we were severally called into the stand, and there received our ordinations, under the hand of Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris. These brethren ordained us to the Apostleship, and predicted many things which should come to pass, that we should have power to heal the sick, cast out devils, raise the dead, give sight to the blind, have power to remove mountains, and all things should be subject to us through the name of Jesus Christ, and angels should minister unto us, and many more things, too numerous to mention." He also adds the following interesting item with reference to the ordinations of that day: "After we [referring to the first three called up to receive ordination] had been thus ordained by these brethren, the First Presidency laid their hands on us and confirmed these blessings and ordinations, and likewise predicted many things which should come to pass." (Times and Seasons, vol. 6, p. 868). While these statements make it very clear that the Prophet Joseph did not join with the Three Witnesses in ordaining the Apostles--except in the way of confirming the ordination they received from the Witnesses, as described by Elder Kimball--the minutes of the meeting held February 21st, at which Parley P. Pratt was ordained, state that he was "ordained one of the Twelve by President Joseph Smith, Jun., David Whitmer, and Oliver Cowdery." Martin Harris must have been absent, and the Prophet evidently joined Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer on that occasion because of the absence of Harris; but whether or not the Prophet was mouth on that occasion does not appear in the minutes or in Elder Pratt's autobiography.

9. According to Heber C. Kimball's Journal, Orson Pratt's ordination took place on the 5th of April, 1835, under the following circumstances: "Sunday morning, April 5, 1835.--The Twelve had not all as yet been together, for the last three mentioned [ Orson Pratt, Thomas B. Marsh and Parley P. Pratt ] were not present at the time of choosing, and as the time drew near that we should travel to the east, we appointed this day to bear our testimony unto our brethren and friends. We were all assembled together, with the exception of Brother Orson Pratt, who had not yet been with us. At this time, while we were praying, and wishing for his arrival, while opening the meeting, he entered the house. We rejoiced at his presence, and thanked the Lord for it. He was then ordained and we proceeded to speak according to our ages, the eldest speaking first. This day Brother Thomas B. Marsh, Brigham Young, David W. Patten, and myself spake." (Times and Seasons, vol. 6, p. 869.) The incident is given as Elder Kimball relates it because of its interest, but he is in error as to the date of the occurrence, since Elder Pratt himself, as well as the Prophet, gives the date of the former's ordination 26th of April, 1835. Elder Pratt also makes this entry in his journal: "April 24--Took the stage, and arrived in Kirtland on the 26th, about ten o'clock in the forenoon; walked into the meeting and learned that they had been prophesying that I would arrive there, so as to attend that meeting, although not one of them knew where I was. I was much rejoiced at meeting with the Saints."

10. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. 18.

11. Elder Parley P. Pratt, in his autobiography (page 127) refers to this question put to each of the Twelve Apostles by Elder Cowdery as the "Oath and Covenant of the Apostleship."

Chapter XIII--2.

The Organization of the Seventies---Blessing of the Faithful Elders and Saints.

[Sidenote: The Calling of Seventies.]

On the 28th of February, the Church in council assembled, commenced selecting certain individuals to be Seventies, [1] from the number of those who went up to Zion with me in the camp; and the following are the names of those who were ordained  and blessed at that time, to begin the organization of the first quorum of Seventies, according to the visions [2] and revelations which I have received. The Seventies are to constitute traveling quorums, to go into all the earth, whithersoever the Twelve Apostles shall call them. [3]

     Names of the Presidents and Members of the First Quorum of
    Seventies, Ordained Under the Hand of the Prophet Joseph Smith,
    with his two Counselors, Sidney Rigdon and Oliver Cowdery. [4]

    Presidents.

    Hazen Aldrich, Leonard Rich, Joseph Young, Zebedee Coltrin, Levi W.
    Hancock, Lyman Sherman, Sylvester Smith.

    Members.

    Elias Hutchings, Harpin Riggs, Cyrus Smalling, Edson Barney. Levi
    Gifford, Joseph B. Noble, Stephen Winchester, Henry Benner, Roger
    Orton, David Evans, Peter Buchannan, Nathan B. Baldwin, John D.
    Parker, Burr Riggs, David Elliot, Lewis Robbins, Samuel Brown,
    Alexander Whitesides, Salmon Warner, George W. Brooks, Jacob
    Chapman, Michael Griffith, Charles Kelly, Royal Barney, Edmund
    Fisher, Libbeus T. Coons, Warren Parrish, Willard Snow, Joseph
    Hancock, Jesse D. Harmon, Alden Burdick, Heman T. Hyde, Hiram
    Winters, Lorenzo D. Barnes,  Hiram Blackman, Hiram Stratton,
    William D. Pratt, Moses Martin, Zera S. Cole, Lyman Smith, Jesse
    Huntsman, Harvey Stanley, Solomon Angel, Almon W. Babbitt, Henry
    Herriman, William F. Cahoon, Israel Barlow, Darwin Richardson,
    Wilkins Jenkins Salisbury, Milo Andrus, Nelson Higgins, True
    Glidden, Harry Brown, Henry Shibley, Jezeniah B. Smith, Harrison
    Burgess, Lorenzo Booth, Jedediah M. Grant, Alexander Badlam, Daniel
    Stephens, Zerubbabel Snow, Amasa M. Lyman, George A. Smith.

[Sidenote: The Prophet's Remarks on the Sacrament.]

The council adjourned to the day following, March 1st, when, after attending the funeral of Seth Johnson, several who had recently been baptized, were confirmed, and the sacrament was administered to the Church. Previous to the administration, I spoke of the propriety of this institution in the Church, and urged the importance of doing it with acceptance before the Lord, and asked, How long do you suppose a man may partake of this ordinance unworthily, and the Lord not withdraw His Spirit from him? How long will he thus trifle with sacred things, and the Lord not give him over to the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption! The Church should know if they are unworthy from time to time to partake, lest the servants of God be forbidden to administer it. Therefore our hearts ought to be humble, and we to repent of our sins, and put away evil from among us.

[Sidenote: More Ordinations.]

After sacrament the council continued the ordination and blessing of those previously called; also John Murdock and S. W. Denton were ordained and blessed; Benjamin Winchester, Hyrum Smith, and Frederick G. Williams were blessed; and Joseph Young and Sylvester Smith were ordained presidents of Seventies.

     The Blessing of those who assisted in Building the House of
    the Lord at Kirtland.

    March 7.--This day a meeting of the Church of Latter-day Saints
    was called for the purpose of blessing, in the name of the Lord,
    those who have heretofore assisted in building, by their labor and
    other means, the House of the Lord in this place.

    The morning was occupied by President Joseph Smith, Jun., in
    teaching the Church the propriety and necessity of purifying
    itself. In the afternoon, the names of those who had assisted to
    build the house were taken, and further instructions received
    from President Smith. He said that those who had distinguished
    themselves thus far by consecrating to the upbuilding of the House
    of the Lord, as well as laboring thereon, were to be remembered;
    that those who build it should own it, and have the control of it.

    After further remarks, those who performed the labor on the
    building voted unanimously that they would continue to labor
    thereon, till the house should be completed.

    President Sidney Rigdon was appointed to lay on hands and bestow
    blessings in the name of the Lord.

    The Presidents were blessed; and Reynolds Cahoon, Hyrum Smith, and
    Jared Carter, the building committee, though the last two were not
    present, yet their rights in the house were preserved.

    The following are the names of those who were blessed in
    consequence of their labor on the house of the Lord in Kirtland,
    and those who consecrated to its upbuilding:

    Sidney Rigdon, Maleum C. Davis, Joseph Smith, Jun., Jaman Aldrich,
    F. G. Williams, John Young, Sen., Joseph Smith, Sen., Ezra Strong,
    Oliver Cowdery, Joel McWithy, Newel K. Whitney, Matthew Foy,
    Reynolds Cahoon, James Randall, Hyrum Smith, John P. Greene,
    Jared Carter, Aaron E. Lyon, Jacob Bump, Thomas Burdick, Artemus
    Millet, Truman Wait, Alpheus Cutler, Edmund Bosley, Asa Lyman,
    William Bosley, Josiah Butterfield, William Perry, Noah Packard,
    Don Carlos Smith, James Putnam, Shadrach Roundy, Isaac Hill, Joel
    Johnson,  Edmund Durfee, Sen., Oliver Higley, Edmund Durfee,
    Jun., Evan M. Greene, Gideon Ormsby, Levi Osgood, Albert Miner,
    Alpheus Harmon, Ira Ames, Joseph C. Kingsbury, Salmon Gee, Ira
    Bond, Peter Shirts, Z. H. Brewster, Isaac Hubbard, Samuel Thomson,
    Horace Burgess, John Ormsby, Dexter Stillman, Luman Carter, Amos
    P. Herrick, John Smith, Mayhew Hillman, Samuel H. Smith, William
    Carter, Thomas Fisher, William Burgess, Starry Fisk, Giles Cook,
    Amos R. Orton, Almon Sherman, Gad Yale, Warren Smith, John Johnson,
    Moses Bailey, John Tanner, Sebe Ives, Henry G. Sherwood, Andrew
    H. Aldrich, Sidney Tanner, Ebenezar Jennings, Joseph Tippits,
    Oliver Granger, Robert Quigley, Orson Johnson, Erastus Babbitt,
    James Lake, Samuel Canfield, William Redfield, Phineas H. Young,
    Cyrus Lake, Samuel Rolfe, Harvey Smith, Calvin W. Stoddard, Isaac
    Cleveland, Josiah Fuller, William Barker, Erastus Rudd, Samuel
    S. Brannan, Isaac G. Bishop, John Wheeler, Roswell Murray, Henry
    Baker, Benjamin Wells, William Fisk, Nehemiah Harman, Henry Wilcox,
    Oliver Wetherby, George Gee, Thomas Hancock, Lorenzo D. Young,
    Josuah Grant, David Clough, William Draper, James Durfee, Ransom
    Van Leuven, Joseph Coe, Tunis Rappellee, Thomas Gates, John Reed,
    Loren Babbitt, Samuel Wilcox, Blake Baldwin, Benjamin Johnson,
    Joseph B. Bosworth.

     The blessings and ordinations of particular individuals of
    the foregoing were as follows:--Reynolds Cahoon, Jacob Bump, and
    Artemus Millet, were blessed with the blessings of heaven and a
    right in the house of the Lord in Kirtland, agreeable to the labor
    they had performed thereon, and the means they had contributed.

    Alpheus Cutler, Asa Lyman, Josiah Butterfield, Noah Packard, Jonas
    Putnam, and Isaac Hill received the same blessing. The blessing
    referred to was according to each man's labor or donation, and
    in addition, Elder Packard was promised wisdom and ability to
    proclaim the Gospel. Edmund Durfee, Sen., Edmund Durfee, Jun., and
    Gideon Ormsby received the same blessing, and Edmund Durfee, Jun.,
    was ordained an Elder. Albert Miner, Ira Ames, Salmon Gee, Peter
    Shirts, Isaac Hubbard, and Horace Burgess were blessed, and Peter
    Shirts and Horace Burgess were ordained Elders. Dexter Stillman,
    Amos F. Herrick, and Matthew Hillman were blessed. William Burgess,
    Jaman Aldrich, and John Young, Sen., were blessed. Giles Cook,
    Jun., and M. C. Davis were blessed and ordained Elders. Wm. Carter,
    who was blind, was promised a restoration of sight, if faithful.
    Ezra Strong, Joel McWithy, Matthew Foy, James Randall, and Aaron
    C. Lyon were blessed. John P. Greene was ordained a missionary to
    the Lamanites, after others have unlocked the door, with a promise
    of gathering many to Zion, and of returning with great joy at the
    end of his mission, to enjoy the blessings of his family. Thomas
    Burdick, Truman Wait and Edmund Bosley were blessed, and Elder
    Bosley was told that God had a work for him, viz.: to go and preach
    the Gospel to the sectarian priests of this age, to call after them
    and hunt them up, wherever he could hear of them, and preach the
    Gospel to them whether they will hear or forbear. William Bosley
    and William Berry were blessed and ordained Elders. Don Carlos
    Smith was blessed with a promise of wisdom to proclaim the Gospel,
    and also to write in wisdom. Shadrach Roundy, Joel Johnson, and
    Oliver Higbee were blessed.

    Adjourned till tomorrow.

    March 8th.--Met pursuant to adjournment. Evan M. Greene, Levi
    Osgood, Alpheus Harmon, Joseph C. Kingsbury, Ira Bond, Z. H.
    Brewster, Samuel Tompkins, John Ormsby, Luman Carter, John Smith,
    Samuel H. Smith, Thomas Fisher, Starry Fisk, Amos R. Orton and
    Almon Sherman were blessed. Amos R. Orton was ordained an Elder and
    a missionary to the Lamanites. Andrew H. Aldrich, Thomas Bailey,
    Sebe Ives, Ebenezer Jennings, Oliver Granger, Orson Johnson,
    Warren Smith, James Lake, and William Redfield were blessed, and
    William Redfield was ordained an Elder. Cyrus Lake,  Harvey
    Smith, Isaac Cleveland, William Baker, Samuel S. Brannan, John
    Wheeler, Henry Baker, William Fisk, Henry Wilcox, George W. Gee,
    David Clough, and Lorenzo D. Young were blessed, and Elder Young
    was set apart as a missionary to the Lamanites. Jas. Durfee,
    Jos. Coe, Thos. Gates, Loren Babbitt, Blake Baldwin, and Jos. B.
    Baldwin were blessed. John Johnson, John Tanner and Gad Yale were
    blessed; and Gad Yale, being one who went to the relief of the
    brethren in Missouri, was blessed accordingly. Henry G. Sherwood,
    Sidney Tanner, Joseph H. Tippits, Robert Quigley, and Erastus
    Babbitt were blessed, and Samuel Canfield was blessed and ordained
    an Elder. Phineas H. Young, Samuel Rolfe, and Calvin H. Stoddard
    were blessed, and Elder Young was ordained a missionary to the
    Lamanites. Erastus Rudd, Josiah Fuller, Isaac H. Bishop, Roswell
    Murray, Benjamin Wells, Nehemiah Harman, Thomas Hancock, Oliver
    Wetherby, Joshua Grant, Jun., William Draper, Jun., Ransom Van
    Leuven, Tunis Rappellee, John Rudd, and Samuel Wilcox were blessed.
    Moses Martin, who went to Missouri, was set apart to be one of the
    Seventies, and blessed and warned as follows: "If thou art not
    purified, thou wilt not be able to execute thy commission. Thou
    wilt fall into the snares and into the hands of enemies who will
    take thy life; thou must begin to make a complete reformation in
    thyself."

    Oliver Cowdery,

    Clerk.

    The following belong to the Seventies, but the date of their
    ordinations is not definitely known: Milo Andrus, Joseph
    Winchester, Zerubbabel Snow, Heman T. Hyde, Henry Brown. Nelson
    Higgins, (Hezekiah Fisk was blessed, but was not one of the
    Seventies,) Henry Beaman, Jesse Huntsman, Royal Barney, Zebedee
    Coltrin, Henry Herriman, and Lorenzo D. Barnes. James L. Thompson
    was blessed, but not ordained.

Footnotes

1. The organization of quorums of Seventy in the Church was regarded as a very strange thing in modern times, but that such an organization had existed in the Church of God, both in the days of Moses and also in the days of Messiah, is evident from the scriptures. The Lord said to Moses: "Come up unto the Lord, thou, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship ye afar off. * * * Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel. * * * And upon the nobles of the children of Israel He laid not His hand: also they saw God, and did eat and drink" (Exodus 24:1, 9, 11). And again, "And the Lord said unto Moses, Gather unto me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people, and officers over them; and bring them unto the tabernacle of the congregation, that they may stand there with thee. And I will come down and talk with thee there: and I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them; and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou bear it not thyself alone. * * * And Moses went out, and told the people the words of the Lord, and gathered the seventy men of the elders of the people, and set them round about the tabernacle. And the Lord came down in a cloud, and spake unto him, and took of the Spirit that was upon him, and gave it unto the seventy elders: and it came to pass, that, when the Spirit rested upon them, they prophesied, and did not cease" (Numbers 11:16, 17, 24, 25).

It is not clear from the Old Testament just what the functions of the Seventy were in the Hebrew Priesthood, but they certainly were endowed with prophetic powers, and it is quite probable that the Sanhedrin (consisting of seventy-one members, inclusive of the president,) of later Jewish times had some relation to this earlier council of seventy.

The organization of the Seventy by the Savior is alluded to in the tenth chapter of Luke as follows: "After these things the Lord appointed other seventy also, [from this it appears that quorums of seventy had been appointed previous to this] and sent them two and two before His face into every city and place, whither He Himself would come. Therefore said He unto them, The harvest truly is great, but the laborers are few: pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that He would sent forth laborers into His harvest. Go your way: behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves. Carry neither purse nor scrip, nor shoes: and salute no man by the way. And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house. And if the Son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it: if not, it shall turn to you again. And in the same house remain, eating and drinking such things as they give: for the laborer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house." That is, while these men were sent forth without purse and scrip it was evidently not the intention of the Lord that they should beg from door to door. Continuing His instructions, the Master said: "And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as are set before you: and heal the sick that are therein, and say unto them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways out into the streets of the same, and say, Even the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you, notwithstanding be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom, than for that city. * * He that heareth you heareth me; and he that despiseth you despiseth me and he that despiseth me despiseth Him that sent me." The Seventy, it appears went forth under these instructions and were successful, for Luke continues: "And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through Thy name." After this very plain allusion to this order of the Priesthood called the Seventy, these instructions, and the definitions given of their duties and callings, there can be no doubt as to their constituting an important factor in the Christian Church Organization. The absence of such quorums of Priesthood in modern Church establishments is but one among many other evidences that the Church of Christ had ceased from among men.

2. (note).

3. The quorums of Seventy, in other words--in connection with the Twelve Apostles, under whose direction they labor--constitute the foreign ministry or the Church; and when the kind of labor they are expected to perform is taken into account, it will be found that their organization is admirably adopted for their work--the means are adequate to the end proposed. In all other quorums of the high Priesthood, excepting the Twelve, the presidency consists of a president and two counselors, but the presidency of the quorum of Seventy consists of seven presidents, equal in authority. For the sake of order, however, precedence is recognized in seniority of ordination; that is, the senior president by ordination--not of age--presides in the council, and over the quorum; and in the event of his absence, then the next senior president by ordination has the right of initiative and presides, and so on down the line of presidents. The order established in the Church for the work of the foreign ministry is for Elders to travel two and two. This doubtless for the reason that the Lord would establish His word by the mouths of two witnesses at least, to say nothing of the pleasure that would be derived from the companionship subsisting between two Elders while traveling among strangers, and even among enemies. A quorum of Seventy, if sent out into the world as a body, is capable of realizing all the advantages conceivable from organization. It can be broken up into just seven groups of ten members; with each group would be a president; these groups can be sub-divided into five pairs, who could scatter out into various neighborhoods, occasionally meet in conference with the group of ten to which the respective pairs belonged, and at greater intervals, the several groups could be called together for quorum conference. Thus a quorum of Seventy can be a veritable flying column, making proclamation of the Gospel, the like of which is to be found nowhere outside the Church of Christ.

4. Instead of giving the forty names that here follow the statement of the Prophet in his history, I give the entire list of names that constituted the first quorum of Seventy, as written by the late President Joseph Young, in his "History of the Organization of the Seventies." All the brethren given in this list were not ordained on this 28th day of February, 1835, but all who were ordained on that date, of course, are included in this list. Of this organization of the quorum of Seventy, the statement of Elder Joseph Young, who became the senior president of the first council, has already been given at page 181.
