The Gathering Saints--Increase in the Number of Stakes Contemplated--Councils in Zion and Kirtland--Close of the Volume.

[Sidenote: Bishop's Agent Appointed.]

At a conference of the authorities of the Church and the Saints in the House of the Lord at Kirtland, September 17th, Bishop Newel K. Whitney said the time had arrived when it became necessary for him to travel, and necessarily he must leave an agent to act in his absence agreeable to the provisions made in the revelations. He nominated William Marks, who was elected agent to the Bishop by unanimous vote.

[Sidenote: The Church Recorder.]

George W. Robinson was unanimously elected general Church recorder in place of Oliver Cowdery, who had removed to Missouri.

[Sidenote: The Bishop's Memorial.]

After taking into consideration the situation of Zion and the Church in general, the conference decided that it was of great importance to the cause of truth in general, and the prosperity of the work, that the Bishop and his counselors send abroad their memorial to all the Saints throughout the land, as well as to all well-wishers to the cause of Zion, and that their appeal go forth in the name and by the authority of the Church to all the Saints scattered abroad.

[Sidenote: The Prophet on the Gathering.]

The same evening the Elders assembled in conference in the House of the Lord when I addressed them on the subject of the gathering of the Saints in the last days, and the duties of the different quorums in relation thereto.

[Sidenote: Other Stakes of Zion to be Appointed.]

It appeared manifest to the conference that the places appointed for the gathering of the Saints were at this time crowded to overflowing, and that it was necessary that there be more stakes of Zion appointed in order that the poor might have a place to gather to, "wherefore it was moved, seconded and voted unanimously that President Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon be requested by this conference to go and appoint other stakes, or places of gathering, and that they receive a certificate of their appointment, signed by the clerk of the Church."

[Sidenote: Arrangements for Preaching the Gospel.]

Elder William Marks, who had previously been appointed agent to the Bishop, being called upon arose and said that he would comply with the request of the Church, and the Lord being his helper he would discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability. After which the Elders present who were in a situation to travel were called upon to number themselves, and there were numbered one hundred and nine, and they were divided into eight companies in the following order--number one to thirteen, called the first company, were appointed to travel east; No. 14 to 26, were to travel southeast; No. 27 to 39, south; No. 40 to 52, southwest; No. 53 to 65, west; No. 66 to 78, northwest; No. 79 to 91, north; No. 92 to 104, northeast. Five being left after this division, No. 105 was appointed to travel with the company going southeast; No. 106, with the company northwest; 107, south; 108, east; 109, with the north company. It was further appointed that those who might desire to travel a different course from the one which was appointed to the division to which they belonged, might have the privilege of changing with those of another division. And lastly it was appointed that the different divisions hold their own meetings, to make such arrangements as they should think proper in relation to their journeying.

Agreeable to the vote of the conference on the 17th,  Bishop Whitney and counselors issued the memorial as follows:

    Kirtland, Ohio, September 18th, 1837.

    To the Saints Scattered Abroad, the Bishop of Kirtland and his
    Counselors send Greeting:

    Whereas the Church in Kirtland has taken into consideration the
    affairs of the Latter-day Saints in general, having opportunities
    of making themselves acquainted with the situation of the Saints
    throughout the continent, and the very flattering prospects of
    the prosperity of the cause of God in our land, and also of the
    peculiar condition of the city of Kirtland, which is a kind of
    first fruits of the cities which the Lord has begun to build unto
    Himself in these last days, it has been deemed of great importance
    to the prosperity of the cause of truth in general, that the Bishop
    and his counselors send abroad this their memorial to all the
    Saints throughout the land, as well as to all well wishers to the
    cause of Zion in this our most happy country.

    It is a fact well known that the Saints in the city of Kirtland
    have been called to endure great affliction for the truth's sake,
    and to bear a heavy burden in order that the foundation of the
    kingdom of God might be laid on a sure and certain basis, so that
    the prophetic vision of Daniel might most certainly be fulfilled,
    that this kingdom might break in pieces all other kingdoms and
    stand for ever. The exertions of the enemy to prevent this have
    been very great; and through their great exertions they have given
    to the Saints great trouble, and caused them much expense. In
    addition to this, they have had to publish the word of the Lord,
    which has been attended with great expense. These things, together
    with building the House of the Lord, have embarrassed them very
    much; for when subscriptions failed they went on and accomplished
    the work of building the house themselves, plighting all that
    they had, property, credit, and reputation, and by these means
    accomplished this great work which is the wonder and admiration
    of the world. This they have done in faith, believing that, as
    the multitude of Saints increased, their liberality would abound
    towards those who, regarding nothing but the salvation of the
    world, have thus exposed themselves to financial ruin in order that
    the work of the gathering might not fail. And besides all this
    there have been a large number of poor who have had to receive
    assistance from the donations of the Church, which have tended to
    increase its embarrassments; and now so numerous are the Saints
    grown that it is impracticable for them all to gather to the places
    which are now appointed for this purpose.

     The Church at Kirtland has, therefore, required at the hand
    of our beloved brethren, Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon,
    men who have not thought their lives dear unto them in order that
    the cause of God might be established, presidents whom God has
    appointed to preside over the whole Church, and the persons to whom
    this work belongs, that they should go forth and lay off other
    stakes of Zion, or places of gathering, so that the poor may have
    a place of refuge, or places of refuge, in the day of tribulation
    which is coming swiftly on the earth. All these things will be
    attended with expense. Feeling ourselves under great responsibility
    by virtue of our office and calling in the Church of God, we
    present this our memorial to all the Saints, making a most solemn
    appeal to the feelings, benevolence and philanthropy of all the
    Saints into whose hands this our memorial comes, in faith and
    confidence that this appeal will not be made in vain.

    It is the fixed purpose of our God, and has been so from the
    beginning as appears by the testimony of the ancient Prophets,
    that the great work of the last days was to be accomplished by the
    tithing of His Saints. The Saints were required to bring their
    tithes into the store house, and after that, not before, they
    were to look for a blessing that there should not be room enough
    to receive it. (See Malachi 3rd chapter, 10th verse). Our appeal,
    then, to the Saints is founded on the best of testimony, that which
    no Saint will feel to gainsay, but rejoice to obey. The Saints
    of God will rejoice in all that the Lord does, and in doing all
    that the Lord requires. The sacrifice of righteousness which the
    Lord requires will be offered with a willing heart and ready mind,
    and with great joy, because they are accounted worthy to offer up
    sacrifice for His name.

    In making this appeal to the benevolence of the Saints of God we
    do not only take into consideration the situation of the poor,
    the embarrassments of the stake of Kirtland, but also their own
    interests, for every Saint has an equal interest in building up
    the Zion of our God, for it is after the Lord has built up Zion
    that He will appear in His glory (Psalm 102:16). We all look for
    the appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, but
    we shall look in vain until Zion is built, for Zion is to be the
    dwelling place of our God when He comes (Joel 3:21). Anyone who
    will read this chapter with attention will see that it treats of
    the last days, and of the Zion of the last days. How, then, is the
    Lord to dwell in Zion if Zion be not built up? This question we
    leave the Saints to answer. The salvation of the Saints one and
    all depends on the building up of Zion, for without this there is
    no salvation, for deliverance in the last days is found in Zion
    and in Jerusalem, and in the remnant whom the Lord our God shall
    call, or in other words, in the stakes which He shall appoint (Joel
    2:32)  It is in Zion where the Lord is to create upon every
    dwelling place and upon her assemblies a cloud of smoke by day and
    the shining of a flaming fire by night. It is upon the glory of
    Zion that there will be a defense. It is in Zion that there shall
    be a tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for
    a place of refuge and for a covert from storm and from rain (Isaiah
    4:5, 6). It is upon the walls of Zion where the watchmen shall see
    eye to eye (Isaiah 3:8).

    Whatever is glorious, whatever is desirable, whatever pertains
    to salvation, either temporal or spiritual, our hopes, our
    expectations, our glory, and our reward, all depend on our building
    up Zion according to the testimony of the Prophets, for unless Zion
    is built our hopes perish, our expectations fail, our prospects are
    blasted, our salvation withers, and God will come and smite the
    whole earth with a curse. Hear, then, O ye Saints of the last days!
    And let this our appeal have a favorable reception among you. Let
    every Saint consider well the nature of his calling in the last
    days, and the great responsibility which rests upon him or her,
    as one to whom God has revealed His will; and make haste not only
    to the relief of Kirtland, but also to the building up of Zion.
    Let every man and every woman give heed the very instant that they
    embrace the Gospel, and exert themselves with energy to send on
    means to build up Zion, for our God bids us to hasten the building
    of the city, saying the time has come when the city must be pushed
    forward with unceasing exertions, for behold, the day of calamity
    draweth nigh, and unless the Saints hasten the building of the city
    they will not escape.

    Be admonished, then, O ye Saints! And let not covetousness, which
    is idolatry, nor worldly ambition hinder you; but gather up your
    gold and your silver and all the means you have and send on to the
    Saints who are engaged in this great work of building the Zion
    of God, that there may be a place of refuge for you and for your
    children in the day of God's vengeance, when He shall come down on
    Idumea, or the world, in His fury and stamp them down in His wrath,
    and none shall escape but the inhabitants of Zion. What we say unto
    one we say unto all, haste, haste, and delay not! for the hour of
    desolation does not linger, and with all the power that the Saints
    have, and with all the diligence they can use they will scarcely
    escape.

    The time is not far distant when some of those who now deride and
    mock the Saints for devoting their all to build up the Zion of
    God, will bless their name for having provided a city of refuge
    for them and their children, regardless of the ravings of ungodly
    priests, and the mockings of a stupid and ignorant people. In the
    confidence which we have in the good sense and righteous principles
    of the multitude of the  Saints, we send this our memorial in
    the name of our Master, Jesus, believing that this appeal will be
    received with great kindness, and will be attended to with untiring
    perseverance until the object for which it has been sent shall be
    accomplished. And may the God of all grace pour out His richest
    blessings on your heads, and crown you with abundance, that the
    Zion of our God may flourish and cease not until the righteousness
    thereof shall go forth as the light and the salvation thereof as a
    lamp which burneth, is the prayer of your brethren in Christ Jesus.

    Newel K. Whitney,

    Reynolds Cahoon,

    Vinson Knight.

[Sidenote: The Voice of Warning.]

About this time Elder Parley P. Pratt, who was laboring in New York, published his Voice of Warning, consisting of 216 pages. [1]

[Sidenote: The Prophet's Departure for Missouri.]

I started from Kirtland on the 27th of September, in company with Brother Sidney Rigdon, to fulfill the mission appointed us on the 18th of September by a conference of Elders, in establishing places of gathering for the Saints; Brothers William Smith and Vinson Knight accompanying us.

October 1.--Elder Lyman Sherman was elected High Councilor at Kirtland in place of Jared Carter, removed to Far West.

[Sidenote: President of High Council Elected.]

October 2.--Samuel H. Smith was elected president of the High Council, and council voted that if a councilor  absented himself from their meetings without a reasonable excuse, he should be reported to the Church as a delinquent. The High Council at Kirtland voted that the clerk grant licenses to the members of the council (who wished to travel), signed by the president and clerk.

We arrived at Terre Haute, Indiana, on the 12th, about midway from Kirtland to Far West.

[Sidenote: Death of Hyrum Smith's Wife.]

My brother Hyrum's wife, Jerusha Barden Smith, died on the 13th of October while I was at Terre Haute, and her husband at Far West. She left five small children and numerous relatives to mourn her loss; her demise was severely felt by all. She said to one of her tender offspring when on her dying bed, "Tell your father when he comes that the Lord has taken your mother home and left you for him to take care of." She died in full assurance of a part in the first resurrection.

October 15.--The High Priests' quorum at Kirtland decided to take Doctor Sampson Avard's license until he returns and make satisfaction; and the High Council concurred.

    Minutes of High Council.

    October 18.--The High Council and presidents of the different
    quorums met in the Lord's House, Samuel H. Smith presiding, and
    after a lengthy discussion concerning existing evils, agreed that
    it was time to commence the work of reform, and voted unanimously
    to meet again in the Lord's House on Monday evening next, and
    invite the different quorums to meet at the same time, and commence
    pruning the vine of God in Kirtland, and thus continue the work
    evening after evening until it shall be wisdom to stay their hands.

    Phinehas Richards, Clerk of the High Council.

[Sidenote: Twenty-two Disfellowshiped.]

Sunday 22.--The Church in Kirtland disfellowshiped twenty-two brethren and sisters until they make satisfaction for uniting with the world in a dance the Thursday previous.

     Minutes of High Council.

    October 23.--The High Council of Kirtland appointed Luke S.
    Johnson, Reynolds Cahoon, and John Gould a committee to visit John
    Johnson, Jun., and see if he would desist from selling spirituous
    liquors to those who were in the habit of getting intoxicated,
    and report to the authorities of the Church those members who
    might drink spirits at his house. Also voted that the Church see
    that all difficulties and differences be settled as speedily as
    possible; and that unruly children be reported to their parents,
    and if they neglect to take suitable notice of it, then the parents
    shall be reported to the authorities of the Church and dealt with
    accordingly.

    Voted that we discountenance the use of ardent spirits in any way
    to sell or to be brought into this place for sale or use.

    Phinehas Richards, Clerk.

[Sidenote: Confessions.]

Sunday, October 29.--Nine more of the brethren and sisters were reported to the Church as having been engaged in the recreations of the 19th instant and eleven of the thirty-one that had been reported made confession.

[Sidenote: Norris Brewster.]

On the 30th of October, Brothers Norris, Brewster, and others, presented to the High Council a plan for the better organization of the Church in temporal affairs, stating that Moroni had appeared to Collins Brewster. The council decided that it was a trick of the devil.

[Sidenote: More Confessions.]

Most of those who were complained of for participating in the recreation on the 19th and had not confessed, acknowledged their fault to the High Council on the first of November, and the remainder were required so to do or be cut off from the Church.

[Sidenote: Action Against Loungers.]

November 2.--The High Council voted that loungers about the streets should be labored with, and appointed a committee of three for that purpose.

[Sideote: The Egyptian Records.]

The Church in Kirtland voted to sanction the appointment of Brother Phinehas Richards and Reuben Hedlock by the Presidency, to transact business for the Church in procuring means to  translate and print the records taken from the Catacombs of Egypt, then in the Temple.

[Sidenote: Arrival of the Prophet at Far West.]

I arrived at Far West some time in the latter part of October or first of November. A meeting of some of the Church was called on the sixth to counsel on certain affairs of the Church, which I attended with Brothers Rigdon and Hyrum Smith. There were present also Elders Thomas B. Marsh, William E. M'Lellin, Lyman E. Johnson, William Smith, and Vinson Knight, from Ohio, the High Council of the Church of Far West, and some other Elders. Prayer by W. W. Phelps. Several topics were discussed, when it was unanimously voted that it be recommended to the proprietors of the corporation of Far West to petition the trustees of said corporation to alter the streets or lessen them so as to make each block contain four acres of ground, and each block to be divided into four lots. Also voted unanimously that it is the opinion of this council that there is sufficient room in this country for the churches to continue gathering from abroad; also that the building of the House of the Lord be postponed until the Lord shall reveal it to be His will to have it commenced.

[Sidenote: The Settlement of Difficulties.]

Adjourned until early candle light, and met accordingly, when remarks were made by many of the authorities present upon the previous disposition of the town plat, the purchase of land, etc.; and all difficulties were satisfactorily settled except a matter between Oliver Cowdery, Thomas B. Marsh, and myself, which was referred to us with the agreement that our settlement of the affair would be sufficient for the council.

W. W. Phelps presided at this meeting, and Oliver Cowdery acted as clerk.

    Minutes of a High Council at Kirtland.

    The High Council and Bishop of Kirtland met in the Lord's House on
    Tuesday evening, November 7th to discuss the question, "Who
    presides when the presidents are absent?" but upon discussion were
    not able to come to any conclusion.

    Thomas Burdick was appointed High Councilor in the place and
    absence of Phinehas Richards; and Harlow Redfield clerk for the
    time being.

    President Joseph Smith, Sen., proposed that Brother Phinehas
    Richards be ordained under the hands of President John Smith and
    Bishop Whitney, and he was accordingly blessed for his mission.

    Phinehas Richards, Clerk.

    Minutes of a Conference at Far West, Missouri, November 7th, 1837.

    At a general assembly of the Church of Latter-day Saints, assembled
    at Far West to take into consideration and transact the business
    of said Church, Elder Thomas B. Marsh was chosen as moderator and
    Oliver Cowdery clerk.

    After singing the moderator addressed the throne of grace in
    prayer, after which President Sidney Rigdon explained the object of
    the meeting, giving a relation of the recent reorganization of the
    Church in Kirtland. The minutes of said meeting at Kirtland were
    read by the moderator who also nominated Joseph Smith, Jun., the
    first President of the whole Church, to preside over the same.

    All were requested (male and female) to vote; and he was
    unanimously chosen.

    President Smith then made a few remarks accepting the appointment,
    requesting the prayers of the Church in his behalf. He also
    nominated President Sidney Rigdon to be one of his counselors, and
    he was unanimously chosen.

    He then nominated Frederick G. Williams to be his second counselor,
    but he was objected to by Elder Lyman Wight in a few remarks
    referring to a certain letter written to this place by the said
    Frederick G. Williams.

    Also Elder Marsh objected to President Williams.

    Elder James Emmet also objected to President Williams.

    Bishop Edward Partridge said he seconded President Williams'
    nomination and should vote for him; and as to said letter, he had
    heard it and saw nothing so criminal in it.

    President David Whitmer also made a few remarks in President
    Williams' favor.

    Elder Marsh made further remarks.

    Elder Thomas Grover also objected to President Williams.

    President Sidney Rigdon then nominated President Hyrum Smith to
    take President Williams' place.

     The moderator called for a vote in favor of President
    Williams, but he was rejected.

    He then called for a vote in favor of President Hyrum Smith, which
    was carried unanimously.

    Some few remarks were made by Presidents David Whitmer and Sidney
    Rigdon.

    David Whitmer was nominated as the President of this branch of the
    Church, but was objected to by Elder Marsh.

    Bishop Edward Partridge said he should vote for President Whitmer.

    Elder William E. M'Lellin made a few marks.

    Elder George M. Hinkle and Elder King Follet made a few remarks in
    favor of President Whitmer.

    Elders Caleb Baldwin and Seymour Brunson spoke against President
    Whitmer.

    Elder Elisha H. Groves spoke in favor of President Whitmer.

    Further remarks from Elder M'Lellin, by request of President
    Whitmer gave general satisfaction.

    Remarks were also made by President Joseph Smith, Jun., who called
    for an expression, which was carried by almost a unanimous vote in
    favor of President Whitmer.

    President Joseph Smith, Jun., then nominated John Whitmer for an
    assistant president, who was objected to, and Elder Marsh spoke
    in opposition to him, and read a list of charges from a written
    document against him and President Phelps.

    President John Whitmer then spoke a few words by way of confession
    and was followed by Elder Isaac Morley.

    The vote sustaining him was called, and carried unanimously.

    The meeting adjourned for one hour.

    Meeting convened according to adjournment, a hymn was sung and
    prayer offered by the moderator.

    W. W. Phelps was nominated for an assistant president for this
    branch of the Church by President Joseph Smith, Jun.

    Brother Phelps rose and made certain remarks on the subject of the
    charges referred to above by way of confession, whereupon the vote
    was put by President Rigdon and passed unanimously.

    Elders John Murdock, Solomon Hancock, Elias Higbee, Calvin Bebee,
    John M. Hinkle, Thomas Grover, and Simeon Carter were unanimously
    chosen High Councilors.

    Lyman Wight was nominated a member of the High Council but was
    objected to by John Anderson; they went aside to converse.

    Newel Knight was unanimously chosen. George M. Hinkle was
    nominated, and objected to by Elder James Emmet, because he was
     too noisy; by King Follet because of his military office; and
    by James Durfee because he was a merchant.

    Elder Hinkle made a few remarks.

    The vote was called and was unanimous in Elder Hinkle's favor.

    Levi Jackman and Elisha H. Groves were unanimously chosen.

    John Anderson then took the stand and made his objections to Lyman
    Wight; after which Elder Wight also spoke.

    The vote was called and Elder Wight was unanimously chosen.

    The Twelve Apostles were then called, namely, Thomas B. Marsh,
    David W. Patten, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde,
    William E. M'Lellin, Parley P. Pratt, William Smith, Luke Johnson,
    Orson Pratt, John F. Boynton, and Lyman E. Johnson, and were
    unanimously sustained.

    Bishop Edward Partridge was nominated to still act as Bishop, and
    was unanimously chosen; he then nominated Isaac Morley and Titus
    Billings for his counselers, who were also unanimously chosen.

    Elder Isaac Morley was unanimously appointed Patriarch of this
    branch of the Church.

    Elder John Corrill was chosen to be keeper of the Lord's Store
    House.

    Elder Isaac Morley was then ordained to the office of Patriarch
    under the hands of Presidents Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon and
    Hyrum Smith.

    The congregation, after a few remarks from Sidney Rigdon,
    unanimously voted not to support stores and shops selling
    spirituous liquors, tea, coffee, or tobacco.

    A vote was called on the subject of the presidents of the
    Seventies; and those who have recently been appointed to that
    office, were unanimously received.

    The congregation then united with President Sidney Rigdon, who, in
    the closing prayer, called upon their Lord to dedicate this land
    for the gathering of the Saints, and their inheritances.

    Thomas B. Marsh, Moderator,

    Oliver Cowdery, Clerk.

    Far West, Missouri, November 10, 1837.

    At a general meeting of the ordained members of the Church in this
    place Elder Thomas B. Marsh opened the meeting by prayer, and
    President Sidney Rigdon read the memorial of the Bishop of Kirtland
    and his counselors, of September 18th, 1837, to the churches
    abroad. He then laid before the meeting the subject of laying
    off cities, of consecrating lands for public purposes, and for
    remunerating those who lay them off. It was unanimously voted that
    all city plats hereafter laid off, after remunerating those for
    their labor who may be engaged in  appointing and laying off
    the same shall be consecrated for the public benefit of the Church,
    for building houses for public worship, or such other purposes as
    the Church shall say.

    President Rigdon then read the prospectus of the Elders' Journal,
    which was unanimously received.

    It was then unanimously voted that the persons present use their
    exertions to support said paper.

    It was then voted that the town of Far West be enlarged so that it
    contain four sections, that is, two miles square.

    Voted that Bishop Partridge and his counselors be appointed a
    committee to appraise the land adjacent to the present town plat
    and see that it is enlarged according to the above vote, provided
    the present holders of those lands will take such a price for the
    same as the above appraisers think them to be worth; and that the
    same be then disposed of as voted above.

    A call was then made for those whose circumstances were such as to
    permit them to go out to preach to present themselves. There were
    twenty-three who arose.

    Sylvester H. Earl, Henry Jackman, Harrison Sagers, and John W.
    Clark were ordained Elders, and William J. Levans was ordained a
    Priest.

    President Rigdon then closed the meeting by prayer.

    Thomas B. Marsh, Moderator.

    Oliver Cowdery, Clerk.

About this time I left Far West on my return to Kirtland.

    Minutes of a High Council at Kirtland.

    Kirtland, November 20th. The High Council met in the Lord's House,
    John Smith presiding.

    Reuben Hedlock preferred the following charge against Zenos H.
    Brewster, Jane Brewster, Collins Brewster, D. H. Dustin and wife,
    Moses R. Norris and wife, Eliza Norris, Samuel Barnet, Jemima
    Butler, Osman M. Duel,--Butler, and Roxanna Repsher, for giving
    heed to revelations said to be translated from the Book of Moroni
    by Collins Brewster, and for entering into a written covenant
    different from the articles and covenants of the Church of
    Latter-day Saints, and following a vain and delusive spirit.

    Two were appointed to speak on each side.

    The writings and revelations kept and received by the accused were
    presented, and read by the clerk of the Council.

    The accused pleaded not guilty.

    Brother Felshaw was called forward by the plaintiff, who stated
    that  he had visited the accused and labored with them
    according to the law of the Church; that the accused justified
    themselves, seeing the Church had not lived according to the former
    revelations, and they considered the High Council and others were
    in transgression; and that most of the accused appeared to be
    determined to pursue their own way, whether right or wrong.

    Brother Allen said the accused appeared to manifest a hard spirit
    against the Presidents of the Church and the High Council.

    Brother Dunn concurred.

    Brother Sawyer stated that he heard Brother Norris say that those
    in authority were against him and if he could not establish an
    order of things here to his mind he would go out among the Gentiles
    and do it.

    Brother Knight confirmed the foregoing testimony.

    The accused called Brother Freeman, who stated that he had attended
    a number of the meetings of the accused and saw nothing out of the
    way.

    Brother E. Strong confirmed Brother Freeman's statement, but did
    not know when he attended the meetings at which they received
    revelations for themselves.

    Brother J. Foster agreed with the last two witnesses. Brother
    Preston was called by the accuser, who testified that the accused
    refused to admit him into their meetings and that others were
    rejected

    Several witnesses testified that they attended their meetings and
    saw nothing wrong.

    Others testified they had heard them speak against the heads of
    the Church and that Brother Joseph had many things to repent of,
    and one of them said he thought some put too much stress on the
    Priesthood, and that he was informed that Brother Norris laid his
    hands on Collins Brewster and ordained him a prophet, and that one
    of the accused said he was determined to pursue his own course
    whether it suited the High Council or not.

    After the pleas of his councilors the accused spoke in
    justification of their course generally, when the Council decided
    that the charge had been fully sustained and withdrew fellowship
    from those who persisted in their course of conduct as before
    mentioned.

    Harlow Redfield, Clerk.

[Sidenote: Reuben Hedlock Chosen President of Elders.]

At a conference of Elders, consisting of all the authorities of the Church in Kirtland, November 27th, Elder Reuben Hedlock was chosen President of the Elders' quorum, in place of Elder Beaman deceased.

[Sidenote: Excommunication of Rodger Orton.]

November 30.--Daniel S. Miles presented a complaint  against Roger Orton "for abusing Elder Brigham Young and for a general course of unchristianlike conduct." The accused having been notified to appear and answer for his conduct, and having refused, the High Council decided that he be cut off, for showing contempt to the authorities of the Church.

[Sidenote: A Question of Compensation.]

Far West, December 6th.--The High Council and Bishop and counselors appointed Elias Higbee, Simeon Carter, and Elisha H. Groves, a committee to consider the propriety of proposing to the Church to pay the High Council for their time while engaged in council. Bishop Partridge, John Corrill, and Isaac Morley were appointed a committee to report upon the subject of raising a revenue to defray the expenses of the Church.

[Sidenote: Various Appointments.]

David Whitmer was appointed to sign Elders' licenses, as chairman of the Council, and W. W. Phelps, as clerk; and Frederick G. Williams, to sign licenses as chairman pro tempore, in the absence of President Whitmer; and John Whitmer, as clerk pro tempore; and Oliver Cowdery, recording clerk, standing clerk of the Council, and recorder of patriarchal blessings at Far West.

The committee on pay for the Council reported:

    It is our united opinion that the Presidency, High Council, Bishop
    and counselors, clerk of the council, Patriarch and agents of the
    Church, (also any others who may be employed in Church business),
    receive per day, each, one dollar and fifty cents.

    [Signed]

    SIMEON CARTER,

    ELIAS HIGBEE,

    ELISHA H. GROVES.

[Sidenote: Bishop Partridge's Report.]

Bishop Partridge reported to the Council that he had paid six hundred dollars to the lawyers to carry on suits against the Jackson mob, and three hundred dollars costs in carrying on said suits for which he had involved himself, and was paying ten per cent interest on the same; and petitioned the Council for leave to liquidate the debt out of the properties consecrated  for the benefit of the Church, and charge the Church for the same. The Council granted the petition.

Voted that the recorder of licenses and patriarchal blessings receive, for each one hundred words, ten cents.

Council adjourned to December 7th.

Council assembled on the 7th, according to adjournment, and heard the report of their Committee on raising a revenue to pay the officers of the Church for their services, and after much discussion and adjournment from time to time, dismissed the subject as being anti-scriptural.

[Sidenote: Apostasy in Kirtland.]

I returned to Kirtland on or about the 10th of December. During my absence in Missouri Warren Parrish, John F. Boynton, Luke S. Johnson, Joseph Coe, and some others united together for the overthrow of the Church. Soon after my return this dissenting band openly and publicly renounced the Church of Christ of Latter-day Saints and claimed themselves to be the old standard, calling themselves the Church of Christ, excluding the word "Saints," and set me at naught, and the whole Church, denouncing us as heretics, not considering that the Saints shall possess the kingdom according to the Prophet Daniel.

[Sidenote: Last Paper Printed in Kirtland.]

The Elders' Journal No. 2 for November was the last paper printed at Kirtland. Our printing establishment was attached to satisfy an unjust judgment of the county court, and soon after the whole printing apparatus and office were burned to the ground.

[Sidenote: The Work in England.]

The work began to spread in England with great rapidity. On the 12th of September Elder Goodson left Bedford for Preston, and about the 1st of October sailed for America, in company with Brother Snyder, taking with him two hundred Books of Mormon, which the Elders in vain tried to persuade him to leave. Branches were established in Eccleston, Wrightington, Heskin, Euxton Bath, Daubers Lane, Chorley, Whittle, Leyland Moss, Ribchester, Thornley, Clithero,  Waddington, Downham, and other places round about Preston, where the brethren hired the "Cock Pit," a large and convenient building for preaching, but, being disturbed by some Methodist priests, were obliged to have the house licensed by the civil courts, according to the statutes of the realm, which, with the aid of two constables who voluntarily proffered their services, restored peace and order. And on Christmas day, December 25th, Elders Kimball and Hyde, and Joseph Fielding (who had previously been ordained an Elder) assembled in the "Cock Pit" with about three hundred Saints, several of whom were ordained to the lesser Priesthood, fourteen were confirmed, and about one hundred children were blessed by the Elders. This was the first public conference of the Church in England, and at this conference the Word of Wisdom was first publicly taught in that country.

[Sidenote: Progress of the British Mission.]

While the work was thus rapidly progressing in Lancashire it continued gradually to progress at Bedford, also a branch was established at Bassynburn, and another at Peter's Green, by Elder Richards.

[Sidenote: Flight of Brigham Young from Kirtland.]

On the morning of the 22nd of December, 1837, Brother Brigham Young left Kirtland in consequence of the fury of the mob spirit that prevailed in the apostates who had threatened to destroy him because he would proclaim publicly and privately that he knew by the power of the Holy Ghost that I was a Prophet of the Most High God, that I had not transgressed and fallen as the apostates declared.

[Sidenote: Close of the Year 1837.]

Apostasy, persecution, confusion, and mobocracy strove hard to bear rule at Kirtland, and thus closed the year 1837.

Footnotes

1. The above named publication, "A Voice of Warning and Instruction to all People," is the first argumentative and doctrinal work published by any of the Elders; and it is no disparagement of other works to say that this pioneer book of its class is not only the first in the matter of time when issued, but first also in excellence. It has been a most successful missionary; and thousands have been brought to a conviction of the truth through reading its pages. The first edition--three thousand copies--sold in about two years. A second edition--two thousand five hundred copies--was issued; and such was the increase in the demand for it that by 1846, the author could congratulate himself upon having seen it pass through five editions. During more than half a century since then "The Voice of Warning" has passed through many editions in English, and has been translated into seven foreign languages, and in a number of these several editions have been issued. The author, of honored memory, is to be congratulated upon the attainment of his fondest hopes respecting this work, as so prophetically expressed in the preface of the first European edition: "And should the author be called to sacrifice his life for the Truth, he will have the consolation that it will be said of him, as it was of Abel--'He being dead, yet speaketh.'"

End of Vol. II.

Index to Volume II.

A

Abolition,--Views of the Prophet on, 436 et seq.

Abraham,--Book of, found with mummies, 236; alphabet to, 238; astronomy in, 286; described by Prophet, 349, 350 (and note).

Adam-ondi-Ahman,--364 (and note).

Angels,--ministrations of, in Kirtland Temple, 381.

Apostles,--Twelve, arrangements for choosing, 180; meeting at which chosen, 181 et seq.; calling of, when first made known, 186, (note); chosen by the Three Witnesses, 186, 187 (and notes); general charge to, 194; instructions to, 198 et seq.; request of for revelation, 209; first mission of, 218; meeting of, 219; departure of on first mission, 222 (and note); at Vermont conference, 238; at Massachusetts conference, 241, 242; at Saco conference, Maine, 252; at conference, Farmington, Maine, 253; return of to Kirtland, from first mission, 283; decision of Prophet affecting, 285; remarks of Prophet to, 308, 309; consider case of William Smith, 347; sustained as Prophets, Seers and Revelators, 417.

Apostleship, oath and covenant of, 198.

Appeal,--of Church in Missouri to people of U. S., 126 et seq.

Arthur, Mr.,--Planter, Clay county (note) 61.

Assembly,--General, of Church to accept Doctrine and Covenants, 243, et seq.; preparations for Solemn, 364; notice of Solemn, at Kirtland, 75.

Atchison, General David R.,--meets Zion's Camp near Liberty, 112.

Avery, Elder Allen,--accused before High Council, 286.

B

Babbitt, Almon W.,--Trial of by Kirtland High Council, 252, 346.

Babbit, Erastus,--testifies in High Council, 33.

Bank, Kirtland Safety Society,--attempt to organize, 467, 468.

Barnes, Samuel,--guest of Prophet, 332.

Barton, Michael H.,--seeks admission into the Church, 235.

Beaman, Father Alva,--entertains Prophet, 43; an early friend of the Prophet's (note) 43; conference at house of, in Avon, 44; consults Prophet regarding journey to Zion, 316; doubts of, 384.

Benner, Elias,--brings company of Germans to Zion's Camp, 65.

Bishop, Gladden,--trial of by Kirtland High Council, 284.

Bishop, Isaac H.,--trial of, 236, 237.

Blessings,--Patriarchal, 346.

Blessings,--given in Kirtland Temple, 379, 380; of the Lord's Anointed, 383; arrangement of quorums to receive, 391.

Bosley, Edmund,--covenant of, 161; trial for breaking covenant, 23.

Bosley, Father,--entertains the Prophet, 43, 44.

Bosworth, Joseph,--entertains the Prophet, 50.

Boynton, John F.,--marriage of, 377.

Brown, Samuel,--charged with  teaching false doctrine, 137; confession of, 138.

C

Camp, Zion's--departure of first division of from Kirtland, 61; equipment and departure of second division from Kirtland, 63; arrival of at Streetsborough, 63; organization of at New Portage, 64; departure of from New Portage, 65; course of travel, 65; fear of "milk sickness," 66; curiosity concerning destination of, 67 (and note); arrival of in Indiana, 68; western spies in, 69; threatened at Indianapolis, 70; course of travel of, 70; sundry instructions of Prophet to, 71; called to arms, 72; angels accompany, 73 (and note); crosses Okaw river, 73; sham battle in, 74; approaches Springfield, Illinois, 76; excitement in Springfield concerning, 77; preaching in, near Jacksonville, 78 et seq. (and note); scourge of predicted, 80 (and note); crosses the Mississippi, 82; arrival of at Salt River, 87 (and note); Elders Orson Hyde and Parley P. Pratt dispatched with message at Governor Dunklin, from, 88l departs from Salt River, 90; Return of Elders Hyde and Pratt from mission to Governor, 94; cross Chariton river, 95; rebellion in, 100; passes Richmond, Ray county, Missouri, 101, 102; camps on Fishing river, 103; preserved from mob by storm, 103, 104 (and note); visited by Colonel Sconce, 105, 106; outbreak of cholera in, 106, 107 (and note); arrives at Rush creek, Clay county, 112; cholera in, 114; disbanded, 114; members of, formally discharged, 123 (and note); object of journey of, 182 (and note); names of members of, 183 et seq.; names of women and children of, 185.

Campbell, James,--swears vengeance on Prophet, 99; is drowned in crossing Missouri, 100.

Carter, Elder Jared,--tried before Kirtland High Council, 277 et seq.; accepts decision of Council, 280.

Carter, John S.,--first in Zion's Camp to die of cholera, 115.

Carter, Simeon,--chosen to receive endowments, 113.

Chandler, Michael H.,--exhibits Egyptian mummies in Kirtland, 235; gives written testimony to the Prophet, 235.

Cherry, William,--false report concerning, 161.

Choir, Kirtland Temple,--407.

Cholera,--prediction concerning, 80; outbreak of, 114, 115, 116 (and note); remedy for, 119; names of those who die of, 120; names of those who nursed victims of, 120.

Church, branch of,--report of Mt. Pleasant, (note) 40; Hewlett, errors of administration and doctrine in, 137, 139 et seq. repentance of, 147.

Coe, Joseph,--speaks in High Council, 34.

Coltrin, Zebedee,--accompanies Prophet to New Portage, 50; blessed by Prophet et al., 51; at conference at Norton, Ohio, 52.

Conference,--Clay count, Missouri, 1; of High Priests and Elders, New Portage, Ohio, 24; at Avon, Livingston county, N. Y., 44; at Norton, Medina county, Ohio, minutes of, 52 et seq.; Kirtland, name of Church adopted at, 62 (and note); of Elders at New Portage, minutes of, 162, 163; at Freedom, 218; of Twelve and Seventies, 218; of Twelve at Freedom, 224; of Twelve at Lyons Town, N. Y., 225; New Portage, minutes of, 227, 228; of Twelve, at Lofborough, Canada, 325; Vermont, minutes of, 238; Massachusetts, minutes of, 241, 242; Saco,  Maine, 252; at New Portage, 273; at Kirtland, minutes of, 468, 509.

Copley, Leman,--confession of, 433.

Corrill, John,--prefers charges against Lyman Wight, 147.

Council, High,--Kirtland, revelation organizing, 28 et seq.; special instructions to, 31, 32; first case before, 33; minutes of, 34, 35; gives audience to delegation from Missouri, 39; meets in Clay county to determine who are worthy to receive endowments, 112; minutes of, 165, 172, 239 et seq.; 242, 252; sundry actions of, 253; provides remuneration for Patriarch, 273; minutes of, 274 et seq., 277 et seq.; considers redemption of Zion, 281, 282; minutes of, 284; cause of John Gould before, 286; Elliot case before, 295; new member ordained into, 366; minutes of, 484 et seq.; rearrangement of members of, 511; minutes of, 519; disfellowships members, 519; minutes of, 520; question of presidency of, 521, 522; case of Brewsters et al. before, 525, 526.

Council, High,--Missouri, minutes of, 49; of organized, 122, 124; instructed by Prophet, 124; Presidency and members of, 124; sundry cases before, 125; appoints Elders to visit scattered Saints, 136; case of Samuel Brown before, 137; of Zion, Clay county, minutes of, 164; new members elected in, 367; minutes of, 481; proceedings of against W. W. Phelps and John Whitmer (note), 483, 484; rejection of presidents of, 522 et seq.; question of compensation before, 527.

Council, Special,--of High Priests and Elders at the Prophet's house, Kirtland; 25; order in ancient, 25; minutes of, 39; of High Priests at house of the Prophet, Kirtland, minutes of, 47; at Kirtland, of the Prophet et al.; 54; at Kirtland, to consider resolutions vindicating the Prophet, 147 et seq.; of High Priests and elders to consider difficulty between Sylvester Smith and the Prophet, 142; of Bishop Whitney and twelve High Priests to consider difficulty between Sylvester Smith and Prophet, 150 et seq.; general of priesthood, minutes of, 219; of First Presidency and Twelve, 283; of the Prophet and Twelve, 307 et seq.; minutes of at New Portage, 317; at Kirtland to fill vacancies in Missouri, High Council, 356, 357.

Covenant,--to redeem Zion, 282.

Covenants, Book of Doctrine and,--presented to general assembly of the Priesthood and Church for acceptance, 243 et seq.; testimony of the Twelve Apostles to the truth of, 245 (and note); title page first edition of, (note) 250; preface of first edition, (note) 250, 251.

Cowdery, Oliver, speaks in High Council, 33; blessed by the Prophet et al, 51; remains at Kirtland during Zion's Camp expedition, 64; discussion on the steamer Monroe, 168, 169 (and note); assists at the ordination of Apostles, 187 et seq.; charge of, to Parley P. Pratt, 192 et seq.; general charge of to the Twelve, 194 et seq.; appointed Church Recorder, 273; transgression of, announced, 511.

Cowdery, Warren A.,--at Freedom, N. Y., entertains Prophet, 42; writes apology (note), 374.

D

Dedication,--see Temple, Dedication of.

Doniphan, General A. W.,--favors the Saints, 98.

Draper, Brother,--reproof of, 326.

Dunklin, Governor Daniel,--refuses to reinstate exiled Saints, 94 (and note); message of to Mo. Legislature, 171, 172; message of, arrives at Kirtland, 177.

E

Elders,--school of, organized, 169, 176; object of, 301.

Elmer, Mr.,--misrepresents the Prophet, 168, 169.

Emmett, James,--disfellowshiped, 482.

Epistle,--see Letters.

F

Faith,--Lectures on, see Theology.

Far West,--Affairs of, 504, 505.

Feet,--washing of, 430, 476.

Fielding, Rev. James,--kindness of, 499.

Fielding, Joseph,--member of British mission, 492 (and note).

Firm, Literary,--agents appointed fir, 273; to be sustained, 482.

Firm, Cowdery and Co., dissolved, 475;

G

Garrick,--vessel, carried first missionaries to England, 494; preaching on board of, 498.

Gilbert, Algernon Sidney,--chosen to receive endowments, 113; declines missionary appointment, 113, 118 (and note); dies of cholera, 118; character of, 118, 119 (note).

Gillium, Cornelius,--sheriff Clay Co., visits Zion's Camp, 108.

Goodson, John,--494 (and note); violates instructions, 505.

Gospel,--arrangements for preaching of, 514.

Gould, Dean,--non-Mormon member of Zion's Camp, 72; baptized, 95.

Gould, John,--accompanies the Prophet on mission, 41; left by Prophet in Catteraugus Co., N. Y., to gather up volunteers for Zion, 42.

Governments,--of, and laws in General, 247, 246 (note).

Grays, Silver, company of, part of Prophet's camp mess, 91.

Green, Henry,--trial of before High Council, 274 et seq.

H

Hancock, Joseph,--chased by enemies, 91; seized with cholera, 106.

Hancock, Solomon,--chosen to receive endowments, 113.

Harris, Martin,--accused of misrepresenting the Prophet, 26; confession of error, 26; bitten by serpent, 95; reproved by the Prophet, 95, 96 (and note).

Harris, Preserved,--tried before High Council, 445.

Haws, H. M.,--teacher of High school, Kirtland, 474.

Hawkins, Lydia Ann,--disfellowshiped, 511.

Hedlock, Reuben,--president of Elders, Kirtland, 526.

Hebrew,--class in, 318; difficulty with teacher, 355; progress in study of, 396.

Hewitt, Rev. John,--of Irvingite church, visits the Prophet, 230-234 (and notes).

Hewlett, Sylvester,--improperly ordained High Priest, 137.

Hill, Isaac,--case of, before Church, 303; confession of, 312.

Hitchcock, Seth,--dies of cholera, 115.

Hodges, Curtis, Sen.,--before High Council, 33; confesses his error, 34.

Holbrook, Joseph,--entertains Prophet, 45.

Hollister, John,--inquiries of, 325.

Holmes, Erastus, inquiries of, 312; concerning baptism of, 316.

Howe, Harriet,--witness against "Dr." Hurlburt, 2.

Hurlburt, "Dr." Philastus,--prayer against, 3; trial of at Chardon, 47; bound over to keep the peace, 49 (and note).

Hurlburt, Wesley,--excommunicated, 2.

Humphreys, Solomon,--protects rattlesnake, 73.

Hyde, Heman T.,--baptism of, 43 (and note).

Hyde, Orson,--attends conference at Avon, 44; appointed to preach in regions about, 44; reproved by Presidency, 48; sent with dispatch to Gov. Dunklin, 88; chosen an Apostle 187; ordained an Apostle, 189; complaints of, 333; satisfied, 337; joins British Mission, 490, posts "Timely Warnings" to N. Y. ministers, 495, arrival of, in England, 498.

I

Islands, Fox,--mission opened in, 507 (and note).

J

Jackson, President Andrew,--views on Indian policy, 358 et seq.

James, George F.,--before Council of High Priests at Kirtland, 47.

Johnson, Luke S.,--reports sentiment of country to Prophet, 81.

Johnson, Lyman E.,--joins Zion's Camp at Richfield, 65.

Johnson, Susan, death of, 407.

"Joshua," alias Matthias,--304-307.

Journal, Elders,--prospectus of, 505; last No. of printed in Kirtland, 528.

K

Kelly, Charles,--disfellowshiped, 442, 444.

Kiln,--Kirtland board, fired, 328; fired second time, 405.

Kimball, Heber C.,--on conditions in Kirtland, (note) 2; on preaching in Zion's Camp, (note) 78; on Zelph, (note) 80; on the outbreak of cholera in Zion's Camp, (note) 116; on the ordination of the Twelve, (note) 188; ordination of, as an Apostle, 189; on the ordination of Orson Pratt, (note) 194; labors of in New York and Vermont, 441; appointed to preside over a mission in England, 489 (and note).

Kirtland,--mob spirit at, 2; conditions in, 487, 488, 489 (and notes;) apostasy at, 528, 529.

Knight, Father Joseph--blesses his son Newel, 124.

Knight, Newel,--chosen to receive endowments, 113.

Knight, Vinson,--Perrysburgh, N. Y., entertains Prophet, 45; ordained counselor in Kirtland bishopric, 365.

L

Lamanites,--(Indians) gathering of, on western frontiers, 357, 358.

Letters,--from Elders in Kirtland to brethren abroad, 4 et seq.; Moses C. Nickerson to the Prophet, 40; John F. Boynton to Prophet, 40, 41; from presidency to Orson Hyde, 48; from brethren in Clay County, Mo., to Gov. Dunklin, 49 (and note); W. W. Phelps to brethren in Kirtland, 61; brethren in Clay Co., to Gov. Dunklin, 75; Elders in Clay Co., to Gov. Dunklin, 84; Gov. Dunklin to Col. J. Thornton, 84 et seq.; Gov. Dunklin to Col. Thomas Pitcher, 89; Judge Ryland to A. S. Gilbert, 89; Elders in Clay Co., to Messrs Doniphan and Atchison, 92; John Corrill to the Evening and Morning Star (note) 92; brethren in Clay Co. to Jackson mob, 107; Elders in Clay Co. to  Samuel C. Owens et al., 113; Joseph Smith, Jun., to Messrs. Thornton, Doniphan et al., 114; Elders of Clay Co. to Gov. Dunklin, 117; Cornelius Cilium to Enquirer, 121; Joseph Smith, Jun., et al. to John Lincoln et al., 121, 122; W. W. Phelps, David Whitmer et al. to the Evening and Morning Star, an Appeal 126; et seq.; John Corril to Samuel C. Owens, 135; John Corrill to Col. Thos. Pitcher, 135; of High Council Mo., to the elders in ministry, 138; Joseph Smith, Jun., to Lyman Wight et al., 144 et seq.; Oliver Cowdery to Joseph B. Bosworth, 163; Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon to George James, 170; J. T. V. Thompson to W. W. Phelps, 171; Alvah L. Tippits to Joseph Smith, Jun., 173; W. W. Phelps to Esq. Thompson, 177; Daniel Dunklin to W. W. Phelps et al. 178 (note); Orson Hyde in behalf of Twelve to Joseph Smith, Jun., 209, 210; Joseph Smith, Jun., to the Saints scattered abroad, (note) 229 et seq.; Thomas Shaw to Saints of the Most High, 230 et seq.; W. W. Phelps to Rev. John Hewitt, 232; Warren A. Cowdery to Oliver Cowdery, 239; Joseph Smith Jun., to the Elders of Church, 253, 272 (and note); Harvey Whitlock to the Prophet, 313, 314; Joseph Smith Jun., to Harvey Whitlock, 314; Orson Hyde to Joseph Smith, Jun., 335 et seq.; William Smith to Joseph Smith, Jun., 338, 339; Joseph Smith Jun., to William Smith, 340 et seq.; Warren A. Cowdery to Messenger and Advocate, 375; Daniel Dunklin to W. W. Phelps to brethren in Kirtland, 444; Warren Parish to the Prophet, 447; Joseph Smith Jun., et al. to brethren in Mo., 455; Joseph Smith, Jun., et al. to John Thornton, Esq., et al., 456 et seq.; Daniel Dunklin to W. W. Phelps et al., 461; Joseph Smith, Jun., to the Church of L. D. S., 508; Joseph Smith, Jun., to the Church, 511; Newel K. Whitney et al. to the Saints scattered abroad, 515 et seq.

Lewis, Lorenzo, L.,--accused before High Council, 285; conversation with prophet, 318.

Licenses,--resolutions concerning, 403; for Elders to perform marriage ceremony, 408.

Lions, Father,--testifies in High COuncil, Kirtland, 33.

Lyman, Amasa,--recruiting officer in Zion's Camp, 72.

M

Manifestations,--spiritual, in Kirtland Temple, 420, 432.

Manship, Esq.,--Jackson Co., Mo., 46.

Marks, Wiliam,--Messenger and Advocate transferred to, 486 (and note); appointed bishop's agent, 513.

Marriage,--article on, Doctrine and Covenants, 246 (and note).

Marriages,--in Kirtland, 331, 376, 377.

Marsh, Thomas B.,--chosen to receive endowments, 113; chosen an Apostle, 187; ordination of, 194; recognized as president of the Twelve, 219, 220 (and notes); revelation to, 499.

Martin, Moses,--asleep on sentry duty, 66; court martialed, 67.

Matthews, Rev. Timothy R.,--trifles with work, 506, 507.

McBridge, Brother,--entertains the Prophet, 41.

McWithy, Elder Isaac,--tavern-keeper, appointed to raise funds for relief of Kirtland, 44; entertains Prophet, 45; before Kirtland High Council, 446.

Meeting,--Citizens of Clay Co.,  96; disturbance in, 98; at which Twelve Apostles are chosen, 181 et seq.; public, at Liberty, Mo., minutes of, 448 et seq.; of Saints in Clay Co., minutes of, 452 et seq.; second of, Clay Co. citizens, 454; of classes in Kirtland Temple, 474; in Kirtland Temple, minutes of, 512; general, of Saints in Mo., 524.

Memorial, Kirtland Bishopric's--513, 515 et seq.

Messenger, Rev., meets with Prophet, 311.

Messenger and Advocate, the Latter-day Saints,--167 (and note); change of editors of, 227.

Miller, Ebenezer,--brings reinforcements to Zion's Camp, 76.

Mission, British,--appointed 489, 490 (and notes); Prophet's instruction to, 492; arrival of in New York, 494; departure of for England, 494, 495; arrival of at Liverpool, 498; progress of, 502, 503, 504; work accomplish by, 528, 529.

Mob,--threats of, at Kirtland, 2; Jackson Co., attempts of to destroy Zion's Camp, 103; prevented by storm, 103.

Morey, Elder,--manliness of, 401.

Morley, Isaac,--chosen to receive endowments, 112.

Mormons, The,--in Mo., action of sectarian ministers against, 3; proposition of Jackson Co. people to, 98; propositions of to citizens of Jackson Co., 121.

Mummies,--Egyptian, exhibited in Kirtland, 235; purchased by the Saints, 236.

Murdock, John,--at conference in Avon, N. Y., 44; accompanies Orson Pratt to Kirtland, 44.

N

Nickerson, Father Freeman, entertains Prophet, 41; appointed to raise funds for relief of Kirtland, 44; accompanies Prophet to Westfield, N.
Y., 45.

O

Olived, John W.,--inquires for Prophet, 378.

Ordinations,--of Twelve Apostles, 187 et seq. (and note); order of considered, 187 (and note); of Lyman E. Johnson, 187; of Brigham Young, 188; of Heber C. Kimball, 189; of Orson Hyde, 189; of David W. Patten, 190; of Luke S. Johnson, 190; of William E. M'Lellin, 190; of John F. Boynton, 191; of William Smith, 191, of Parley P. Pratt, 191; of Thomas B. Marsh, 194; of Orson Pratt, 194, (and note); of Seventies and others, 207; propriety of, 400.

Orton, Roger,--appointed to raise funds for relief of Kirtland, 44; reproved by the Prophet, 90; excommunicated, 527.

Owens, Samuel C.,--speaks against the Saints, 97; bitterness of against Saints, 99; ludicrous adventure of, 100.

P

Packer, Elder,--Assists the Prophet, 326.

Page, John E.,--called to the ministry, 253 (and note); labors of, 491.

Page, Hyrum,--carries message for Prophet, 120.

Parrish, Warren,--becomes Prophet's scribe, 293; illness of, 385; resumes duties as scribe, 393; apostasy of, 528;

Partridge, Bishop Edward,--at conference, Clay Co., 1; arrives in Zion's Camp from Clay Co., 95; called to receive endowments, 112; appointed to purchase lands in Mo., 112; appointed to purchase lands in Mo., 112; report of to council, 527.

Patten, J. M.--complaints against, 482.

Petitions,--in behalf of Mo., Saints, 329.

Phelps, William W.,--called to receive endowments, 112; appointed to assist in printing establishment in Kirtland, 112; arrival of in Kirtland, 227; makes his home with Prophet, 227.

Piexotto, Dr.,--teacher of Hebrew, 355.

Porter, Francis,--inquires concerning work, 295.

Pratt, Orson,--at conference, Avon, N. Y., 44; appointed to return to Kirtland preaching by way, 44; appointed to return to Kirtland preaching by way, 44; appointed with others to visit scattered Saints in Mo., 136; chosen an Apostle, 187; ordination of to Apostleship, 194 (and note).

Pratt, Parley P.,--sent as messenger to Prophet, 1; reports to Kirtland High Council conditions in Mo., 39; accompanies Prophet on mission to N. Y., 41; description of associations with the Prophet, (note) 43; at conference in Avon, N. Y., appointed to visit churches in Black River country, 44; recruiting officer in Zion's Camp, (note) 73; sent with message to Governor Dunklin, 88; chosen to receive endowments, 113; chosen an Apostle, 187; ordained an Apostle, 192; Oliver Cowdery's charge to, 192, 193, 194 (and note).

Prayer,--of Prophet et al. for special blessings, 2, 3; of Prophet, Oliver Cowdery, F. G. Williams for deliverance from "dr." Hurlburt, 24; for success of the Evening and Morning Star, 24; necessity of, urged, 31; of Prophet et al. for deliverance from debt and triumph over Hurlburt, 47, 48; of Prophet for deliverance of Zion, 50; special in behalf of Zebedee Coltrin's mission, 54; of Prophet and Oliver Cowdery for continuance of blessings, 175; special in behalf of Zebedee Coltrin's mission, 54; of Prophet and Oliver Cowdery for continuance of blessings, 175; special of Prophet et al. for means to go up to Zion, 291; dedicatory of Kirtland Temple, 420 et seq.; dedicatory, accepted, 427.

Presidency,--First, write to brethren scattered abroad, 4; meeting with Oliver Cowdery, 176 (and note); reconciliation between Twelve and, 372 et seq. (and note); removal to Zion, (Mo.) contemplated, 407; embarrassments of, 479; debts of, 480.

Press,--printing,--prayer for safety of, 3.

Priesthood,--remarks of the Prophet on, 477; importance of the lesser officers of, 478.

Priests,--sectarian, in secret council against the Saints in Mo., 3; High nature of calling of, 477.

R

Reproofs,--necessity of, 478.

Resolutions,--vindicating Prophet, 147 et seq.; concerning ordinations, 388; Prophet's draft of, to govern ordinations, 394; action of Twelve on, 395; action of Kirtland High Council on, 396; action of High COuncil of Zion on, 397; action of First Presidency on, 398; final action on, 402; on licenses, 403, 404.

Revelations,--inquiries preceding, (note) 210.

Revelations,--on organization of the High Council, 28, et seq.; on redemption of Zion, 36 et seq.; on consecration and stewardships, 54 et seq.; on Fishing river disbanding Zion's Camp, 108 et seq.; concerning Warren A. Cowdery, 170; on priesthood, 210 et seq.; concerning Reynolds Cahoon, 299; to Frederick G. Williams, 300; to the Twelve, 300; to Warren Parrish, 311; to Harvey Whitlock, 314; to Lyman Sherman, 345; on those who have died without receiving the Gospel, 380; concerning the coming of Moses, Elias, and Elijah, 435; on labors in Salem, 465; concerning the Twelve; 499, et seq.; making known transgression of John Whitmer, W. W. Phelps, 511.

Rich, Charles C.,--President of High Priests in Mo., 507 (and note).

Rich, Leonard,--on trial for transgressing the Word of Wisdom, 27; blessing of Prophet on, 329.

Richards, Jenetta,--first member confirmed in England, 504 (and note).

Richards, Willard,--baptism of, 469 (and note); joins British Mission, 492.

Rigdon, Sidney,--Question of his removal from Kirtland to New Portage, 25; with the Prophet in Geneseo, preaches, 44; attends conference at Avon, N. Y., 44; accompanies Prophet from New York to Kirtland, 44; blessed by the Prophet et al., 51; remains in Kirtland during Zion's Camp expedition, 64; discourse of at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, 413 et seq.

Riley, Rev.,--speaks against the Saints, 97.

Robinson, Ebenezer,--baptism of, 290 (and note).

Robinson, George W.,--appointed Church recorder, 513.

Rockwood, ALbert P.,--investigates Mormonism, 501, 502 (and note).

Ross, Colonel,--converses with Prophet, 80.

Roundy, Shadrach,--entertains Prophet, 40; entertains Prophet, 298 (and note).

Russell, Isaac,--494 (and note); raises branch in Alston, 508.

Russell,--States Attorney for Portage county, treatment of Prophet 47.

S

Sacrament, The Lord's Supper,--manner of administering in Kirtland Temple, 431.

Saints,--in Missouri, preparations of, to return to Jackson Co., 24; condition of, 39; manufacture of arms by, 69; requested to evacuate Clay county, 448, 449 et seq.; gather at Shoal Creek, 467, 475; found Far West, 468, 482, 483 (and note), 491, 596.

Salem, Mass.,--Prophet's labors in, 464, 465.

Salisbury, Wilkins Jenkins,--entertains Prophet, 4; unwisdom of, 442.

School,--Kirtland, report of, 200 see also Elders, school of.

Seixas, Prof. Joshua,--engaged to teach Hebrew, 368; arrival of in Kirtland, 385; lectures in Kirtland, 390; Prophet's regard for, 397; misunderstanding with, 402; sends for family, 406.

Seventies,--spoken of by the Prophet, 181 (and note), 182 (and notes); organization of, 201 (and note), 202 (and notes); first quorum, names of, 203 (and note); number of to be chosen, 221 (and note); report of labors of, 346; anointed in Kirtland Temple, 388; second quorum of, 391; faith of, 395; sustained as Apostles and Special Witnesses, 418; presidents of, to be chosen from among Seventies, 475 (and note).

Sherman, Lyman,--seeks the word of the Lord, 345.

Smith, Alvin,--seen in Celestial Kingdom, 380.

Smith, Asael,--grandfather of the Prophet, prediction of, 443.

Smith, Emma,--appointed to make selection of sacred hymns, 273.

Smith, George A.,--with Zion's Camp, 67 (note); discovers spring, 73; and armor bearer to the Prophet, 88; attacked by cholera, 115.

Smith, Hyrum,--joins Zion's Camp at Salt River with recruits from Michigan, 87 (and note); chosen Captain of Prophet's life guards, 88.

Smith, Jerusha B.,--death of, 519.

Smith, Uncle John,--mission of, to Eastern States, 446.

Smith, Joseph, Jun. the Prophet,--prays for special blessings, 2, 3; visits Wilkins J. Salisbury, 4; on rights and duties of the President of the Church, 25; on order of ancient councils, 25; on responsibility of those who sit in judgment, 26; prophesies his triumph over enemies, 26; reviews and corrects minutes of High Council, 31; urges necessity of prayer, 31; organizes High Council at Kirtland, 31, 32; declares intention of going to Zion, 39; calls for volunteers to accompany him to Mo., 39; seeks volunteers for Zion, 40; preaches at Westfield, 41; prayer of, for welfare of the Saints, 41; course of travel of, when seeking volunteers for Zion, 41; holds meetings at Father Nickerson's, 42; preaches in Palmersville, 42; preaches at Freedom, N. Y., 42, 43; attends conference at Avon, Livingston Co., N. Y., 44; journey from New York to Kirtland, 45; attends court at Chardon, 46; prophecy against "Dr." Hurlburt, 46; a witness for Father Johnson at Chardon, 47; prayer of, with Bishop Whitney et al., 47; triumph over "Dr" Hurlburt, 49 (and note); temporal labors of, 50; attends conference at New Portage, 50; escaped from enemies en route from Kirtland to New Portage, 50; blessed by Sidney Rigdon et al., 51; attends conference, Norton, O., 52; returns to Kirtland, 54; receives money for deliverance of Zion, 61; departs for Kirtland with Zion's Camp, 63; loneliness of, in passing ancient battle-field, 66; instructs Zion's Camp relative to animals, 71; writes from "Camp of Israel" to brethren in Mo., 75; reproves camp cook for partiality, 75; gives the history of Zelph, the Lamanite, by inspiration, 79; prophesies a scourge on ZIon's Camp, 80 (and note); accepts a rejected supper, 81; commander-in-chief of Zion's Camp, (note) 88; reproves brethren for trifling with God's promises, 95; reflections on Jackson Co. proposition to Saints, 99; sickness of, in camp, 101; addresses committee from Ray Co., 106 (and note); reveals his identity to Cornelius Gillium, 108; leaves Rush Creek, Clay Co., 115; visits with brethren in Clay Co., 120; prophesies stay of the plague of cholera, 120; organizes High Council in Mo., 122, 124; authorizes discharge of Zion's Camp members, 123 (and note); departs from Mo. for Kirtland, 135; arrives in Kirtland, 139; charges brought against, at Kirtland, 142 et seq.; foreman in Kirtland Temple quarry, 161; mission to Michigan, 168, 169; calls meeting for choosing the Twelve, 180; vision of Church organization, 182 (and note); confirms ordination of the Twelve, (note) 187, 188; instructs the Twelve, 198 et seq.; instruction on the sacrament, 204; instructs the Twelve and Seventy, 219 et seq.; (and note); instructions of, to Elders in Zion, 228; works on translation of Book of Abraham, 238, 286, 289, 320; returns from Michigan to Kirtland, 253; seeks special blessing for himself and brethren, 281; takes leave of brethren bound for Zion, 281; comforts and instructs the Twelve, 287; blessing of, upon Bishop Whitney, 288; waits upon his father in illness, 288, 289, 290; prays for deliverance of brother's wife, 292, 293; meets parents of Bishop N. K. Whitney, 294; remarks concerning  prophets, 302; labors with those in error, 303, 304; meets "Joshua," alia Matthias, 304 et seq.; cautions debating society, 317; insulted at Mentor, 323; requires payment of postage on letters, 325; assisted by the brethren 326, 327; reproves a young lady, 329; reflections on opening year, 352; difficulty with Wm. Smith, his brother, 334; reconciled to William Smith, 353; remarks on ministry, 394; reflections on intemperance, 406; instructions to the ministry in Kirtland Temple, 431, 432; vies on abolition, 436 et seq.; mission with others to Salem, Mass., 463 et sep; reflections on religious intolerance, 465; illness of, 492; suggestions of apostates concerning, 493; resigns office in Safety Society, 497; starts on a mission to Canada, 502; detained at Painesville, by vexations law suit, 502; returns from Canada to Kirtland, 508; arrives at Far West, 521; departs from Missouri for Kirtland, 525; arrives at Kirtland, 528.

Smith, Joseph, Sen., the Patriarch,--pronounces blessings of his progenitors upon head of the Prophet, 32; blesses Samuel H., 22; also Father John Johnson, 32; illness of, 288, 289; sorrow of, over his son William's errors, 338; gives patriarchal blessings, 346; reconciles the Prophet and William, 353; mission of, to Eastern States, 446; return to Kirtland from Eastern mission, 467.

Smith, Lyman,--wounded accidentally, 107.

Smith, Mary, grandmother of the Prophet,--arrives in Kirtland, 442; death of, 443.

Smith, Samuel H.,--charged with neglecting military duty, 292; President of Kirtland High Council, 518.

Smith, Sylvester,--member of Zion's Camp, 65; refractory actions of, in Camp, 65; reproved by the Prophet, 68; rebellion of in Zion's Camp, 83 (and note); creates division in Camp, 100; trial of for slandering the Prophet, 142 et seq.; refusal to abide decision of COuncil, 149; second trial of, 150 et seq.; vindicates the Prophet in a signed statement, 160.

Smith, William,--disorderly conduct of, in High Council, 295; difficulty with the Prophet and his brother Hyrum, 296, 297; assaults the Prophet, 334; seeks Prophet's forgiveness, 338; charges against, 346; reconciliation with Prophet, 353, 354; confession of, 354.

Snow, Willard,--joins Zion's Camp, 65.

Snow, Zerubbabel,--chosen commissary General of Zion's Camp. 64.

Snyder, John,--494 (and note).

Society, Kirtland Safety Anti-Banking,--organization of, 470 et seq.; remarks of the Prophet on, 472, 473; its notes rejected, 487, 488 (and note); president of, resigns, 497.

Spirits,--evil, assail Elders in England, 503.

Spring,--Mormon, 73.

Squires, Andrew J.,--returns to Church, 319.

Star, Evening and Morning,--criticism of, 40; to be discontinued, 167 (and note).

T

Taylor, Jonathan,--Norton, Ohio, entertains Prophet, 50.

Temple,--blessing of those who assisted in building, 205 et seq.; names of those who assisted in building, 205, 206; subscriptions to, 234; New York Evening Star on, 351; progress in building, 363; rules to be observed in,  368, 369; Priesthood meeting in, minutes of, 370; washing and anointings in, 379; arrangement of veils of, 399; dedication of, 410 et seq.; contributions to, 411.

Thayer, Ezra,--prefers charges against Curtis Hodges, 33; seized with cholera, 106.

Theology,--lectures on, 176 (and note); to be published in Doctrine and Covenants, 180.

Times, Northern,--weekly news paper, 227, 434.

Tithing,--covenant of the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery concerning, 175.

Turnham, Mr.,--moderator of meeting, Clay county, speaks in defense of the Saints, 97.

Tyler, Father,--restored to fellowship, 50.

V

Visions,--Prophet's of Celestial Kingdom, 380; of the Twelve, 381; of other persons, 382, 386, 387, 392; in Kirtland Temple, 435.

W

Walker, Esquire,--Palmersville, entertains Prophet, 42;

Warning, Voice of,--published, 518 (and note).

Watt, George D.,--baptism of, first in England, 504.

Wells, Daniel H.,--on Prophet's intuitive knowledge on law 4 (note).

West, Nathan,--prefers charges against Samuel Brown, 137; against Hewlett Branch, 139.

Whitmer, Christian,--chosen to receive endowments, 113.

Whitmer, David,--chosen to receive endowments, 113; made president of High Council and Church in Missouri, 124, 125; instructs High Council, 136, 137.

Whitlock, Harvey,--transgression of, 314, 315.

Whitmer, John,--chosen to receive endowments, 113; editor of Messenger and Advocate, 229.

Whitmer, Peter, Sen.,--blesses his sons, 124.

Whitmer, Peter, Jun.,--chosen to receive endowments, 113.

Whitney, Bishop Newel K.,--mission to New York, 288; blessing of the Prophet upon, 288; blessing of the Prophet upon, 288; feast of the poor at house of, 362.

Wight, Lyman,--messenger to Prophet at Kirtland, 1; reports to Kirtland High Council conditions in Missouri, 39; at conference at Avon, N. Y., 44; joins Zion's Camp at Salt river, 87; elected general of Zion's Camp, 88 (and note); baptizes Dean Gould, 95; makes division in Camp, 100; chosen to receive endowments, 113; accused of teaching false doctrine, 147; charges against, 481.

Wilcox, Eber,--dies of cholera, 116.

Williams, Frederick G.--made pay master of Zion's Camp, 64; reproved by the Prophet, 90; appointed to administer to the sick in Cleveland, 146; appointed scribe to the Patriarch of the Church, 273; accused before Kirtland High Council, 485; objected to as one of the First Presidency, 509.

Willis, Ira J.,--whipped by mob in Jackson county, 46.

Wilson, Moses,--Jackson county, whips Ira J. Willis, 46.

Wilson, Reuben,--China, N. Y., charges Prophet for entertainment, 45;

Witnesses, Three,-choose the Twelve Apostles, 186 (and note); propriety of choosing the Twelve, 187 (note).

Witnesses, Twelve,--see Apostles.

Woodruff, Wilford W.,--opens mission in Fox Islands, 507.

Y

Young, Brigham,--member of Zion's Camp, 63; cares for families of Brothers Angel and Boothe, 64; directed by Prophet to call meeting for choosing the Twelve, 180, 181 (and note); chosen an Apostle, 187; ordination of to apostleship, 187 (note) and 188; flight of from Kirtland, 529.

Young, Joseph,--member of Zion's Camp, 63; Prophet predicts that he would be president of Seventies, 181 (note); ordination of, 201, 202.

Z

Zelph,--a Lamanite, skeleton of, 79 (and note), 80.

Zion,--prayer for deliverance of, 3; action of Priesthood at Kirtland concerning deliverance of, 222; sons of, blessed, 242; the Prophet et al. appointed to receive money for, 434; other stakes of, than Kirtland to be appointed, 514.

Zion's Camp, see Camp.
