Monte S. Nyman, Robert L. Millet, Joseph Smith Translation: The Restoration of Plain and Precious Things ( 1985)

3

Insights into the Book of Genesis

George A. Horton, Jr.

One afternoon, shortly after the "new" King James Version, LDS Edition came out, I boarded the Wasatch Boulevard Bus going south on State Street in Salt Lake City and found that there was only one seat vacant—right in the middle of the back row. After the bus had gone a few blocks, I noticed the person next to me was reading his Bible. All I knew about him was where he got on and off the bus. His well-worn Bible appeared to be one of the old black-covered Cambridge missionary editions, and he was reading Genesis 14. He finished the chapter, slowly closed the book, and began to gaze out the window.

Risking the possibility that he might not be LDS, I said, "Pardon me, do you mind if I ask you a question?" Looking a little surprised, he said, "No, go ahead."

"Do you mind telling me why you are reading the old Bible when the new one is available?" Again he looked a little shocked at the challenge, but as he searched for words, he almost unconsciously pulled his book close to him and said, "I just like my old Bible, that's all." Then he added, "And besides, I guess it's the money."

"You can buy a new Bible at the Distribution Center for about seven dollars," I suggested. After a pause, he said, "What's so good about the new one?"

"Well, I happened to notice that you just read Genesis 14. Did you know that you skipped over sixteen complete verses of scripture that you didn't even read?"

"What do you mean?" he questioned.

Reaching into my briefcase, I pulled out my new KJV, LDS Edition. Opening to Genesis 14, and holding the book over where he could see, I pointed to the little superscript "a" at the end of verse 24. "See that little 'a.' Now let's look down to the crossreferences. It refers us to JST Genesis 14:25-40. If we go back to the Joseph Smith Translation [hereafter referred to as JST] in the appendix, we will find sixteen more verses of scripture which you did not read." The questioning look on his face was obvious, but before he could even finish his next question, "What does it say?" I had already closed my book and was putting it back in my briefcase. Just then the buzzer rang for his stop, and as he started for the door, he looked back and grinned as if to say "Thanks!"

The man who studies the stories and message of Genesis without the aid of the Joseph Smith Translation is like unto the captain of a ship who, while viewing the tips of many icebergs (doctrines), tries to estimate their true size and shape without considering all information available and the underlying currents which affect their movement. His ship (the good ship Private Interpretation) will surely be on a collision course—he will miscalculate, and if he does not make the proper corrections may, like the Titanic, sink into the depths of faulty interpretation and misunderstanding from which it is difficult to return.

HOW IS THE BOOK OF MOSES RELATED TO JST GENESIS?

Most of us probably don't fully appreciate or have a true perspective on the value of the JST because we have been using part of it for such a long time (i.e., the book of Moses). We are much like a person who often has steak or some other delicacy for dinner—he probably won't fully appreciate it unless he is suddenly without it.

To gain valuable insights into Genesis, the place to start is with the book of Moses—in fact, chapter 1. The Lord revealed to Joseph Smith the experience Moses had when he (Moses) "was caught up into an exceedingly high mountain, And he saw God face to face, and he talked with him" (Moses 1:1-2). This revelation to the latter-day prophet came at the time when he was being instructed to begin the inspired study, translation, or revision of the Bible. [^1]

Our current book of Moses (2:1-8:30) is an almost verbatim copy of JST Genesis 1:1-8:18 (covering King James Version Genesis 1:1-6:13). It was prepared by Orson Pratt in 1878 as he edited the Pearl of Great Price to be presented in the general conference of the Church. [^2] Therefore, when we read the book of Moses we are in reality reading the first chapters of JST Genesis. The title of the former seems appropriate since the first book of the Bible in some editions is given as "The First Book of Moses Called Genesis." (See title of Genesis in the King James Version.)

Approaching the study of the JST is a lifetime endeavor to which we each bring different levels of gospel scholarship. Since our individual insights usually come according to the level of spiritual maturity which we bring to the task, you may be able to add to the following basic questions:

WHAT IS THE FUNDAMENTAL MESSAGE OF GENESIS?

When discussing the Genesis creation story, what teacher has not been pressed with questions such as: How was the earth created? How long did it take? Were there dinosaurs before Adam? Were there pre-Adamites? Did God just place a spirit in man at one point in his evolutionary development from lower forms? What about organic evolution? Was Adam brought from another planet? Where did God come from? Did God's father's father have a father? What is an intelligence? Where did it all begin? And numerous others that you can think of. Is it possible that most of these questions totally miss the mark?

If the Lord intended to reveal the specific details of creation there seems to be a great defect in the present record. In this regard, Elder James E. Talmage said, "The opening chapters of Genesis, and scriptures related thereto, were never intended as a textbook of geology, archeology, earth-science, or man-science." [^3]

Instead of trying to squeeze out information that doesn't seem to have been in the Genesis account in the first place (indeed, may not yet be revealed—consider Doctrine and Covenants 101:32-34), let us ask the following: What is the source of the book? Who was the prophet-scribe? When did he write? Where was he at the time? To whom was he writing? What seemed to be the intent of his book?

The Divine Author is easy to recognize, especially in the first part—the premortal Lord Jesus Christ is speaking as the Father by divine investiture of authority. [^4] He is the Almighty God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob—the great I Am—and Jehovah of the Old Testament. Moses, the eighty-year-old shepherd of Midian, spoke to him "face to face" (Moses 1:2), beheld the world and the end thereof (1:8), was instructed at the time of the burning bush (1:17), received the call to deliver Israel from its long Egyptian bondage (1:6, 26), and was commanded to "write the things which I shall speak" (1:40). That these writings were not only for the Hebrew slaves is revealed in the added note that "in a day when the children of men shall esteem my words as naught and take many of them from the book which thou shalt write, behold, I will raise up another like unto thee; and they shall be had again among the children of men—among as many as shall believe" (1:41). The translation of the Bible through Joseph Smith must be a major part, if not the direct fulfillment, of this prophecy.

Judging from the more complete revelation to Moses (found in JST Genesis), could not ancient and modern Israel conclude that among the most important things they were to know are the following:

Because Genesis covers a period of history over twice as long as all the other thirty-eight books of the Old Testament combined, obviously it was not intended as a detailed history, but contains things the Lord felt were vital for Israel to know.

Before considering the great gospel themes which become plain in the JST, one other preliminary observation could be made to emphasize the large amount of additional scripture that it makes available. If we organized all the scriptures chronologically (in parallel columns) so the scriptural story could be read as completely as possible, we might be mildly shocked at Genesis 5:21-24 (the Enoch material), when instead of 5 or 10 or even 25 additional verses in the JST, there are 111 consecutive verses with no counterpart in the common edition of Genesis.

WHAT GREAT GOSPEL THEMES ARE BETTER CLARIFIED IN JST GENESIS?

One who is familiar with Genesis in the King James Version (hereafter KJV) is excited when he discovers some almost obscure gospel themes suddenly coming into focus in the JST. Let us consider eight which are either obscure or completely missing in the KJV:

The Role and Mission of Jesus Christ

The single most important concept to grasp in a study of Genesis is the role and mission of Jesus Christ (known in his preexistent state as Jehovah). Unfortunately, the KJV adds to the obscurity of this idea because the translators generally rendered the Hebrew tetragrammaton (i.e., Jod He Vav He) representing Jehovah (or Yahweh) to read LORD (i.e., large capital L and small capitals ORD). Therefore, one can read Genesis without recognizing that Jehovah (or Jesus Christ) is on almost every page.

Some of the major facts which cannot be overlooked in the JST are:

He is the Only Begotten Son—creator of heaven and earth.

He was prepared before the foundation of the world—chosen to suffer for men if they would repent.

Men are created in his image.

Men were to make offerings in similitude of his atoning sacrifice.

They are to believe in him, hearken to his word, be baptized in his name, and pray to the Father in his name.

He was the Lord God who spoke to Adam and all the prophets.

With his Father, it is his work and glory to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

In short, Adam knew of the mission of Jesus Christ, received instruction from him, understood the necessity of exercising faith in him, bore witness of him, and taught these things to his descendants for several generations.

The Role of Satan

To appreciate the contribution of the JST on the adversary's role, we remind ourselves that the word Satan occurs only nineteen times in the KJV Old Testament, and its first occurrence does not appear until 1 Chronicles 21:11 Chronicles 21:1. The word Lucifer occurs only once, at Isaiah 14:12, and the word devil does not occur at all. Thus, we see that none of them occur in the common version of Genesis. [^5]

We recognize the work of Satan as represented by the serpent in the story of the Fall, but his presence or influence seems to be practically nonexistent in the rest of the Genesis story. Consider the JST Genesis contributions:

Satan wanted to save all mankind and receive God's honor.

He rebelled and sought to destroy man's agency.

He was cast down and became the devil, the father of lies, to deceive, blind, and lead men captive.

He spoke by the mouth of the serpent.

He knew not the mind of God.

Because of his sophistries, many loved him more than God.

Cain's unacceptable offering came only after Satan commanded it.

Satan agreed to submit to Cain's commands in return for Cain's entering into the secret oaths to commit murder.

Thus Satan became the author of secret combinations of darkness.

The Lord Jesus Christ and Satan represent the two great forces vying for man's allegiance in this life—(1) the power of life, truth, love, service and salvation offered by Jesus Christ, or (2) the power of death, error, darkness, and damnation which come by following Satan. We can only wonder to what extent the seeming systematic failure of these topics to be found in the common version of Genesis represents a calculated effort to obscure Satan's struggle for souls. Did Nephi see this in vision? "For behold, they have taken away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord" (1 Nephi 13:26).

The Fall of Adam

In Genesis, the Fall is mentioned primarily as an event only. Most of the Christian world, with the help of a few assumptions, reaches the following conclusions: Adam and Eve both openly rebelled against God and committed a wicked, evil sin—undoubtedly breaking the law of chastity. Also, that by this sin they doomed all mankind to be born already stained with original sin upon their souls into a world of grief, sorrow, and suffering.

By way of contrast, the JST says:

"The sins of the parents [e.g., Adam and Eve] cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world" (JST Genesis 6:56/Moses 6:54).

Man's nature is not fallen to begin with, but "they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish." (JST Genesis 4:13/Moses 5:13.)

The consequences of partaking of the fruit are given and then qualified by "nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself" (JST Genesis 2:20-22/Moses 3:17).

After the Fall, Adam and Eve were taught "the plan of salvation unto all men, through the blood of mine Only Begotten" (JST Genesis 6:65/Moses 6:62).

Contrary to the traditional Christian view of being dejected, conscience-smitten, beaten, hanging their heads in shame, and in a general state of hopelessness, when they comprehended the implications of the Fall, Adam and Eve sort of jumped up and clicked their heels.

"Because of my transgression," said Adam, "my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God" (JST Genesis 4:10/Moses 5:10).

Eve "heard all these things, and was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient" (JST Genesis 4:11/Moses 5:11).

The Nature of Man

According to the generally accepted Christian doctrine, man is born with the taint of original sin upon his soul; therefore, his nature is automatically evil. It would be hard to overestimate the negative psychological impact this false doctrine would have on a person's life when trying to overcome individual weaknesses and gain eternal perfection. Would this not make it possible to rationalize bad behavior by assuming that by nature, man is bad to begin with?

The JST clarifies these fundamental aspects of the nature of man: "The Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world" (JST Genesis 6:56/Moses 6:54; emphasis added). But, if children are born whole, then how does one account for the wickedness in our society? The scriptures explain by saying that "when they begin to grow up, sin conceiveth in their hearts" (JST Genesis 6:56/Moses 6:55).

"Adam and Eve . . . made all things known unto their sons and their daughters. And Satan came among them, saying: I am also a son of God; and he commanded them, saying: Believe it not; and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish." (JST Genesis 4:13/Moses 5:12-13.) Enoch reaffirms this teaching: "Behold, Satan hath come among the children of men, and tempteth them to worship him; and men have become carnal, sensual, and devilish, and are shut out from the presence of God" (JST Genesis 6:50/Moses 6:49).

It is clear that "every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning" (D&C 93:38), and can remain that way unless there is failure to yield to "the enticings of the Holy Spirit" (Mosiah 3:19). In most of the passages there is an emphasis on the fact that man becomes that way, clearly implying he was not so to begin with.

The Gospel of Jesus Christ Was Taught from the Beginning

The fact that the gospel of redemption was taught from the beginning has to be one of the most exciting insights we encounter in our gospel study. "The Gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost" (JST Genesis 5:44/Moses 5:58). Thus we see the perfect justice of God in working with his children for their salvation. This reinforces the apostle Paul's statement that "Jesus Christ [is] the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever" (Hebrews 13:8). The principles that will sanctify, save, and exalt men today are the same that applied in every age or dispensation.

Jesus Christ (the Only Begotten Son) was called before the foundation of the world to be the Savior and Redeemer. Therefore, even though men sin, through faith in Christ, true repentance, and baptism, they can be given the gift of the Holy Ghost, and by living in the Lord's way, be justified, sanctified, sealed up to eternal life, and eventually dwell in his presence. Since these blessings are contingent on man's overcoming his personal sins, it is no surprise that the most persistent single injunction in the early record is for men to repent. This is in contrast to the KJV where there is no direct call to repent in the entire book of Genesis. In no other place in scripture is the need to repent more consistently emphasized than in the JST.

Adam was told to repent, and he in turn called upon his sons to repent.

The Lord called on men everywhere by the Holy Ghost to repent.

All men must repent.

One must repent to inherit the kingdom.

Christ suffered for sins and we will return to him if we repent.

God's Way Vs. Man's Way

The big choice placed before Adam and Eve, their children, and grandchildren is identical to ours. Will we choose to serve the Lord, or, by deliberate choice (or default), serve Satan? The early record provides ample examples of the consequences of such a decision. Adam and Eve taught their children in the ways of the Lord, but Satan prevailed "and they [the children] loved Satan more than God" (JST Genesis 4:12-13/Moses 5:12-13). At Cain's birth, Adam and Eve were filled with great anticipation. Eve said, "I have gotten a man from the Lord" (Genesis 4:1). "But behold, Cain hearkened not, saying: Who is the Lord that I should know him? . . . And Cain loved Satan more than God." (JST Genesis 5:4, 6/Moses 5:16, 18.)

However, not all was lost; his younger brother (Abel) "walked in holiness before the Lord" (JST Genesis 5:11/Moses 5:26), yet another (Seth) offered an "acceptable sacrifice" (JST Genesis 6:4/Moses 6:3), and they began "to call upon the name of the Lord" (JST Genesis 6:5/Moses 5:4). Undoubtedly there were others who chose the path of faith and obedience, but the sacred records reflect that many in Adam's generation did not enthusiastically lean toward spiritual things.

Righteous patriarchs did teach their children "in the ways of God" (JST Genesis 6:12, 22, 43/Moses 6:13, 21, 41), and those who learned to "walk with [the Lord]" and "abide" in him (JST Genesis 6:36/Moses 6:34) became the sons and daughters of God. Those who would not hearken became known as the sons and daughters of men. The JST clearly provides the reason why Noah, his sons, and their wives boarded the boat and were saved, while the rest of their family, friends, and neighbors all went to a watery grave. The JST says: "And Noah and his sons hearkened unto the Lord, and gave heed, and they were called the sons of God" (JST Genesis 8:1/Moses 8:13). This also explains why the Lord was grieved when Noah's daughters accepted marriage proposals from the sons of men (i.e., those who would not hearken). (JST Genesis 8:3/Moses 8:15.)

Lest the value of the JST be missed, consider the conclusion reached in a popular Bible dictionary about the nature of the sons of God and daughters of men referred to in Genesis 6:2: "The text seems to imply that the gods married existing gigantic earthly women and that these marriages produced the mighty men . . . [or] Nephilim (i.e., giants) . . ." [^6] Thus the story is further dismissed as simply "saga and legend." [^7]

The Priesthood

The only direct reference to priesthood in KJV Genesis is to Melchizedek, priest of the most high God (see Genesis 14:18-20). From this, who could possibly reconstruct the history or operation of the priesthood for approximately twenty-five hundred years—from Adam to Moses?

To Enoch it was revealed that after Adam was baptized and received the Holy Ghost, the Lord said, "And thou art after the order of him who was without beginning of days or end of years, from all eternity to all eternity" (Moses 6:67), thus referring to the Holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God, now called the Melchizedek Priesthood (cf. JST Hebrews 7:3; D&C 107:3). After mentioning that Seth was appointed in his murdered brother's stead, the record continues, "Now this same Priesthood, which was in the beginning, shall be in the end of the world also" (JST Genesis 6:7/Moses 6:7). The Lord ordained Noah (see JST Genesis 8:7/Moses 8:19 and cf. D&C 107:52). Melchizedek also, "having been approved of God, he was ordained an high priest after the order of the covenant which God made with Enoch, It being after the order of the Son of God; which order came, not by man, nor the will of man; neither by father nor mother; neither by beginning of days nor end of years; but of God" (JST Genesis 14:27-28). Priesthood functions are also mentioned: "He [Melchizedek] blessed Abram, being the high priest, and keeper of the storehouse of God; Him whom God appointed to receive tithes for the poor" (JST Genesis 14:37-38).

At least one other allusion to priesthood includes the three messengers at the time of Sodom's impending destruction, "which were holy men, and were sent forth after the order of God" (i.e., the order of the Melchizedek Priesthood). (JST Genesis 18:23.)

Covenants

When priesthood is mentioned covenants most assuredly will be there also. References to covenants do appear in Genesis, particularly in chapter 17, but the details are vague.

After mentioning that the gospel had been preached, the JST continues: "And thus all things were confirmed unto Adam, by an holy ordinance" (JST Genesis 5:45/Moses 5:59). Those covenants mentioned directly or indirectly include tithing (Genesis 14:20), priesthood (JST Genesis 6:7/Moses 6:7), and baptism (Moses 6:52). The Lord also covenanted to preserve the patriarchal lineage of Enoch, Methuselah, Noah, and Abraham (JST Genesis 7:58/Moses 7:51; 8:2; JST Genesis 8:23; 9:14, 17, 21-25). However, the covenant is best elaborated in connection with Abraham wherein it is called an "everlasting covenant" (JST Genesis 13:13). He was not the first to receive it, but was counseled that he "should observe to keep all my covenants wherein I covenanted with thy fathers" (JST Genesis 17:12).

Also promised is that one would be raised up in the latter days to once again bring Israel to a knowledge of the covenants (JST Genesis 50:31).

It is clear that reading Genesis without the benefit of the JST would be something like chewing on a T-bone with much of the steak already cut off, or reading the New Testament parables, never realizing that they had a dual meaning and that the one we missed was the most valuable.

Having sampled the main course, let's go back and pick here and there at the relish plate.

WHAT OTHER UNIQUE TEXTUAL CONTRIBUTIONS ARE GIVEN?

Before considering many unique changes, it might be observed that Joseph Smith's work anticipates some of the very elements and themes emerging from recently discovered apocryphal texts, including segments about Adam, Enoch, Melchizedek, Abraham, and Joseph, thereby providing additional evidence of Joseph Smith's prophetic calling. [^8]

There are over two hundred changes or added verses in JST Genesis, which in itself suggests the monumental impact that it would have on an understanding of its message. Following are a few small but critical corrections that add to the beauty of the scriptural account:

There are many more exciting contributions to be found, each worth a diligent search.

WHAT RELATED EXTRA-TEXTUAL SOURCES ARE AVAILABLE?

One of the most significant dimensions of this quest for insights is represented by sources that are not actually in the JST itself, but which might be considered an extension of it. Robert J. Matthews has pointed out that "most of the revelations dealing with doctrinal subjects [found in the D&C] were revealed to Joseph Smith . . . from June 1830 to July 1833, which was exactly the time he was working on the Bible translation. While engaging in such a concentrated study of the scriptures, it was natural for him to ask questions and ponder on various subjects, inquire of the Lord, and receive divine revelation in answer to his inquiry." [^11] Of what consequence could this be to a greater understanding of Genesis? Consider two examples:

The section summary for Doctrine and Covenants 107 indicates that portions of that particular revelation were received as early as November 1831 and the remainder is dated 28 March 1835. Compare verses 40 to 57 with Genesis 5 (or Moses 6) about the Patriarchs: "The order of this priesthood [i.e., Melchizedek] was confirmed to be handed down from father to son, and rightly belongs to the literal descendants of the chosen seed, to whom the promises were made. This order was instituted in the days of Adam, and came down by lineage in the following manner: From Adam to Seth, who was ordained by Adam at the age of sixty-nine years, and was blessed by him three years previous to his (Adam's) death, and received the promise of God by his father, that his posterity should be the chosen of the Lord, and that they should be preserved unto the end of the earth; Because he (Seth) was a perfect man, and his likeness was the express likeness of his father, insomuch that he seemed to be like unto his father in all things, and could be distinguished from him only by his age." (D&C 107:40-43.) Then the revelation continues to indicate at what age and by whom each of the patriarchs was ordained, down to and including Noah (see D&C 107:44-52).

Continuing further, the revelation states that "Three years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all high priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing. And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel. . . . And Adam stood up in the midst of the congregation; and, notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation." (D&C 107:53-56.) None of the foregoing information is found in either Genesis or JST Genesis directly, but "These things were all written in the book of Enoch, and are to be testified of in due time" (D&C 107:57).

The wording of section 132 and its doctrinal nature reflect its connection with JST Genesis. "Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you my servant Joseph, that inasmuch as you have inquired of my hand to know and understand wherein I, the Lord, justified my servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob . . . as touching the principle and doctrine of their having many wives and concubines. . . . I am the Lord thy God, and will answer thee as touching this matter." (D&C 132:1-2.) Then follows an explanation of the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. The indications that at least part of this revelation was received while Joseph was studying the lives of these ancient patriarchs is very persuasive. Continuing, the revelation says, "Abraham received all things, whatsoever he received, by revelation and commandment" (v. 29), which brings us back to Genesis.

When introducing the covenant to Abraham, in the King James Version Abraham is instructed to "walk before me, and be thou perfect" (Genesis 17:1). In the JST this is considerably strengthened: "I, the Almighty God, give unto thee a commandment; that thou shalt walk uprightly before me, and be perfect" (emphasis added). This seems a most appropriate place to conclude.

SUMMARY

In summary, to gain insights into the book of Genesis, it has been suggested that:

However, the search of the dedicated student or teacher will not end here. He will continue to look for valuable insights wherever they may be found, and be persuaded that the most valuable commentary on the scriptures are the scriptures themselves (e.g., Lehi on the fall of Adam, Alma on the tree of life, Paul on a variety of topics relating to the early patriarchs and covenants). Other sources highly relevant to a greater understanding of Genesis include the book of Abraham, Lectures on Faith, doctrinal expositions of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve (e.g., "The Father and the Son"), statements of the First Presidency (e.g., "Origin of Man"), and the sermons and writings of the latter-day prophets (e.g., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith and the Conference Reports).

The man who studies Genesis with the aid of the JST is like unto a ship's captain who, while viewing many majestically beautiful icebergs (doctrines) floating in a vast ocean (the everlasting gospel), seeks all the information available (from the standard works and teachings of the modern prophets) as to their true size, shape, and direction. If he applies his knowledge properly, his ship (the good ship Inspired Interpretation) will surely sail safely through difficult waters to the blissful shore.

Blessed Savior, [wilt thou] guide us,

Till we reach that blissful shore.

(Hymns, no. 188)

NOTES

George A. Horton, Jr., is associate professor of Ancient Scripture at BYU.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Exodus 3:2. The "angel of the Lord" who appeared at the burning bush is changed to read "the presence of the Lord" which makes the entire conversation that follows with Jehovah (I Am) much more comprehensible. Leviticus 12:3-5. There are corrections in these three verses which seem euphemistic. That is, the changes appear to be made in order to read more comfortably in a puritan society. In verse 3, there is a change from "the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcized" to "the man child shall be circumcized." In verses 4 and 5, there is a change from "the blood of her purifying" to "the time of her purifying." There is probably no objective way of knowing whether these changes were the Prophet's idea, or whether they came from the Lord. Number 16:10. Discussed hereafter in the section on "Seek Ye the Priesthood Also." Deuteronomy 2:30. KJV reads, "But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass by him: for the Lord thy God hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate." The correction here is reminiscent of several Exodus passages. As corrected it reads, "But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass by him: for he hardened his spirit." Mortal man, under certain conditions, can see God and live. Charles A. Callis, Fundamentals of Religion (Independence, Mo.: Zion's Printing and Publishing Co., 1945), p. 155.
[^2] Exodus 5:4. The JST strengthens the Pharaoh's charge from "Wherefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, let the people from their works?" to "Wherefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, lead the people from their works?" Leviticus 21:1. "There shall none be defiled for the dead" to "There shall none be defiled with the dead." Numbers 22:20-22. A strange paradox exists in the Authorized Version. Balaam is being harassed with pleadings and lucrative bribes to curse the advancing Israelites coming into the land of Moab. King Balak sends his emissaries to further persuade Balaam. Then God instructs Balaam, "If the men come to call thee, rise up, and go with them," and then when Balaam does just that the text says, "And God's anger was kindled because he went." Does God vacillate? The corrected version reads, "If the men come to call thee, rise up if thou wilt, and go with them; but yet the word which I shall say unto thee, that shalt thou do." Deuteronomy 10:2. Discussed earlier, in the section dealing with the first and second sets of tablets. Ancient Israel had the full gospel law (cf. Hebrews 3:8; 4:2), the Melchizedek Priesthood, and the higher ordinances associated with it until they forfeited their rights through disobedience. Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1855-56), 16:152 (emphasis added).
[^3] Exodus 6:30. We are often perplexed by the seeming difference between Stephen's assertion that Moses was "mighty in words" (Acts 7:22) and Moses' own response to his call, "Oh my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue" (Exodus 4:10). A significant insight comes when the JST clarifies another Moses statement that "I am of uncircumcized lips," by rendering it to read "I am of stammering lips, and slow of speech" (JST Exodus 6:29). Leviticus 21:11. A clarifying word is added in this verse: "Neither shall he go in to touch any dead body." Deuteronomy 14:21. This passage gives the impression the Lord has a double standard—one for Israel and another for strangers. "Ye shall not eat of any thing that dieth of itself; thou shalt give it unto the stranger . . . or thou mayest sell it unto an alien" is corrected to read, "Ye shall not eat of anything that dieth of itself; thou shalt not give it unto the stranger . . . or thou mayest not sell it unto an alien." Perhaps they knew the Melchizedek Priesthood had been taken generally, and was only retained by the prophets. In any event, these rebellious Israelites complained because they did not have power and authority like that of Moses. Ibid., 15:69.
[^4] Exodus 7:1. This passage has Moses becoming "a god to Pharaoh: and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet." It is corrected in the JST to read "I have made thee a prophet to Pharaoh: and Aaron thy brother shall be thy spokesman." Deuteronomy 16:22. The JST qualifies the kind of image set up. "Neither shalt thou set thee up any graven image; which the Lord thy God hateth." The Lord Jesus Christ was known to the early patriarchs from the time of Adam by his name Jehovah. Joseph Smith's "New Translation" of the Bible (Independence, Mo.: Herald Publishing House, 1970).
[^5] Exodus 12:37. The JST simply adds the fact that there were women in addition to the six hundred thousand men plus children. Deuteronomy 34:6. What happened to Moses at the time of his death has been the subject of some speculation. The scripture says, "And he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab, over against Beth-peor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day." From statements by ancient and modern prophets, it is clear that Moses was translated. In speaking of Alma it was said, "He was taken up by the Spirit, or buried by the hand of the Lord, even as Moses" (Alma 45:19). Maybe the following from the JST hints more strongly in that direction. "For the Lord took him unto his fathers" (JST Deuteronomy 34:6). Josephus also lends credence to the idea of translation, saying, "As he was going to embrace Eleazar and Joshua, and was still discoursing with them, a cloud stood over him on the sudden, and he disappeared in a certain valley, although he wrote in the holy books that he died, which was done out of fear, lest they should venture to say that, because of his extraordinary virtue, he went to God." [^9] If a man's heart is hardened, it is the man, not the Lord that is responsible for the condition. H. & E. Phinney's Stereotype Edition, The Holy Bible, Containing the Old and New Testaments Together with the Apocrypha (Cooperstown, N.Y.: H. & E. Phinney, 1828).
[^6] Exodus 14:20. The antecedents to them and these are plainly clarified to be first the Egyptians and in the latter case the Israelites. To the former, what came up before them was a cloud of darkness, but to the Israelites it gave light by night. A wide variety of small but significant changes add to the internal consistency of the biblical account. The Interpreter's One Volume Commentary on the Bible, (Nashville, Tenn.: Abingdon Press, 1955), p. 493.
[^7] Exodus 21:20. In the JST, the penalty for murdering a servant is designated as death, rather than merely punishment. There are related extra-textual sources available which provide further insights into the books of Moses. The Holy Bible Containing the Old and New Testaments with a Commentary and Critical Notes (Nashville, Tenn.: Abingdon Press, n.d.), 1:324.
[^8] Exodus 22:18. It is not a "witch" who shall be put to death, but "Thou shalt not suffer a murderer to live." The Interpreter's One Volume Commentary on the Bible, pp. 40-45.
[^11] Exodus 32:12. Moses takes the Lord to task for his judgments upon Israel, and boldly says, "Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people." Doesn't this seem a little presumptuous for mortal man, prophet or no prophet, to be demanding of the Lord, maker of heaven and earth? The JST corrects it to read, "Turn from thy fierce wrath. Thy people will repent of this evil: therefore come thou not out against them." The Interpreter's Bible, 12 vols. (Nashville, Tenn.: Abingdon Press, 1953), 2:221.
