Monte S. Nyman, Robert L. Millet, Joseph Smith Translation: The Restoration of Plain and Precious Things ( 1985)

12

The JST on the Second Coming of Christ

Keith W. Perkins

As with all of the work of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible adds some very important information to our gospel understanding. There are additional verses which illuminate many aspects of the life and ministry of the Savior that cannot be found in any other book. A classic example of this concerns the period of time following the visit of the boy Jesus at age twelve to the temple in Jerusalem. The present biblical record is almost silent on this stage of Christ's ministry. Luke alone makes any mention of this period: He "came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them. . . . And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man." (Luke 2:51-52.)

For this juncture of Jesus' life, however, three critical verses have been added to the Gospel of Matthew by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Had they been found in the Holy Land, like the Dead Sea Scrolls, these verses would have been proclaimed as one of the greatest biblical discoveries of our age. Not only have these verses been ignored by biblical scholars, which we would expect, but they have generally been ignored by Latter-day Saints, which should not be the case. These verses give us a great deal of insight into the years of preparation by the Son of God.

And it came to pass that Jesus grew up with his brethren, and waxed strong, and waited upon the Lord for the time of his ministry to come.

And he served under his father, and he spake not as other men, neither could he be taught; for he needed not that any man should teach him.

And after many years, the hour of his ministry drew nigh. (JST Matthew 3:24-26.)

As it is with these verses, so it is with our understanding of the second coming of Christ. Truths are taught in the JST that are found nowhere else in scripture, truths which have not only been ignored by biblical scholars but also frequently overlooked by Latter-day Saints. Let us first look at the changes Joseph Smith made in Matthew chapter 24, Mark chapter 13, and Luke chapter 21, which provide great insights into the Second Coming.

One of the most significant changes made by the Prophet in Matthew 24 is the rearrangement of the verses. The following chart shows these changes.

Significant Changes in Verses

Matthew 24 Joseph Smith-Matthew

v. 6 v. 23, 28

v. 7 v. 29

v. 8 v. 19

v. 14 v. 31

v. 15 v. 12, 32

v. 33 v. 39

v. 34 v. 34

v. 35 v. 35

v. 36 v. 40

This rearrangement becomes very significant when it is realized that the Prophet Joseph Smith rearranged the verses so that those signs that apply to the destruction of the temple, Jerusalem, and the Jews following the death of Jesus are placed in the first portion of Matthew 24, while those verses concerning the second coming of Christ are placed together at the end of the chapter.

Another significant change is the many additions made by the Prophet in Mark 13 so that it now reads basically the same as Matthew 24, with a few additions and deletions.

Let us first examine what the Savior said about the destruction of the temple, Jerusalem and the Jews, and see how this can help us as we prepare for his second coming. From the JST we learn very plainly concerning the two questions the apostles were asking Jesus: "Tell us when shall these things be which thou hast said concerning the destruction of the temple, and the Jews; and what is the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world, or the destruction of the wicked, which is the end of the world?" (JS-M 1:4). Notice that in this version by the Prophet we get the definition of what the Savior meant by the end of the world—the destruction of the wicked.

Jesus further warned them in this chapter of a number of things that would happen prior to both events. Before the destruction of the temple there would be false Christs who would deceive many (v. 6). The apostles would be hated by all nations and eventually they would be killed (v. 7). False prophets would arise who would deceive many (v. 9). Iniquity would abound and the love of many would wax cold (v. 10).

In addition to these signs given both in Joseph Smith-Matthew and JST Mark, Luke 21 also gives us interesting insights into those events that would precede the destruction of the temple of Jerusalem. In discussing how they will be hated by all nations, Jesus gives some additional detail as to how they would be treated. They would be tried in the synagogues before kings and rulers, and finally cast into prisons (Luke 21:12), but there would be something which must have seemed even worse: they would be betrayed by parents, brethren, kinsfolk, and friends—and in some cases these close associates and relatives would cause them to be killed (Luke 21:16). The Lord promised them, however, that their suffering was only a temporary thing—for this life—and in the Resurrection "not an hair of your head [will] perish. In your patience possess ye your souls" (Luke 21:18-19; cf. Alma 40:23).

Next Jesus warned them of the great destruction coming upon Jerusalem and how the former-day Saints would be able to escape this disaster. Both JS-M and JST Mark talk about the abomination of desolation which Daniel had predicted. Contrary to the many things that some have felt this meant, the JST plainly teaches us that it had reference to the destruction of Jerusalem (JS-M 1:12; Mark 13:14). But in Luke 21:20, we are given even further detail on how this time can be determined: "And when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with armies, then know that the desolation thereof is nigh." In an earlier account of the Savior's prophecy concerning what was coming upon Jerusalem, Luke records, "Thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, And shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee; and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another; because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation" (Luke 19:43-44).

Thus the warning of the coming abomination of desolation was very clear: Jerusalem would be encircled by an invading army which would bring about its complete destruction. This prediction was very dramatically fulfilled when in A.D. 70 the city was leveled to the ground by the Romans, and, according to Josephus, the Jewish historian, approximately one million Jews were killed. [^1]

Not only did the Lord tell his faithful Saints what was coming upon Jerusalem, but he detailed how they could avoid the impending destruction. He instructed the early Saints that when they saw the signs that he had forwarned them of they were to immediately leave Jerusalem. Those in Judea were to flee into the mountains (see JS-M 1:13). The disaster was coming so rapidly that leaving immediately was essential for their temporal salvation. Those on the housetop were not even to take time to return into the house to take their belongings with them (see JS-M 1:14). Those in the field were not to return back to their own homes to take their clothing (see JS-M 1:15). They were to remember Lot's wife and not look back at what they had to leave (see Luke 17:32).

The Savior expressed concern over those who might be expecting a child at the time and also that their flight not be in the winter or on the Sabbath because of the speed with which they had to flee (see JS-M 1:16-17). He further instructed them that despite the terrible things that had befallen the Jews before (capture by the Babylonians, Assyrians, etc.) the coming destruction would be the worst tribulation that had ever befallen the nation of Israel or ever would befall them at Jerusalem (see JS-M 1:18). All one has to do to see the fulfillment of this prophecy is read of the destruction that came upon Jerusalem as described by Josephus. [^2]

Obedient to this command of the Savior, the Jewish converts to Christianity immediately left Jerusalem when the predicted signs came to pass. The Christian historian Eusebius gives us a vivid description of what took place:

The rest of the apostles who were harassed in innumerable ways, with a view to destroy them, and driven from the land of Judea, had gone to preach the gospel to all nations. The whole body, however, of the church at Jerusalem, having been commanded by a divine revelation, given to men of approved piety there before the war, removed from the city and dwelt at a certain town beyond the Jordan, called Pella. Here, those that believed in Christ, having removed from Jerusalem, as if holy men had entirely abandoned the royal city itself, and the whole land of Judea; the divine justice, for their crimes against Christ and his apostles, finally overtook them, totally destroying the whole generation of these evil doers from the earth. [^3]

Thus, by being obedient to the command of the Lord, these early Saints escaped the terrible destruction that came upon Jerusalem. This is very important because the rest of Joseph Smith-Matthew, and the other similar scriptures, tell us what events are going to precede the second coming of the Savior; they also tell us how we can avoid many of the problems that are coming. By learning from the past, we too may escape to a degree those terrible predictions that are connected with Christ's second coming.

Verses 18 through 21 of Joseph Smith-Matthew seem to be the transitional verses between the events associated with the destruction of Jerusalem at the time of the ancient apostles and the second coming of Christ. Verse 21 tells us that prior to the Second Coming there will again be tribulation upon Jerusalem. Once more there will be false Christs and false prophets who will attempt to deceive the very elect (see JS-M 1:22). President Joseph F. Smith helps us understand the meaning of this verse in a statement of the First Presidency on 2 August 1913, entitled "A Warning Voice."

At other times people who pride themselves on their strict observance of the rules and ordinances and ceremonies of the Church are led astray by false spirits, who exercise an influence so imitative of that which proceeds from a Divine source that even these persons, who think they are "the very elect," find it difficult to discern the essential difference. Satan himself has transformed himself to be apparently "an angel of light." [^4]

There will be wars and rumors of wars. This is not to concern us, for this is exactly what the Savior predicted would precede his coming. But the end is not yet (see JS-M 1:23-24). We are not to follow those who try to deceive us when they say Christ is in the desert or in the secret chambers, for the Second Coming will not be done in secret but will be made known to all the earth (see JS-M 1:25-26).

As it was with the destruction of the temple at Jerusalem, so the Second Coming will be one of great tribulations and persecutions. Nation will be against nation; there will be famines, pestilences, and earthquakes in many places (see JS-M 1:29). But there will also be the gathering of the elect from the four corners of the earth (see JS-M 1:27). There will not only be great physical tribulations but there will be those tribulations within families: iniquity will abound and the love of many will wax cold. We can see how fully this is being fulfilled in our own day. However, if we are not overcome by these problems, the Lord promises us that we will be saved. (See JS-M 1:30.)

Another important sign of the Savior's second coming is the preaching of the gospel to all the world—then the end will come, which is the destruction of the wicked (see JS-M 1:30-31). Sometimes Latter-day Saints seem to feel that we have almost accomplished this goal. But, upon more careful examination, the nations who have at this date had missionaries among them represent approximately one-third of the world. There are some very significant nations that we have yet to reach: China, the Soviet Union, most of India and Africa, as well as all those smaller countries that still have not had missionaries in their midst. Truly we must lengthen our stride and accept with greater enthusiasm the call we received from President Spencer W. Kimball for every worthy young man to go on a mission as well as many, many more of our retired couples.

Once again there will be the abomination of desolation which was predicted by Daniel (see Daniel 9:27; 11:31; 12:11). Will there once again be terrible destruction upon Jerusalem by invading armies? This will undoubtedly be the time when the two prophets (not young missionaries, but General Authorities who hold the sealing power) will be killed, left to lie in the streets for three and one-half days, and then be resurrected (see Revelation 11:3-13). Immediately following this great tribulation, the sun will be darkened, the moon shall not give her light (other sources talk about the moon turning to blood, becoming as blood, bathed in blood; see Joel 2:31; Revelation 6:12; D&C 45:42; 88:87), and the stars shall fall from heaven (see JS-M 1:33) or refuse to give their light (see Isaiah 13:10; Ezekiel 32:7).

This is one of the most universally taught doctrines in all the scriptures, since it is in every standard work of the Church: the Old and New Testaments, the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. In the generation that these signs are given, all that Christ has predicted will be fulfilled (see JS-M 1:34). As one reads the account by Josephus of the terrible destruction of the Jews and Jerusalem, one begins to gain an appreciation that the Savior was trying to tell us something about the great tribulation that will once again come upon the earth, this time prior to his second coming.

This will also be the generation in which the times of the Gentiles will be fulfilled; that is, their time for receiving the gospel will be over (JST Luke 21:25, 32). This will not be one grand event, but will cover a long period of time—apparently the entire dispensation prior to the Second Coming. Then will come the time for the Jews to again receive the message of salvation. [^5]

Following the great tribulations, which will include the powers of heaven being shaken, there will appear "the sign of the Son of Man" in heaven. This will cause the tribes of the earth to mourn, while the righteous will rejoice when they shall see the Son of Man coming in "the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory" (JS-M 1:36). One is reminded of the great destruction upon the American Continent prior to the first coming of Christ, and also that following this great tribulation came the great joy of seeing Jesus Christ descending from heaven (see 3 Nephi 8-11). We cannot help but feel that this is simply a type and a shadow of things to come. Will the sign of his first coming—the new star, the day and night and day as though it were one day—be the same sign of his second coming? (see Zechariah 14:6-7).

There are, however, several things that the righteous must do in order to witness the Second Coming. First, we must treasure up Christ's words which he has given us so that we will not be deceived (see JS-M 1:37). Next, we must watch, pray always, and keep the commandments, so that we may be counted worthy to escape the tribulations that will come, and also that we will be worthy to stand before Christ when he comes (see JST Luke 21:37). The Doctrine and Covenants expresses this a little differently, indicating that we should be looking for the signs of his coming, because he "that watches not for me shall be cut off" (D&C 45:39, 44). We must be like the wise virgins who had oil in their lamps; that is, we must take the Holy Spirit as our guide so we will not be deceived (see Matthew 25:1-13; D&C 45:57). No wonder we are given so much detail about the signs of the coming of Christ, so that we will be watching and thus be ready for this great and dreadful day (great for the righteous and dreadful for the wicked). May we be as ready as were the former-day Saints, those who escaped the terrible destruction of Jerusalem because they watched and obeyed.

Before that day the remainder of the elect will be gathered together from "the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other" (JS-M 1:37). To further illustrate this, the Savior told the disciples that two would be in the field, one taken and the other left, and that while two would be grinding at the mill, again one would be taken and one left (see JS-M 1:44-45). Once again the JST clearly explains what Jesus meant by this.

Where, Lord, shall they be taken [the disciples asked Jesus]. And he said unto them, Wheresoever the body is gathered; or, in other words, whithersoever the saints are gathered, thither will the eagles be gathered together; or, thither will the remainder be gathered together. This he spake, signifying the gathering of his saints; and of angels descending and gathering the remainder unto them; the one from the bed, the other from the grinding, and the other from the field, whithersoever he listeth. (JST Luke 17:36-38.)

To help the apostles understand the signs of the times and their relationship to his coming again on the earth, Jesus gave the parable of the fig tree. When one saw the leaves of the fig tree, he would know that summer was near. So it will be with the elect who are watching for Christ's return to earth: they will know that it is near, "even at the door," by the signs that are given (see JS-M 1:39).

THE TIME OF HIS COMING

No one knows the precise time of the second coming of the Lord, for it will come like a thief in the night to the wicked (see JS-M 1:47). It will be like it was in the days of Noah when the people did not realize the flood was coming until it was there (see JS-M 1:43). For the righteous, however, the coming of the Son of God will not be as a thief in the night: "And again, verily I say unto you, the coming of the Lord draweth nigh, and it overtaketh the world as a thief in the night—Therefore, gird up your loins, that you may be the children of the light, and that day shall not overtake you as a thief (D&C 106:4-5; emphasis added).

For faithful members of the Church, the coming of the Lord will not be as a thief in the night, but as a woman in travail. Although the expectant mother does not fully know the hour of delivery, she does know the approximate time. So it is for those children of the light who are watching for his return and not sleeping (see 1 Thessalonians 5:2-6). Even though no man nor the angels know the day or the hour, our Heavenly Father knows. One of the interesting insights from the JST is that in discussing who does not know the time of the Second Coming, it is significant that the Son of Man is not one of those so listed (see Mark 13:32 and JST Mark 13:47). This is logical; since the Father and the Son are one, the thought and knowledge of one is the thought and knowledge of the other.

The time of the Second Coming has been of interest to every generation of Saints, former-day as well as Latter-day Saints. Following the death of Jesus, it was obvious that many members of the Church felt that he would return in their lifetime. The same is true of some Latter-day Saints in this last dispensation. It appears that in every generation since this prophecy was given by the Savior, many believed that in their lifetime they would witness the Second Coming. [^6] It is essential, therefore, that we learn what the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible teaches us concerning the time of the Second Coming and in what age he will come.

The Joseph Smith Translation brings out a truth that cannot be found anywhere else in scripture. In Luke 12:36-37, we learn that we are like men who wait for the bridegroom returning from the wedding. We are told that we should be found watching, so that we can be invited to the wedding banquet. It is at this point we learn one of the profound realities from the JST.

For, behold, he cometh in the first watch of the night, and he shall also come in the second watch, and again he shall come in the third watch.

And verily I say unto you, He hath already come, as it is written of him; and again when he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third watch, blessed are those servants when he cometh, that he shall find so doing. (JST Luke 12:41-42.)

Here is a great truth. It is not wrong that every generation feels it is their day when Christ will come, for according to this scripture, he comes in every watch of the night; that is, in every generation. Indeed, he has come already. Elder Bruce R. McConkie gives an excellent interpretation of this important scripture:

One of the great incentives which encourages and entices men to live lives of personal righteousness, is the doctrine of the Second Coming of the Messiah. Many revelations speak of the signs which shall precede our Lord's return; others tell of the tragic yet glorious events which shall attend and accompany his return to earth; and still others recite the good and ill which shall befall the living and the dead at that time. All this is preserved in holy writ so that men will be led to prepare themselves for the day of the Lord, the day when he shall take vengeance upon the ungodly and pour forth blessings upon those who love his appearing. (D&C 133:50-52; 2 Thessalonians 1:7-10.)

Deliberately and advisedly the actual time of his coming has been left uncertain and unspecified, so that men of each succeeding age shall be led to prepare for it as though it would be in their mortal lives. And for those who pass on before the promised day, none of their preparation will be wasted, for both the living and the dead, speaking in the eternal sense, must prepare to abide the day. . . .

All of the Lord's ministers, all of the members of his Church, for that matter all men everywhere ("What I say unto one, I say unto all"), are counseled to await with righteous readiness the coming of the Lord. However, most men will die before he comes, and only those then living will rejoice or tremble, as the case may be, at his personal presence. But all who did prepare will be rewarded as though they had lived when he came, while the wicked will be "cut asunder" and appointed their "portion with the hypocrites" as surely as though they lived in the very day of dread and vengeance.

Thus, in effect, the Lord comes in every watch of the night, on every occasion when men are called to face death and judgment. The phrase, "He hath already come, as it is written of him," pointedly inserted in verse 42, is a witness that even then he ministered among mortal men and that they were judged by their acceptance or rejection of him. [^7]

What a thought! No preparation that we make for the second coming of Christ is in vain, for in effect he comes in every generation. If we die prior to his coming, it will be just the same as if we were living on the earth when he finally does return in great glory. When we die, therefore, it is in reality the Second Coming for us. If we are righteous it does not matter whether we come with him in the Second Coming or are caught up to meet him when he descends with the Saints in the greatest reunion of all time.

And the Lord said unto Enoch: As I live, even so will I come in the last days, in the days of wickedness and vengeance, to fulfill the oath which I have made unto you concerning the children of Noah. . . .

And the Lord said unto Enoch: Then shalt thou and all thy city meet them there, and we will receive them into our bosom, and they shall see us; and we will fall upon their necks, and they shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other;

And there shall be mine abode, and it shall be Zion, which shall come forth out of all the creations which I have made; and for the space of a thousand years the earth shall rest. (Moses 7:60, 63-64.)

What a wonderful experience this will be!

Let it not be misunderstood. There will be an actual time when Christ will return to earth again to greet those in the flesh who are so privileged to meet him in that day. There is that day which has been set aside by the Father from the beginning when his Beloved Son will return a second time on earth in a formal second coming. But, the insight we gain from the Joseph Smith Translation of Luke 12 is that no matter when we live or have lived, none of our preparation will be vain. If we have died before he comes we will be with him in the Second Coming. If we are alive at the time we will be caught up to meet him. All will be treated the same in this great event. With this knowledge we need not worry so much about the day of his coming, but rather concern ourselves with our preparation to meet him, regardless of the day. That is the most important thing. Come he will "in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory," but whether it will be a day of great joy or a day when there will be weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth will all depend on us. Our personal preparation will be the deciding factor. May we so prepare that we may be able to receive the greatest reception that will ever be received by any of us: "Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord" (Matthew 25:21).

NOTES

Keith W. Perkins is chairman and associate professor of Church History and Doctrine at BYU.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Latter-day scripture. The Revelation is of John. It is his testimony and witness that is being recorded (see JST Revelation 1:1, 2, 4, 5). This in no way lessens the fact that the source of the vision and inspiration is divine, but the KJV suggests that the revelation is from God to Jesus Christ (see v. 1). The JST clearly identifies it as being given to John, a servant of God, from Jesus Christ. Why is this significant? It is another example of how the Savior views his prophets and apostles. They are his servants and he honors them for their faithfulness. As noted above, throughout these letters the Prophet changed the wording to make it clear that each letter was addressed to the presiding authority of each church. The earth in its celestialized future state will become like a massive Urim and Thummim to its inhabitants (see D&C 77:1; 130:7-9). The book in the right hand of the Father represents the history and destiny of the world. It is in his right hand to suggest he controls everything in and about our world. No one except the Savior was worthy to open the book because the atoning sacrifice was what made the whole of world history possible and meaningful. The "angel from the east" is Elias (D&C 77:9). This at first may not seem helpful, but we know that the concept of Elias is as a forerunner, and that here it refers to the restoration of the gospel in the last days. [^30] Applying that interpretation to John's vision makes perfect sense. Before the angels of destruction are loosed, the servants of God will be sealed and thus saved from destruction, through the restoration of the gospel, with its priesthood and ordinances. Commenting on these very verses, the Prophet later explained that the sealing "signifies sealing the blessing upon their heads, meaning the everlasting covenant, thereby making their calling and election sure. When a seal is put upon the father and mother, it secures their posterity, so that they cannot be lost, but will be saved by virtue of the covenant of their father and mother." [^31] Canon Leon Morris, The Revelation of St. John (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1969), p. 15.
[^2] Non-scriptural sermons and writings. The KJV indicates that the revelation was given because "the time is at hand" (v. 3). The JST clarifies what time is meant when it says, "for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh" (JST v. 3). The bed into which the false prophetess and those who followed after her was to be cast is actually "hell" (see JST 2:22). Animals from our own world and from other worlds are celestialized and dwell in the presence of God. (See D&C 77:2-3; see also the Prophet's discourse on the meaning of the beasts. [^27]) The seven seals represent the seven thousand-year periods which the earth will have during its temporal existence. This not only provides us one of the most specific clues we have as to the closeness of the Second Coming, but it also shows that the book of Revelation is basically structured chronologically, unfolding the earth's history from the time of Adam until the earth is celestialized. The Prophet clearly indicates that the twelve thousand sealed from each of the twelve tribes is not just a symbolic representation of the forces of righteousness, as some scholars maintain. They are a great missionary force of the sixth seal (see D&C 77:10). Joseph Smith shows us that they are ordained high priests chosen from among every nation to carry forth the gospel and bring as many as will come to the true Church (see D&C 77:11). (In another revelation the Prophet indicated that these 144,000 would also stand on Mt. Zion with the Savior. See D&C 133:18 and compare with Revelation 14:1-5.) Joseph Henry Thayer, Greek English Lexicon of the New Testament, s.v., apo and kalypto.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants 77. In several places in the opening chapters, reference is made to "seven Spirits" (1:4; 3:1, 4:5) and "seven angels" (1:20; 2:1, 8, 12, 18; 3:1). As is, this makes it sound as though the seven Spirits and the seven angels are different things. But the Prophet changed or explained all references to the seven Spirits and the seven angels to show that the seven Spirits and the seven angels both refer to the leaders of the seven churches (see JST for all of the above verses). John, who at this time is the leader of the Church, is writing to seven branches of the Church in Asia. The JST makes it clear that he specifically addresses the leaders (the bishops or branch presidents, as it were) of each of these branches. Those who are faithful in Thyatira are promised that they will be given power over nations and will rule them with a rod of iron, smashing them to pieces like clay pots (2:26-27). This seems contradictory in the KJV. Faithful saints are promised the power to smash the nations to pieces. This symbolism is strongly suggestive of tyranny. The imagery of Nephi's vision shows that the iron rod is a symbol of the word of God (see 1 Nephi 15:23-24) which helps somewhat, but in the JST, the Prophet dropped the imagery of smashed pottery and turned it instead into the idea of a potter shaping and molding vessels. He said that those who were faithful in keeping the commandments would rule the nations "with the word of God; and they shall be in his hands as the vessels of clay in the hands of a potter; and he shall govern them by faith, with equity and justice (JST 2:26-27). This is a very different imagery from that of the KJV. The rather bizarre imagery of beasts covered with eyes and wings is actually symbolical of their celestial nature (see D&C 77:4). Studying that chronological structure carefully, we can see that John's Revelation focuses most heavily on that short period of time between when the last period of a thousand years begins and when Christ comes. Note the amount of time spent on each of the seven seals. The first five (6:1-11) are covered briefly, merely highlighting the thing of greatest import to the covenant people that happened in that time frame. The sixth seal, the one in which we currently live, is expanded considerably (6:12-7:17) but still takes only a few verses of the total. Knowing that the Millennium is the major event of the seventh seal, we might expect John to dwell at great length on that. But the opening of the seventh seal begins in the first verse of chapter 8. The Second Coming and the Millennium are not seen until chapters 19 and 20. Thus, clearly, the majority of the revelation focuses on that period "after the opening of the seventh seal, before the coming of Christ" (D&C 77:13). Though the Prophet did not give us specific help in interpreting the various images mentioned under the sounding of the seven trumpets that begin in chapter 8, two things he revealed are of great help as we study this section of Revelation. First, he revealed that the trumpets represent the judgments of God which will prepare the world and cleanse it for the millennial reign of Christ (see D&C 77:12). Second, he clearly specifies that these trumpets (or judgments) happen in the seventh seal (see D&C 77:12-13). Since the evidence suggests we have not yet entered that last period of a thousand years, this prophecy is yet future to us. In fact, once the judgments happen it may be that the imagery used by John in this section will become much more clear. It also tells us that any attempt to tie these judgments with past historical events is not justified. Ibid., s.v., apokalypsis.
[^4] Joseph Smith Translation revisions of the text of Revelation. Also the JST makes it clear that the seven Spirits (now servants) are the receivers, not the source, of the vision (see JST v. 4). The seven leaders of the churches as well as twenty-four elders from the seven churches were going to dwell in the presence of God (see JST Revelation 4:5; D&C 77:5). In times of intense persecution and martyrdom, this would have served as a great encouragement to the faithful to stay true to their commitments. This understanding of the time frame aids us greatly in interpreting the symbols used by John. For example, a man on a white horse is seen in 6:2. That same imagery is used of the Savior in 19:11. Therefore, one might think both places refer to the Master, and this is indeed a common interpretation of the scholars. [^28] But knowing that the first seal represents the first thousand years of the earth's history (approximately 4000 to 3000 B.C.) makes that interpretation no longer tenable. That single piece of information helps us look for someone or something in that period of time that meets all of the symbolic conditions. With that we conclude it is not Christ but Enoch that is represented. [^29] And there are other examples of how this key to the chronology becomes a key to the correct interpretation of the symbolism. In chapter 10, there is a brief pause in the description of the judgments in which John is given a little book to eat. This seems puzzling at first, but again the information revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith helps us with the interpretation. He explains that the book is symbolic of the mission of John himself during these great events, which mission is to help gather the tribes of Israel (see D&C 77:14). We know from scripture that John is privileged to continue his ministry on the earth until the Savior returns (see John 21:22-23; D&C 7). It is almost as though the Lord says to John in chapter 10, "Since you will still be living at the time all these things I have shown you are transpiring, would you like to see what you will be doing?" At a conference of the Church in June 1831, the Prophet confirmed that the "little book mission" was being fulfilled when he said that "John the Revelator was then among the ten tribes of Israel who had been led away by Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion." [^33] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), p. 290. (Hereafter cited as Teachings.)
[^5] Finally, the Prophet added to the concept of Christ's second coming that he would come clothed in "the glory of his Father" and be accompanied by "ten thousand of his saints" (JST 1:7). Perhaps here is a good time to note that in Greek the largest named number was ten thousand, which is the word "myriad." [^26] Often it is used symbolically to express uncountable numbers. Joseph Smith, Joseph Smith's "New Translation" of the Bible (Independence, Mo.: Herald Publishing House, 1970), pp. 236-317.
[^6] Finally, we learn from the Prophet's revelations that the "two witnesses" seen by John as playing a pivotal role in the great battle of Armageddon were two prophets raised up to the Jewish nation (not necessarily Jewish themselves, as some have maintained) in the last days, who would work among the Jewish people in their homeland (see D&C 77:15). Elder Bruce R. McConkie said that these two prophets would be "followers of that humble man, Joseph Smith. . . . No doubt they will be members of the Council of the Twelve or of the First Presidency of the Church." [^34] Ibid., pp. 513-23.
[^7] Ibid., pp. 27-116.
