A. Lynn Scoresby, Bringing Up Moral Children ( 1989)

PREFACE

As I have studied about families and the immense influence they have on growing children, my respect for them has grown and deepened. I have learned that families frequently produce remarkable children. I have also learned that when families do not properly fulfill their role, the resulting human suffering can be catastrophic. My contact with children and parents who suffer great unhappiness has shown me that something needs to be done. We need to improve our parenting skills, or we will be unable to meet the challenges that we face both today and tomorrow. We cannot continue to let bad things happen or fail to respond well to bad things because we are unprepared.

Even when we as parents are highly committed to do well by our children, many things make child rearing difficult. We want to know how to help our children grow to maturity with strength of character, self-confidence, and wisdom so they can make a contribution to the world and be happy with themselves.

That is a difficult task, but it is possible to accomplish if caring and committed parents know how to teach morality and then teach it in their families as a continuing part of family life. My strong feelings about children and families led me to present the best information I knew, or could find, and support it by research and other writings. Morality and how to teach it to children are not simple, nor are they learned automatically. But we as parents can learn to understand morality and how to teach it. I hope you will find these ideas easy to understand and even easier to use.

The first five chapters of this book do not contain the usual simplified techniques or strategies often found in books about parenting. Rather, they contain the most accurate information and the most effective approaches I know for teaching morality to children. Reading and understanding this information gives parents the foundation for understanding how to use what is presented thereafter. In these first chapters, then, we will analyze the four parts of a moral circumstance that children must learn about and then learn to integrate in order to make moral decisions. Next, we will discuss six moral traits that will help our children to reason, to judge, and to act morally in any situation. Then, we will look at examples of how we can teach these six traits to our children. Finally, in order to put the moral development of our children into perspective, we will examine how and when the integration of morality takes place.

We will explore moral reasoning, moral judgment, and moral conduct and discuss how they promote moral development. We will see how all three come together with the parts of a moral circumstance to form a self-reinforcing circle of increasing morality as our children grow.

Once we understand these tasks and have determined how to teach them to our children, we can use our knowledge and experience to prepare our children for certain "high-risk" situations they will likely encounter. Rather than wait for morality to mature "naturally" as our children encounter these situations, we can teach our children how to think about and what to do in situations that are likely to challenge them morally. Such situations occur when our children are faced with choices about sexual behavior and opportunities to use drugs, including alcohol. Chapters 6 and 7 discuss these high-risk situations.

Children are also challenged morally when they face issues of fairness and equality. Chapters 8, 9, 10, and 11 discuss these issues in relation to friendship, money and property, authority, work, and school.

Children have to learn the sometimes difficult task of being morally responsible for their own well-being. Chapter 12 discusses this problem by considering self-destructiveness as manifested in eating disorders and, most tragically, suicide.

Sometimes certain children present special difficulties to those who try to teach them. Chapter 13 talks about how to deal with "difficult" children whose unique needs require us to adjust mentally and emotionally in our teaching in order for them to learn moral behavior. Because hypocrisy is such a hindrance to teaching morality, it is discussed at length in chapter 14. And because love is the basis for all good teaching, this volume concludes with a chapter on love and morality.

I have written this book chiefly for parents. Knowledgeable parents are best prepared to teach morality to children. My hope is that morality will become more fashionable. If we read about, hear, and discuss ideas associated with morality more often, they will be more prominent in our thoughts. Instead of feeling like we must defend ourselves when we commit our families to moral standards, I hope we discover that by making this commitment with love, skill, patience, and flexibility, we find the greatest satisfaction for ourselves and long-lasting happiness for our children.
