A. Lynn Scoresby, Bringing Up Moral Children ( 1989)

CHAPTER 1

PARENTS AND MORAL CHILDREN

As a child psychologist, I work with children in trouble. Many of these children are like the fifteen-year-old boy who sat across the room from me one day—defiant but also ashamed and discouraged. This boy was trying to change his life, but to this point he had failed. He had dropped out of school, unwilling or unable to maintain a responsible schedule of study. His life revolved around weekend parties. On Friday and Saturday nights, he got drunk. He had sex. Sometimes he knew the names of the girls he was with, and sometimes he couldn't remember. He was not on good terms with his parents. Like all children, this boy deserved love and help, but, like many I have seen, he had placed himself beyond the reach of those who cared about him most.

Sexual promiscuity, alcohol, and drugs are now almost a routine part of adolescent life. These things are harmful, even deadly. But something about the boy in my office was more distressing to me than his drinking or promiscuity. He had an intense disregard for himself, shown partly by his complete apathy about the consequences of his actions for himself or anyone else. The problem was not that he knew something better and chose not to do it. Rather, it was that he knew nothing else, at least not well enough to do anything about it. The most important thing to him, and to many other children like him, is the sensory thrill that drinking, drugs, and sex provide. If such children are asked about other values, such as school achievement or family relationships, they will respond with indifference.

These children scare me—not because they threaten me with physical harm, but because they are evidence of a terrible failure. For although someone, perhaps many people, may have tried, no one has succeeded in teaching these children something else; no one has been able to help them find something of substance, significance, and true worth—something enduring. The selfish pursuit of material things, the constant need to look good in order to impress others, and the persistent seeking for sensory pleasure are not the goals of people who have a mature understanding of life, of themselves, and of their relationship to others. Children who seek only these things are empty, and in their hollowness they find little to contribute. Unless they change dramatically, they are lost to us, and we to them. Their actions so occupy their attention that they do not see any danger. We may call out to them or get angry at them. We may plead with them or cry over them. They are our children. We have loved them from birth. They have such great promise. Why, we wonder, do they make such choices?

Some of us start out as parents with enthusiasm, believing in the enjoyment we will find. We soon learn that rearing children is sometimes a tiring and thankless task. Parenthood has its rewards, but we begin to understand why so many of us need help. We begin to rely on churches, schools, other institutions, and even television to assume major roles in rearing our children. Financial necessities and other pressures exhaust us. Teaching children some important lesson often requires so much effort, so much energy, that we are secretly thankful when a church program involves our children, or when a good television program occupies their attention. We tell ourselves that only this once we will not follow through; we will do our parental duty next time, when we are not so tired.

Few of us are wholly consistent and responsible as parents. We fail to do our best at one time or another. If the world around us is safe, we will have other chances to make up what we miss. But if people and conditions around us are dangerous, then we may not have enough "other chances." So we hope that our children will learn from other caring people. Unfortunately, however, the people in church, school, or other institutions, though they may be helpful, are limited in their ability to influence a child's development. Specifically, in the absence of strong parental guidance, organizations are notably ineffective in one important area: developing morality. Any thoughtful observer can see that during the past several years, while parents have increasingly turned to other people and organizations for moral training of their children, increased numbers of children are less moral. A United States government commission reported in 1985 that at least 15 percent of American youth under age nineteen are so impaired by drug abuse, or by criminal, illegal, or other debilitating acts, that they will never be competent members of society.

And if we consider that the trend is clearly toward a worsening condition and that many of these young people will one day be parents themselves, then we foresee a truly alarming number of children who will not receive adequate moral training in the future.

Parents are, or at least ought to be, the guardians of their children's moral development. If we accept that role, we can help our children develop the sensitivity, the compassion, and the standards of moral people. If we do not teach them, or if we teach them poorly, our children may never know how to live as moral beings.

Some of us don't want to believe that. We would rather believe that teaching morality is the exclusive domain of our churches, and we have even managed to feel somewhat secure in letting church programs play the primary role in this aspect of our children's lives. Also, some of us hesitate to get very much involved with teaching morality because morality itself has an unfavorable image these days. Perhaps the very word smacks of narrowness or misguided ideals or even of bigotry. Perhaps morality puts us in mind of Puritans or Inquisitors or holy wars, or perhaps we think of grim parents and religious fundamentalists who over- regulate and emotionally abuse children in an attempt to preserve them from the devil and his influence in this fearsome world. For these and other reasons, some of us find it easier to forget about morality. We may even think that we are doing our children a favor by our indifference.

That attitude is unfortunate. For even though history and our own observations can reveal to us many people, nations, and cultures who have used private standards they called "moral" to excuse what we can see only as bad behavior, real morality is something else. Morality actually means honesty, concern for others, responsible work, and mature judgment. A truly moral life is a rich life. If we understand it that way, we are less likely to find the notion of morality unpleasant.

Teaching Morality in the Family

The idea that parents are in the best position to teach morality is satisfying because of the values we traditionally hold about close families and good parents. Many religions, school systems, and communities openly emphasize the importance of "good" families. This emphasis alone, however, does not seem to provide sufficient motivation for many parents to do what may be necessary to adjust work or play schedules and learn new teaching skills. Many children are in trouble because their parents have been indifferent to their real needs or ignorant of them. In my view, it is imperative that parents learn what to teach their children and also how to teach it. Teaching morality must be an act of love, the result of wholesome and warm concern. Attempts to teach it any other way, by force or with angry threats, will so frighten or distract children that they will not be able to learn what is professed. If we start out knowing the importance of love and compassion in teaching morality, we can use the ordinary events of family life to ensure that our children grow and learn in a positive way.

Family members are usually bound by intense emotional bonds. These are established through the shared experiences family members have from childhood to old age. This makes anything learned in the family more memorable than what might be heard or seen elsewhere, such as in church or school. Combinations of people of either sex and of different ages give opportunity for variety, organization, adjustment, and regulation of family relationships. Families make rules, build traditions, and develop styles of communication and ways of expressing and receiving affection. These patterns are often carried by children outside the family as moral standards.

Family members must also perform work of some kind. The tasks vary from family to family, but all families divide their work to some degree. As with other family practices, how the work gets done creates attitudes children have about themselves that may last throughout their lives. As children work, play, love, and communicate, parents evaluate their actions and words. What is good and bad or right and wrong is first understood by children from these parental judgments. Parental approval and disapproval provide a child's first and most profound lessons about the moral standards of community and society. If we know how to teach these lessons, we can give our children a moral standard within the family that will serve them well in many situations outside the family.

Let me emphasize that living a moral life will not make children less happy. A moral life is not excessively structured by rules and obligations. Moral children are more successful than others during adolescence, and they grow up to have happier marriages. Having developed character based on faith in standards of honor and commitment, these people seem, at every stage of life, to live fully. They are respectful and law-abiding members of their communities. And they are likely to honor their parents. Few of us would complain of that.

If we are afraid that teaching morality will prevent us from sharing the joys of childhood with our children, we need to recognize that in teaching morality we will find the real joy and fulfillment of parenthood. Teaching morality lets us enter our children's lives and have something to do with the formation of the kind of people they will become. Fulfillment and satisfaction come from contributing to and watching such development, as our children come to love knowledge, respect truth, and live in ways that will help those around them. That is possible for us if we teach the principles of morality.

Public Consequences of Private Acts

In recent years, our society has focused on the rights of individuals, hoping to allow each person as much freedom as possible. We have courted the idea that any private act is acceptable as long as it does not infringe upon the rights of others. This line of thinking seems to imply that we do not have to maintain shared standards except as they are codified in our legal system. Some parents even excuse their failure to teach moral values by appealing to such reasoning. These parents assert that if they do not bother anyone outside the family, they have the right to neglect or abuse their children or teach them unusual behavior. One man explained to me why he physically abused his son. "My father hit me," he said, "and I turned out okay. Besides, what I do in my family is my own business." I explained to him that his reasoning failed to consider what his son, angry and hurt, might do to other people. Parents who rationalize in this way are protected from seeing their own immorality. And because the effects of private acts are often not immediately seen in public, the parents are protected from public censure and from a chance to understand the long-range effects of their behavior.

I have heard many people defend promiscuous sexual behavior, abusive parenting, and chemical abuse with the inadequate and shallow rationale that what they do does not hurt anyone else. During our rush in the past twenty years to accommodate new sexual freedoms, few could have anticipated that the private sexual acts of some would have such a terrifying public consequence as Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). Now that we are more aware, we can more accurately recognize the public consequences of those private acts in human suffering, in enormous financial burdens, and in human life itself. This one disaster provides a lesson that no one can easily forget: private acts have public consequences.

What we teach or fail to teach our children in the privacy of our homes will someday have public consequences. Our children will go from us and either contribute to the general well-being of others while they pursue individual goals, or else they will be a drain on society because the hurt they bring to others diminishes life for all involved with them. Justice may require us to put such people where they will not be able to continue to do harm, at great cost in dollars as well as in human pain.

I once heard a man say as he contributed to a Boy Scout fund-raising project, "I would rather pay a few dollars to help boys succeed than pay triple the amount for the cost of a new prison if they don't." Such a sentiment can lead us to consider the role parents have in maintaining a stable and productive society. Every organized group of people establishes standards to govern individual members. Some of these standards may be formal laws; others may be behavioral prescriptions that enable people to get along with each other socially. Although many of us do not teach our children much about the legal system of our society, we do teach them how to act in public so they will not be offensive to others. For example, when I was a boy my mother always made sure that I carried a clean handkerchief, and I still follow her teaching in this matter to this day. Almost all parents have standards of this sort. Some, for example, insist that their children have clean teeth and fingernails before they leave for school or church or the neighbor's birthday party. Some want hair done neatly or clothes carefully matched. Some parents like their children to speak quietly and play cautiously. Other parents think it more important for children to dress as they please, to deal with danger in their play, to shout if they want to. For almost all parents, some standards will vary according to the public context for the behavior—"best behavior" might be required for church but not for a picnic.

Our attempts to teach children about appropriate public actions indicate the existence of community standards. Community standards are acceptable ways of acting that all members of a community (religious, language, or ethnic group) share and understand. These standards exist in our minds, and we hold them in common, though some variations might exist from family to family, religion to religion, region to region, and so forth. Some easily recognized examples of such standards are standing and placing our hand over our heart while our flag passes by, not taking all the credit for a team victory even though our own performance may have been the very best that day, or being quiet in a museum.

When we try to teach these standards to our children, we discover that they usually behave better when we are around to supervise. We conclude that we must do something to help our children behave according to these standards even when we are not around. When a child acts appropriately without supervision, a community standard has become the child's personal standard.

Knowing about community and personal standards helps us understand the important role parents have in helping children become contributing members of society. We are the first to teach them about how to act in public. We maintain this unique teaching relationship with our children throughout our lives. We also have a major role in helping them form "character" and the personal standards that will last them a lifetime.

A Definition of Morality

Of course, morality is much harder to teach than it is to define, but even defining it can be difficult. A really useful definition requires the resolution of a long-standing argument. Some have said that moral standards cannot be universal because what is moral in one situation may be immoral in another. Further, what may be moral for one person may not be moral for another person in the same situation. Those who think in this way see morality as relative and situational. From their point of view, no general standards exist for everyone, and morality is merely a matter of personal choice.

Others have argued, in contrast, that some moral standards should be recognized by all, regardless of the differences between people or the situations they are in. People who accept this idea have a more absolute interpretation of morality and make a fairly clear distinction between what is right and what is wrong. According to this view, what is right is nearly always right and what is wrong is nearly always wrong.

In the definition I offer here, I attempt to resolve these two points of view. I give morality an absolute definition: morality helps. Morality contributes to mental, emotional (spiritual), and physical well-being; it promotes general welfare. Behavior that hurts people, behavior that contributes to mental, emotional (spiritual), or physical distress, behavior that disrupts the general welfare, is not moral: it is immoral. To be moral, people must know how to promote their own welfare and both how to help and how to avoid hurting others. Using this definition, we can judge what is moral or immoral by whether someone is helped or hurt.

Of course, it is true that what might help someone in one situation might hurt someone else in another. Extreme anger, for instance, would usually be considered hurtful when directed by parents to children. Yet there could be a time when a parent's anger might motivate and help a child. There could also be a time when an intention to help could cause harm. Much of what we do to help people is based on individual choice, relative to a specific situation. Thus, teaching morality to our children requires us to teach them how to interpret many situations so that they can decide how to help and avoid hurting themselves and others.

A mother was informed by school authorities that her seven-year-old son was a "behavior problem." Instead of being concerned only about the child's misbehavior, she asked questions about when and where he misbehaved. She learned that he usually misbehaved around 10:00 a.m., during reading. So, one day she went to school and observed the teacher organizing small reading groups for students to read aloud. She immediately knew why her son was misbehaving. When he was a baby, fluid in his inner ear had affected his hearing and therefore his ability to learn to speak clearly. He was embarrassed about his handicap, and rather than read aloud, which was expected in the reading group, he disrupted the class. When he was given an opportunity to practice reading another way, his misbehavior ended.

This mother wisely recognized that she should understand her child's behavior by learning about the circumstances in which the actions took place rather than think about the child as "good" or "bad" because of an identification made by someone else. We would be wise to think about moral behavior as it is expressed in contexts of time, place, and company. That is the sense in which morality has a relative meaning. If we are to help our children learn to live moral lives, we must prepare them to adapt to many situations and act appropriately in them.

How the Definition Helps Us

For some people, this will be a new way to think about morality. Traditionally, morality has been thought of as obedience to a set of rules or laws transmitted by God, governments, or parents. Although important and useful in many ways, this definition is limited. In teaching children, for example, when we think about morality just as a set of rules they must follow, we place limitations on them that may prove a disservice to them. Learning obedience is important, but there are times when children might have to disobey a rule in order to be moral—for example, they must break a rule at school in order to help someone in need. Teaching children to focus just on the rules or laws does not prepare them to be as adaptable as they will need to be in order to act morally in a variety of situations. Such a focus also inhibits the development of moral independence, leaving children feeling a need for permission from someone before they act.

Another disadvantage to a view of morality as only a set of rules is that it can leave us without good answers when we discuss moral questions with our children. They deserve explanations when we tell them what to do and what not to do. "Because I said so!" or "It is the rule, and you know it!" are not effective defenses of a moral position. Our position is made stronger by an explanation that some act, some event, some people could help or hurt our children.

Further, the idea of helping and hurting lets us teach children about the consequences of their actions. In explaining to one of my own children about the reasons for telling the truth, I mentioned that lying would hurt him. Seeing I had his attention, I pointed out that a person who lies is cowardly—he avoids telling the truth because he is afraid of punishment or other consequences. If a time came when he needed courage to do something, he might be afraid instead of brave. He and I were both satisfied that he had learned an important and useful lesson.

Finally, by thinking of morality as helping someone and immorality as hurting someone, we can more effectively teach children the balance between responsibility for themselves and responsibility for other people. If it is immoral to hurt others, it is also immoral to hurt ourselves. In order to lead moral lives, then, children need to learn to help themselves and to help others.

Morality and the Moral Circumstance

Developing morality is a lifelong process. It takes a long time to become capable of acting morally in a great variety of circumstances. We all continue to face some situations in which we are prepared and able to act morally and some others in which we are not so prepared and able. That should tell us that we cannot teach morality unless we also understand something about the situations in which moral actions occur. Besides learning moral principles, then, children must learn to recognize the difference between a situation that involves moral choice and a situation that does not. In some situations, helping or hurting someone is not ordinarily a matter of much concern. We do not, for example, usually think of eating, exercising, studying, or walking to school as requiring moral judgments. We refer to these situations as nonmoral or "conventional" because they usually do not involve helping or hurting.

Suppose, however, that one of these ordinary situations changes—an argument starts between two friends walking to school. Now the idea of helping or hurting becomes relevant. Or, suppose that a child is faced with decisions about dating, going to a party where alcohol is available, or joining a youth gang. Such situations have greater than average potential for helping or hurting. If we think a particular activity or situation is likely to help or hurt someone, then we think about it in a moral sense. As parents, we might want to know who will be there, what they will be doing, who is in charge, how long the activity will last, or how people will get there. We want to know all of these things for ourselves and for our children because we recognize the potential for someone's being helped or hurt.

Children are more likely to be moral if they can tell when a conventional situation is changing into one in which someone could be helped or hurt. Teaching our children morality, then, requires, first, that we teach them what helps or hurts, and, second, that we teach them to recognize circumstances when helping and hurting can take place. In other words, we must teach children about moral circumstances at the same time we teach them about moral principles.

For example, when we tell our children that stealing is wrong, we should also tell them that they might find themselves needing to avoid stealing something in a department store when other children may be encouraging it. Obviously, this is more complete than the moral imperative "Do not steal." We might explain, "It is harder to be honest if you are afraid that you will be laughed at, but you can still do it."

Teaching Morality Is an Everyday Opportunity

I have often been asked what can be done after people have been hurt by what has happened. Attempts to help someone recover from immorality can range from a short and somewhat mild effort to an enormous, long-term struggle. In the case of one woman I know who was abused by her father, the effects of his immorality have extended into her marriage and family life, continuing for many years. Her efforts to develop a belief in love that could replace her fear will require many more years, even though she has already worked at it for some time. Knowing something about her father, I can understand with some compassion that he, too, is the product of immorality and, as many parents do, has passed on to his daughter what he has learned.

As a way to prevent such misery, the demanding task of teaching morality to children in the small moments of family life seems well worth the effort. In my opinion, teaching children to be moral provides the greatest joys of parenthood, the most fun, and the greatest satisfaction. It also produces the most lasting rewards.
