A. Lynn Scoresby, Bringing Up Moral Children ( 1989)

CHAPTER 2

HOW MORALITY DEVELOPS

We are used to the idea that children improve their abilities as they grow, and so it makes sense that children will understand more and be able to handle more complex situations as they mature. Yet, we have not had much understanding about how morality develops. Some have thought that morality develops along with children's abilities to reason and think. (Kohlberg, 1969.) Others have suggested that morality develops along with children's abilities to communicate socially, to act out examples they see, and to carry out instructions or rules. But these proposals, and others like them, do not give us much useful information when we are responding to a child and his or her moral development is at stake. We want to know what will work and, because we love our children, we want to know what will yield enduring results. That view in itself is the best one I know of for promoting the moral development of children: morality develops over a long period of time, and parents must continually be a part of it.

Furthermore, the key to moral development is in the process of mental and emotional synthesis, or integration.

In other words, as children mature they are able to synthesize, or integrate, more completely what they know about themselves with what they know about rules, work, people, and situations. When we promote our children's ability to integrate, we are promoting their moral development. When we neglect to nurture that ability in our children or stunt its development by our ineffectiveness in parenting, then we are also slowing or hindering the moral development of our children.

Children and the Moral Circumstance

Much evidence shows that maturity and experience increase children's ability to reason. Yet even young children are capable of acting on high levels of morality in specific instances for reasons as sophisticated as those attributed to older, more mature people. And of course, adults can be both moral and immoral, mature and immature.

We tell our children what to do and what not to do. Sometimes they obey, and sometimes they do not. Having told them something, we think they understand it and know what to do. We are chagrined if they fail. Expressing frustration at their disobedience might relieve us and perhaps make a more dramatic point with them, but it does not explain why they failed to do as we asked. Were they simply immature? Is something wrong with their personality?

As parents, we want to know in specific terms why children cheat, steal, or tell lies instead of doing something better. We want to know how to teach them to help people and to avoid hurting people, and when a moral situation arises, we want them to act as we have taught them. We may emphasize compliance to rules, maintaining good relationships with others, or achieving goals and working hard. In doing so, we try to develop control or teaching strategies that will influence children to be more moral. The result is that we miss teaching them how to integrate all the aspects of the situation we are calling the moral circumstance. Even though parents have taught their children what to do, and even though children have "learned" what the parents have taught, if children do not understand the moral circumstance and how to adapt to it, they still might not act morally.

To help them integrate the parts of a moral circumstance, it is useful to define three integration tasks our children face:

When children fail to act as they have been taught, the failure could represent inadequacy at one or more of these tasks. Their failure might mean that they are uninformed about what is going on. Or they might misinterpret a situation and not recognize that someone could be helped or hurt. Even after they recognize that help is needed, they might be unable to decide what to do to help. Or perhaps they have interpreted the situation correctly and have made good choices but still fail to act. We must teach our children to integrate the parts of a moral circumstance in which they might find themselves as well as about the moral principles we want them to learn. Otherwise, they may know what to do but not when and how to do it.

Ellen, a teenaged girl, wanted to be popular. She was thrilled when some popular girls invited her to a slumber party. During the evening, she found that Gail, one of her best friends, had not been invited, and the popular girls made several critical comments about her. Although some of the girls seemed to like Gail, Ellen saw that the group intended to exclude Gail. Ellen left the next day with mixed feelings—wanting to be liked and included by the girls at the party but feeling friendship and loyalty for Gail. If she spent time with the group who did not want Gail, Gail would be excluded. If she kept her friendship by spending time with Gail, she might be left out of the group.

Distinguishing a moral circumstance depends on identifying the purpose or tasks of the situation. Most of us learn from an early age to gauge the purpose of social situations so we will know how to act. When we do not know the purpose of a situation, we may feel uncomfortable and confused. Suppose we enter a room uninvited and find it filled with people standing and talking with one another. We do not know immediately whether this is a family gathering, a business meeting, or a party. Our first reaction is to gather information so that we can decide what sort of meeting or gathering is taking place. If we learn about the purpose of the meeting, then we will know what to do there. Sometimes we identify a purpose of a gathering by identifying the people who are present. If the mayor is in the room, for example, we might conclude that the meeting has something to do with city government. Sometimes we can learn a purpose from some other aspect of the situation. The presence of food in the room tells us something about the meeting, and its arrangement tells us even more. If the food is arranged on a long table with paper plates and plastic utensils at one end, we can probably assume that it is an informal buffet and that we are free to help ourselves. If the food is placed on a table where individual places have been set, we conclude that it is a formal dinner, and we will probably wait for an invitation to be seated. Teaching children to appraise situations in this way will help them decide whether or not the purpose of a situation is to help or hurt someone. So our young friend Ellen must first discern the purpose for this gathering of "friends." Having thought about that, she makes an evaluation: Can this purpose help or hurt someone? Yes, it can. She has found herself in a moral circumstance. Now she must decide what she will do.

Ellen is a moral agent, with personal desires closely tied to all the experiences she has had. What she wants to do will greatly influence her choices in this situation. Since she is in her early teens, she might want to go with the popular girls and exclude her friend Gail. But she also has some knowledge of moral standards—what she thinks she should do—and these standards will also influence her choice. The final component of this moral circumstance is the other girls, including the absent friend, Gail. Moral circumstances almost always involve other people, who may or many not be physically present. What Ellen thinks about Gail and the other girls will influence what she eventually chooses to do.

The child. The person brings into the situation his or her experience and character traits. In a moral circumstance, the child will be faced with three moral tasks: first, interpreting the situation and evaluating the possibilities for helping or hurting (moral reasoning); second, deciding what should be done (moral judgment); and third, acting to help and not hurt (moral conduct).

Moral standards. The moral standards are the rules known to the child and others about what helps and what hurts people. Moral standards include and involve many types of knowledge.

The purpose or tasks to be performed. A moral circumstance is a social situation, meaning that people are together. Any situation may have several purposes, each of which must be discerned and evaluated by the child to see if it can help or hurt someone.

Others. The others in the moral circumstance are those, present or thought about, who influence the moral decisions of the child and who may be affected by them.

All the elements of the moral circumstance come together in the example of Tommy Edwards. Tommy was popular at high school. He was a star player in football, basketball, and baseball. He was also a student-body officer. After the last football game one year, most of his teammates decided to have a party to celebrate the end of the season. As a starting player, Tommy felt an obligation to go. He felt added pressure when some of his teammates stopped to talk about the party one day at school and wondered sarcastically if "Tommy the All-American was too busy to come to a little old team party." Tommy shrugged off this jibe good-naturedly and assured his friends that he planned to be there.

When he arrived, many of the other boys were already there and were sitting and talking. Each had brought some food, and, Tommy learned, some had also brought marijuana and cocaine and assorted alcoholic beverages. Tommy picked up some chips and a soft drink. His parents had taught him to avoid drugs and alcohol, and he had never used either. He had been to other parties and so was not concerned as he settled in to watch some reruns of old game films.

During the evening, several of the boys got drunk; others got stoned; some were using both drugs and alcohol. The others began to notice that Tommy was not joining in. At first no one said anything, but finally one boy, a bit drunk, said, "Hey, wait a minute! Our All-American wonder boy isn't drinking anything!" Several of the others stopped talking. Smelling some fun, they turned to join in. Soon all were kidding Tommy about being "churchy" or "too good for the rest of us."

The party had changed from a celebration of a fine football season to a confrontation between the values of one person and the values of the others present. For Tommy, a conventional situation changed to a moral circumstance. Someone could be helped or hurt—in this case, Tommy himself. Tommy has his personal desires and his knowledge of moral standards. Now he must interpret this situation, make a decision, and act.

With more experience, Tommy might have been able to see that from the beginning the end was probable. The sequence of events was predictable, from the pressure that was put on Tommy to go to the party, to the drugs Tommy noticed when he arrived, to the taunt of the first boy and the joining in of the group. If we want to teach our children to behave morally, we must help them see as clearly as possible and integrate all the elements of a moral circumstance.

Children and Moral Character

If our children's moral training is complete, it will include instruction in correctly integrating the parts of a moral circumstance. Even though we cannot teach them about every situation they might face, our own understanding of moral circumstances will help us prepare our children to know when someone can be helped or hurt, what kinds of decisions they will need to make, and what they must do to be moral.

Because our children are moral agents, they will need moral standards that can be followed in many moral circumstances. So we want to teach them standards of right and wrong. We also need to help them develop certain personality traits that will help them apply what they know. The term moral character implies moral standards expressed in personality traits (such as honesty and kindness) that are applied in many different situations. Developing moral character in our children is the purpose of all our teaching.

Children can be influenced, sometimes excessively, by people or situations. Helping them develop moral character is how we prepare them to withstand pressure and have confidence to choose and act morally.

As we watch our children, we can notice certain tendencies in their behavior. If they are often quiet in social events, for example, we might conclude that they are shy, retiring, or backward. If they persistently refuse to share or cooperate, we might think of them as selfish or stubborn. We usually do not apply the names of these traits to our children unless they describe frequent or typical behavior. Using such words can be dangerous because our children may assume that they are true. Once we have labeled a child, we may miss other aspects of his or her personality. If we label our children too often or too narrowly, our children will feel limited or misjudged. Then we may have difficulty teaching them to be moral. Not many children will let parents teach them moral behavior when they believe the parents do not understand them.

The words that describe character traits have other powerful effects. Heard from us these words stay in our children's minds; they are the words the children will use to understand themselves. We may call a certain action "kind" and use this word often to describe behavior we see, or would like to see, in our children. Then our children learn what kind means in their behavior. We can use words in this way to motivate children to acquire the traits we value. So we should use such words as loving, kind, and thoughtful as we help our children develop moral character and learn to describe themselves. And of course we should avoid such words as liar and stupid.

But we do not use trait words solely to describe how our children behave. We also use trait words to predict how children will act in situations for which we have not directly prepared them. When a child wants permission to do something new, we think about what kind of person this child is before deciding whether to give our permission; in essence, we review the child's moral character. If we think a child is predictably good or obedient, then we are more likely to give permission. If a child has frequently acted differently from what we had expected, then we consider the child unpredictable and are less willing to give our permission.

When we repeatedly use trait words to describe a child's behavior and to predict what he or she is likely to do, we help form the child's character. Thus, we can consciously help a child develop moral traits.

At first, it might seem naive to suppose that certain character traits are useful for every child; after all, every child is different. Yet, if we examine the lives of moral people, we discover that all moral people seem to have some common characteristics, which we want our children to develop:

Autonomy. Autonomous people have a sense of responsibility for self. They have the ability to pursue a course of action they believe to be correct and to withstand pressure to oblige.

The opposite of autonomy is susceptibility. In a moral sense, susceptible people are extremely reactive to external pressure.

Empathy. Empathetic people have a vicarious understanding of the feelings of another person, leading to compassion and a sense of caring. Empathy produces guilt, which can help prevent hurtful acts.

The opposite of empathy is defensiveness. Defensive people shift responsibility for their actions to someone else. This allows them to justify immorality by avoiding guilt. They hide their feelings and alienate themselves.

Activity. Active people have initiative, responsiveness, and an orientation toward achievement. The quality of activity leads them to perform acts of helpfulness and to find alternatives when judgment says that someone can be hurt.

The opposite of activity is passivity. Passivity prevents people from doing acts of helpfulness. Combined with susceptibility, passivity increases the likelihood of hurtful acts of omission.

Acceptance. Acceptant people have the ability to receive or accept what exists or is given. Acceptance is the ability and the willingness to understand instead of judging in a nonmoral context.

The opposite of acceptance is prejudice. Prejudiced people excessively judge others in nonmoral contexts, failing to distinguish between what should and what should not be judged. Prejudice can lead to insensitivity and hurtful acts.

Conversability. Conversable people participate in communication, which teaches, informs, and promotes understanding about oneself and other people.

The opposite of conversability is social isolation. Socially isolated people fail to participate in conversations, which failure leads them to have inadequate knowledge about people.

Emotional competence. Emotionally competent people regulate their moods to maintain positive emotional states. Their positive emotional style increases their alertness to their surroundings and aids them in resisting temptations.

The opposite of emotional competence is emotional incompetence. Emotionally incompetent people have a negative emotional style, a tendency toward extremely negative or changeable moods, which reduces their awareness and weakens their ability to resist temptation.

In Stanley Milgram's famous study of moral behavior, subjects were told that they were participating in an experiment about the effects of punishment on learning. They were asked by a scientist to operate a machine that supposedly applied shocks to a "learner" whom they could see through a one-way mirror. Unknown to the subjects, the learner knew the truth about the experiment and received only a mild shock.

Actually, the experiment was about compliance with authority. Even though the subjects exhibited stress, a large percentage of them followed the instructions of the experimenter even when they were asked to administer a "lethal shock" to the learner. This classic study illustrates that obedience to authority is a powerful motive, especially if someone believes the one in authority will be responsible for what is done.

This explanation is not all we need to understand what is happening here, however. We want to know about the people who did not comply with the experiment so that we can understand what makes a person likely to act morally instead of immorally.

The people who gave what they thought to be lethal shocks to another human being lacked the ability to resist the demands of authority: they were susceptible to the pressure they felt from the experimenter. These people lacked autonomy, which is a sense of responsibility for one's actions and the ability to act without being unduly influenced by others. Thus we can say that autonomy is perhaps the first prerequisite to moral behavior.

The role of autonomy in moral action has been the subject of much study. Autonomy exists in children when they are able to understand the consequences of their behavior for themselves and for others and when they know how and when to exert self-control to produce certain consequences they desire. (Morrison, Siegal, and Francis, 1983.) Autonomy is also described as self-control achieved when children have mental plans they talk to themselves about. These plans help children regulate themselves during times of temptation and when they do tasks and anticipate rewards. Without such plans, children are more susceptible to distractions, including temptations to disobey instructions. (Patterson and Mischel, 1976.)

Children have low esteem and are more susceptible to distractions and pressure when they compare themselves unfavorably with other people or feel nervous about performing some task. Children who have previously been neglected or rejected report more often than other children that they are worried their friends will leave them. These children more often do what their friends want than do children who have known more emotional support. (Shannon and Kafer, 1984.) Children made vulnerable by various negative life events—such as poor parenting, illness or injury, and divorce—are less likely to develop competent social functioning than are children not made vulnerable by these events.

We conclude that a child's having a sense of self- control, an understanding of the consequences of behavior, and the ability to resist pressure in order to obey a rule or finish a task will increase the likelihood of that child behaving morally. A person capable of this kind of behavior is autonomous. A susceptible person, on the other hand, is unusually vulnerable to outside pressure. Autonomy enhances moral behavior; susceptibility undermines it.

A second characteristic that contributes to the likelihood of moral behavior is empathy, the ability to sense vicariously the emotions and needs of other people and to help them. Research informs us that children display a kind of empathy from birth. (Hoffman, 1982.) If they have adequate examples, discussion of their feelings, and praise, children expand their empathy for others as they mature. Vicariously feeling what someone else feels is the basis for compassion, for sensitive attention to others. In addition, children who feel empathy for others are more likely to feel guilty when they fail to act morally. Empathy helps children sense when help will be needed, and guilt helps children avoid hurting themselves and others.

The opposite of empathy is defensiveness. Defensiveness is shown by an inability to express feelings and thoughts, excessive fear of the disapproval of others, shifting responsibility for one's actions to someone else, avoiding new or strange situations, aggression, and insensitivity to the feelings of others. Many of these conditions in the behavior of preschool children show that assertiveness and defensiveness were influenced by children's racial background and by divorce. (Weigal, 1985.) Defensiveness appears in children as early as four years of age and increases as they get older. (Brody, Rozek, and Muten, 1985.) Defensiveness increases with the pressure children feel to control the expression of their feelings. Boys, because they receive more social pressure to control their emotions, are generally more defensive than girls. Shannon and Kafer reported that young children who felt vulnerable to the influence of others felt more distance between themselves and other people. Interestingly, the most vulnerable were also the most defensive. They did not value trust, nor did they believe it to be a part of friendships.

In summary, then, empathy, the sensitive concern for other people, promotes moral, responsible behavior, while defensiveness, marked by emotional distance and fear, contributes to immoral, irresponsible behavior.

A third trait moral people have is an active orientation toward achievement. Active people tend to set long-term goals and work toward them. Passive people do not tend to have long-term goals or to work consistently toward achievement.

Researchers have found that children who scored higher on measures of achievement motivation and who did actually achieve were less easily persuaded than children not so oriented. My own research also showed a connection between moral behavior and achievement. (1988.) I submitted questionnaires to 1,457 young adults, asking them to rate themselves in certain areas of personal achievement and in their success in dealing with such problems as excessive drinking, drug use, early sexual activity, and conflict with parents. I also asked for certain biographical data. The responses showed that young people who were most successful in avoiding harmful practices and conflicts had committed themselves early in life to values and goals and were working toward those goals. Those who rated themselves less successful reported that they had been more aimless, noncommittal, and passive.

A fourth trait moral people share is acceptance. They have the ability to distinguish between moral and conventional standards and they understand the value of the ideas, values, and traits of others, even though they may differ from their own. If children understand when moral judgment is required and when it is not, they will be less likely to hurt someone. A prejudiced person, on the other hand, makes a moral issue out of a nonmoral condition, such as a person's religion, racial or ethnic background, or appearance.

A fifth characteristic of moral people is their conversability, which includes a willingness to discuss morality. Their vocabularies may include such words as honesty, fair- ness, sharing, and unselfish. Conversation is important in resolving moral issues. It is especially important in resolving problems between friends, learning about the intentions of others, and arriving at a moral decision that involves other people.

Henry (1983) has shown how moral development results from communication that helps children identify with their parents. Grando and Ginsberg (1976) studied the effects of a communication program on father-son relationships. Prior to the program, sons and fathers reported anger, difficulty in sharing, and difficulty in disclosing their feelings. Afterward, through improved quantity and quality of conversation, these conditions were decreased.

Clinical reports show that children are more likely to be self-destructive (anorexic, alcoholic, drug addicted) when they spend little time communicating with friends and family. In many dramatic cases, criminals felt isolated from others for many years before they committed a crime. Conversation skills help children learn morality and behave morally. Social isolation, on the other hand, prevents children from learning morality and may be related to self- destructive acts and criminal behavior.

The sixth characteristic moral people share is emotional competence. They can regulate their emotions. Children who are generally happy, content, or calm are more likely to behave well than those who are irritable, depressed, or moody. One study found that children were less able to resist the temptation to eat candy when they were sad than when they were happy. Children who were happy were more alert to their surroundings; they were better able to delay gratification. Positive moods (happiness) strongly correlated with achievement activity, social ability, and lack of hostility. Depressed people were less active, more isolated, and more hostile than happy people.

Mood, then, seems to play an important role in maintaining self-control. Fortunately, children do not have to be prisoners to bad moods. They can learn to control their emotions and be happier.

Integrity and Internalizing

As children mature, they grow in understanding and experience, which helps them better interpret an ever-increasing number of situations and more fully develop the six moral traits I have described. Even young children do moral things. They sense right and wrong. They recognize in a basic way what helps and what hurts people. But most children get better at morality as their abilities improve and their experience broadens.

In the early stages of their moral development, children explain that they behave morally to avoid punishment, to obtain pleasure, or to win approval. We could say that during these stages, children think about themselves and their needs but do not necessarily think about others or act morally even if they have been taught to do so. In the later stages, children are motivated to moral behavior by their knowledge of laws (moral standards) and eventually by a consideration of their relationship with others.

Whether children can use their increasing knowledge in their reasoning, judgments, and actions as they mature depends on increased intellectual and social awareness. Since such awareness can be taught, we need not think that children are unable to learn morality while they are young. We can teach them by helping them increase their understanding of all parts of the moral circumstance and by helping them think about and integrate each part with the others.

The ability to integrate is important for parents, who are the primary means by which children learn awareness of moral circumstances. If we fail to teach all aspects of the moral circumstance, or if we emphasize one aspect over the others, children will follow us, focusing on just that one part as they face moral dilemmas. Many parents emphasize rules or laws, and this can lead to a neglect of people and their needs. Other parents stress getting along with others to the point that moral standards are neglected. A preoccupation with the purpose of a situation could lead to a pragmatic focus about "getting the job done" that ignores both people and the appropriate moral law.

Because we love our children, we want more for them than just an ability to think about lofty moral ideas: we want them actively to avoid hurting themselves and others. So, we are interested in the best way to teach. We want to be assured that we can do it. We want to know that it will work. Then we want to see results.

The better children understand the elements of a moral circumstance (other people, themselves, purposes or tasks, and moral standards) and see relationships between these parts, the more likely they will act morally. When they act morally, they develop the personality traits that eventually form a moral character.

As children grow, they can understand more about purposes, people, and moral standards. Further, they can understand more about how to relate concepts to themselves. For example, young children may help others without fully appreciating the idea that they are also helping themselves. Also, a person's ideas about helping someone will change from sharing a toy as a young child to giving complex emotional support as an adult.

We grow in understanding throughout our lives. When facing a moral dilemma, more mature individuals usually take more rather than less information into account when making judgments. They are more likely to know what will help or hurt people under many conditions, and they come to see moral standards as complex principles rather than as simple rules. As Piaget (1965) noted, what children think about morality changes and becomes more person- oriented as they mature. As children learn more about people and how to help them, they grow in moral character. This progression can be observed in five stages of moral development.

Discrimination and intention. During the first three years of life, children coordinate their senses and explore the world. Changing vision, hearing, and movement helps children identify the parts of a moral circumstance. They identify a sense of self, develop intentional behavior, and learn to understand the concept of purpose. Further, they discover much about other people and show a basic ability to evaluate people's actions or objects as good or bad. During this time, children display empathy, an emotional style, and the beginnings of autonomy. The synthesis between a child's behavior and his or her knowledge of situations is now possible.

Adapting self to others. Once children have identified the parts of a moral circumstance, they adapt to different situations according to the approval or disapproval they receive from others. These responses stimulate them to search for cues about how to adapt successfully. During this second stage, children use conversation skills to help them adapt. They talk to learn how to adapt or to explain why they did not. Children deepen their understanding of other people and of themselves. Most important, they recognize that situations require certain behavior. That is, how they act is governed by the rules of a situation. The rules may be those of a judge's gavel, what parents say, or how to choose the sides of a team. This adaptation may be observed when young children practice going to school, going shopping, and other adult activities.

Applying moral standards to self and others. In adapting to different situations, children discover that rules exist for each situation. Examples include admonishments to share, take turns, say only nice things, and so on. These early admonishments related to social conduct become moral standards when children evaluate whether people have been helped or hurt by their actions. As a result, in the third stage they learn to distinguish moral standards from social rules. Children learn it is they who must choose how to apply a moral standard so that no one gets hurt. Children have by now made many choices, some of them about moral issues. A child becomes a moral agent who is responsible for what he or she does or does not do rather than merely being controlled by external forces.

Self-interest and responsibility to others. In the fourth stage, children face what seems to be conflict between promoting their own interest and acting from their sense of responsibility to others. Throughout adolescence, children may hurt others through selfishness or help others selfishly (with an ulterior motive). During this stage, children are developing morally if what they do for themselves does not exploit anyone else. They also develop a sense of affiliation with others, believing that others may be helped or hurt by what they do or do not do.

Internalized moral character. In the fifth stage of development, children attempt to make their actions coincide with their beliefs. They look sensitively at situations to see if someone can be helped or hurt. They attempt to help people by volunteering time, energy, and resources. Such individuals recognize situations when someone can be helped or hurt. They understand moral standards and usually act morally.

Understanding the course of moral development can give you a perspective of where your child might be at a given time. Further, it can help you identify what children need to help them progress. Moral development is not inevitable. Children must be taught, and we must identify the most effective way to teach them.

Integrating the elements of a moral circumstance can be done by teaching children how to reason, judge, and act morally. That is the beginning. The end is the formation of their moral character.
