A. Lynn Scoresby, Bringing Up Moral Children ( 1989)

CHAPTER 4

MORAL JUDGMENT: CHOOSING TO HELP AND NOT TO HURT

Living a moral life sometimes requires us to exercise our freedom to choose to help ourselves or others. We are never free from the freedom to decide. It is possible, of course, that we may not recognize a situation as a moral circumstance and think that no decision is required of us. If we make that mistake, the resulting inaction may hurt someone. A decision is always necessary in every circumstance in which people may be helped or hurt. Moral judgment is the process of making the choice to help or hurt after we recognize that either may happen. If our eventual choice, or decision, is moral, then we decide to help rather than to hurt. If we choose to do what hurts ourselves or others, our choice is immoral.

It is not natural for children to know how to decide well. Although the basis for making choices is an inherited function of the brain, much about deciding is learned. For example, most of us learn as we mature to suspend making decisions until we have searched for relevant information. We learn to compare pros and cons in order to make a better decision. We also learn to make a decision at a certain rate or within a certain time. Some of us are impulsive deciders, others are extremely deliberate, and most fall somewhere in between. Some even try to avoid decisions, fearing that anything they do might bring them harm. For these people, a moment of decision is agonizingly difficult.

One of our tasks as parents, then, is to teach decision making to our children. But we want to teach more than a general form of deciding: we want to teach moral judgment, which means identifying a moral circumstance— when someone can be helped or hurt—and then making the correct decision when it needs to be made. Some of the judgments will be easier than others to make, especially when it is clear that one course is obviously better. At other times children will have to judge between doing what is right and having such things as other people's approval. Sometimes children will be required to make judgments when it is not clear what to do or when two or more alternatives look equally good. Decision making is a complex task, so, to simplify things, part of our teaching is directed to helping children understand the difference between moral choices and conventional choices. Then we can focus on the moral choices.

Whether automatic or involving thoughtful consideration, moral judgment is an essential part of morality, and in some ways it is at the very heart of it. Moral decision making is learned, and therefore it is up to us to teach our children to do it well.

Moral and Conventional Choices

Teaching moral judgment should include teaching children both what is and what is not moral. There is much about human behavior, for example, that should not be judged, only understood. Acceptance is the term we use to describe nonjudgment. Acceptance is one trait of a moral person. Being accepting means we acknowledge that we wish to understand rather than to judge. There are many different but equally acceptable ways to talk, dress, believe, socialize, marry, give birth, practice religion, and express opinions. All deserve to be understood rather than judged as moral issues.

Prejudice is the opposite of acceptance. This attitude exists when children fail to understand other people and their circumstances and then make judgments about them from ideas based on limited experience, learned at another time or from someone else. Prejudices are usually family traditions, not a result of firsthand personal experience, and are often learned by children because of harsh disapproval they receive from others. That disapproval creates fear, the root of prejudice. If we react in an overly intense and angry way when a child thinks or acts in a way that we parents do not, our children may believe they are required to think as we think. The absence of our acceptance makes our children's fear of disapproval so intense that they hide their thoughts and emotions to avoid exposure. Unfortunately, this reaction reduces their ability to understand others accurately, and instead they learn to disapprove without knowing much more than the briefest and shallowest information. They have learned prejudice.

Teaching children to be accepting also helps them distinguish between social conventions and moral concerns. Social conventions include etiquette, or customary behavior we may think to be important socially, but social conventions are not the same as moral judgments. Children ranging in age from seven to nineteen were asked to read a list of three types of social transgressions, classify the list into three groups, and indicate which, if any, of the items on the list were wrong. The list included such moral issues as cheating, lying, and stealing; conventional behavior such as styles of dress and table manners; and personal choices such as selection of friends and joining clubs. Children of every age were able to distinguish moral behavior from the other two. They were also able to identify immoral behavior. (Nucci, 1981.)

Significantly, the children assumed that everyone agreed with them about what is right and what is wrong. The study suggests that, distinguished from social conventions, children know that moral judgments focus on issues of right and wrong. That means we can teach children to distinguish between the two by teaching them to accept and understand social conventions and to judge only in situations when someone may be helped or hurt.

Knowing Right and Wrong

It is essential for us to recognize that knowing both right and wrong is necessary. One tells us about the other. Sometimes, especially for children, right is what wrong is not; however, the importance of teaching both right and wrong is often lost in the challenges of routine child management. Most of our disciplinary methods, for example, emphasize responses to mistakes children make rather than point to the right choices available to them. Reacting only to correct wrong behavior creates an imbalance unless we give equal emphasis to teaching children the correct thing to do. The most common measures of restricting privileges, yelling or scolding, spanking, or isolating children in their rooms seldom teach what is correct. The very best punishment for misbehavior is to require children, whenever possible, to rehearse what would have been correct but what was not done in the misbehaving situation. Children who argue can be expected to do something cooperatively. Children who hit can help someone. Children who can't get home on time can be given a watch and told to go outside and practice coming in "on time" before they are allowed more extensive time away from home. If we explain to our children what we think is wrong, require them to practice what is right, and use positive reinforcement, they will learn about both right and wrong.

Another idea that deserves emphasis is the connection between the judgments children make and the actions they subsequently choose to take. We, of course, want our children to do more than be intellectually aware of what is right and wrong. We want them to make moral judgments that lead to moral acts. In some situations, there is a connection between children's judgments and their actions, but at other times there appears to be no link between the two. (Blasi, 1980.) Obviously, then, we need to identify what makes moral actions follow moral judgments.

I believe that whether children act morally after making a correct decision depends on how they learn about making moral judgments in the first place. If we teach only by telling, lecturing, or practicing, for example, children may develop definite ideas about right and wrong, good and bad, but they will not have clear connections between the ideas and what actually to do. Moral judgments that lead to moral acts cannot be considered just a mental exercise.

How Children Learn the Concept of Moral Judgment

Recent findings about the human brain indicate that some conditions appear to be present in the human personality without having to be learned. Our concepts of time, space, numbers, and language appear to be a few of these. (Restak, 1984.) Another of these inherited characteristics is the basis of evaluation. It appears that every human mentally evaluates ideas in order to understand them. (Arnold, 1960.) Further, we evaluate an idea or an object in terms of its being good or bad. (Osgood, May, and Miron, 1975.) Whenever we are confronted with something new, our first evaluation is between good and bad, to see if the object, person, or idea is a threat or is not a threat.

The basis of moral judgment (evaluation) is present at birth, a natural condition of all human beings. The ability to discriminate between what is good and bad, right and wrong, is important to our survival, our intellectual development, and our social relationships. Beyond that innate ability, what we believe about morality and teach to our children comes from a shared understanding called a moral order, which embraces the standards of conduct that promote the welfare and unity of a given group of people. Such standards are called "community standards." They are based on values about human behavior held in common by all in the group, values derived from religion, traditions, and family rules.

Sometimes the shared ideas that unify one group hurt others. For example, Nazi harassment and killing of Jews may have unified some groups in Germany. In such a case, of course, the community standards and the moral order are no longer moral in the true sense. As parents, because we want our children to be truly moral, we teach them the personal and community standards that guide them to help and to avoid hurting themselves and others.

For the most part, children's first acquaintance with community standards is through the approval or disapproval they receive from parents. Ours are the first judgments children experience. Approval may include praise, rewards, attention, warmth, and social station. Disapproval may include such responses as spanking, criticism, shunning, shaming, and punishments.

From approval and disapproval, children learn to discriminate, or judge, what is right and wrong or what will be approved or disapproved. Just as important, however, they learn a style of making judgments, which they tend to use thereafter. The way we judge children will generally be used by them to judge themselves and others. Parents who harshly and punitively judge will often produce the tendency in children to make judgments with the same negative intensity. Parents who seldom approve or disapprove may teach their children there are no judgments to make, because children cannot identify what is moral from what is not. Parents who give both approval and disapproval, considerately and consistently, will teach children this style of judgment and also to judge between right and wrong, good and bad.

After learning what will be approved and what will be disapproved by their parents, children will usually test their knowledge in public. When and if they find that other people outside the family also approve and disapprove, children confirm their knowledge of what is judged and also the style of judgment. Thus they learn community standards. When children find that their parents differ from other people in what they approve or disapprove, the children often have difficulty establishing standards for themselves. The conflict between parents' standards and the standards of others is often associated with children's delinquent behavior.

To avoid that situation, some parents of teenaged children formed neighborhood groups to make common rules about curfews, dating, and activities their children could participate in. Later, when they informed their own children about these conditions, the children were unwilling to comply with the rules until they learned that their friends were affected the same way. Children accept their parents' right to make judgments and are willing to learn the behavior that would be approved or disapproved when the children believe their parents' standard to be shared by others—a community standard.

Children also tend to believe that their parents' judgments and their own are similar to others' standards. Nisan (1984) suggested that children learn moral standards from their culture. Children think these beliefs, or standards of right and wrong, are agreed to by others. Thus in a moral circumstance, children's judgments are based partly on what has been taught them and jointly reinforced by parents, schoolteachers, church leaders, and so forth.

Sometimes children find that choosing to do right brings the approval of some and the disapproval of others. If children try to make judgments that satisfy other people, then how can they be helped to choose what is right if they know others will disapprove? I suggest that children have several "reference" groups, and disagreeing with one may bring the approval of another. That is why parents who establish a warm and communicative relationship with their children are usually rewarded by the children making judgments that agree with their parents' rather than someone else's. If children have such a relationship with their parents, they can more easily make right decisions that result in the disapproval of someone else. When children do not belong to a reference group, or if their group has immoral standards, they are likely to decide to act immorally themselves.

Research has demonstrated that by age five, children identify two ways to be moral. One is to help by being fair or just, and the other is to help by regulating how they themselves act in order to promote the welfare of themselves and others. (Turiel, 1979.) Both of these judgments are influenced by what children think others expect. This finding suggests that children will learn to be fair and just and to attempt to regulate themselves, if they believe others will approve if they do.

To teach our children to have moral judgment, we must give them numerous examples and opportunities both of judging how to help and of having the courage to trust their judgments and act on them. If we always tell our children what to do or prevent them in other ways from choosing themselves, they may be less likely to make moral choices when it is required of them. Whether alone or in the company of others, our children must be able to judge whether to help or to hurt and then decide how to do it.

In summary, then, children must first know right from wrong and, further, be able to make judgments that lead them to do moral acts. Children must be able to judge.

In summary, then, children must first know right from wrong and, further, be able to make judgments that lead them to do moral acts. Children must be able to judge whether a situation requires them to decide to help or to hurt and then to decide how to help. What children decide to do will be an attempt to satisfy the moral requirements of their community (family, friends, town, or nation) by regulating themselves to promote the welfare of themselves or others or by seeking justice and equality. These ends can be accomplished in many ways and will vary according to the situation.

The Role of Emotions in Moral Judgment

One part of the human personality lends itself in an exceptional way to the development of moral judgment. Although the emotions are not as well known as some other parts of us, it appears that they, combined with moral instruction, are the means by which children learn moral judgment. First, emotions are "action tendencies," which are the motivation for action. When we influence how children express themselves emotionally, we are teaching them to act upon their judgment. Second, children learn two sets of emotional responses about themselves and other people that are related to morality. One set is the positive emotions (love, joy, caring) that are related to actions that promote the welfare of people. The other set is the negative emotions (anger, fear, disgust) that are related to actions that hurt people. And third, children learn to express emotions in specific situations according to cultural expectations, and they display or express emotions in ways they believe other people will understand and approve.

We can see how close the relationship is between the display of emotions and moral judgment when we recognize that the outward expression of emotion is part of the basis for the judgments we make about ourselves and others. For instance, we watch facial expressions to identify the emotion (smiling and happy, or frowning and discouraged). By observing voice tones, posture, and other physical movements, we judge how intense the emotions are. We rely so much on these cues that should the person's words contradict the emotions displayed, we rely more on the behavior than on what is said to make our judgment.

In addition, we evaluate the emotional display of one another in a moral sense. Our society usually considers it good, for example, if we are able to control or regulate our emotions to some degree and are not too extreme or exaggerated. It is considered "bad" or "wrong" to be "out of control" and display emotions too intense or otherwise inappropriate for the situation. A person might apologize for crying or for losing control of his or her temper.

The role of emotions in moral judgment and human behavior is illustrated in a story about the great athlete Jim Thorpe. An American Indian, he was reared according to his tribal customs. Then his accomplishments in sports brought him into contact with people and customs new to him. One of these customs involved displaying emotion. One day some of his friends were good-naturedly kidding him and being mildly sarcastic. To them he seemed to smile in response. Thinking he was not offended, they continued. His smile became even broader as they continued to tease and laugh with him and at him. Suddenly he became angry, pushing and shoving some of them. They, of course, were shocked at what seemed to be anger. After the ruckus died down, he explained that their "kidding" was insulting to him. He had been trying to get them to stop by showing his teeth—a gesture, or emotional display, that to him meant displeasure. Of course, the others had not interpreted or judged his display correctly because they had thought it to be a smile.

Similarly, we evaluate emotional displays as good or bad, helpful or hurtful. We express emotions according to what we believe others approve of, just as with making moral judgments.

Emotions are the bridge between thoughts and acts. If individuals display emotions correctly for any given situation, they are likely then to act correctly.

Learning moral judgment requires learning emotional skills in combination with learning moral knowledge about right and wrong. Knowing moral principles, without having emotional skills, is the same as knowing what is right and failing to do it.

As parents we can teach our children about emotions, and we can teach them how to express both the positive and the negative emotions related to moral behavior skillfully and accurately. Having these skills will help them make moral decisions and then act to help and to avoid hurt.

These objectives require us to teach our children to recognize and feel a variety of emotions and to express them in many different moral circumstances. Because emotions are related to the ways they are expressed with moral judgment, we need to teach children the skills of regulating and adapting emotions and behavior to the requirements of moral judgment. In other words, we need to teach our children to make judgments that are understandable by others in our moral community, to regulate their emotions and adapt their behavior to promote the welfare of themselves or others or to achieve justice for themselves or others, and to make judgments that they will act upon, not just think about. We teach them to recognize and feel a variety of emotions, to regulate the intensity of their emotional display, and to adapt their emotions to many situations.

A Variety of Emotions

Because we want to help our children make moral judgments that lead to various helpful actions in many different situations, we need to teach them a variety of emotions related to moral behavior. In conversations with our children, we can introduce the names of emotions—trust, love, and generosity, or shame, envy, and greed—and relate these names to moral behavior. When we use such words as happy, loving, calm, and so on, children tend to use them also to communicate with us. The next step is to link the word to the action by pointing to the child's action and using the appropriate word: "You seem happy" or "You seem jealous" or "You seem to be feeling nervous or guilty about what you did. This tie between word and act is solidified by reading and telling stories. When words and actions are related in these ways, children remember the associated emotion. My mother told marvelous stories about people, their sadness, and what made them happy. She often became so involved that she displayed the emotions that the people in the stories must have felt. She wept at sadness or tenderness and laughed at fun or joy. As a result, stories and feelings are inseparably connected in my memory. I soar with the triumph of others and feel some shame at the mistakes of others.

Consider how empathy, a characteristic of a moral person, is learned. Children have empathy from birth and develop it further unless they are mistreated. Empathy is vicariously feeling what another feels and then being willing to help without expecting a reward for doing so. When we do not feel empathy, we are indifferent to others. That indifference may show up as defensiveness, which is such intense concern about our own welfare that we worry excessively about making ourselves look good and shift responsibility for our actions to other people.

Learning empathy reduces defensiveness. More importantly, helping children learn empathy also teaches them faith in a sense of moral rightness.

The Hendersons were concerned about comments their son Rob made about a boy at school. One day after Rob spoke harshly and critically about this boy, Mr. Henderson asked Rob about him."Well," Rob began, "the other day in class, I was talking and he made fun of what I said. Then, a group of us were standing in the lunch line and he jumped in front of me, saying he was late for class. He is so stupid!" Mr. Henderson asked, "Do you know why he acted that way?" He knew that the other boy's parents were divorcing. He asked Rob if he knew. "No," Rob replied. "I wonder if that would make him feel strange enough to do what he did," the father suggested. "How do you think children might feel when their parents get a divorce?" Mr. Henderson could see Rob's feelings soften somewhat, and he asked, "Do you think there is any way to help him?" They continued talking until Rob recognized that the other boy might benefit from some friendly attention.

Susan was ten years old and planning a birthday party. She wanted to invite her friends. A new girl had recently moved into the neighborhood. Susan and her friends did not yet know her very well, and Susan's shyness made her resent the new girl somewhat. When Susan asked her best friend about inviting the new girl to the party, her friend said, "Don't invite her. Just have our friends come." When Susan and her mother were preparing the invitations, her mother suggested that Susan invite the new girl. "I don't want her to come," Susan replied. "Why not?" her mother asked. Feeling accused, Susan retorted, "Shelley doesn't want her to come either." "Hmm," her mother said, "do you remember how lonely you felt when we first moved here and how happy you were when Heather and Tami brought over welcome gifts?" "Yeah," Susan said. "Well," said her mother, "don't you think we should help this new girl feel welcome too?"

These parents were teaching their children to go beyond the obvious to gather information about the other person, who was being judged too quickly and defensively. The children were asked to understand by comparing their own feelings with those of the other person. Then they were asked to do something right to try to help. No reward was mentioned, nor was success guaranteed.

Our children must be familiar with many emotions to understand what others may be feeling in various situations. Rob was asked to understand frustration, anxiety, and anger at a hidden enemy so he could have sympathy for someone whose parents were divorcing. Susan needed to know what loneliness, rejection, and unhappiness felt like in order to feel what might happen if she did not invite the new girl to her birthday party. The more emotions children understand, the more likely they will be able to sympathize with others in varied situations. A lack of familiarity with various emotions suggests that sympathy will be limited and defensiveness more pronounced.

Another way for children to learn a variety of moral emotions is to practice and rehearse their appropriate display. That is done routinely in real-life situations through imitation. Parents can do more than that, however. A family game that my children like to play is based on the idea that names of emotions need to be linked to actions.

To play the game, write each of the following words on a small card. Shuffle the cards and give five to each family member. Taking turns, each player has forty-five seconds to pantomime the actions (gestures, facial expressions, etc.) associated with the word on the card. Score one point for each emotion correctly guessed. After each person has a turn, shuffle the cards, distribute five to each person, and repeat the process until someone scores twenty points. Eventually, children will learn how to display these emotions and many others as they are taught. They will recognize them in others, too.

love care concern thoughtfulness kind appreciation trust

cheerfulness optimism nice helpfulness empathy affection calm

forgiveness gratitude serenity warmth interest loyalty

friendliness activity freedom self-control passivity reliance

respect reliability autonomy slyness spitefulness bullying

stealing meanness lying exploitation hurt anger rage revenge

jealousy envy tempt spoiled defensive cooperate share

equality fairness honor sham just sorry foolish shame

unequal rude hate annoy ridicule cowardly greedy disgust

tenderness gentleness sensitivity esteem

responsibility courage contempt flattery guilt selfishness

unfriendliness taunt remorse resentful unfair using destroy

insensitive

Helping Children Regulate Their Emotions

There are many ways to characterize emotions. One is intensity, shown in loud talking, flushed or pale skin tone, and other nonverbal cues. In our culture, most people expect and are expected to regulate the amount of intensity they show in their behavior. Too much excitement, anger, aggression, pouting, or sulking usually results in disapproval. Too much passivity, boredom, or indifference is considered negative, too. When we act in these ways, we are told to "calm down," "grow up," "get moving," or "do something useful." We are patient with young children's emotional excesses, but as they grow we expect them to exercise more and more control.

Children who are less able to regulate their emotions are more vulnerable to pressure from others, temptations, and distractions. Their vulnerability, in turn, makes them less reliable in their moral judgments. In contrast, the ability to regulate emotions is a major component of autonomy. In fact, helping children to regulate their emotions is a chief means of helping them develop autonomy.

Being able to regulate their own emotional intensity, or becoming autonomous, does not mean that children are inhibited or overly restricted. It simply means exercising self-restraint according to a set of personal standards to prevent themselves from being overwhelmed by a situation. Moderating the intensity of anger is one example of regulating emotion.

The ability to regulate the intensity of emotions generally and naturally increases with maturity. The human brain acquires new abilities because of practice and increased effectiveness. Parents can help the process along. One technique is to let children be responsible for being in control of themselves. If they are irresponsible—by having a tantrum or by being oppositional and refusing to obey—we can calmly say that we are sorry they are out of control and they will have to sit on a chair until they control themselves. When I suggested this procedure to one mother, she said, "What if he won't stay on the chair?" "Sit on him (without hurting him)," I suggested. She reported later that it took two sittings before the boy learned to sit on the chair until he got himself under control.

We can also teach our children cognitive techniques to regulate their emotions, such as the old tradition of counting to ten before speaking. These work best if we teach the children to recognize situations in which such techniques will be helpful. First, keep a record of the times and places that the child is not in emotional control. Second, discuss the situation with the child and ask for an explanation of what happened. Third, reconstruct the situation step by step, until the point is reached where the child's emotions were too extreme. Fourth, have the child practice a self- command that we whisper with them ("be calm"), or develop a distraction (thinking about a favorite movie) that the child will use when the situation happens again. These techniques have been used successfully with touchy children to help them regulate their emotions. (Douglas, 1972; Varni and Henker, 1979; Cameron and Robinson, 1980.)

Although these and other techniques may be applied with success, parental example is the most influential teacher over the long term. Parents with tempers, for example, actually teach children to be violent. Parents who regulate their tempers can help their children do the same. The importance of regulating our own emotions is made very clear when we remember that such significant moral concerns as sexual opportunity, chemical abuse, and aggression are closely linked to children's inability to regulate their emotions.

Helping Children Adapt Their Emotions

The ability to adapt or adjust emotionally is as important for moral judgment as learning a variety of emotions and regulating them. There are two kinds of adapting or adjusting. One is to alter an aroused or excited state by making a moral choice in order to feel more at peace. To be able to do that, children must be taught that contentment, calm, peace of mind—"feeling good"—are related to choosing and doing the moral, or right, thing. The second type of adapting is to alter feelings to match the behavioral requirements of a given situation.

Moral choices are often difficult because of a conflict between two or more things. Children may be torn between what they want to do and what they believe they should do—for instance, between wanting to do what their friends are doing and knowing they should not. And even if children decide to do the moral thing, they must further decide what to do to help. That is often not clear. Quite frequently, children must decide and act, hoping, but not knowing, whether anyone else will agree with them or support them. In some cases, they may think rejection will be the only reward they receive for making the right choice.

Many moral decisions are difficult because the stakes are high: what eventually happens will either help or hurt human beings. In a moral circumstance, anyone—except the naive, the crass, the insensitive, or the hardened—can appreciate what might happen to others. Further, those threatened by the immoral intentions of others can feel the challenge or risk of the threat. Moral judgment, therefore, may be highly emotional.

Let's consider two different situations. Suppose one moral circumstance involves a decision to steal or to refrain from stealing something. Most children will have been taught repeatedly that stealing is not acceptable and will know without much deep thought what the choice ought to be. If the object to be stolen is highly desired, or if friends apply pressure, an individual child may feel forced to make a choice between doing what is right and yielding to other competing pressures.

In the second moral circumstance, suppose a child knows a friend is about to do something wrong and is faced with the choice of telling someone (in order to prevent the friend from hurting himself or others) or keeping quiet in order to be loyal. The child has not repeatedly been taught about such a case and does not have a ready idea about the "right" thing to do, yet feels caught between two conflicting feelings.

In both cases the children feel frustration, anxiety, and uncertainty. These feelings are unsettling and provide a motivation to solve the problem in order to get rid of them and feel calm again. Sometimes children think that a decision, any decision, is better than agonizing between two conflicting feelings. Yet at the same time they also understand that an expedient or immoral choice will not reduce the feelings of anxiety or guilt.

The connection between choosing morally and peace of mind can be taught to children. We can teach our children by telling them about the calm and contentment they will feel when they have made correct choices. We can discuss their choices with them and encourage them to make decisions rather than avoid resolving the difficult feelings involved.

A widow called the minister of a nearby church and complained that some young boys had been harassing her by throwing broken bottles in her driveway, piling rocks on her lawn, breaking an outdoor security light, and throwing snowballs at her house. The matter was announced in church so that the neighbors could be made aware of the situation and help out. After church, one father asked to see if his son knew anything about the matter. The son's claim that he knew nothing was a little too quick and a little too certain. A few minutes later the boy was on the phone to his friend, having a quiet, guarded conversation. His dad correctly interpreted this to mean that the boy did know something about it. The father asked, "Did you do anything to this woman?" The son answered no. "Do you know who did?" his dad continued. Then he confronted his son with his knowledge of the phone conversation. The boy finally admitted he knew who had harassed the neighbor but claimed that she was not telling the full truth. The father asked, "What are you going to do about what you know?" "I don't know," came back the not-so-calm reply. "Well," the father said, "I think you have a problem. Because you know who is doing these things, if they do anything more, you are partly responsible."

During the days that followed, the father pointed out in other conversations that the boy would feel at peace only after he made the right decision. The boy just wanted to drop the whole matter, but his dad wouldn't let him. Finally the boy said he would tell the minister what he knew. The father supported his son's choice, accompanying him to his interview with the minister. Afterward, the minister called all the boys in, listened to their side of the story, and worked out a solution with the woman.

Resolving dilemmas by making moral choices is a necessary part of moral judgment. Our children have learned this principle when they know that regardless of whether the moral circumstance is an easy situation or a tough one, the moral choice will produce a sense of rightness or peacefulness. Through repeated practice or sensitive concern we can point out to our children, "Look how happy you feel," or "Don't you feel good when you have done something right?"

The second form of adapting that is necessary to making moral judgments is learning to alter the display of an emotion to fit the demands of the situation. For example, certain emotional behavior is more appropriate on the playground than in church. What children feel and express appropriately during meals with the family may be different from what is appropriate for a public speech.

We recognize the need to adapt our expression of emotions to situations when we teach our children about social behavior. A mother has taken her three-year-old son with her to the grocery store. He is happily calm until he asks for some candy. She says no, refusing to let him have it. He begins to yell and falls to the floor kicking and crying. What are her alternatives? She might first try to regulate him by telling him to "calm down" or "stop it." If that doesn't work, she might get angry and threaten him with a spanking or worse if he doesn't stop. Or, she might take him from the store to calm him. (Some parents might even give in and get the candy.)

In order to understand what she actually chooses to do, we need to know that at home earlier in the day, the boy wanted some cookies just before lunch. When he was told "no, not until after you eat your lunch," he had a tantrum, but his mother ignored it and walked out of the room. He soon quieted and readied himself to eat. The mother did not get angry, did not threaten, did not even try to quiet the crying. Why?

In most cases the difference between her responses to her child could be explained by the difference between the circumstances of home and store. In the privacy of home a young child's crying may be considered more appropriate, though an unpleasant experience for the mother. Crying and yelling in the store, a public place, is not usually considered appropriate by most. If his mother ignores the child's tantrum in the store, she has to reason, "What will others think?" So, if she is typical, she will do something to quiet her child. If he stops yelling and crying, she might also let him know his emotional response is now more acceptable. Adapting her discipline to the emotional display of the child in several situations teaches him that he too must adapt.

Attending school, church, and participating in numerous friend and family relationships, children learn to succeed in a variety of social contexts by adapting their emotional responses. We can think of many that are commonplace. Consider children working quietly in school. The bell rings for recess, and suddenly there is noise and tumult. After recess is over, they must adjust back to quietness. Or consider adjusting a modest display of affection for a neighbor to a more exuberant expression to a well- liked relative. Another example is the talkative expression of a teenaged boy with other boys that changes to reserved attention with a girl he likes. Still another is the smiling, chatter, and laughter that change to quiet reverence when children enter their church.

We should remember that some emotions, their expression, and the circumstances for expressing them appear at different periods of a child's life. Thus children are busy integrating emotion and context for several years. We seem to possess an internal cultural clock that helps us recognize that certain emotions will be of greater worth to us and must be fitted into situations according to our age and experience. It is widely accepted, for example, that toddlers will have a limited variety of emotions and not express them well in any situation. We tolerate that. During the "terrible twos," because of their new language skill, children demonstrate more anger and more autonomy. This period is followed by a social period when play and friendships involve sharing, cooperation, jealousy, loneliness, and liking. This period may be followed in our culture by a period of achievement and industry with accompanying emotions of hope, despair, fun, enjoyment. Then sexual emotions and friendships motivate learning an appropriate form of expressing sexual attraction, courtesy, self-consciousness, enthusiasm, affection, and warmth.

At first children try out an emotion in ways they have observed others use. We usually are more tolerant and patient if they fail at first to match the appropriate display to the situation. As time passes, we think the need for correct adaptation increases. Our approval and disapproval become stronger, and if children at a certain age still fail to adapt, our concern increases and we search for other ways to teach or pressure children to adapt properly. If they delay adapting, we call their behavior delinquent.

While children are learning to fit an emotional response to a situation at any stage, they also learn a sense of rightness or wrongness about each. That is felt as a moral requirement, or what should happen, at a given time and in a given situation. As an elementary student, I was walking toward the school door after recess and heard a boy say mean words to a girl and then hit her. I instantly felt he should not do that and told him to stop it. He replied, "Make me." I felt a real obligation to do so because I was bigger and what he was doing I thought to be wrong. Fortunately, as I moved toward him, fearful but full of a sense of right, a teacher appeared and saved us both. I wondered why I felt as I did until I remembered the many occasions my mother reminded me, appropriately approving or disapproving, until I began to show the responses of respect she thought a boy should use toward a girl.

We must teach our children to adapt to moral situations within their control. When they cannot adapt, we must remove them from the situation. Then we need to show them how we want them to act by modeling the desired behavior for them. This process helps children become skillful at adapting their display of emotion. As time passes, they repeat the appropriate expression for a given circumstance and find it approved. The response eventually becomes habitual, and they no longer are conscious of it. The skills of adapting emotional behavior allow them to enter into familiar settings with the confidence that they know what to do. As our children mature and are faced with something new, they apply their adapting skills to find the correct adaptation for the new situation.

Learning the appropriate emotional display for a given situation is the means by which children acquire social confidence and a sense of moral rightness. When children, as well as adults, express emotions inappropriately, a sense of rightness or wrongness comes into play. I remember treating a man who was a passenger on a commercial plane when an engine exploded and the plane was forced to make an abrupt landing, dropping suddenly from thirty thousand feet in the air to the landing strip. The next time this man went to fly he began to tremble and couldn't board the plane. Because he had his own pilot's license for small planes and had previously enjoyed flying, he wanted to overcome his fear. I asked him what he did after the explosion. He answered, "It was terrible. The room filled with smoke and the plane decompressed." Because he had not answered my question, I asked again. Again he avoided it and told about being able to see into the pilot's cabin. I asked a third time. Seeing that I would persist, he fell quiet and then told of the terrible fear he had felt. "I began to scream," he said.

This admission on his part helped us solve the problem. He was not so much afraid of flying or of planes. He was afraid of his own feelings, afraid of being unable to control them and failing to express them the "right" way in that situation. The sense of inappropriateness he felt and his fear that he would again do something he felt was inappropriate was preventing from flying. We talked about what was right or wrong about his feelings. With a few experiments to build his confidence, he began to fly again.

His experience tells us that we have a sense of rightness or wrongness about the way we express our feelings. If we display the right intensity or the right emotion for the situation, then we can expect to be more successful socially.

Adapting becomes very significant for our children the moment a dilemma creates a tension that impels them to judge. One feeling often has to be changed into another as part of the judgment children make. Twelve-year-old JoAnn was walking home from school on the same route she took at the end of each school day. As she walked along the road, she saw a woman's purse. Opening it, she found a large quantity of money and also the owner's name and address. What had been a routine walk was now a moral circumstance. She found something belonging to someone else. She may have first felt surprise and excitement about the money that then was colored a little when she found the name and address of the owner. What is the right thing to do?

Intellectually, we know the purse should be returned. JoAnn's judgment, however, will be affected by her ability to adapt the emotion of excitement she felt when she found the purse. To do what is moral she will have to alter that feeling of excitement into one that includes a sense of right and concern for the individual who lost the money.

Consider another example. This time some high school boys were standing in the parking lot talking about a very disliked math teacher. Each had a separate story to tell about being mistreated. As they talked, their anger and frustration grew. Bill was angry, too, thinking of a recent unhappy experience. Someone spotted Mr. Taylor's car and said, "Hey, let's let the air out of his tires." Others moved toward the car, indicating they agreed. Bill walked with them. He began to think that it was not right, but he too was mad at Mr. Taylor. For Bill to be moral and not to hurt someone, he has to adapt the emotions of anger and resentment into concern about doing the right thing and concern for Mr. Taylor.

What determines whether these two children alter their emotions, make a correct judgment of what to do, and then act morally? Foremost, of course, is the skill of adapting that children learn as they grow. Those who understand they must adapt to some situations are more likely to adapt during a moral circumstance. JoAnn, for instance, could get a temporary excitement by never telling anyone and keeping the money she found. Bill could get immediate approval from his friends and a temporary satisfaction from letting the air out of Mr. Taylor's tires. But if they elect the moral option to help and to avoid hurt, they must alter their feelings into other feelings. They will be more able to do so if they have practiced this skill.

Another factor that helps determine whether Bill and JoAnn choose morally is a belief about what they would prefer to feel. In the last few years, behavioral scientists have demonstrated that many emotions are related to what we believe about ourselves and others. Is the excitement about the money and the satisfaction of getting back at a teacher better than feeling secure about doing what was right, peace of mind at doing something correct, and the warmth that results from concern for others? If Bill and JoAnn believe the latter is better for them, they will be able to make the choice to help and to avoid hurt. JoAnn will take the purse home, find the owner, and return it. Bill will be more likely to tell his friends he won't let the air out of the tires and he doesn't think they should either.

Adapting during a moral circumstance requires that children become aware of their own feelings and have beliefs about the more desirable feelings that will result from the moral choice they make. This skill is learned from a full exploration of the mistakes our children make while growing up to ensure they feel the negative emotions related to immoral choices and the positive emotions associated with moral decisions. We can recognize that mistakes are as useful to us as wisdom while we are teaching our children the process of moral judgment.

Lastly, adapting to make moral choices is affected by the idea of faith and hopefulness. Bill and JoAnn had no guarantee they would feel better if they chose morally than if she kept the money and he released the air in the tires. What makes them or any child do what is moral when there is no guarantee or even a possibility they will receive anything in return? They must make the moral judgment believing, hoping, but not knowing, that it is right. In the end, all moral judgments and the emotional adaptations that precede them are based on faith. Parents teach children faith when they teach them the worth of hoping and planning for a positive future. It may be religious faith, in which children are taught of God and his commandments. It may be faith derived from the confidence one gets from enduring hardship and achieving success. It may be faith in loving parents or in caring friends. Regardless, it is faith, meaning hope for some future possibility. If children lose faith, or have not had it at all, they have much less motivation to be moral. With faith, children are more likely to solve their challenges morally.

In all our teaching, we must teach by example, giving encouragement more than criticism. We must teach by optimism, by loving in abundance, and by involving ourselves with our children as they grow. They come to believe in us, and as we live and hope, so will they. When we rise from disappointments and help them, then they will believe they can rise from disappointments and help themselves and others. At that very moment, when our children are compelled to decide between right and wrong, it is practice, belief in something more desirable, and faith that enable them to adapt to the circumstance and choose the right.
