A. Lynn Scoresby, Bringing Up Moral Children ( 1989)

CHAPTER 5

MORAL CONDUCT

Why do some people with good moral training act morally whereas others with similar training do not? Some believe that those who act morally feel a responsibility others do not feel. According to this view, those who do not act morally apparently believe that someone else will do what needs to be done. Others believe that those who act morally have more skill in interpreting complex situations than those who do not.

Lawrence Kohlberg (1969) proposed that moral deliberation develops and matures from one stage to another: first children are motivated by trying to avoid punishment, and then they are interested in seeking approval from others, in fulfilling expectations about what a good boy or girl does, and in following rules simply because they have learned the rules. Mature morality, according to Kohlberg, is displayed when children recognize their responsibility to others and accept a universal "truth" about the right thing to do. Jean Piaget (1965) demonstrated that moral judgment (deliberation) changed with the age and growth of children. Kohlberg's work helps us understand more about moral reasoning, and Piaget's work shows that moral perception changes with maturity and experience.

But these two popular descriptions lead to us to think of morality as an intellectual or a cognitive aspect of a person's life rather than as the representation of a whole human character. Obviously these descriptions of morality lack something: they emphasize knowing morally, not doing morally.

Moral conduct requires that children go beyond moral reasoning and moral judgment to actually doing something helpful. Those who teach morality to children only according to Kohlberg's and Piaget's theories might help children to know about right and wrong in a moral circumstance, but they may not help the children develop the skills to actually do what is moral. Because we know that sometimes moral actions follow moral reasoning and sometimes they do not, as parents we focus on moral action as the result of our teaching. We want our children to interpret situations to know what helps and what hurts people, and when they are confronted with a moral choice, we want them to choose what is moral and then do it.

Developing Moral Character

As parents we are interested in helping children develop a moral character rather than producing children who merely think about morality. We also want to help children become compassionate and flexible in their judgments rather than to behave like robots programmed with a "moral code." Such programming can result when our punishments and rewards are so strict that children are left with little room for initiative or with little sense of freedom. That is why we must teach them moral reasoning and moral judgment. These help us influence our children's thoughts and feelings, the parts of their personality that allow for uniqueness and freedom. If we try to control how our children act by using force or by yelling, anger, threats, withdrawing love, or bribery, we are actually undermining our efforts to teach them morality.

Helping children to understand their thoughts and feelings and then integrate them with their actions will foster in them a more complete system of morality. This total approach helps ensure that our children will demonstrate moral character by their actions.

Morality Is Active

Some actions, related to thoughts and feelings, are learned cumulatively. Each experience is added upon earlier ones until children have acquired a variety of actions they apply to a variety of situations. Some specific acts, such as telling the truth or demonstrating respect for property, may have to be repeated many times before they are a consistent part of a child's behavior. It therefore is useful to begin moral training when children are very young.

Children do not naturally know that they need to do something instead of being passive. They usually must be taught that there are times when they are to implement, perform, function, achieve, accomplish. We teach children when and how to do this by participating with them in many situations where they act rather than merely listen or observe.

Because children need to learn to be active rather than avoidant or passive, parents should promote rather than stifle active behavior. Children allowed to roam the house instead of spending excessive time in a playpen, for example, are likely to be more active. Too many restrictions by overly cautious parents may promote passivity. Excessive criticism or punishment of children may do the same.

Even television reduces the activity levels of children. In 1970 the average time children watched television was three and one half hours daily. In 1980 the average time had increased to five and one half hours. By age eighteen the average child will have spent more than thirty-six thousand hours being passively entertained in front of a television. When we consider that active experience is necessary for children to learn morality, we can imagine how detrimental these passive hours are.

Children cannot choose to refrain from doing something immoral unless they are active doers. The better we teach children to do things, the easier it will be for us to teach that there are times when it is useful to choose to be passive. In contrast, allowing children to be passive makes it more difficult to teach them to be doers. Passivity leads to more passivity, not to action.

Identifying Moral Acts

Children do not automatically know what moral actions are. We have to teach them what is moral and what is not. In order for them to learn morality, they must actually participate in the activities that will teach them. As we participate with our children in those activities and allow them actively to satisfy their curiosity about things, we can make sure that moral actions stick out and are noticed by them. We do that by our own example, by our approving of what they do well and by our disapproving of their mistakes. All three are essential for children to learn what is moral and what is not.

Any situation can be made a part of our children's moral education if we focus on what we do to teach them our standards. Unless we are consciously aware of the need to help our children develop morality, we might not see mealtime, for example, as a time when morality can be taught. But when we realize that any of our children's actions might lead to a certain character trait or type of personality that will continue throughout their life, then we will use any situation to teach.

Think of children who are grumpy or angry and who argue with others at breakfast. The mood, the noise, and the frustration prevent others from having a peaceful and pleasant meal. We can respond by (1) saying or doing nothing and allowing the disruption to continue, hoping it will pass, (2) becoming angry and yelling at the children to stop, (3) making the children leave the table because they are offending other family members, or (4) distracting the children by telling a story. These possibilities exist for every parent who eats with his or her children. Let's consider what children might learn from each of these four potential responses. Frequently allowing children to act angry and grumpy without regard to others' feelings might contribute to insensitivity and a lack of concern for other people. Ignoring how children act will not teach them anything moral or immoral unless they interpret our lack of response as approval.

Yelling at children will help them know that some behavior is not acceptable, but it may teach them to be considerate only when a strong authority is present to enforce the standards. This response may also present to the children an example of hypocrisy, a distinct difference between what we say and what we do—that is, we are yelling to get them to stop yelling. In most such cases, children will do what they see us do, not what they hear us tell them to do.

If we just send the children away from the table, saying they can return when their mood has improved, they will learn grumpiness is not acceptable because of our disapproval, but they will not learn what is correct behavior unless we do something else. That is true also of the option to distract the children by telling a story.

To teach our children correct behavior at mealtimes, we must set an example of the behavior we want our children to learn and then be willing to show approval (such as praise and affection, or returning the children to the table if they have been sent away) as well as disapproval. Another example will further illustrate. Two four- year-olds are playing in the bedroom. They play quietly at first, but soon we hear loud, angry voices, and soon the children hit each other. Both begin to cry. Our child comes to us, and we find out that our child would not share with the friend. Effective teaching suggests that we go into the bedroom, find out what was wrong, ask the children to explain how selfishness made them feel (unhappy), and then show them what sharing means. We might even practice sharing additional toys or make up a sharing game. When the children are able to share well, we might reassure them again before we leave them alone. By following this routine of teaching both moral and immoral acts, we can demonstrate our example of sharing with them (the correct behavior), our approval when they do share, and our disapproval with their failure to share properly. If we apply the same series of steps for many other situations where children participate, we will highlight moral concerns and moral behavior. Through this means, children will come to know that the requirement to act is an integral part of life.

Verbal Cues and Moral Conduct

As our children mature, we begin to use words to regulate them. We tell them what to do, we say "no, no," and give love or short explanations, depending on our inclination and their abilities to understand. We use this process to tie words to children's actions and to teach children to regulate their behavior by using key words. In one study, situations were identified in which impulsive children either did not act or did not act correctly. The children were given a cue word to whisper or to say out loud when they found themselves in these situations, words such as go, walk, and so on. This technique helped children learn what to do and how to control their actions. (Meichenbaum and Goodman, 1971.) The same thing ordinarily happens when we teach children, "Don't cheat," or "Stealing hurts someone," or "Tell the truth," or "Be kind." If we use words to name and describe moral and immoral possibilities, our children will use these words to guide their actions.

Moral Acts Are Governed by Rules

The next step in the development of moral conduct is to teach children about rules and about how rules govern their actions. How children learn rule-governed behavior is a fascinating story that shows us that children are observant, that as they mature they gain a greater and more complex understanding of the world, and they sense the need to adapt rules to a specific context or situation, much as they alter or adapt the expression of emotions. These characteristics suggest that the behavior of children is generally pliable and that we can reasonably expect varieties of positive skills, depending in part on the time and energy we take to teach them. Child psychologists generally believe that children's understanding of rules develops in the following sequence:

Experimentation, ages birth to two-and-a-half years. Infants and toddlers usually respond to their immediate surroundings. They experiment to learn how to fit physical skills—crawling, walking, and so on—with language and relating to other people.

Rules and actions, ages two-and-a-half to five years. Children discover that a rule of action applies to them. Their imitations of adult behavior, such as playing house or other childhood games, introduces them to the idea that they must learn rules about how to act; otherwise, they cannot successfully participate with others.

Rules for specific situations, ages five through nine years. Children learn that different rules for actions exist in many situations, such as games, school class, family situations, and playing with friends. As they learn to succeed in these situations, children usually believe the rules for each situation are fixed and cannot be changed. They evidence frustration and annoyance if someone fails to follow the rigid rules or attempts to change them.

Negotiating a change in the rules, ages nine through thirteen years. Children evidence more flexibility in their understanding of rules and recognize they must be willing to change them to fit a given situation—not having enough players to make up two complete basketball teams, for example. These changes, however, are arrived at by agreement among everyone concerned. Thus we see groups of children participating in "fair" strategies to "choose sides."

Adaptation: organizing a principle, ages thirteen years through adult. Children appear able to adapt a given rule to fit many different situations. This process involves trial and error, and occasionally mistakes are made—"We were just having fun and didn't think anyone would care." Children are expected to know how to act in many circumstances and especially how to adapt to changes. Those who fail at either of these will receive disapproval from others who share the situation and believe they know the rules.

The connection among rule-governed actions, situations, and morality is important. We want children to know that certain acts must be applied to certain situations so they will feel impelled to act and then be motivated to act morally.

Morality requires two sets of rule-governed behavior: (1) regulating behavior to help and to prevent hurting someone; and (2) promoting justice and equality. (Kurtines, 1984.)

Regulating behavior means that children will be able to help actively—that is, they will be kind, show charity, give love. Moral conduct requires children to regulate their behavior so that people are not hurt. Honesty, resisting temptation to cheat or steal, patience, and self-restraint help people. Lying, cheating and stealing, impatience, and lack of self-restraint hurt people.

Promoting justice and equality involves such things as learning to take turns, cooperating, sharing equally, and understanding social reciprocity. Social reciprocity means that in relationship to each other, both individuals give and both get something. Reciprocity establishes equality in that what one person gives another is equal to what he or she receives. Further, reciprocity is the basis on which justice is established. Justice requires that punishment fit the crime. People who have taken something from others "deserve" a just, or reciprocal, deprivation. Someone who has sacrificed for others to some degree deserves a just, or commensurate, reward.

Regulating behavior and promoting justice are the names for groups of specific actions we want our children to know. There are numerous ways to perform each action, and children choose these ways according to the conditions they find in the moral circumstance. At least one of these actions—regulating behavior and promoting justice—is involved in every moral circumstance, and sometimes children must do both to be moral. Teaching morality will require that we teach both.

Community Standards: What Children Are Expected to Live Up To

After we have helped our children identify what is moral and what is not, the next step in developing moral conduct is to help them expand their personal experience to include an understanding of the rules and laws of society and to make community standards (the requirements of the moral order) into a set of personal standards they can strive to live up to. In this way children begin to learn that regulating behavior and establishing justice have general social applications as well as specific personal ones. Parents, neighbors, television programs, schoolteachers, newspapers, books, and friends portray and teach common expectations about rules for regulating behavior and establishing justice.

Community standards shape the goals that children strive for and the ideals they live by in order to be like others. Children may, of course, encounter specific differences between the standards of the several communities of which they are a part. Religious standards, for example, may conflict with the standards of the team or the school. These differences, however, do not prevent children from learning a set of standards that are shared by others who matter most to them and that they are expected to live up to. Most people do find it easier to live in communities where people think and act as they do. That is why we choose to live among people who mirror our own standards of morality. We want our children to discover that they are to live up to the standards we find acceptable. Therefore, our neighbors, our friends, and our fellow church members are important. Children learn community standards from several people, and we quickly learn that it takes many people to rear a moral child.

There are many ways to learn community standards vicariously as well as through direct experience. Children talk with their friends and learn about their friends' family rules. They may see their friends receive some form of approval or disapproval from their parents. And community gossip can be an effective source of information about the approval or disapproval other people receive. Such gossip may include sensational events reported in newspapers as well as more immediate neighborhood events such as a divorce or an incident of child abuse.

We are wise, I believe, to recognize that gossip has its malicious side, which must be avoided if we want our children to be moral, but the informal discussions of other people's acts and their consequences are an effective way of establishing and reinforcing community standards. We often talk about others' proper or improper displays of character compared to the community standard. Usually gossip is about whether someone has failed to display the character trait—self-regulation, for example—that satisfies the standards. Children hear or participate in these discussions, which adds to their information about what is right and wrong. (Sabini and Silver, 1984.)

Children learn another part of how to act in accordance with community standards from ceremonies and rituals. Community ceremonies that honor traditions—such as celebrations on Independence Day, Veterans' Day, or Presidents' Day, for example—teach children community standards about those traditions. In addition, when children believe that everyone else maintains the community standards, they can develop a sense of "rights," which gives definition and direction to their actions. Our concept of fairness toward one another teaches us one of those rights. So does our idea of responsibility in the face of needs: if one person's need is greater than the need of another, the one with the greater need has the "right" to seek assistance from the other. (Harre, 1984.)

The "rights" shared by those in a given community are the spaces, the allowances, the opportunities, or the freedom for action in a moral circumstance. They are what people allow without disapproval. If everyone else does it, or should do it, then we assume it is within our rights to act the same way. Every parent hears children justify their actions by making the claim that "others do it." Another example of how our sense of rights influences us can be shown by comparing children's behavior in the classroom. In Europe children do not openly tell or correct a teacher about some irregularity because it is not considered a child's right to do so. In America children are more likely to make such comments because they assume they have the right to openly address or question authority.

Our culture-wide sense of rights gives children latitude to act in some situations and restricts them in others. The wider our children's exposure to people and situations, the clearer will be their concept of their rights. When children are brought into contact with different types of people, have experiences with many things a community deems to be of worth, and are exposed to many ideas, they will have a more elaborate sense of their own rights and the rights of others. Thus they will have greater freedom to act morally when a circumstance requires it.

Internalizing: How Children Form Personal Standards and Character

When children have learned to act, learned that actions are governed by rules, and learned what those rules and their applications are, children can internalize what they know and form their own standards of moral conduct. As children grow, their experience and knowledge will be varied and probably uneven; that is, they may have more experience in one area than in another. Therefore, a child may be better at being moral in some settings than in others. A child might steal, for example, but won't lie. Some cheat on tests at school but donate hours to a service organization. Some appear to be moral in public but engage privately in immoral acts, knowing they would receive disapproval if others knew. Such children may feel guilt for wrongdoing only if they are caught. Internalization is the process of testing what they have been taught against their own experience to see if it is emotionally true for them. Internalization smooths out the rough spots and inconsistencies in children's understandings and creates a more integrated moral character. This process in children implies that they have transformed ideas into actions. It suggests a strong sense of responsibility for self, so that they will adhere to standards even when pressure is exerted to prevent adherence.

Internalization is a complex of social, emotional, and mental events that usually take place during late adolescence, but they may begin earlier or may not begin until later in life. Some researchers have suggested that the notorious "midlife crisis" may happen because internalization did not occur earlier. In any event, when children reach a stage when they have had a variety of experiences with moral behavior, when the adults around them give them less supervision and external control, when they accept real responsibilities with real consequences for failure and success, then internalization takes place. The process of internalization usually has three stages:

Becoming private. Internalization requires that children's experience with a community standard become a private matter. To accomplish that, children remove themselves from those who represent the community, especially authorities; they might spend increased amounts of time alone, or complain that others are trying to control them, and they state, "I just want to be left alone."

To achieve a sense of privacy, children might also deviate from community standards just to see if they can get away with it. Many form a private life away from authority figures with friends exemplified by a vocabulary of new words, going to parties, and adopting rules in their group. These rules may or may not contradict community standards. Many children will privately violate some community standard, ranging from pranks and mild deviance to life-styles that are vastly different from the usual. Most prominently, children in this stage psychologically remove themselves from those they are intimately acquainted with in order to think and act alone without supervision. Many children will, eventually, quietly adopt the community standards as their own.

Integrating: forming a sense of individuality. The second phase takes place when children begin to participate in work, play, school, or personal activities without much supervision from others. The experiences they have "alone" are fit together with their knowledge of community standards. These standards are, in effect, tested to see if the child's experience will confirm the community standard as correct. When children succeed at doing this, they can better sense their uniqueness from others and will show improved ability to reason about themselves, recognizing they can acceptably differ from other people. They will understand what consequences their actions will produce for themselves and others, generally accepting some of their personality traits as permanent. Those who have deviated from the accepted standards and in the process have been alienated from others (having broken the law or some other standard) begin to return to the community because they discover that personal success requires a more conventional life than they have lived. Children sense a shift in the balance between emphasis on what others think and attention to their own choices.

Internalized personal standards are evident when children recognize that what they may decide to do may not be fully approved of by others. They are aware of and understand their personal beliefs as well as how others may think. During this phase children will show less fear of stating their opinions, values and standards.

Becoming conventional. The third stage begins once children have felt a sense of individuality and experienced some of the consequences of their own choices. Now, seeking to belong and succeed with others, they discover that demonstrating the conventional standards of the community improves communication and reduces the possibility of friction. Further, such demonstrations bring respect and approval from others. Economic and social success is often tied to a reputation of being a "good" person as measured by a person's display of the community standards. When opportunities permit, children with these personal standards will demonstrate their knowledge by adopting behavior accepted as proper by others, even if others might fail to demonstrate what is proper. Thus, children become conventional to be successful with others and because conventionality is consistent with their individualized set of standards.

After internalization, the children's moral character as represented in their personal standards is a demonstration of the community values. Standards are like traits, or behavioral tendencies. They include many ways to help by regulating or adapting certain actions or to help by seeking justice. Importantly, these traits are shared by other community members, thus making any individual a representative of what the community or society believes about how help is or should be given to one another.

Character is the understanding and interpretation of moral conduct shared by both the individuals and the other members of their community. If we now say our child is honest, then the way honesty is expressed by this child will be mutually understood by the child and other people.

Having a moral character means that our children have many ways to help, many ways to prevent harm, and the sense of responsibility to act when it is not clear that others agree or that what is to be done will actually work. The moments of moral courage when our children willingly maintain their standards are among the most important moments of their lives. Most of them will not be earthshaking. They will not usually produce fame or fortune. But they will provide for our children many private moments of deep personal satisfaction.

A group of college boys in my dormitory formed committees to prepare for a coming Christmas party. The party was a success. The refreshments were delicious, the music was great, and the decorations were outstanding. Everyone enjoyed themselves. Later one or two of the boys on the decorations committee admitted they had stolen the decorations. The guilty parties feared getting caught, so a general meeting was called to help decide what to do. Since we were friends, it was understandable why the purpose of the meeting focused on "how to avoid getting caught."

"Let's not tell anyone," someone said. "We can keep it a secret." (A sense of privacy.) "Yea," another fellow replied, "but we would know." "Well," another stated, "it is not my problem. You guys should have thought about this mess before you did it." After a long pause, another said, "Why don't we take them back?" This comment was answered that someone stealing from people wouldn't take down the address. "Let's sell them and give the money to charity," another voiced. The chairman of the committee answered, "In the first place," he said, "we didn't keep records of where we got the stuff. In the second place, if we sell it, people might find out we took it." His comment was followed by a few nods of agreement.

In the midst of this discussion, one older fellow, who had been silent, now spoke. "I want you guys to know I won't have anything to do with something dishonest, and I don't think you should either."

I wished I had made that statement. All of us did. As a freshman and a friend of culprits, I was caught up in trying to find a way to prevent them from getting caught. The difference between the older person's comment and what I was thinking staggered me just a little. Why didn't I think it, or say it? He had internalized his standards and was less controlled by the situation he was in. I had not yet developed to that point, but on that day, I wished I had.
