A. Lynn Scoresby, Bringing Up Moral Children ( 1989)

CHAPTER 6

SEXUAL MORALITY

Sexual experience in some form is a part of everyone's life. We may differ in the amount and the exact kind of our sexual contact with others; we may differ in the way we talk about sex, if we talk about it at all; we may differ in what we think about the appropriateness of certain sexual acts, or what we consider the proper circumstances and times for sexual behavior. So, we will differ in what we teach our children about sexual behavior. But we must all realize that every child learns something about sex; every child develops attitudes toward it; and every child participates in situations where sexual acts are possible. All children can be helped or hurt and can help or hurt others by sexual acts.

The pathway from immature child to sexually mature adult is such a natural part of human development that it is quite easy to notice the transformation in our children and not fully appreciate that sexual development can and ought to be accompanied by relevant moral education. As our children mature, we may teach them about their bodies; we may talk to them about human reproduction. They will also talk to their friends about sex, and out of curiosity they may experiment to find out more. Many of the sexual experiences our children have are simply motivated by a desire to learn.

It is possible for our children to go through this natural process without learning that they can be helped or hurt and can help or hurt others by what they know and do about sex. Unless we help them, they may not understand that moral sexual development must be accompanied by awareness and mastery in many different situations. If we are interested in teaching sexual morality, we will want our children to be prepared to make decisions about the way they express themselves sexually, with whom, and under what conditions. If they are not informed and prepared to understand sexuality as involving decisions, they will be vulnerable to sensory pleasure and to impulsive violations of their own moral standards. Mature morality about sex includes active decision making, that is, making informed choices related to sex instead of acting impulsively.

Remembering our discussion of moral reasoning, we understand that it will help children if they know something about other people and how to interpret what these people do or intend to do sexually. How can other people be hurt or helped by sexual behavior? How can I? Being able to make these kinds of evaluations will help our children make correct moral judgments in moral circumstances involving sexual behavior. If they understand what helps and what hurts others in such a circumstance, if they have moral standards and know how to regulate their emotions in order to act according to these standards, then our children will also know moral sexual conduct.

Sexual Openness

Over the past few decades, sexual issues have gradually become more openly discussed in public. This increased openness has probably improved our general knowledge about sex and should be appreciated for that, but there are many things it has not accomplished. For one thing, we still do not have a clear-cut, accepted community standard about the way children are to learn about sex. Generally, parents are still not the primary teachers of sexual knowledge. If other people, such as school personnel, attempt to teach our children, we worry about what they teach and whether they will teach them our standard of sexual conduct. But many of us still assume, apparently, that children will find out what they should know from someone other than us. Our parents were often not our teachers, and we are often unable to overcome their example. We should realize, however, that so many different kinds of information are openly available to our children that if we ourselves do not teach them what they should know, they will not lack information, but they will at least be confused and probably misinformed.

In my opinion, although our lack of involvement in teaching our children about sex is a serious problem, a greater failing is the continued societal confusion and disagreement about what is moral and what is immoral sexual conduct. The absence of agreement in our religious and civil communities makes it more difficult for parents in individual families to decide what they will teach as moral, and many, rather than stand alone, simply neglect to decide at all. What will children value if we, their parents, are confused?

Since every healthy child develops sexual desire, and all children grow up participating in situations where decisions regarding sexual behavior must be made, it seems reasonable that by now the increased openness about sex would have resulted in agreed-upon standards of moral behavior that we could teach our children. In the absence of such standards, however, I fear that many of us have communicated to our children that their sexual conduct is a matter not of morality but of personal preference. I have interviewed many young people who began sexual activity as a result of whims and experimentation. Sex is such a profound part of us that our failure to help our children understand the use of it as a moral issue places them at great risk. Its great power to bring joy is accompanied by at least an equally great power to hurt.

Making sex a moral concern does not mean that we have to judge and disapprove or approve of every touch, embrace, or kiss. But, as with any other part of morality, we want our children to know how to reason about sex, make appropriate moral judgments about it, and then act morally to help and to avoid hurting anyone. That will not be easily accomplished unless we make clear decisions about it ourselves. Using the guideline that moral is what helps people and avoids hurting them, I believe it is possible to come to a sound understanding of sexual morality and a clear distinction between what is moral and what is immoral.

Sexual Behavior: Seeking a Moral Standard

We usually evaluate a behavior as moral or immoral by examining its consequences. If someone is hurt, then we can, with hindsight, recognize it to have been immoral. If an act results in helping someone, then we define that act as moral. Then we apply these evaluations to future acts of the same kind. Using consequences as the only measure of behavior, however, makes it difficult to establish a definition of moral and immoral for some kinds of behavior. Sexual behavior is one of these kinds, because the consequences of sexual acts are not always immediate or readily apparent. We can easily recognize that rape is immoral because its harmful consequences are obvious and well known. As a community, we find it more difficult to reach agreement about the morality or immorality of premarital sexual contact from french kissing and petting to intercourse between consenting adults because it is hard to tell if someone is hurt by it. Thus we have a tangled growth of opinion seeded by religious belief, legal definition, personal preference, peer pressure, and the fashion of the day.

Some define sexual morality in relation to a legal definition of immorality as any act of sexual exploitation by one person of another. Examples of exploitation are child molestation and rape, including statutory rape (performed by an adult upon a "willing" but underaged partner). Others consider sexual morality to be behavior on one side of a "line" drawn through a list of possible types of sexual behavior—after a few kisses and caresses but before heavy petting, or after petting but before intercourse. Still others consider any sexual behavior with a loved person to be moral, while the same behavior engaged in randomly or casually, without love, is immoral.

It is easy to see why the diversity of opinion about so many types of sexual conduct confuses us about standards of sexual morality. It is also understandable that deciding about sexual morality seems such a large and complex task that we are reluctant to try to establish some common standard all can rely on.

The increasing incidents of sexual exploitation we hear about and the increasing sexual activity among young people should motivate us to try harder to arrive at community standards for sexual behavior. (Robinson and Jedlicka, 1982.) After our initial outrage at hearing a new instance of sexual exploitation, however, we seem to ignore the matter until the next dramatic case comes to our attention. Our collective efforts are like running from fire to fire, thinking that we are making progress against an epidemic of arson if we put out each blaze as it appears. And many have decided that sexual activity among young people is so widespread and inevitable that rather than trying to regulate it in any way, the best course is just to teach children to prevent some of its consequences. So, these people teach "safe sex," with prophylactics to prevent disease and contraceptives to prevent unwanted pregnancies.

Sexual exploitation and sexual activity among young people deserve our compassionate attention. Nevertheless, the urgency to respond to these concerns, combined with our confusion about sexual morality, tempts us away from confronting and accepting the obvious solution: the injuries and harm resulting from any inappropriate sexual behavior are virtually eliminated when people live the standard of chastity. This standard is gaining more favorable attention as it has become clearer in recent years that other sexual standards risk harm and misery.

For many years now, however, those who believed in chastity before marriage and sexual fidelity in marriage have felt they had to justify this position against the claim that anything is moral, or at least not immoral, if it does not hurt anyone else. Because it has been difficult to confirm that an obvious consequence results from some sexual acts (such as intercourse between consenting adults), the standard of chastity has been taught and lived in the faith that sex at the wrong time and place is harmful, even if the harm is not apparent.

Our culture's experimentation with varieties of sexual freedoms has not resulted in a better life and more happiness for those who have tried them. As parents teaching morality to children, we recognize the need for a community standard of sexual morality that is clear and understandable so that we can help our children learn and live it. The standard of chastity and fidelity, though still somewhat ambiguous, is at least more clearly defined than any other standard except sexual license, which is clear- cut because it has no limits of any kind.

If it can be successfully argued, and I believe it can, that the role of morality is to preserve society and create unity among a people, then the far-reaching personal and social effects of sexual behavior certainly imply a demand for a sexual standard. And all sexual standards other than chastity and fidelity risk hurting or exploiting the people directly involved through emotional trauma and disease and also risk hurting the children their actions may call into being. And now, because of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS), an even wider group of innocent people can die as a consequence of other people's sexual acts. We live in a time when it is clear that society is faced with a serious struggle and disunity partly because of our lack of chastity and fidelity.

The advent of AIDS has brought many people to the realization that sexual acts can have life-threatening consequences. That innocent victims are vulnerable to AIDS has created a greater moral crisis and has helped fuel the search for solutions. The standard of chastity, however, need not be justified only by this terrible possibility. The past decade has yielded increased information about other effects sex can have on people. For example, we did not know a few years ago what we know now about the effects on the human personality of sexual exploitation. Chastity and fidelity do not exploit anyone and thus, according to our guideline, are moral.

If we truly understand the breadth and scope of the influence of sexual relationships in human experience, we can understand that sex should be more than a series of momentary pleasures from brief encounters. The true role of the sexual relationship is to bring a full and rich passion to life, to help us form a lasting emotional bond, to enable us to procreate, and to bring numerous other personal rewards. Sharing sexual experiences with the same partner, in the absence of fear and in the context of affection, allows expression of a person's deepest heartfelt impulses to give and receive love. This complete expression has been called, by those who have known it, the most wonderful experience possible for human beings. So we add to our definition of sexual morality any sexual behavior that promotes this outcome. Immorality, then, is anything that stifles and limits the full expression of sexuality in marriage.

The immorality of sexual exploitation and the morality of sex that builds love provides a rationale for chastity and fidelity as our standard of morality:

Intimate premarital sexual contact alters our children's social perception and narrows their focus to finding sexual pleasure rather than forming friendships. According to our definition and rationale for sexual morality, sexual intercourse and all intensely intimate sexual contact between consenting adults before or outside of marriage may be immoral. The lack of an assured commitment between them will, at least in the long run, prevent them from a more total expression of love. Further, should a person have several partners, there is some probability of reduced ability to form an enduring emotional bond with another.

If there is no obligation or sense of responsibility for children born from the sexual union of uncommitted partners, the lives of these children, faced with uncertainty and potential unhappiness, may be evidence that sexual acts are immoral when people are unprepared to be responsible for the consequences. The immorality of adultery is demonstrated by the emotional pain often felt by both partners, and the terrible void it very often creates in the lives of others, spouses and children, which often requires years of struggle to overcome.

It seems obvious that teaching our children to be chaste is the one way to prepare them for future happiness. We can teach this standard of morality to children just as we can teach them not to cheat, steal, or lie. If we have decided to accept this standard ourselves, they will more likely learn and follow.

Children's Nudity, Curiosity, and Imitation

During the first five years of life, children learn much about sex. They gain impressions of their own bodies, they learn that two sexes exist, they understand that pleasure results from stimulating their genitals, they are exposed to our notions of modesty, and they will see other people engaged in some forms of sexual expression. They may also imitate what they see.

We can do several things while children are learning about sex to prepare them to be moral. For instance, we can help them learn acceptance, one of the moral character traits, by helping them think of their bodies as marvelous and beautiful. Warm touches and affectionate embraces create impulses of self-acceptance. If we praise their arms, their legs, faces, backs, and feet, we can help children form positive feelings about what they look like. Children with unhappy, negative feelings about their physical appearance are often more vulnerable when pressured or invited to engage in sex.

Sexual acceptance is also promoted when we tell them the names of their body parts as we talk with them about breasts, penis, testicles, vagina. Such matter-of-fact conversations help them recognize that differences between boys and girls do not make one inferior. Our ability to talk calmly, using sexual names and words, will also help them feel free to talk with us about their questions and ideas. Conversations about sexual topics are an important way to transmit sexual values to children as well as to prepare them to be moral.

A friend of mine and his wife were very good at talking with their children about sex. One day, my friend overheard a conversation between his five-year-old daughter and a neighbor boy. The boy asked her to take down her pants so he could look at her. "I will if you will," he said. "Nope," came the reply, "I know about that stuff, and it's no big deal." Talking with our children when they are young will make sex a topic easier to talk about when they are older, when the importance of talking is greater.

Many of us are concerned about our children's lack of modesty in running nude around the house or out-of- doors. Not having feelings of embarrassment, they go without clothes because they feel freer and cooler without them. They may also find that we run after them when, without clothes, they run away from us. Then it is fun. Most children develop a greater sense of modesty as they grow, and those who thought nothing of going to the bathroom with other boys and girls at age four or five will soon sense a desire for privacy and usually cover up. If we are uncomfortable about their nudity, or lack of modesty, it is usually our problem, not theirs. Mild reminders of getting dressed in private, accompanied by our example, will usually be sufficient. If we are too extreme and too restrictive, we risk making children feel that something is wrong with them.

Most children stimulate their genitals, usually before going to sleep when they turn on their stomachs and place their hands between their legs, or during bathing, or diaper changing. Occasionally, children will engage in prolonged stimulation. Girls, for example, will stimulate themselves with their hands or the corner of the bed or some other piece of furniture. Boys will stimulate themselves while going to the bathroom or while outside playing. In most cases with children under eight years of age, it is advisable simply to remove their hands without saying anything, or if that does not succeed, to talk with them about not touching themselves. Usually, the less said and done, the better, because too much attention could aggravate a situation that would have soon disappeared on its own.

In some instances, however, young children continue to stimulate themselves. Nearly always, masturbation over a prolonged period of time is an indication of some emotional disturbance. Childhood anxieties, including fear of parents or school or friends, may be involved. Or childhood masturbation may reflect molestation. In every case, we can further moral development by talking calmly with our children and frequently expressing our love and warmth. Their problems, though unfamiliar and discomfiting to us, should not make us withdraw our care and concern.

I have known parents who have become angry at their children for masturbating. Some have been repulsed and have withdrawn their affection. One mother, in contrast, sought counseling for a six-year-old daughter who frequently masturbated. After learning that emotional problems could be the cause, she kept records and discovered that her daughter stimulated herself after any intense or stressful experience. The mother participated in a program to reduce family conflict and to help her daughter learn another response to stress. It was not long before her daughter stopped masturbating.

Indifference is also generally the best first response when children imitate a Hollywood kiss or engage in exaggerated forms of sexual expression; however, playing doctor and nurse to examine one another or displaying knowledge of petting or the positions for intercourse require something more than our indifference. Examining one another sexually is an experience that shapes attitudes and provides knowledge. Such experiences should always be followed by guiding conversations with parents. Finding out about a doctor-and-nurse episode, we should make it clear to the child that we want to talk about it. Curiosity usually signals a need to know. We could get some appropriate pictures of females and males, show them to our child, and begin to talk about what is in the pictures. Usually, in this context, children will become more open and will talk. If we are talking with our child about a simple experience that happened out of curiosity, we can ask, "What did you see?" "What did you feel when someone was looking at you?" "How do you feel now about what happened?" After helping the child talk about the experience, we should show appreciation for the openness and trust the child displayed in talking about the incident.

Talking with children about their early sexual experiences also gives us a chance to help them learn what to say and do in order to avoid such experiences. We can advise our children that if anyone wants to play a "game" again or look at them, to come immediately to us. We can role-play the situation and teach them to say, "No! I don't want to." And, we can remind them that whatever they want to know, they have only to come to us for answers to their questions.

We are currently much more aware of child sexual abuse than we have ever been, and this awareness has presented us with a dilemma. Do we teach our children that some people may hurt them and risk making them unduly afraid of everyone, or do we keep them uninformed and trusting? The risks of keeping our children naive seem too great, and we can choose to solve the problem by helping children learn to distinguish between those people who will help and those who might hurt. To protect their children against predatory people, parents must teach them specific skills:

Despite our efforts to teach them, many children will be hurt sexually. If a child is molested sexually, what is the best thing to do? First, we must be calm, loving, and reassuring to the child. We must take the child for a medical examination. This examination will reduce the likelihood of disease, and medical records may be needed as evidence if the police become involved. Then, because molestation can result in lasting harm, we should get professional help for the child. The goal is to help the child resolve the situation as rapidly as possible. We can go to the police, or to government social services. And while we are helping the child, we should, of course, inform officials of who did the molesting. Anyone who molests a child needs help and without help will usually repeat the molestation.

Sexual Language, Experimental Sexual Games, and Pornography

Older children are likely to try out other sexual behaviors, including sexual language, experimental sexual games, and pornography.

Usually sexual words are first used by children to talk about body parts and bathroom activities. When children use "toilet talk" in public, other children laugh, and this reaction may lead others to use the words to get attention. Moreover, the words violate social etiquette. Either of these is sufficient reason for us to expect children to regulate their feelings and their language in order to give themselves and others greater respect. Helping children regulate their language teaches them autonomy. When we require children to avoid some terms, we are asking them to regulate their behavior. We can compliment them, remind them, and impose some punishment to reinforce the behavior we would like them to use. If we also point out that their friends may not believe as we do about language, we can also prepare them for the time when they will make a choice between doing what others do and maintaining their own standards.

Knowing that some forms of language are not appropriate and that other forms are appropriate in some situations and not in others helps children learn to adapt. We can be clear about our desire to have children talk with us, tell us their experiences, and ask questions. In these conversations they can use explicit sexual terms. They also learn, while young, that there are some places and times when they are not to use some words. This way they will learn both the need to adapt their speech and the methods they can use to adapt their speech to situations and people.

At about six or seven years of age, many children participate in some sexual experimentation, such as running and chasing each other at school. First-grade children may tell of having ten girlfriends or boyfriends. They may even kiss on occasion. These are fairly normal and harmless games, and we can feel good that our children are having fun while learning about themselves and the rudiments of heterosexual communication.

But many childhood sexual games are not harmless. At sleepovers with friends or at unsupervised parties, for example, children have been known to fondle each other. For children over age six, these games are not the immature games of first-graders. They are genuinely sexual in nature. These are the early sexual experiences referred to later by many homosexual males and many child molesters, as well as by other troubled adults who were hurt by such experiments in childhood.

One young man, struggling with homosexuality, stated that his first sexual experience took place with some cousins when he was six years old. Whenever they camped or slept out, their activities included masturbation and oral stimulation. By the time he was eighteen, he had had numerous such experiences. As an adult he was confused about his sexual orientation because of these early experiences, and he was able to resolve his feelings only after a great struggle.

We can make it very clear that sexual activities are not to be a part of campouts or sleepovers. Nevertheless, because many of our children will experiment in some way or another anyway, we need to have a strategy for dealing with occasions when our children participate in such experiments and are hurt by them. If we have completed our first task, to talk calmly and reasonably about sex, our children will feel comfortable talking to us. When they do talk with us, we can reinforce that choice through praise and warm attention. "Thank you for talking with me" is easy to say even before we answer a question. Children hurt by some experience usually benefit from talking about it so that they can examine their feelings and rid themselves of any shame. If we are warm, inquiring, and accepting, they will feel reassured and will be more likely to accept our help in ensuring that such experiences do not happen again.

Many children are introduced to pornographic or explicit sexual material at a very young age. At any public elementary school, children as young as seven or eight have sexually explicit pictures or stories in their possession. Sexual scenes on television, in movies, and in magazines on newsstands are readily available to children. Although we may not yet have complete, scientifically documented proof that exposure to these materials is harmful or that it is harmful in any specific way, our own common sense warns us that it can harm our children, and most of us want to keep it away from children vulnerable to its influence. Certainly, there is no evidence that pornography is helpful to our children, so they deserve to be warned against it and given suggestions for ways to avoid it.

Three boys found some pornography under a bed at the home of one of the boys. Because both parents worked, the boys had time to look at the pictures and magazines. For several days the boys stopped after school to look at them. At first the pictures were exciting and interesting to all three, but after a while Ricky got tired of it and started withdrawing. The other boys became afraid that Ricky would tell on them and began to threaten him, first by saying they would not be his friend if he told and then by threatening to beat him up if he betrayed them. One evening, Ricky asked his dad, "Why would anyone want to have their pictures taken without their clothes on?"

Interested, of course, his father asked questions, and Ricky began to tell his experience, eventually spilling it all out in a torrent of words and feelings. After listening to Ricky talk, his dad thanked him for talking with him. Then they talked about what Ricky had seen and what he felt about it. They discussed possible reasons why the people in the pictures could think so little of themselves and others that they would be involved in something like that. Then his dad asked Ricky why he thought it was wrong to look at pornography. They wondered together if Ricky could learn from these kinds of things to think it was all right to be disrespectful of girls. His father suggested that the reason the other boys threatened him was that they felt guilty and afraid. The father told his son that looking at pornography was wrong because of how it would make him feel about himself and about other people. They planned what to do if someone ever wanted to show Ricky pictures like those again. Ricky agreed to tell his dad if that happened. They also agreed that his dad should talk to the parents of the other boys.

When we discover that a child is looking at pornography, we should confront the child with our knowledge of the situation as quickly as possible. If the child has pornographic materials in his or her possession, we should take the material away from the child, asking for an explanation of where it was obtained and how it was used. We can assume that further parent-child talks are needed to reinforce the behavior about pornography we want the child to use. No one benefits by avoiding the discussion.

Self-Consciousness, Social Skills, and theDouble Standard

Puberty changes the outward appearance of everyone's body. Our children may be early, average, or late in going through it, but all become more self-conscious because of it. If girls develop early, they may be self-conscious about being different from other girls. They often feel less well- liked and are unhappy until their friends mature. If boys mature early, however, they are conscious of improved physical prowess and of having the interest and feelings of older boys they may admire. For them, early maturing is usually a positive experience rather than a negative one.

Self-consciousness among early teenagers creates vulnerability to social pressure, especially to the attention of the other sex. Natural sex drives, of course, motivate children to seek the attention of others. Being liked by others brings feelings of confidence, a remedy for self-consciousness. Thus, children in their early teens are strongly motivated to closely associate with each other. If sexual participation is offered or used to keep the closeness, many will participate.

Sharon, aged fourteen, spent excessive time with her boyfriend. He stopped by in the morning to walk with her to school, and they were together nearly every evening. One evening they went into Sharon's bedroom. Her mother had been afraid they were getting too close, but had not said anything about it. Realizing that something needed to be done, she walked in and found them undressed and petting. Their initial embarrassment was replaced by anger, and Sharon criticized her mother for "intruding." After a short conversation, the boy left.

When the mother called me the next day to ask for some ideas about dealing with this situation, I suggested that she ask Sharon if she wanted to be pregnant before she was fifteen, and that she keep asking her daughter this question until she received a yes or no answer. She first asked the question at about nine o'clock that evening. Sharon responded angrily, "Get off my back! It's none of your business!" The mother's first impulse was to give up, until she realized that Sharon had not answered yes or no. Then she asked again, and Sharon became even more angry. After being asked this question several times, Sharon left the house. Her mother was afraid, but after an hour or two Sharon returned. At first she was quiet, and then she said, "No, Mom, I don't want to be pregnant, but I am afraid I'll lose him." This statement led to a conversation about the real emotional issue. Mother and father talked together and with Sharon to find ways to help her through her feelings of loneliness and self-consciousness.

Social skills have much to do with sexual morality. There are ways children can meet and succeed in relationships with others without being involved in sexual activities. Helping children learn social etiquette, teaching them how to get acquainted with others, give compliments, tell jokes, and ask questions in order to carry on conversations will help improve their social confidence and make them less vulnerable to many forms of undesirable peer pressure.

Our social folklore for a long time perpetuated the idea that girls have a less intense sex drive than boys and should therefore be armed with defenses against sexually aggressive males, who would move as far sexually as girls would let them. This notion placed a false and unfair burden on girls to maintain sexual standards and at the same time allowed many boys to avoid sharing the responsibility for sexual conduct. Further, and much worse, many boys first learned about sex as something they did to girls, talking and thinking about "scoring" with girls, using the language of conquest and victory over an opponent. Unfortunately, a great many people still think that way. In fact, because the "sexual revolution" of the last twenty years has sought to equalize the situation, girls and women are often more sexually aggressive than they would have been in the past. But thinking of sex in terms of aggression, viewing another person as an object to be conquered or used, is immoral and underlies the immorality of sexual exploitation found in sex between immature children and in pornography.

Both boys and girls deserve the opportunity to develop personal standards of sexual morality according to which each feels autonomy and responsibility for self. Both boys and girls can learn to regulate sexual desire. Both can be taught to appreciate that sex at the wrong time is exploitation.

Sex, Commitment, and the Courtship Dance

Increased maturity should bring with it a greater awareness of other people and increased sensitivity to them. In dating, increased knowledge intensifies genuine feelings of liking and caring. It is quite natural and desirable that these feelings include sexual feelings. If chastity is not their standard, young people will measure their "commitment" to each other purely by their strong feelings of attraction to one another. This thinking leads to the idea that sexual intercourse is a natural and reasonable extension of that "commitment." To avoid the trail of broken hearts (not to mention disease or unwanted pregnancy) that often results, we can teach children that strong sexual feeling may be an important part of commitment, but it is not all of it. Commitment also includes a willingness to care for the welfare of another person. We can teach our children that a true, lifelong commitment of this sort should be consummated in marriage. We can teach our children that because sex is so important and so powerful, it deserves to be reserved for the condition of highest or greatest commitment: marriage. Chastity, we would teach, is the best preparation for sexual passion and commitment after marriage.

If children understand both morality and immorality, and if they have been taught that chastity is the accepted standard for them to follow, they will more willingly accept the suggestions we make to help them understand and interpret morally circumstances involving sex. Many of these circumstances are well known to us because we have experienced or observed them. We can, for instance, recognize the consequences of such situations as a boy and girl who like each other spending too much time together alone; or a child having friends who are sexually active (many girls and boys begin to have sex because their friends do); or a child's moods change from positive to negative, and we think the mood change is related to dating; or a child is regularly looking at pornography; or a boyfriend or girlfriend of our child seems usually demanding or possessive. Knowing the potential consequences of these situations and others like them will help us prepare our children to be moral. In addition, watching what children do after we have talked about these situations can give us some idea of how well they are maintaining their standards. Keeping the lines of communication open between us and our children is vital in helping our children maintain their standards of moral sexual behavior.

Ranae, aged fifteen, often had arguments with her parents about failure at school, boys she dated, and her frequent sullen withdrawal from the family. Because she spent excessive time with boys she dated, and because several boys came around asking for her, her parents thought she was sexually active. Whenever she went out, they quizzed her, forcing her to make promises about what she would and would not do. She usually left angry and upset. As Ranae reported it later, when a date was coming to an end and she was kissing a boy, she would at that moment blame her parents for her unhappiness and would sometimes lead the boy into sex just to spite her parents. Her story is like that of many teenagers. She was defensive, she was often negative and angry, and she was not able to talk very openly. She exhibited the characteristics of children who do immoral things.

There is another way an understanding of sexual behavior can prepare children for morality. According to one researcher, there are twenty-four steps after the first physical contact between two people and before the most passionate sexual embrace. Holding hands is step one of this "courtship dance." Step two is squeezing fingers, and step three is intertwining fingers. This sequence progresses to placing a hand inside of an arm, placing arms around shoulders, putting arms around waist, and so forth until the couple is fully intimate. Dating couples use the sequence as a natural part of physically reflecting their level of emotional intensity. They also use the sequence to measure whether a partner is "fast," "slow," or "easy." If someone moves through the sequence quickly, he or she will be considered fast. If someone takes a long time to move through the steps (or doesn't move at all beyond a certain point), he or she will be considered slow. If someone ignores the earlier steps and attempts or invites intimate touching at an early stage of the relationship, he or she will be considered easy. Children can understand the sexual intentions of others by learning to recognize rates of progression through this sequence. (Birdwhistle, 1970.)

We can teach our children to use their knowledge of this sequence to regulate the progression of sexual contact. Such preparation and knowledge can add to their sense of self-control. Aware of the sequence, our children might decide that they will be unwilling to move beyond a certain point (kissing, for example). That decision will help them prepare to make moral choices when they are faced with the intense emotions of a moral circumstance where someone can be hurt sexually.
