A. Lynn Scoresby, Bringing Up Moral Children ( 1989)

CHAPTER 7

CHEMICAL ABUSE

Until relatively recently, the problems associated with the abuse of chemicals affected the lives of children primarily because of the behavior of adults. Children knew of alcoholism and drug addiction because they observed it or heard about it, perhaps in their families, or perhaps only on television or in passing conversations. Now, however, more and more children are themselves using alcohol and other drugs, some to the extent that their lives are wholly controlled by the addictive and destructive effects of these chemicals. Many adults who had never thought young people's use of alcohol and other drugs was a real problem are going to rehabilitation centers, embarrassed to need help for their children, and they are meeting their neighbors there. A great many of us are shocked and dismayed at how great a problem we have let these addicting substances become in the lives of our children.

The shock and dismay touched Kathy and Stan Roberts in a different way. Their daughter Tammi was tall, slender, smart, just entering the real beauty of womanhood. She was excited about the homecoming queen contest and was genuinely surprised when she won. Helping Tammi get ready for the dance, Kathy was as excited as her daughter. Tammi's date was a very fine boy, well-liked, responsible. When he picked her up for the dance, he talked with Kathy and Stan in the living room while they all waited for Tammi to take care of the few last details. At last she was ready, and they left, smiling, happy. It was the last time Kathy and Stan saw Tammi alive. As they were coming home from the dance, Tammi and her date were hit by a car driven by a drunk eighteen-year-old boy and were instantly killed.

The overwhelming emptiness felt by these parents was shocking and sudden. Parents whose children are addicted to drugs and alcohol also know shock and overwhelming emptiness. But whereas Tammi and her friend died suddenly, addicted children die a slow, living death. The killer is easy to identify, but it isn't easy to stop. And parents of addicted children often feel as helpless and angry as the parents of children who are killed by drunk or drugged drivers. Obviously it would be much better for all of us if we could teach our children that drinking alcoholic beverages and taking drugs are matters of great moral concern. Those who use these substances are invariably hurt, and they hurt many others who are innocent but are victims still.

In our society, many people smoke, regularly use prescription drugs, and drink alcoholic beverages. Many are parents who do not want their children to be hurt or to hurt others. Unfortunately, however, this example by adults is one of the major causes in children of what is now frequently called "chemical abuse." With so many parents using chemicals to regulate, stimulate, and otherwise change emotional and physical states, it is plain to see why we, as a society, have not established a moral standard for using drugs and alcohol.Trafficking in these substances is extremely lucrative, and it has created a huge financial establishment. Sellers find creative ways, legal and illegal, to attract buyers. Public efforts to curtail the use of legal drugs (including alcohol and tobacco) are met with equal pressure not to interfere.

Public education programs and the efforts of law- enforcement agencies may be making some headway against the proliferation of dangerous substances in our society, but they are not enough to protect our children. Our children need our help now. They frequently face choices concerning alcohol and other drugs. It is up to us to teach them how to behave morally when faced with such situations.

We can all recognize the immorality in some acts involving drugs and alcohol. It is obviously immoral to sell drugs to young children or otherwise to influence them to use substances that will be harmful to them. But do we see the immorality in our using harmful substances and so introducing them to children who otherwise might never have been influenced to use them? We see the immorality in killing someone while driving drunk. But do we see the immorality of teaching children by our example that drinking is all right for us, even though it is not all right for others? People who know the harmful effects of certain substances but allow the use of these substances to harm their own lives and the lives of others are, in my opinion, acting irresponsibly in the face of moral issues.

Moral issues related to the use of chemicals harmful to the human body have become more complex as a result of the scientific discoveries of the past decade. For example, because of what we now know about the effects of "secondary" tobacco smoke on the health of people inhaling it (so-called passive smoking), smoking in a public place (or in a home with children) is no longer merely an issue of choice.

As they mature, children will have to reason, decide, and act in many moral circumstances, obvious and subtle, that will challenge their understanding of how chemical substances affect them and others. Some children will find themselves asked to buy, sell, or deliver illegal drugs. Many will know about the illegal acts of someone else and will have to choose either to "rat" or to remain silent and thereby become an accessory to a crime. Many more will be faced with less dramatic but equally challenging situations involving choices between doing what others do (in order to be liked and accepted) and resisting (which could result in social rejection and loneliness). Children will have to decide what to do and say when friends use dangerous substances or when friends offer the substances or apply pressure to use them. Children will have to decide what to do when they are unhappy and know that chemicals are available that can make them feel better. In all of these situations, children can be prepared to reason, make judgments, and act morally. Our effort to teach them may save them and us great expense and much emotional pain. It may also help them grow to adulthood with self-respect, healthy, and free from addictions.

The first step is to decide on a standard of moral conduct for ourselves. We teach our children by precept and example what that standard is. Then we help them understand clearly what will help and what will hurt in the many moral circumstances involving alcohol and other harmful drugs. We may need to teach them what the chemicals do to the human body and mind and how to "say no" when invited to use these substances. Then, because we can foresee the kinds of situations they will face, we teach them how to act to regulate their emotions and their behavior when decisions about alcohol and other drugs are most likely to be required.

A Moral Standard for Using Alcohol and Other Drugs

It does not require much evidence or logical thought to recognize that total abstinence, except for careful medicinal use, is the moral standard our national community should establish in regard to mind- and body-altering chemicals. Anything less than that standard is irrational and illogical. The chemicals in drugs, alcohol, and tobacco are substances damaging to the human body. For these substances to be tolerated, changes must take place in our bodies to accommodate them. To the extent that we require our bodies to make these accommodations, we develop a physical and/or mental dependency on the substance.

Individuals differ in their abilities to make these physical and psychological accommodations—in other words, individuals differ in their abilities to "tolerate" foreign chemicals in their bodies. For example, some people have very little ability to tolerate foreign chemicals; others have a great deal. Part of this variation in vulnerability is believed to be inherited. That is why alcoholism, or the predisposition to alcoholism, is often found in several generations of the same family. The variation in ability to tolerate chemicals presents problems to parents. Parents may not know how any particular child will be affected by any small or large dose of alcohol or drugs. "Social drinking" may be practiced by parents and "taught" to children, without the parents realizing that a child has a particular vulnerability to addiction in a way they themselves may not. Obviously, then, only total abstinence is enough protection.

The problems associated with the use of alcohol are compounded by social factors. In many areas, social and business opportunities are attached to drinking—if you go to parties and drink cocktails, you are likely to get ahead. For teenagers, status is often attached to drugs and drink— the more you can take, the more impressive you are. Thus, instead of helping us and our children avoid or even limit the harm of alcohol and other drugs, social requirements set the stage for pride in the variety and quantity of these substances we can use.

It is easy to see that we live in a society with a double standard: on the one hand we recognize the enormous cost in money, family unity, and human life created by alcohol and other drugs. On the other hand, we justify drinking and using certain drugs because of certain personal and social "advantages" that come from so doing. The problem is just like the one we saw with sexual morality. Instead of teaching and reinforcing a moral standard that would protect us and our children from harm, society accepts the reality of the harmful behavior and suggests only that we take steps to minimize the effects.

What society fails to do, however, need not prevent us from establishing a moral standard and teaching it to our children. If we drink, we may have to stop in order to avoid the hypocrisy of trying to teach our children something we do not do ourselves. It is a sacrifice, perhaps, but a small one to make if it can prevent harm to the children we love. When more and more parents rid themselves of alcohol and other drugs and become actively involved in teaching their children to lead their lives without such substances, these individual family efforts will make a great contribution to improving the quality of life for everyone in our society.

Identifying the Consequences of Using Drugs

Maintaining the standard of abstinence requires active avoidance. It may be difficult at first to think of active and avoid together. But anything tempting has an allure that must be resisted. Children cannot be passive in response to invitations to use drugs, for example, because those selling or inviting often consider silence or passivity as agreement and will continue persuading. Actively avoiding something or someone is demonstrated by using the word no. When asked to use cocaine, for instance, one boy said, "No, I want to keep my brain healthy."

Active avoidance is best motivated by knowledge of the consequences. That is why we must teach children a clear description of what we believe to be right and wrong about alcohol and other drugs and then explore the consequences of abusing them. According to our definition of morality as helping someone and of immorality as hurting someone, we can say that taking into our body anything that hurts or damages it is wrong—immoral. By the same definitions, it is not wrong to use drugs as medicine, if they are used to help and are carefully regulated to prevent addiction. In every other case, though, the possibilities for harm make abstinence the moral standard.

A 1985 study of high school students in the United States reported that between one in five and one in eight students have used drugs by the time they are seniors in high school. The use of some drugs, such as heroin, has dropped, but this positive indicator is offset by the fact that children start to use drugs at a younger age. There has also been a sharp increase in alcohol consumption by children in a variety of social and economic conditions. By the time they are eighteen years old, more than ninety percent of American teenagers have used alcohol. (Johnston et al., 1985.)

We might not be moved by these statistics if our own children are not at present using drugs or drinking. We should remember, however, that when children think of morality, one part of their concept of what is moral is their belief about what others are doing. If use of alcohol or other drugs is as pervasive as this research indicates, every child will come in contact with users and with direct or implied approval of chemical abuse.

Even young children can be taught about the unhappy consequences of alcohol and drug abuse. The concerned parents of one young family took their children to a meeting of Alcoholics Anonymous and listened to people talk about their struggles. They acquired some literature from the city-sponsored drug and alcohol counseling center that described the drugs most commonly used by children. The family read and discussed these brochures.

As a family, they collected newspaper articles and made a scrapbook of articles about accidents involving intoxicated drivers, drug-related crimes, or arrests and convictions of criminals. The children drew posters with slogans for not using any drugs. They attended a program sponsored by the Boy Scouts. Police officers showed them how drugs look, let the children smell them, and told what happens when they are used. Finally, the family visited a rehabilitation center and talked with a trained therapist about the effects of drugs and alcohol.

Another family activity might involve talking to physicians to learn what drugs and alcohol do to harm children and, by contrast, what good health practices do to help them. It also helps to teach children that using drugs or alcohol does not produce real popularity or bring close friends, which is what many children think it will do.

The physical harm caused by chemical abuse is sufficient reason to avoid it. But because drugs and alcohol are addictive, the consequences for using them extend beyond physical damage. I have lost count of the number of teenagers I have known who do not see any relationship between their use of drugs and alcohol and the difficulties they have with their parents or their inability to keep jobs or succeed in school. Almost from the first time children use drugs or drink alcohol, they have to stop doing something else they are doing. The greater their involvement with the harmful substances, the greater the amount of time, money, and energy it consumes, and the greater their decline in achievement, or even in their desire to achieve anything.

As bad as the loss of motivation to achieve may be, even worse is the pervading and enduring sense of inferiority or inadequacy that results from the loss of self- control that children experience as they become addicted to alcohol and other drugs. Abusers gradually lose control over everything. They try to achieve and cannot. They make promises they don't keep. They try to stop using the drugs or the drink and find they are unable to. They lose control over their emotions, and they are filled with anxieties, depression, and anger. Eventually, their entire life is virtually taken over and controlled by the harmful substance, the need for it, and the attempts to obtain it.

Occasionally, I have seen an eighteen- or nineteen- year-old who, having suffered the problems of drug or alcohol abuse for two or three years, has reached a point of emotional numbness and is grateful for it. The numbness seems better than the feelings of self-recrimination that preceded it. Usually, however, their loss of control creates such inferiority that children do not believe anyone could love them or care for them, and a desperate cynicism emerges. Then they find that the "friends" they acquired in the drug and drink scene are no longer interested in them.

Tommy (the name is fictional, of course) learned that truth the sad and hard way. He was a sophomore at a high school that had a deserved reputation for being cliquish. Although he had one or two friends from junior high, he felt alone when he entered the larger school. He tried a few times to meet others, but as the year progressed, he spent more and more time alone. In the spring he met some kids who introduced him to marijuana. Later, these "friends" asked him to a "party." He soon found that to these people, "partying" meant excessive drinking. Getting "smashed" was the goal. What had been decent grades for most of his sophomore year declined during his junior and senior years. Some last-minute extra credit and a summer class were required for him to graduate on time.

He continued to party. He spent nearly everything he earned on alcohol and drugs, and he occasionally stole money to support his habits. After one party he became ill. He had drunk thirty cans of beer, some wine coolers, and some vodka, although he couldn't recall how much. He vomited a sizable amount of blood. Out of fear he went to a doctor, who hospitalized him. While he was in the hospital no one went to see him, no one even called. It was then he learned about the shallowness of friendship based on alcohol, drugs, and parties.

Of course, children who do not use alcohol or other drugs still struggle with achievement problems and with inferiority, so we also need to discuss with them the consequences of actively avoiding chemical abuse. We need to teach our children about the rewards of a drug-free life so that they will have something positive to look forward to for their efforts in avoiding something that can be so tempting to them. Their primary reward may be their sense of control over life, which can be more easily maintained if alcohol and other drugs are never used. Along with the feeling of being in control of their lives comes an ability to find and feel what is happy and beautiful in life, including the true love and concern of others. Their creativity is waiting to be developed, creativity that can be diminished and distorted by drugs. People who keep their minds and bodies free from harmful substances can maintain the spark of life, a vibrant appreciation of life and its wonders that is the natural "high" non-abusers say they would rather have than the unnatural high created by drugs.

Learning How Drug Users Think and Feel

Knowing some of the reasons why children begin to abuse alcohol and other drugs will help us be more successful at preventing or eliminating some of the effects. Drug users generally start without knowing the effect drugs have on them. They may even be told that drugs cannot harm them. That assertion is rampant among those still trying to justify using drugs. Because this lie comes from friends, perhaps even many friends, it is often believed. This lie promotes denial, a psychological condition of ignoring reality, even in the face of direct personal experience. Part of this denial is maintaining that users "can quit any time." They may have heard stories about kids who have quit. Others deny the effects of the drugs they take by claiming that certain abilities are actually improved by the substances. While psychological and physical sensation caused by drugs can bring about a temporarily euphoric and confident state, that euphoria is certainly overshadowed by the much longer "down" period of reduced performance that follows.

Large numbers of children are led into drug and alcohol use because it is the fashion. The socially unacceptable part is getting caught using or using too much. When parents are confronted with that justification, a good response is to ask the children about valuing popularity more than self-respect.

In teaching our children to deal with others' "reasons" for using harmful chemicals, we also need to consider the role of moods or emotions in the problem. In the first place, psychological addiction to any chemical takes place because use of the chemical becomes associated with certain moods or emotional states. Many people drink alcohol or use a variety of over-the-counter and prescription drugs to combat pain, fear of pain, anxiety, shyness, depression, and loneliness. It is not surprising that drug abusers indicate that they are more likely to use drugs or alcohol when they are feeling lonely, depressed, unloved, or powerless. Some users, in addition, are thrill-seekers, "partying" to get a "buzz." Others have frequent bouts with self-pity and escape through altered states of mind produced by the chemical. Some, their immaturity exposed, feel anger toward an authority figure and mistakenly think they are thumbing their noses at parents, police, or school principals when they drink or take drugs.

When both the motives and the feelings of users are understood, we can formulate ideas about what we can do, even for very young children, to help them develop a personal standard of abstinence. We can help them develop a strong sense of autonomy, a sense of responsible self-control. We can guide them to the emotional competence that will enable them to maintain the positive emotional style that helps them resist temptations. An active orientation toward achievement will give our children stability, a sense of belonging, and opportunities for social recognition that inactivity does not provide. Further, their ability to talk openly with us about the moral implications of using drugs and about how to refuse them will help children control much of what happens when they are invited or persuaded to use harmful substances.

Because we know that nearly all children will one day face situations in which they must decide about the use of alcohol and other drugs, not one of us is exempt from teaching our children. And because children are now coming in contact with these substances very early in life, we must begin teaching when they are very young. We should concentrate on the development of moral traits and avoid the conditions—including our own use of alcohol and other drugs—that make children vulnerable. If we do that, we help prevent chemical abuse by eliminating some of its causes.

Avoiding the Dependency That CreatesVulnerability

Many children addicted to some chemical have family backgrounds, including a parental discipline style, that have reinforced a sense of dependency. Children are members of family system that may or may not reinforce health. By defining a family as a system, we mean to say that each person affects others and is affected by them. Such a view of the family precludes the singling out of a parent or child as the cause of a problem. In family systems, parents and children interact to create many personality traits. If we view dependency as a precondition for chemical abuse, we can see it as a problem jointly created by parents and children.

One girl I remember had a chronic illness, first diagnosed when she was five years old. Most members of her family also had some sort of continuing health problem, many of them somewhat exotic. Rachel was fifteen years old when I first met her. She had been referred to me because her illness had remitted, according to her physician's diagnosis, but many of her symptoms continued. The physician suspected that her problem had a psychological component.

I learned that her parents still drove her every day to the bus stop, a block from home. She fell ill frequently, often when she felt any stress. Such stress could come from homework, chores, or an accusation that she was "not really sick." She was the youngest child, and her parents spent considerable time helping her, taking care of her, and arguing with her. Together, they had created an addictive system of interaction in which both the girl and her parents were dependent on certain aspects of their relationship to one another. Since Rachel "had to" convalesce from her chronic illness, she was not able to make close friends. When she did go to school, she used the drugs or alcohol she was offered in order to feel that she belonged. It was not long before she became addicted. In her case, her addiction and the attempts to treat it became a continuation of the dependency relationship already formed with her parents. When I recommended that she enter a rehabilitation program, she said that it would "probably be a good idea, because I cannot stop myself, but I don't want to go because I don't know what I'll do if I give everything up." In other words, she didn't know how she would survive without the dependency she had known for so long.

Rachel's situation is not typical, but in other more subtle ways many of us create dependent children who sense a need for some type of "crutch." If we want to prevent our children's finding such a crutch in drugs or alcohol, we must help them avoid the need for a crutch. That usually requires that we find ways to teach and reinforce autonomy. To do that we can, right from the beginning of their lives, avoid doing for them what they can do for themselves. During their first year of life we encourage them to explore their surroundings (home) and to walk, run, and speak when they are ready. Then—again, when they are ready—we help them learn to eat, dress themselves, and tie their shoelaces by themselves.

Many opportunities exist for us to help our children acquire the sense of self-control and responsibility that characterizes autonomy. We can help them learn responsibility for their chores, their homework, and their mistakes. We need to be willing only to supervise, require decent and reasonable work, and help them talk about their feelings of responsibility for their own actions. Further, we can ask them to make decisions and carry them out, reporting to us when they have done so. Asking our children to choose between two times when they will do their chores or to choose chores from a list of alternatives will help them feel our respect for them and our trust in their ability to make responsible choices. Our seeing to it that they do what they have agreed to do at the time and in the way they have agreed will teach them the importance of completing tasks and resisting distractions while doing so.

But while we are being firm with our children in guiding them to accept responsibility, we should not be rigid and inflexible. Many children who use drugs and alcohol are members of families where parents exert excessive and harsh control. This style of exercising parental authority produces children who are as dependent as those of parents who are overindulgent. The dependence in this case, however, is not the submissive helplessness we often think of as dependency. It is, rather, a persistent anger focused on the parents that leaves children with little desire or even ability to do much for themselves.

Dependent attitudes can be created whenever the emotional relationship between us and our children is misused. Children who are overcontrolled or overindulged without our setting any limits on their behavior, children who are physically neglected or abused, children whose parents withdraw affection after mistakes or abuse them verbally— all are likely to develop dependent feelings. Children are made dependent from loneliness, from fear that they are not loved, and from anger due to mistreatment.

And besides all of that, as we saw in Rachel's case, children are made dependent from the results of their own manipulation of others. As all parents find out, children are capable of manipulating us to get what they want (and once they reach a certain age, what they want is usually money). If we allow them to manipulate us successfully, we will together create a system of overindulgence. If we excessively supply every want, for example, to avoid their emotional traps, our indulgence will make us partners in their dependency.

Three forms of manipulation are common in childhood. The first and most obvious is when a child complains or whines. If we think the complaining is unjustified, we can deal with this maneuver by insisting that our children learn to accept no for an answer and demonstrate that excessive complaining will result in future no's. The second form of manipulation is the "fairness" ploy. When children are not treated equally in families or treated the same as their friends, they may come to us with the complaint that we are unfair. If we feel guilty, we may give in and try to make the situation more "fair." If we do that, we can be assured that they will use this approach again. We can avoid falling into this guilt trap if we openly admit that we are not "fair" parents in the way they want us to be and, further, that we don't intend to be. Instead, we want to treat each child according to her or his needs, without having to treat everyone alike. After we admit that we are not "fair," our children will discover that they cannot manipulate us by inducing this form of guilt in us. (That is true, of course, only if we are not deserving of guilt.) And the third form of manipulation comes after parent-child conflict.

All of us have conflict with our children at some time or another. It usually hurts everyone involved. Afterwards, however, when we are all calming down, a child's compliant, humble, and soft responses may prompt us to "undo" what we caused with our anger. We might try to do away with our guilt for getting angry by giving the children what they asked for in the first place or give them something else "to make up." One father of a drug- dependent, twenty-year-old son described their repeated conflicts. The boy was not working, he was failing school, and his only interest was in partying. The father frequently got angry and lectured, yelled at, or threatened his son, telling him what he ought to be doing with his life. Then the anger would subside, and the father would be sorry. One evening, an hour or two after such an incident, the son went to his father, saying that he was going out. The father asked him if he needed money and gave him twenty dollars.

The solution to this problem is obvious. If we become aware of what we are doing, we can avoid assuaging our own guilt by giving too much. In the middle years of childhood and thereafter, our children can be cured of dependency and the effects of our indulgence if they are able to develop compassion, a willingness to be of service to others, and a good, old-fashioned responsibility for self. When we give chores to children and help them responsibly to complete them, they learn that doing work, and doing it well, is a matter of personal responsibility. Everyone benefits from the sense of mastery that results from accomplishment. When children achieve, they feel stronger and more in control of themselves and their lives.

We also help children overcome dependent feelings if we help them accept responsibility for their mistakes. When mistakes are made, children may blame others in an attempt to shift the responsibility from themselves. A sense of responsibility for self does not result from our arguing with them over who caused the mistake. It comes from a willingness on our part to see mistakes as a natural part of growing and then calmly to ask questions about who did what, or what happened and when, and keep asking and listening until the child accepts and understands his or her share of responsibility for what was done. If we are quick to anger and threaten, children will not learn to accept responsibility and might lie to avoid our wrath, compounding their denial of responsibility.

After receiving a low grade, one of my sons explained that the teacher didn't like him. I was less concerned about the grade than that he did not seem to recognize his own role in achieving it. I asked him, "Who has the grade on his report card, you or the teacher?" "Me," he replied. "Then," I went on, "your choice seems to be what you will do to help yourself rather than letting your feelings about the teacher prevent you from doing the best you can." We talked about that for a long time until I felt he understood that he was more responsible for his grades than the teacher was. It took many other episodes like this one before he gained a complete understanding of his own responsibility for his grades.

Dependency is also minimized and autonomy enhanced when children are asked to serve others by giving of their time and energy. Service to others gives a sense of usefulness and competence. We need to help children sympathize with others by talking about situations where someone is in distress. We need to include children in family projects that help others. We can ask them before school if they know of anyone who needs help and afterward ask if they were able to help anyone. When children help us in our concern for neighbors, relatives, or friends in distress, they acquire compassion for others and an appreciation for their own importance in the world. Helping others also makes our children happy and content. Such positive emotions are so satisfying that they fill unmet emotional needs in our children and remove many causes for dependency.

Handling Relationships

Adolescence is the period in our children's lives when smoking and using alcohol and other drugs are most likely to begin. As they begin to separate from us and engage in activities with friends, they will find that drinking, smoking, and using drugs are prominent among the things teenagers do together. Children do not usually begin to smoke, drink, or do drugs completely on their own, and they will not usually use these substances when they are alone, unless they are addicted.

This means to us that to help our children be moral, we need to understand the social and emotional situations most likely to be associated with children's use of harmful substances. It is most important for us, in coming to this understanding, to be aware of the power of peer pressure in American society. Children in America form groups in order to gain confidence, confidence that serves them as they enter new situations at school, as they deal with members of the other sex, and as they go through the process of becoming independent from parents. As these groups form, however, they exert pressure on each individual to follow certain "rules" or practices in order to belong. Children may feel pressured to use new words as an indication that they "belong," or to wear certain types of clothing based on aspects of the fashion of the day. In some cases, the clothing must be very specific to the group: preppies, punkers, surfers, cowboys, and jocks each have a particular and very identifiable style. Each group also demands certain attitudes from its members, such as toughness for the athletes, cynicism for the intellectuals, anti-authoritarianism for the deviant, status consciousness for the rich (or would-be rich), or aloofness and indifference for the ones who feel rejected.

Compliance to the "rules" of these groups is maintained by the possibility of exclusion and ridicule. It is easy to see how children might sense pressure to conform. In most cases the pressure is real. And it is often intense. Consequently, when it becomes a group "rule" to drink, or to drink excessively, to smoke, or to use drugs, some children who would not do it on their own will do it with the group. If they have the thoughts and feelings that contribute to their being vulnerable to such influence, then they will be even more likely to engage in immoral behavior. We need to be alert to the likelihood of chemical abuse by our children when they (1) are involved with friends who use drugs and alcohol—even if our children claim they themselves are not, (2) have feelings of social inadequacy, (3) do not belong to a group and feel lonely, (4) are exposed to excessive peer pressure and are controlled by others, (5) have conflict with us that produces strain and frustration.

Our challenge is to help our children develop the ability to maintain their standard of morality concerning alcohol and other drugs, even when they are feeling pressure from others. We can do several things to help them.

One is to avoid withdrawing our emotional support from our children. When children do not follow family rules, or when they treat us unkindly or disrespectfully, it would be easy to withdraw our attention and affection. That withdrawal only increases their susceptibility to the influence of others. Emotional support does not mean that we give our children whatever they want. It is, rather, communication filled with affection, interest, concern, and warmth. Teenagers who are feeling great pressure to violate their moral standards need our emotional support in order to know they are safe and secure at home.

A second way to help our teenagers is simply to teach them to understand peer pressure and to notice its effects on them. High school health classes or social science classes are often useful in helping teach about peer pressure.

A third way to help is to review our family rules to see if adjustments can be made that would give our children more time for good activities they may want to participate in. Even small adjustments are noticed and usually appreciated.

The effects of peer pressure are moderated when children feel more secure with their family relationships. When communication is good and family members are close, children are less threatened by the effects of pressure they feel from others. Although most of us sense that to be true, we often fail to realize that children must be taught how to participate in relationships with others. For one thing, they start out in life quite egocentric and spend much of childhood concentrating on themselves. Developing the skill to relate successfully to the members of their own family helps increase children's confidence in relationship to others and increases their chances of being able to resolve successfully the conflicts that come from peer pressure.

Children dependent on chemicals of some kind often use the substances as a means of maintaining relationships with others. A close look, however, reveals that such relationships are shallow and are based on more immature feelings than are the relationships formed on the basis of social skills. For instance, many groups of teenagers exhibit what seems on the surface to be a genuine concern for one another. That concern, however, is narrow in its focus. Sometimes, relationships are based on who supplies the drug or drink, who makes people laugh the most, or some other similar and limited characteristic. The relationships among the members of the group are often one-sided, with one teenager exploiting another. Conflicts arise as they make attempts to "right" this "wrong." Side-taking and immature gossiping ("tearing people down") are characteristic of such conflicts, and the participants lack the mature social skills needed to talk over and resolve problems.

In an attempt to prevent this from happening to our own children, my wife and I ask them as they start junior high school whether they want a good relationship with us or a strict set of rules to follow. So far, each child has voted for the "good relationship." We have found, however, that they did not know what we meant by "good relationship," so we have needed to have several talks about it. In these talks we tell our children that a good relationship is made up of love, trust, and affection and that it means frequent communication about many different concerns. We are willing, we tell them, to say what we will do and we will do what we say. In return, they will tell us their plans and we will expect them to do as they say. We also explain to them that people in a good relationship do not retreat from disagreements in silence but try to work them out so that people on both sides are satisfied.

As the years have passed, we have spent much time talking with our children, trying to teach them how to participate in a "good relationship." We have discontinued almost all of our "flat" family rules. Instead, we ask each child to be responsible for herself or himself in such matters as cleaning rooms, coming in at night at a reasonable time, keeping us informed of plans or changes in plans. When they fail, we talk things over. Underlying their willingness to participate is the idea that this is the price they must pay to get along with us. In other words, by doing this, they will get more than they would if they didn't do it.

In these conversations we have been clear about what we believe our standards to be, and we have asked our children to say what they believed, too. We praise them by telling them that it is important to us that they sit and talk with us and that we like it very much. When they want to do something away from the family, we ask that they talk with us so that we know what they are doing. We also ask them to share family time with us. There have been times, of course, when confrontations have taken place and feelings have been hurt. We have misunderstood each other and have occasionally failed to keep promises. But the "good relationships" have survived all this, for the children have accepted our love and deserved our trust.

The purpose of family relationships that are emotionally fulfilling and informative is to give children security, to let them know that there is a place for them in the world. If we create and maintain bonds with our children that are characterized by warmth and open communication, in most instances our children will find peer groups that reflect what we want for them, or at least they will be able to make choices that reflect our standards and values whether others do or not.

Sometimes we are afraid that we do not know enough to help our children succeed in keeping their lives free from destructive substances. We should be reassured, however, to know that in most cases if we let our children know of our efforts to learn and our intent to love, they will be helped by a sense of our interest in them. Even if we make some mistakes in what we say or do, we can avoid making the mistake of letting our frustrations or anger come between us and our children. Children need as much emotional support during their teenage years as they did at any other time of life, and sometimes they need even more. Our love, affection, and involvement will make a difference to them. Even if they make errors of judgment that bring harm, they will probably recover more rapidly if they know we care.
