A. Lynn Scoresby, Bringing Up Moral Children ( 1989)

CHAPTER 8

FRIENDSHIP: HELPING CHILDREN BE JUST AND FAIR

Children's friendships can mean pressure to violate personal standards of morality, but friendships can also help children develop morally. Most parents want their children to have friends and to be good friends to others, because good friends make us feel happy and secure. Friendships also provide conditions for learning, practicing, and demonstrating ideas about justice and equality. Friendship, in fact, is made up of the very skills that build success in many other areas of life.

Friendship is a special moral relationship of "concern, care, and sympathy." (Blum, 1980.) It includes a willingness to give that goes beyond what is given in other relationships. The caring within a friendship is built upon knowledge, trust, and intimacy. Good friendships exist when each friend identifies with the good of the other person. This type of friendship usually appears at later stages of development, only after children have learned a great deal about the morality of relationships. To enjoy mature friendships children must be able, for instance, to think of and about others as well as themselves; they must have a "moral orientation" toward what helps and what hurts others, and they must have a sense of responsibility about being fair and just. (Keller, 1984.) Friendships provide a great variety of situations in which someone can be helped or hurt. Friendship can involve the support one friend gives to another, loyalty in time of crisis or need, sacrifices made in the name of love, but friendship can also involve promises made and not kept, disloyalty found in malicious gossip, criticism, misjudgment, or choosing some friends while rejecting others. These situations and others like them present the moral circumstances of friendship, and they give our children opportunity to choose and then act to help or to hurt.

As a result, we teach our children to be good friends. Instead of letting all social opportunities occur by happenstance, we might want to involve ourselves, although not too much, at those times when children might benefit from our experience and help. Because satisfying friendships require justice and fairness, helping our children succeed in friendship will provide us a particularly good opportunity to teach our children to be just and fair, as all moral people are.

The Development of Friendship

To learn justice and fairness, children must acquire a social perspective, that is, a view of themselves in relationship to another person. Children develop this perspective to some degree as they grow, but certain aspects of it must be learned. At about age three, children have grown beyond the stage of watching others or enjoying the individualistic style of relating to others called "parallel play." Children now want a real involvement with other children. Some unspoken, perhaps inherited, motive raises anticipation and excitement when they have someone their own age to watch and be noticed by. These early attempts to form friendships are, of course, temporary moments, and children soon want to return to the familiarity of home. As they mature and the time with playmates increases, so does the demand for social and moral competence.

Competence in friendship is acquired much the same way morality is learned in other circumstances. Children imitate adult behavior. They practice the rules of games and discover rule-governed behavior. They find that they must understand several situations, make judgments, and adapt, and they learn which of their actions will help or hurt. As children grow, the situations involved in friendship increase in number and complexity. Selman and Selman (1979) studied the social perspective of a large number of children and identified the following stages in friendships as children matured:

Momentary playmateship, ages birth through three years. Children choose friends on the basis of some attractive toy or physical attribute. Friendships last as long as children are curious and stimulated.

One-way assistance, ages four through six.When children begin to understand the intentions of other children, they choose friends according to who intends to do what satisfies them. Friends are whoever will do what they themselves selfishly desire.

Two-way, fairweather cooperation, ages seven through nine.Children recognize that friendships require some give and take but in a way to satisfy self-interest. When the self-interest of one of the children cannot be met, the friendship ends.

Intimate, mutually shared relationship, ages ten through thirteen. Children form valued friendships. They are usually exclusive, with children often feeling possessive about them. Cliques of friends may form, excluding those not "in" the group. Emphasis is on loyalty to one another and mutual help-giving.

Autonomous and interdependent, ages fourteen through adult. Friendships have deep emotional commitment. Children can understand both dependence on others and the need for autonomy. Concepts such as trust and caring for another are relevant. These friendships may become lifelong.

Children's concept of friendship changes because of their increasing ability to understand more about people than their looks, their toys, or their popularity. Children eventually learn that friendships require an equal give-and- take, with accompanying emotional investment.

We can foster our children's progress along the path to mature friendships just as we help them mature in other ways. We can, for example, teach them to use conversation to talk out misunderstandings. That will help them understand how avoidance at moments of difficulty in relationships can leave them ignorant of what to do to help and to avoid hurting. We can teach them to ask questions and listen to what others say—skills that will serve them not only in friendship but in other situations where gaining information is important. We can practice these skills with our children, asking them questions, listening quietly to them, and summarizing what they have said to us. We can also teach them good conversation rules, such as "not interrupting" and "not ignoring."

We can also teach children the rituals of courtesy and respect. For example, we can teach them to give and to accept compliments and to avoid unpleasant mannerisms and moods. While these rituals change somewhat from generation to generation and from place to place, knowing them helps children feel confident when they begin to expand their social world and make friends.

Children display different and appropriate skills to participate fully in each level of friendship. Under ordinary circumstances, children will progress through these stages and gradually achieve a perspective that allows emotionally intimate friendships. During the years of this process, they will also make mistakes. Understanding how children learn to help and to hurt others will help us get a clearer idea of how to teach them to be moral and have successful friendships.

How Children Learn to Help or to Hurt in Friendships

An axiom of human relationships is that what others do to us, we will usually do to others. Children treated with consideration will usually treat others considerately, just as children who are treated hurtfully will usually treat others hurtfully. But factors other than mistreatment also contribute to our children's learning ineffective and hurtful ways of treating others. Some of these factors are children's own emotional style—calm or intense—their knowledge of social skills, how much and what kind of exposure they have to social situations, and, of course, the quality of parental example. Examples of how these conditions combine to shape children's moral and social behavior are readily found in developmental psychology. Some evidence shows that parents who fail to provide consistent and warm care influence children to become more anxious, resulting in misinterpretation and ineffective response (selfishness) with their friends. Even clearer evidence shows a connection between parental neglect when children are young and children's violent behavior toward others when they are older. A high proportion of people convicted of violent crimes, homicides, rapes, assaults, and battery have experienced prolonged neglect.

Children who are brought into contact with many people in their communities—neighbors, friends, storekeepers, at restaurants, in schools, in churches—show greater "social intelligence" than do children who do not have this contact. They can more readily adapt to a greater variety of people and situations. In contrast, children who are restricted in their contact with others tend to be more suspicious of others, more likely to fear making mistakes, and less aware of how to be helpful to other people.

Children inherit their temperament, or emotional style. Some aspects of the temperament appear at birth and remain throughout life. How easy or difficult it is for children to learn friendship skills can depend to some degree upon their temperament. Some children, for example, show from birth an intense response to their environment. At an early age these children display strong reactions to disappointments and to parental attempts to regulate their behavior. Their responses can be intense anger, temper, shyness, and anxiety. Later, many "intense" children exhibit exaggerated emotional responses, including dominating and controlling behavior or excessive submissiveness toward their friends. These responses lead to early failure in social relations. When children's first attempts at friendship produce failure, they often begin to worry more about being approved of than about learning appropriate friendship skills. The emotional goal of such a child is to please others.

We can imagine what can happen to children with inherited intense temperaments who are raised by parents who mistreat them, who exemplify poor social skills, and provide few positive social opportunities. Such children would be very likely to hurt themselves and others with whom they have close relationships.

Effective human interaction requires accurately recognizing another's emotions. To learn to do that, children need to learn to accurately perceive facial expressions, and to gauge correctly what different facial expressions mean, children must be able to maintain eye contact with others. When children either do not look at one another or misinterpret what they see, they are more likely to misunderstand one another.

One of life's great ironies is these misunderstandings. Almost always, feeling misunderstood makes people feel threatened or angry. Since misunderstanding may simply be "not knowing" and therefore as likely to be complimentary as derogatory, it is perhaps surprising that misunderstanding almost always hurts us or makes us feel uncomfortable. It is not surprising, in light of this human characteristic, that when children feel misunderstood, they typically compound the problem: instead of correcting the misunderstanding with more accurate information, they misjudge the person who is misjudging them, perpetuating the hurtful cycle.

So the ambiguity arising from misunderstanding makes children feel threatened and angry. Because they are afraid of these feelings or because they are selfish, children may respond to such a situation by striking out. In early and middle childhood this aggression may appear as taking advantage of others by bullying, coercing, excluding, being unfair, fighting, and name calling. These immature social acts can form attitudes that lead in later childhood to such behavior as ridicule, discrimination, cliquishness, physical abuse, threats, and swearing.

So children learn to hurt others primarily because they are themselves mistreated, because their parents provide poor examples for them, and because they tend to misunderstand others and deal inadequately with being misunderstood by others. These negative learnings imply that it is possible for children to learn positive skills that will help them develop a sense of responsibility in relationships. We can, by precept and example, help them learn the morality of justice and fairness through their friendships.

The Meaning of Justice and Fairness

Justice and fairness, though almost synonymous, have different meanings when applied to social relationships. Justice is related to actions and the consequences the actions produce; justice requires that we accept the consequences for our actions in a responsible way. Moral acts produce moral consequences. Immoral acts produce immoral consequences. To be just, we must be concerned for the welfare of another person and be able to adjust to promote it. Further, to be fully just, we must be able to act with consideration even if another is unjust.

Fairness in relationships comes into play when all affected by a decision are invited to have a role in making the decision. In friendships, fairness is called upon when there is more than one person who wishes to participate in an activity or who wants to have a share in some object or commodity. For example, two or more children want to play the same game or eat the same candy. Fairness involves using a style of reasoning that considers everyone to be of equal importance to everyone else. Fairness, therefore, means giving to others to help them rather than withholding from them to hurt them; it means that we regard others as being deserving of receiving equally to what we receive.

Since children learn their basic attitudes about justice and fairness from us, we need, once again, to think about our own standards before attempting to teach a standard to our children. To do that, we can ask ourselves, Do I respect friendships and maintain them? Do I make and keep promises? Do I acknowledge responsibility for my actions or do I blame others for what happens to me? Do I tell the truth? How do I usually respond when I feel that someone has mistreated me? Do I retreat? Do I seek revenge? Or do I wait for the sting to go away, overlook the pain, and try to talk calmly about the problem in order to resolve it? How do I respond to people in different positions (prominent and powerful versus lacking in social status)? Am I able to meet a variety of people and feel comfortable? Do I sometimes feel superior or sometimes feel inferior?

If we think carefully about our answers to these questions, it should become obvious to us that it is possible for children to learn a great deal about justice and fairness from us. If our own views are warped, we will undoubtedly find that our children have warped views as well. Most of us have a strong sense of fairness in some situations but not in others. That is why it is useful to evaluate ourselves. It is important to accept the idea that being unique, or different from others, does not make us better or worse than anyone else. To teach elitism, we need only believe that others are less deserving than we are of such things as respect, consideration, and the blessings of life. Our arrogance and ignorance soon transfer to our children. By the same token, if we believe that others are more deserving than we are of respect, consideration, and other blessings of life, we teach our children that they too are less deserving than others. By squelching their aspirations and degrading them, we teach them to accept less than they deserve because they believe themselves to be less. What we believe as we compare ourselves to others will be our children's first lesson about fairness—and perhaps the one that lasts.

Teaching Children to Be Fair

Johnny Barton was six years old. He was playing with his friend Sam. Johnny asked his mother for a couple of apples, but Mrs. Barton had only one apple. The boys were undecided about what to do, until Johnny said, "We'll share." Mrs. Barton put the apple and a knife on the cutting board; both boys moved close. Mrs. Barton said, "One of you can cut the apple, and the other can choose first." That proposal seemed fair to the boys, and they were satisfied.

Mrs. Barton was helping these boys develop a sense of fairness. Fairness to her meant that both boys should be treated equally. So that they could learn to understand fairness in that same way, both boys were required to think about the other, and they were given a strategy according to which they could make things fair between them.

The Frandsens asked their eight-year-old daughter, Heather, to go to bed. She was playing with her dollhouse and did not want to go. She dawdled until her mother became exasperated. In response to her mother, Heather yelled, "It's not fair. Why do I have to go to bed before Ellen?" Ellen had complained to her mother a few days earlier that she was not being fair when Heather had received a new blouse and Ellen had not.

Their mother talked with both of them. "In a way, you're right," she said. "We are not treating you both in exactly the same way. So I suppose you could say we are not being fair to you. But your father and I don't intend to be that kind of 'fair.' " Her comment surprised the girls who, like most children, used the "unfair" argument to get more for themselves. Mother continued, "We treat each of you differently because you are different people and have different needs. If we try to help you get what you need, even if what you get is not the same all of the time, we think that you will be happier."

These examples illustrate how children can learn two aspects of fairness: one is based on equal shares and on using a strategy to achieve equality; the other is individualized and based on what each person knows about the other. It was fair for Heather to get a blouse when Ellen didn't. Fairness, in this case, was based on the mother's knowing that Heather needed a blouse and that Ellen didn't.

When children begin to form friendships, they usually learn the equality part of fairness first. It is simpler and easier to understand. At first, friendships last only as long as the reciprocity lasts. So our first task is to help our children resolve their tendency to selfishness so that they can both give and receive. Generally, the desire to play with friends is great enough to motivate children to learn equal sharing if we show them how to share and keep them from playing unless they do it. Praise and positive reinforcement will strengthen their ability. We can help children learn fairness by getting some special "sharing toys" and showing them how to share before a friend comes to play. Other fairness strategies children must learn for happy friendships include choosing sides for a game, making sure the sides are "even," taking the side of a smaller person against someone older or bigger, and crying "unfair" if someone is treated unfairly.

Since the strategies that children devise to promote equality are usually based on one of two general notions, we will help our children if we teach them these notions early. The first is that every person must get something; no one can be excluded. The second is that other people have feelings similar to our own, and so we will all benefit from taking turns. Children accept both notions if they are praised for being able to let another go first or get something they do not. We also teach our children that in certain situations a child needs to go to a third party for help. This person, usually a parent, can arbitrate differences by finding out what each child wants and by making suggestions.

Teaching fairness or equality is conceptual as well as practical. That is, we can teach ideas about it, as well as help children understand what they actually do. The following are some problems that can be used for practice in thinking about fairness:

As children mature, the way they think about one another changes. At first, they may know people by their toys or other possessions—"Susy has a new doll." Then they know other children by a physical characteristic, such as height or hair color, or by where they live. That stage is followed by knowing other children by how they act in public—"Johnny is funny at school, and Lucy is shy." Just before puberty, children begin to know others by understanding their individual personality traits—"Mary is kind, and Jack is smart."

Knowing how children's social perceptions change and develop, we can devise a way to teach strategies that promote the second notion of fairness, the idea that other people have feelings similar to our own. These strategies will help our children look for ways to help each individual as help is needed.

Because younger children notice what is external, they think about other children first of all in terms of what they possess, then by physical characteristics, and then by the way they act in public. With children basing their judgments on these kinds of observations, it is difficult to help them learn to be fair on the basis of someone's need. "Need" implies something about internal conditions that younger children usually do not understand unless we teach them to understand. That means that we must help our children learn to see when people need something; we must point out other people's needs.

Most people need recognition, need to belong, need to be cared for. Particular needs often depend on particular situations. We can help our children see and understand many of these situations. In addition, we can ask our children to put themselves in the place of others and imagine what these people "need." Finally, we can ask them to evaluate their own needs in comparison with the needs of others and to decide whose need in a given situation is greater.

Mrs. Merriwether divided her sixth-grade class into two groups. Each group was to write and present a short patriotic play. Some time each day was devoted to this activity until the plays were ready. All the children worked hard, and some good ideas emerged and were blended into a script calling for actors and actresses, producers, and directors. On the day that the children were chosen to play the parts, Jennifer, a friendly and outgoing girl, was absent.

The following day, when the time came for the children to practice, Mrs. Merriwether remembered that Jennifer had not been given a part. But before Mrs. Merriwether could correct the situation, Jennifer discovered she had been left out and immediately slumped into her chair, head down, fighting back the tears. Mrs. Merriweather invited all the children to sit in a large circle at the front of the classroom. She presented the problem to the entire class and asked them for a solution. At first, some of the children were flippant, but others quickly pointed out that anyone would be hurt if they were left out. The mood of the group changed, and they began searching for a solution. "Well," a boy said, "it is her fault for not being here." Another student suggested that maybe somebody with a part would give it up and let Jennifer have it. "Then someone else would be left out," was the reply. They sat in silence while they thought.

"It can't be just anything," one boy said finally. "What would Jennifer like to do?" Jennifer was silent. "I know!" a girl exclaimed. "Jennifer could be the narrator for both plays." Although the idea was new, it seemed just right because it fit Jennifer and it gave her something to do. Jennifer happily agreed.

This example illustrates both types of fairness. The children were concerned that everyone be treated equally. More than that, however, they searched for something that matched Jennifer's need. Equally impressive is the way the teacher helped the children learn fairness by considering one another's feelings.

We can do the same for our own children by helping them understand what people need in a given situation and then integrate that information with what can be done to be fair or helpful. "What is that person like?" we might ask. Or we could point out what we notice: "She seems very shy." After making the evaluation or helping the child make it, we then suggest what can be done to help: "So we won't make her pin the tail on the donkey; let's ask her to be 'it' when we play the song game." In this way we teach children to think about the traits of others and to create fairness by doing what can be done to satisfy the needs of that individual.

Helping Children to Be Just

Children's relationships get them into many situations involving unkind or inconsiderate actions. Every parent has calmed hurt feelings created by mistreatment, or chided and scolded a child who has been unjust to another. Because there is a sequence involved—one child's actions are followed by the responses of another—we think of the actions as being the cause of the response. When we ask, "Who started it?" we are trying to find out who acted first and "caused" the problem. The trouble is that in a situation like this, each child sees his or her own behavior as a response to something the other has said or done, so each will think the other caused the problem and is at fault.

To teach children to be just in their friendships, then, we must teach them to understand and to say how their actions affect their friend, to withstand a friend's unjust treatment without seeking revenge, and to talk with a friend about a problem as a way to find a solution without giving further offense. When children understand and can say how they affect others, they are able to accept responsibility for what they do. When children can resist the urge to get revenge for being mistreated, they exhibit a sense of justice because they do not wish to inflict on someone else the same hurt they have experienced. When children learn to talk about ways to solve problems, they are being just because they are seeking a shared solution. To teach children these three parts of justice, we can tell them what they must learn. Then we can help them apply what they know when an opportunity arises.

Applying Skills to Learn Justice

We can teach our children to understand how they affect their friends. When children are meeting someone new, we can say, "What do people like about you?"

When there is a misunderstanding, we can say, "How do you cheer up your friends or make them sad?"

During conversations about our children's friends, we can say, "Let's talk about what you did to your friend. If your friends feel happy around you, they will like you. Do your friends feel happy around you?"

We can teach our children not to seek revenge if they are treated unjustly. If one of their friends says something mean, we can ask our children, "What do you think would make someone act that way?"

If a friend ignores or excludes our children, we can ask, "What can you do other than what your friend did?"

If a friend hits our child, we can ask, "Can you make other friends so you don't have to rely on just one or two?"

If our children are ridiculed or embarrassed in public by friends, we can say, "Some people do things without realizing they hurt. I wonder if your friends did that?"

If friends play a trick or a practical joke and our child misinterprets it, we can say, "Make up your mind you will not do what your friend has done to you."

We can teach our children to talk to solve a problem. When a friend says hurtful things, we can help our children practice saying, "Do you know it hurts me when you say . . . ?"

When a friend neglects to ask for our children's opinion and tries to control them, we can help our children practice saying, "I want to make up my own mind. Please don't decide for me."

When a friend manipulates our children to get food, a toy, or some money, we can help our children practice saying, "I don't like it when you try to get me to ask my parents for things. Please ask them yourself."

When friends ask your children for more than they give, we can help our children practice saying, "I think we had better talk about this."

When a friend ignores what is important to our children, we can help our children practice saying, "I can tell that you don't know it is important to me because you don't notice. I want you to let me tell you how important it is to me."

When our children make a mistake and hurt someone, we can help our children practice saying, "I have not been a good friend to you, and I am sorry. I want to talk about it."

Friendships provide social stimulation, enjoyment, and new opportunities to learn. Children need to be encouraged to make and keep several friends so that they will be helped to grow. While participating in friendships, children will discover that the ideas and actions that produce close friends are the same as those involved in the morality of fairness and justice. By teaching children to be just and fair, we not only help them have good friendships but also help them be moral toward all people. Our families, our schools, our communities, our country, our world all need more people who know how to be good friends.
