A. Lynn Scoresby, Bringing Up Moral Children ( 1989)

CHAPTER 9

MONEY AND PROPERTY

The task of teaching children morality about money and property has been made more complex by trends in our society that have moved us away from the collective sense of responsibility we once felt as a nation. The antiwar movement, the civil rights movement, the women's movement, and other such movements had in common a belief that true freedom is best expressed in individual rights. Nevertheless, in our headlong race to right long-standing wrongs and increase everyone's freedom to exercise their individual rights, we may have failed to consider carefully enough the proven idea that increased freedom brings increased responsibility. One result of this failure is that many of our young people possess a strong sense of individual freedom but lack an understanding of the corresponding individual responsibilities.

Consider the age-old conflict between striving for material wealth and working to develop intellectual qualities and personality traits that uplift and inspire others. Individual freedom without responsibility to others can become a selfish materialism in which people are the means and achieving possessions is the goal. Anyone who has this view of life can easily concentrate on making money and acquiring possessions. For such a person, devotion to principles, companionship with family members, teaching their children, service to others, are all expendable in the single-minded pursuit of money.

Every culture has values related to property, and as parents we try to teach these values to our children. Because most people in the United States believe in the sanctity of private property and the rights of ownership, issues about property are viewed as moral issues. As with other moral issues, we may have strong feelings about what we think is the right or the wrong way to regard property. Yet we are not all agreed about what that right way is or even on the specific roles money and property should play in our lives. We have our own styles of managing money and of caring for or not caring for the property of others. We see these values emerging in the lives of children as they grow. Some children appear to care relatively little about possessions, and others think possessions are extremely important.

The pursuit of possessions has brought us both help and harm. It has resulted in jobs, security, compassionate giving, and other things that make life satisfying, but the desire for possessions, when unrestrained by moral judgment and moral conduct, has resulted in graft and corruption, theft, violent robbery, treason, and murder. For example, we hear frequently about varieties of scams that have been used to bilk millions of dollars from unsuspecting investors. The victims of these crimes are often easily hoodwinked because their own greed leads them into believing wild promises about easy ways to increase material wealth. To help our children protect themselves from becoming involved in such dealings, we must begin very early to teach them a clear and definite morality about material possessions.

In our culture property and money play such a large role in our lives and relationships with one another that no one is free from contact with money and property or from dealings with other people about them. Recently, I read a newspaper account about some people who were seeking help from the local government to force a neighbor to improve the appearance of her house and yard. Her failure to keep her lawn mowed and her house painted led to lower property values in the neighborhood. The neighbors were upset and felt justified in their feelings. As a result, the woman was compelled by the city commission to take care of the problems that led to the complaints. We have only to become aware of such attitudes to see that they are all around us. At any business luncheon, for instance, conversations can be overheard about the acquisition and use of property, about who owns which house or building, and, if we listen carefully, we see that a person's social status, at least in part, is determined by income or property. For many of us, such attitudes are woven so thoroughly and so deeply through the fabric of our thoughts that we accept their place without feeling their true significance. To help teach our children what they need to know, we need to be conscious that money and property play an important role in many moral circumstances because of the help or hurt that results from the decisions made about them.

Moral Circumstances for Using Money and Property

To be prepared to reason, to decide, and to act morally where money and property are concerned, our children need to know something about the way people think about money, about how money affects people, and about how people relate to one another when money or property is involved. I remember a time when my own father taught these principles to me. We were shopping together, and he advised me to watch a salesman closely while he was talking to see if he was being honest. "People won't look at you," Dad said, "when they are about to tell a lie." He also warned me never to let someone push me into buying something before I felt ready: unscrupulous people use false deadlines and play on our fears to motivate us to buy. My dad also taught me to make comparisons when I shop, in order to get the best bargain. He taught me that in any business deal I should make sure that both people feel satisfied about it. "Even if you are within your rights," he would say, "it's a bad deal if one person is unhappy about it." In this way, my father informed me of his views of people and their relationships to money and property.

As we teach our views to our own children, we carefully point out examples of selfishness, greed, and dishonesty. Every town newspaper is full of examples: money and property will forever attract people who think of schemes that hurt others. We also want to help our children learn generosity, kindness, sharing. The fairness and justice we have helped them learn in their relationships with family and friends will help them deal morally with many other people. If we point out to them the fair and the just (or the unfair and the unjust) dealings of others, they will learn to understand the intentions of others and improve their awareness of potential consequences in moral circumstances involving money and property.

We can also help children be aware of their feelings when they want something new. Quite frequently children hurt each other over toys and other possessions. These experiences give us many opportunities to help children understand the feelings associated with moral judgment. If children's desires for "things" are greater than their concern for others, they can learn to adapt and be more considerate of other people. Once a neighbor boy offered several large "steelies" to one of my sons. These were highly prized during spring marble season. In exchange he wanted an old radio he had seen in our home. My son was so interested in getting the steelies that he grabbed the radio and was about to leave to conclude the deal when I asked him if he knew who the radio belonged to. "Aw, Dad," he said, "it's old and no good. No one wants it anyway." I pointed out that his desire to get what he wanted was clouding his thinking a bit and that he needed to make certain that trading the radio was a right thing to do. At first he resisted thinking about his feelings, but as we talked more, he admitted what he felt. He took the time to talk with all family members to see if anyone objected to his trading away the radio. As he left at last to make the deal, I passed on the "make sure both people are happy" idea I'd learned from my father, and my son worked out a fair agreement with his friend.

Helping children think about their feelings and intentions and the feelings and intentions of others prepares them to act morally. Now they need to have a full and clear understanding about a moral standard, and they will be ready for the moral circumstances involving choices about money and property.

A Moral Standard for Using Money and Property

Because we live in a property-oriented society, it makes sense for us to teach our children to use property and live with it in a moral way. In other words, where property is concerned, our children must learn to choose properly between greed or generosity, sharing or selfishness, and must have a balanced attitude about the relative worth of people and things. Greedy people collect property simply for the purpose of ownership, even if others are hurt in the process. Selfish people deprive others of property when it would be possible for others to benefit in a share. Those who steal (thieves and robbers) take what belongs to another. We recognize that greed, selfishness, and stealing are terms describing behavior about property that hurts people and is therefore immoral conduct. Generosity, sharing, and having respect for others are terms describing behavior about property that helps people and is therefore moral conduct.

To make our own attitudes clear, we can ask ourselves questions such as these: Is it moral to use money and property to help people? Is it moral to hurt people to get property? Is it moral to use property to exploit or control people? Do we have a responsibility to care for our property so others are not hurt? These questions raise concerns that most of us face whenever we deal with property in relationship to people. When our dealings in this relationship are honest, we are said to have integrity. If we have this integrity ourselves, we will be more successful in teaching it to our children. They will need integrity when they confront their own questions about property and people.

George Murdock came to school as a new student. He was in the third grade and had just moved into town. He looked at the other boys and girls playing. They seemed to be having fun. He went over to join in, but no one invited him to be on a team. He waited for a while and then went into the classroom. During lunch he went to a store across the street and bought some candy bars. One of the kids noticed the candy bars and said hello. George offered him one of the candy bars. The boy stayed and played during the rest of the lunch period.

The next day George brought more money to school. He met his new friend and showed him the money. During lunch the two went to the store and bought some more candy. This time George gave some of it to two or three other boys. They all played together for the rest of lunch recess. The next day George did not have any money. One of the boys said, "Where is the candy, George?" Because he did not have any, the boys ran off and left him. The next day George had some money. The boys sent him to the store for the candy while they played. When he came back and shared, they played with him. Every day after that George brought some money.

During a parent-teacher conference Mrs. Murdock confided in the teacher that George had been stealing money at home. Had the teacher noticed anything at school? The teacher had happened to see George bring candy to the boys and then knew why George was stealing the money.

Many of us witnessed such experiences in childhood. Our children may be like George or one of his playmates. Yet many of us think nothing of giving things to people so that they will like us. What was wrong with George's actions? What could we teach George to do instead of what he did? To teach a moral standard to our children, it will help if we begin by recognizing that money and property are mediums of exchange that symbolize one person's attitudes toward another. Generosity with money, for example, shows compassion for others. Fairness with money symbolizes respect for other people, and honesty about money signifies a belief that people and their needs are as important as money and property.

We trade, bargain, buy and sell, give and receive, share or withhold. The morality of property we should establish for ourselves and our children is that as we participate in these transactions, we act according to our belief that property is of less value than people. A real estate agent I know demonstrated this morality. He had tried to sell a particular house for several months. Business was slow and he was in a tight spot himself, which put him under a great deal of stress. A young couple saw the house, liked it, and made an offer. They had a small down payment, and their banker was willing to make a loan, so the deal could have been concluded. But after the agent found out about their work plans, plans for their family, and anticipated future income, he realized that the amount of money they had offered was really more than they could pay, and he tried to talk them out of making the purchase. He told them, "I can't in good conscience sell you this house without telling you that I very strongly believe that the price you have offered will be far too heavy for you to pay." He then explained his reasons in detail. He valued people and their welfare more than money or possessions.

In an example that is unfortunately somewhat more typical, we may encounter the car salesman who, when we explain what we can afford to spend, ignores this information in his attempt to sell us a car. This action indicates an insincere and possibly dishonorable person. As our children grow, we can help them refine their ability to converse in ways that will enable them to learn about others and express themselves until they are able to make a transaction a gain for everybody.

Money and Property as Social Exchange

A standard of morality is learned in teaching moments accumulated over a period of years until the decisions made according to it are automatic. If we want our children to make automatic "right" decisions about money and property, we will have to help them establish in themselves a "right" standard.

In the following example, Burton (1984) describes how a moral standard for property can become automatic. His daughter Ursula, aged one-and-a-half, came home from Halloween trick-or-treating and tried to take some candy from her sister's sack and place it in her own sack. The sister yelled, "No, Ursie, that's mine!" Her father explained that she should put only her own candy in her sack. A few days later the older sisters found some of their candy in Ursie's bag. "That's stealing," one said. This time Ursula's mother explained to her about not taking someone else's things. The next day a similar event took place, and her mother explained again. A day later her father saw Ursula in Maria's room. She looked up and said, "No, this is Maria's, not Ursula's."

Several months later Ursula took a plastic toy from the store and had to return it to the manager and say she was sorry. One day when she was in first grade, Ursula came home with someone else's pencil. Her parents explained again about temptations and honesty, and they asked her how she would feel if someone took something of hers. Seven years later, Ursula found a wallet in Yellowstone Park. She began frantically to gather bills that were blowing in the wind. She found the address and mailed wallet and money to the owner. When asked if she was tempted to keep the money, she replied, "No, that would be stealing."

This account shows that morality is cumulative and eventually becomes automatic, so that when faced with a decision, children do not deliberate painfully but simply react according to what their experience has taught them.

Many such decisions are automatic, and we need to be consistent over the years as children grow so that they will be able to identify and follow a clear standard of morality about property. There are certain situations, arising more often when people are older, in which moral judgments are not automatic and in fact require us to thoughtfully deliberate in order to make the moral choice. On the simplest level pertaining to money and property, however, very young children can start along the path to automatic right decisions by learning not to take something that belongs to someone else. If this principle is reinforced many times in their early years, then a later temptation to steal will be met with a firm decision to refrain from doing so.

Helping children learn an automatic moral response about property is not the only thing we can do very early. It is possible to teach very young children to have empathy for others. At age two or three they can be helped to understand how other children think and feel in many circumstances—when other children do not have something to play with, for example, or when one child will not willingly share. Very young children can feel the happiness that comes from giving something to someone else, and they can learn the social skills attendant to giving and receiving graciously.

One important thing we can teach children to do is to talk with us about their ideas about money and possessions. Little children will have toys they love and others they don't like so much. One set of parents gathered their children in the living room once a week to play games and teach little "life" lessons. On one occasion they had each child bring out a favorite toy. The parents asked each child in turn to explain why the toy was the favorite.Then they asked their children, "Do you think other children have favorite toys, too?" "What should we do about the children who have no toys?" "What happens if we share our toys with one another?" The children were able to talk quite openly about feeling sad if someone didn't have toys and feeling happy if toys were shared.

The children in this family were learning to talk about property and their feelings about it. They were learning that possessions are involved with friends and family relationships. If their parents continue to provide them with experiences like these, the children will grow up able to use conversations about property to help them make moral decisions and to prevent others from exploiting them. They will be able to test the sincerity and integrity of others by expressing their own feelings about property and money and then watching how others respond.

Careful Management: Generosity and Sharing

Careful management of property carries with it attitudes of respect that are related to generosity and other virtues. During middle childhood, children can be taught careful management of their possessions. Managing their possessions requires that they learn to regulate themselves—as an aspect of autonomy. We do not often think about how generosity, integrity, cooperation, and sharing can come from learning to be careful about our own possessions. Certainly many children who are not good managers are able to give to others. True generosity, however, is a gift by someone who knows the true value of the gift. It is not just an attempt to please someone. When children have something that is "theirs" and learn to manage it well, they gain feelings about property based on an earned understanding of worth. Children who do not own anything or who fail to care for what they own often cannot determine the real value of things and therefore cannot know as well about cooperation and integrity.

Most of us, for example, try to get our children to keep their rooms clean or to perform chores thoroughly. The most common method to teach these skills is to ask our children, sometimes repeatedly, to keep their room clean or to perform chores thoroughly and then to get angry when they fail to do what we ask. But those of us caught in this pattern need to try some other approach because our frustration with nagging is as great as our children's.

Another approach is to show them what we want them to do, tell them we expect it done before a certain time, and then leave them to it, perhaps promising a reward (paying them) when it is done. This approach can work, but it can get expensive. So just how do we get our children to care enough about something they own, have a share in, or have responsibility for, so that they will consistently demonstrate this care? We need to begin by recognizing that ownership is as much responsibility as it is privilege. Children tend to think only about the privilege or pleasure ownership creates, especially if they are given most of what they have. For children to be careful managers, they might need to earn a possession, or some part of the cost of it, through actual effort. We can also ask them to demonstrate the ability to care for something very well before they get something else. For example, children must take good care of an old bike before getting a new one is possible.

Careful management is more than doing chores: it is also discovering what will prolong the usefulness of something. Some people are careful because they are niggardly and selfish, but others are good managers because of a respect for the property that is cared for. If we want children to know what to do as careful managers, we must think about how to prolong the usefulness of some object and teach this routine to our children. What do we do to prolong the usefulness of a car, a vacuum, a bedspread, a mixer, or a lawnmower? If we know, do we teach our children?

Careful management also teaches morality about money. Many adults do not know a standard for using money morally, and they show it when they spend more than they have or earn, spend for foolish reasons, cheat to get more money, or even steal money from others. If we do not want our children to engage in any of these immoral behaviors, we can use middle childhood and early adolescence to teach them the moral uses of money. The principles are straightforward, and we can teach them if we have the will to be consistent and follow through with what we begin. Here are three principles for us to consider:

The Consequences of the Moral Use of Property

One positive consequence of the moral use of property is the idea that "someone else's gain is my gain." It is felt as peace of mind and satisfaction. To know this consequence, children will have to understand that their own gain must not exploit others; they must understand empathy. When our children have successes in sharing with someone or receiving from someone, we can point out and reinforce the feelings these experiences bring. When they have unhappy experiences, such as someone's refusing to share with them, we can help them understand the sources of their unhappiness (someone else's selfishness, perhaps compounded by their own unreasonable demands). Developing an ability to feel content with someone else's gain is basic to morality in circumstances involving people and property.

The competition was keen for junior high cheerleader, and all the girls felt the pressure of it. Two of the girls who were competing, though they were not close friends, occasionally walked home together from the bus stop. As they were talking one day after school, Judy confided to Karla that she did not think her chances were very good. "Why?" questioned Karla. "Well, I am not as good as the rest," came the answer. "That's not true," Karla protested. "You dance and move as well as anybody." There was a long moment of silence. Then Judy confided that she thought her clothes were not as nice as the other girls' clothes. She was especially worried about the outfit she would wear while trying out in front of the studentbody. Karla offered to let Judy wear her sweater and skirt if they did not have to try out at the same time. She also offered to help her work on a routine for tryouts. She went home and talked about this proposal with her mother, who gave suggestions.

The next day at school arrangements were made so that the girls would try out at different times. Karla's mother kept track of the situation, continuing to talk with her daughter and help her think about what might happen in this moral circumstance. With her mother's help, Karla thought about the possibilities: both of them could win a position, both of them could fail, one of them could win, and the other could fail. The hardest possibility for Karla to think about, of course, was the possibility of Judy's winning and her losing. "What would you do if that happened?" Karla's mother asked. "You know that you really want to win yourself." Karla thought about it.

A few days later, it happened. Judy became a cheerleader, and Karla did not. They both cried, though of course not for the same reason, and both tried to be gracious. Having been taught well, Karla went to games to support Judy. The two girls became close friends.

The moral use of property means that in our transactions with others we find a way for both parties to benefit or to receive equal value for what they give. Sometimes, as Karla learned, it will require great effort to regulate our own emotions in order to share in the pleasure or the excitement of the gain of another.

In our families we have obvious opportunities to teach our children that principle. Children ask for something from us, often without thought for anything other than the pleasure of getting it. We can help them expand their moral understanding if we ask what they will do with what they get and tell them what happens to us as a result of our giving it to them. This might mean, for example, that when our children want us to give them money, they should be prepared to tell us how they think getting the money will affect them and also to tell us how it will affect us to give it to them. If we fail to ask them to think of these consequences, children can become so concerned with their own desires that they do not understand what fulfilling their desires can cost someone else. Many children ask for and receive money and only later find out, if they ever find out at all, about their parents' sacrifices to give them what they wanted. For many children, the work their parents do to bring home the money is invisible. Because they have little awareness of the work parents do to earn the money, though, the children will be concerned only with getting what they want, unless we teach them otherwise.

We neglect to teach our children about this relationship between our work and the money we have available to give them for several reasons. We may not want our children to know about us and so might refrain from telling them much. Or it might not be much of a sacrifice just to give them what they want. But we can help our children develop the sensitivity they should have if we occasionally take the time to ask them to tell us about their needs and invite them to listen to our situation. When we see them involved in some transaction, we can help them ask the questions and judiciously offer the information that enables both parties to work out a fair arrangement. Being able to participate in these kinds of conversations will help our children make good judgments about what is fair in moral circumstances involving money and property.

We can begin teaching this fairness very early. Little children can be asked to tell why they want a certain toy when they are fighting over it with someone else. If children fight simply to prevent someone else's having something, they can be faced with a choice either of talking to work out something agreeable to both or of having the toy removed so that neither can play with it. Later, as children learn to share and bargain, we can encourage them to think about both people in the transaction. If we are worried about our children's being exploited by others, we can help them understand cooperation. Generosity and cooperation are reciprocal behaviors, which means that if one person gives to or cooperates with another, the other feels the need or senses an obligation to give or cooperate in return. Our children need to be prepared to give, even if they will not be given to. (If that situation happens very frequently, though, we should look into the matter.)

One father prepared a small garden plot for his daughter. He spent enough time with her to explain about planting, weeding, watering, and even told of the enjoyment the fresh produce would bring. He showed her how to make the rows and plant seeds, and then he left her to do the rest of the work. He showed interest by asking whether or not the plants had come up. As the plants grew, he showed her about weeding and left her alone to finish. He evaluated her work with her and showed her how to improve. More than this, he took her to other people's gardens and pointed out the difference between the gardens of someone who took care and someone who was indifferent. They talked about the two kinds of gardens, and he explained to her that he wanted her to grow a garden that would be like the gardens of the people who took care. He did not tell her how much weeding or watering she had to do to achieve that goal. He left that for her to discover. He occasionally went with her to check her garden but did not do much to help her unless she asked him to. He talked about what she was doing, though, and pointed to both the good and the less-than-good, hoping to avoid discouraging her.

The first year her garden was not especially good, but she still liked doing some of the gardening. The next spring she told her father what she intended to plant and talked of what she had learned about the plants she had grown last summer. He complimented her, helped her prepare the soil, but left her to do most of the work. This summer the garden was better because she cared for it better. They both took time to compare her garden with those nearby until she could see that her care was as good as that of the other people. She was excited that she had some vegetables to give to the neighbors and insisted that she be the one to do the giving. Each year thereafter she planted a garden again, and her father came occasionally to see her work. He complimented her often.

It is not always as easy to teach sharing as it was for this father to teach his daughter. Many of us struggle in frustration to get our children to do their duties and care for their possessions. And children often have difficulty learning to share genuinely. We learn that the whole process takes much longer than we would like it to. If we are having trouble, we might want to think about whether or not we have helped our children truly feel that what we are asking them to do or take care of is theirs alone. The solution might be to provide them an opportunity for discovering that they are on their own when it comes to caring for something. If we assign a task and then leave them to it, going and returning as they work, evaluating their work, and praising more than criticizing, we will help them learn to be careful and begin to discover generosity and sharing.

Stealing and Vandalism

Money and property can present different problems for teenage children, depending on their circumstances. Money might represent status among their friends because of cars, clothes, and social opportunity. Many who are well-to-do have comfortable lives and use money liberally to obtain whatever they want. Those with less money have to find ways to get more of it in order to have many opportunities. Though their situations differ, both the well- to-do and the less-well-off have problems and potential.

The wealth of some children enriches their opportunities in life, but it can also stimulate attitudes of superiority or indifference to others, which are antecedents of immoral behavior. Well-to-do parents often do not limit the money they give their children and then discover that their children have not developed a sense of value about money or have not learned to be helpful and considerate people. Children who have no ready supply of money recognize the need to find jobs. While most of us tend to think that is laudable, it too can bring problems. For one thing, working can interfere with achievement in school. Work, money, and the things money can buy, can easily become more important than anything else. Some surveys indicate that many high school students work nearly forty hours a week to buy cars and clothes and suffer a corresponding reduction in friendships and academic experiences. It is clear that the moral value of money for teenagers must include balance between possessions and development in other areas of life.

When attention to money and possessions is not balanced with concern for people and moral values, the results can be very harmful. Stealing is the name we have for acquiring property in violation of moral standards. People steal because their desire to have something is greater than their motivation to be moral. Sometimes what the person wants is not only the object stolen. In many instances of shoplifting, for example, children steal both to get what they don't have and to get the thrill that stealing gives them.

A teenaged girl named Tina brought home several new items of clothing. When her mother asked about them, Tina said the clothes were borrowed from her friends. Having no reason to doubt her daughter, Tina's mother accepted her answer. But more clothes appeared, and some still had price tags on them. These facts made the mother suspicious, and she confronted Tina. Finally, Tina confessed. She told of stealing from stores at least two hundred times.

Had she been caught by the police, Tina would have had to go through the juvenile court system, which required some restitution and imposed punishment—the idea being, of course, that consequences of this type keep children from misbehaving again. Too often restitution and punishment do not work, however, as parents with children in this situation learn. Why? Because the child is not required to cross the bridge from immorality to morality. That bridge is crossed when a child carefully examines the purposes or intentions in the immoral behavior, clearly describes what feelings were involved in the actions, and admits that the actions were wrong.

In Tina's case, because she had not been caught by the police, her parents were faced with the choice of turning her in or of trying to resolve the problem themselves. For a variety of reasons, they could not bring themselves to call the police, but Tina would not talk to them about what she had done or her reasons for doing it. Nor could she talk about her feelings at the time she was stealing. When they tried to suggest the feelings she would have if she had integrity and refused to steal, she was quite flippant. She also showed little remorse. After several attempts to talk with her, they brought her to my office and explained the situation.

At first, she was as unwilling to talk with me as she was with her parents. Eventually, however, she was able to talk about experimenting with stealing and told how she found it to be exciting. Besides, she said, she was able to get new clothes. In the interview, she talked about her parents. Her feelings were not fully happy. She felt very much controlled by her mother and described her as a "nag" and "overprotective." Gradually, after imagining herself in a store owner's situation, she was able to think about feeling guilty and was able to describe what she might feel if she did not steal. In the course of our conversations she decided that she should take as much of the clothing back as she could to the store she had taken it from. To do this she was to find which lines of clothing were sold by each store and then return the corresponding items to the manager. When the clothes had already been worn, she and her parents worked out a plan for her to earn money to repay the store.

I then asked Tina to go with her father to a store, pick up an article of clothing, and then put it down. She agreed to do this at least ten times on four or five different occasions. Then her parents purchased for her a new outfit of shoes, pants, blouse, and coat. She was asked to write down how she would care for these items in the best way possible. When she balked, she was, in kindness, given the choice of learning how to be a "good manager" or being reported to the police for stealing. She decided to learn how to care for her clothes by washing, ironing, folding, and hanging them in the closet, and cleaning her shoes weekly. After doing that for two months, she was able to talk about what stealing was doing to her. There was no recurrence of her stealing after that.

Vandalism is another form of behavior that indicates inadequate understanding of the moral value of property. Vandalism is the destruction of property as an expression of hostility to others. It may be done by thoughtless people as an isolated act, but most often it is done by those who are angry and have not yet accepted moral values about property.

Three teenaged boys broke into a new elementary school. They damaged many chalkboards, drew obscene pictures in many classrooms, urinated on the carpets, and left small bottles of urine on a few teachers' desks. After an investigation, they were caught. Two were brothers who lived in a home where conflict was the most constant event in the family. Others in the family had broken the law. The third was a boy who reported that he felt friendless and isolated. On the surface of it, there seemed to be no adequate explanation for their destructive acts. A deeper understanding, however, revealed that because they could not openly express their anger toward the abusive authority in their lives and because they could not express their frustration and anger at being lonely, they made a gesture of defiance in the dark of the night, thinking no one would know and there would be no reprisals. Their actions were exactly suited to attracting the attention of the people in our sleepy and conservative community. Their gesture seemed to say, "We'll make you notice us." While their behavior was extreme and improper, what they did fit their feelings.

They were required to pay for the damage they created. They were required, with their parents, to clean a local baseball park. They had to participate in family counseling to talk through what they were feeling. Their situation was not as serious as many I have seen, but their behavior can teach us what even the most angry people are attempting to communicate through their destructiveness.

If our children destroy property simply to destroy it, or to express their anger or their frustration at being lonely, the first step in teaching a moral standard is to stop the destruction. That is accomplished by identifying who did it and by confronting them with their acts. Imposing a consequence that requires careful management also helps. For most, that will correct the problem. For others, intensive work to change their feelings will be required so that they no longer use destruction of property to symbolize their distress. Sending children to jail is often necessary when their underlying feelings cannot be resolved and they are not able to acquire a standard of respect for law and property.

Fads and Fashion

Nearly every teenager takes part in the fads and fashions of music, clothes, and other social customs. To keep up, a teen must know the names of popular songs, groups of singers and instrumentalists, and the "in" brands of clothes, and he or she must own some of the right recordings and clothes and be able to afford the dates and other experiences that bring prestige. It is easy to see the dilemma for many teens. Money will buy belongings. Having money or knowing the most popular fads will help them belong and avoid isolation, the most feared social condition. Of course, the most fashionable clothing, tapes, and dates cost more than the "ordinary" ones. So our children bring their dilemmas over fads and fashions to us in the form of requests for money. Now we have to decide. Do we buy the newest and latest name brand shoes so that they can feel good socially, or do we spend less and risk their social disappointment?

If we do not have the money to spend, then there is no question about what we will do. If we have enough to buy what our children want, we might do it. Whatever we do, though, if we do it without teaching them something about morality, we will have lost a great opportunity to instill in them the moral standard about money. They must learn that people, including themselves, are more important and more interesting than money. If children rely on the fads to bring popularity, they will find instead shallow and temporary friendships. We can help them see that having money or not having it is not the main problem. Adolescence is a very good time for children to focus on friendliness, warmth of personality, sense of humor, courtesy, and consideration as the chief means by which a lasting popularity is achieved. That is not an easy lesson to learn, and many conversations and decisions will be required to help children truly internalize it.

Danny Thompson is fourteen. He is good looking. He has brown eyes, brown hair, and a clear complexion, but he is small for his age. He will be in ninth grade this coming school year. His parents sought family counseling because they had found him sneaking out at night and had discovered that he had stolen a few things, but, worse, he had made several strange decisions. He had gone on a church-sponsored campout in the mountains. In spite of clear instructions from leaders of the group about what he could or could not take, he had hidden some cans of food and large amounts of candy in his pack. That was unusual because he ordinarily did not like candy very much. He also took some clothing that was not allowed. Another time, he dismantled a good clock in order to take out one part. He suddenly became a "hot" fan of a rock group, and when he went to the barber he returned with a "buzz" on one side and a colored streak on the other. When his parents objected to these things, he became secretive and sullen. He began to spend more time in his room alone.

When I first talked with him, he was very reluctant to say anything to me. But when his parents left the room he began to talk about feeling stupid for having to see a psychologist. I asked about those feelings, and he told me his friends would tease him. I took that statement as a clue and began to ask more about his "friends." They were larger than he. They had money. They had haircuts like his, and they wore "neat" clothes. After a while, he seemed more relaxed as we talked about some of his unusual decisions. He was embarrassed as he talked about his mother's clock and about the church camping trip. When I asked him for his reasons, he paused a moment, and then with more intensity told of how he had to do "special" or "terrific" things or he would lose his friends. We talked about that feeling at some length. We examined every possible reason for his thinking that his friends would not like him for himself and would like him only if he did these "neat" things. Then one day he said brightly, "You know, I am tired of doing things that these guys want. I don't care if they leave me. If I am not good enough for them, I will just be a 'no pal' for awhile." Together, we talked about just how bad that was, and he decided that he could survive it.

Money, carefully managed and used to demonstrate that people are more important than things, is a blessing. Money without these standards often hurts people. If we remember that learning a morality of money and property is cumulative, we will use each teaching moment along the way to teach young children to share and be generous, to be good managers, and then to make decisions according to this standard.

Because children learn moral behavior gradually as they mature, the chances are good that they will make mistakes along the way. In adolescence, children are especially vulnerable to money and property and are likely to make many mistakes. These mistakes may give us an opportunity to teach them a more constructive and moral way to act if we remember that the bridge from incorrect behavior to correct behavior is a careful examination of intentions, of feelings and the basis for judgment, and of the consequences of actions.

Therefore, although it is wise to be somewhat tolerant while children experiment and learn about personal standards, it is also wise to tell them we know about their deviant behavior. For example, if we discover some pornographic material under the bed, we can immediately let our child know we know about it, and if our standards reject its use, we can persist until the child gets rid of it. If we are surprised to learn that a child is using drugs, we can quickly let the child know we know and become involved in a constructive plan to stop it.

What if we know about a lie? What about a speeding ticket, or cheating at school, or malicious gossip about someone? In most cases, when our children know we know, they will think of ways to correct the behavior. Or, if they do not correct it—some children are beyond our ability to influence—they will at least have our standards reinforced in their minds.

When children have deviated from a community standard as part of their private experimentation, a change in their lives usually must involve telling some "authority" (someone who represents the standard) about it. That may take the form of an apology, a confession in a religious setting, or some other obvious attempt to assume responsibility by making restitution. Once children have done these things, they will have realigned their personal standards with those of their community.

One thing seems clear. It is the practice of correct or moral behavior that brings about true moral character. It is not merely ceasing immoral behavior or making a restitution that does it. Moral character is formed when children see examples and then act according to these examples themselves. Sometimes that must be done repeatedly. By encouraging them to live morally all through their childhood, we can expect with greater reliability that the character traits our children develop will be those of people who can balance the pursuit of things with ample concern for other people and their needs.
