A. Lynn Scoresby, Bringing Up Moral Children ( 1989)

CHAPTER 10

AUTHORITY

Of the many things children learn in families and take with them throughout life, perhaps nothing is learned more thoroughly than ideas about authority. Authority, the use of power to influence and control, exists in every family, usually in a variety of ways. Parents, of course, exert authority over children. Older children use authority over younger ones. Authority is part of any relationship when work is required, when rules exist for games and family activities, and when children are required to share and cooperate. Since there are so few areas of family life where some application of authority is not present, it is easy to understand why children come to sense authority everywhere in other activities and relationships outside the family.

We have seen that any situation involving drugs, money, or sex is a moral circumstance. That is also true of any situation in which authority is exercised: there is always a possibility in these situations for someone to be helped or hurt. Our children will face these circumstances both when someone has authority over them and when they are exercising authority over others. It is our task to help our children learn to meet these situations in a helpful, moral way.

Standards for the Moral Use of Authority

In a democratic society such as ours, the proper and beneficial application of authority is a matter of considerable public interest. A quick glance at any newspaper or magazine will demonstrate the emphasis we give to situations involving the application of authority. Many of these situations are crimes that result from breaking or abusing the law. Others are abusive applications of authority in business or family life. Still others involve the use of power to help or sustain someone.

In all of these descriptions we can find implied, if not directly stated, a consensus of opinion in our culture about the proper exercise of authority: authority is moral when it promotes the welfare of those who are affected by it, when it is applied with the intention or actual consequence of helping people. Authority is immoral when it is exercised to control others and hurt them by simply maintaining power over them or when it requires those affected to perform immoral acts.

The Role of Parental Authority

As we have seen before, it is one thing to define a standard and quite another to teach it. Perhaps that is somewhat surprising in the case of authority, because experience with authority is such a fundamental part of our lives. At first it would seem that we should have many clear and firm notions about how to teach our children to use and respond to authority. After all, there are few of us who could not clearly describe the way our parents exercised authority, whether they were "strict" or "lenient," for instance, "harsh" or "gentle," or perhaps "consistent" or "inconsistent." Impressions about our parents and their authority over us create our first ideas about our own application of authority. But these ideas are usually not enough to determine exactly how we teach our children. What does determine whether we teach our children to use authority in a moral way is our own strong sense of morality when it comes to authority over our own children. If we start with the commitment to use authority only to benefit or help our children, never to hurt them, then we are on the right track. If we occasionally make mistakes, such as expressing too much anger because of our frustration or weariness, we will compensate for them by the times when we use authority correctly and by the understanding our children have of our intentions to help them. If, however, we are ambiguous about our style of authority or if we often use authority in a way that hurts our children, then we are immoral ourselves. Our actions, which our children observe over a long period, determine whether or not our children come to understand and live the moral standard for authority.

As children, we may not have been permitted to discuss openly with our parents how and why they used their authority over us. Now that we are parents, we are frequently so caught up by the need to regulate our own children that we may respond out of habits learned years earlier. Many of us promised ourselves that when we became parents, we would not do the wrong things our parents did. We then find, to our dismay, that when we are faced with similar situations, we do those very things. By the same token, many of us would like to be able to do the right things our parents did, but we find that our circumstances are different enough to make that difficult. Obviously, relying on our instincts where authority is concerned will not guarantee that we behave in the ways that we want to behave ourselves and that we want to teach our children.

When we carefully examine our ideas about parental authority, it becomes plain that traditions about family authority are readily passed from one generation to another. Remember the man who said, "Yes, I hit my kids. My dad hit me, and I turned out all right. Of course," he added, "I take my rings off before I hit them so I don't mark them." Another man had grown up so frightened of authority that he would not let himself get emotionally close to anyone. His parents had used authority inconsistently and often harshly. He exerted authority over his own children only when his wife pushed him to it, and then it was often excessive. Although he knew something was wrong about what he was doing and wished he could do something else, he was unaware that his aloofness and his abrupt, intense responses were the same actions he openly blamed his father for using with him.

Many others of us, fortunately, had parents who exercised authority in more beneficial ways. Of course, it is possible for people who were treated well as children to mistreat their own children. And it is also possible for children mistreated by the authority of their parents to learn as adults how to apply parental authority in a more moral way. Whether or not we have been blessed with a healthy tradition to follow, we can develop a better style of using authority by becoming aware of how authority was applied during our childhood so that we will better understand what we are likely to do with our own children.

Parental Authority Styles

One widely known description of parental authority involves combinations of control, affection, and anxiety, which form eight types of parental authority. (Becker, 1964.) These eight types are as follows:

Neglecting. Parents use little authority and show little affection and anxiety. Consequently, their children are often delinquent, aggressive, and uncontrolled.

Rigid controlling. Parents use high control with limited affection and low anxiety. Consequently, their children may be shy, socially withdrawn, anxious, and self- punishing.

Democratic. Parents use high affection with limited control and little anxiety. They are warm and supportive of children, and family rules are set by the parents and the children together. Consequently, the children tend to be socially outgoing and may sometimes be viewed as nonconforming. They also tend to find achievement self- rewarding.

Organized effective. Parents exert high control with high affection but little anxiety. Consequently, their children usually have strong consciences, are compliant, and have high standards of excellence. They respect people in authority over them.

Anxious neurotic. Parents use low control and low affection and are very anxious about other people. They often feel they are unable to cope with children. Consequently, their children are also highly anxious, often perform antisocial acts, and may excessively punish others.

Authoritarian. Parents use high control and show much affection but are very anxious. Consequently, their children are often shy but do develop warmth. They often abuse authority over others.

Overindulgent. Parents use little authority but show considerable affection and anxiety. They fear they will frustrate their children's development by rules. Consequently, their children are often independent and manipulative, and they usually have poor consciences. They lack compliance and are aggressive and mischievous.

Overprotective. Parents are very controlling, use considerable affection, and are highly anxious. Their lives are centered on their children. They control by manipulation and by withdrawing their love. Consequently, their children may be compliant and dependent. They develop strong consciences based on guilt because of parents' withdrawal of love.

Considerable research supports the correspondence Becker shows between certain types of parental authority and deviant behavior in children and between the types of parental authority and children who develop strong consciences about right and wrong. When parents fail to organize a family government or are highly inconsistent in showing affection or enforcing rules—when they are negligent, rigid, overanxious, harsh, overindulgent, or overprotective—their children are likely to be confused about the moral use of authority. They will probably develop self-serving attitudes leading to disobedience and have poorly developed consciences.

In contrast, when parents organize a family government that involves children in making rules and when parents are consistent in enforcing the rules and in showing affection, their children are likely to understand the moral use of authority. They will probably develop strong consciences and respond appropriately to authority.

Parental authority is moral when it is not excessive and when it is imposed with affection and little anxiety. Such parental authority uses a few rules clearly defined and firmly enforced, with abundant conversation to explain obedience and disobedience. As children grow older, if they are given greater participation in forming the rules, they will likely accept and comply with parental authority.

How Children Learn about Law and Order

Many police departments now have a public relations program called "Officer Friendly." Representatives present programs at public schools about police activities, hoping that children will develop positive attitudes about police officers and the work they do. These programs were begun in the 1970s after the country went through a period of civil disobedience that was aimed at abuses of authority by many enforcement agencies. As might be expected, much of the disobedience was also abusive and dangerous. Many were shocked to discover the extent of negative attitudes about the police. Those involved in law enforcement learned from this experience that they had not done enough to inform the public about what they did.

Behavioral scientists became involved in finding ways to increase our understanding of the roots of this problem. Some assumed this national frustration was mostly on account of the Vietnam war and the divided loyalties it created. Others looked for family or social causes for the hostility toward the police that many college students displayed. Kenneth Keniston (1965), for example, wrote about youth who were alienated. Their sense of belonging to a community was upset because of economic problems, family conflict, pursuit of intellectualism without the pursuit of supporting values, and participation in rapid and uprooting societal change. Keniston proposed that these conditions led to attitudes that left many young people uncommitted to our system of laws and government: they had developed a pessimism about America.

Keniston at first assumed that youth were troubled primarily because of conditions existing in schools and in government. Further investigation, however, revealed that the attitudes of young people were virtually identical to attitudes expressed by their parents. Keniston was able, therefore, to find a strong relationship between parental attitudes about laws, police, society, and community.

Another noted behavioral and social scientist, Nevitt Sanford (1965), wrote about similar questions, describing how individuals are influenced by events or conditions in society, including the family. Like Keniston, he too found a strong relationship between parents' sense of community (the standards of the community) and four types of criminals, who by definition are examples of the failure of effective moral, social, and family conditioning. His descriptions give us some insight into what we might do to help our children learn a positive sense of law and order.

Presocial criminals are immature and suggestive individuals who are influenced by any group they are with because they have undeveloped abilities to abide the rules and laws of society. The lack of a cohesive family unit where children sense belonging and responsibility to help other family members makes children more vulnerable to the influence of others who do help them feel that they belong. Children gain a sense of cohesion, or belonging, from shared family experiences, including love and affection, similar work and play experiences, conversations, sympathy for one another, and respect for parental authority.

Antisocial criminals are individuals who usually have had conflict with abusive authority and learn to attack it by disobeying laws and rules. Most antisocial criminals have had experience with abusive parental authority, which leaves lasting impressions on children's notions about law and order. Antisocial criminals often feel justified in breaking a law because they believe that those in authority are abusive or dishonest. Occasionally, children reared by abusive parents even believe they are gaining a measure of revenge or are helping someone by breaking a law.

Asocial criminals are individuals who have limited knowledge of laws and organize all their activities toward satisfying themselves. They may want to be the "big guy" who displays money and power and indulges in sensual activities purely to seek gratification. The asocial person is ignorant of family rules or the need to obey them. Parents' inconsistency or neglect has much to do with the formation of asocial attitudes. If we want children to be law abiding, we must treat our pronouncements with respect ourselves and ask or insist that our children do likewise. One mother I know told her child not to eat cookies before lunch. When the child ran past the room where she was visiting with a friend, she excused herself to her friend, found the child, removed the cookie, and reminded him that she meant what she said. No further punishment or consequence was necessary. By consistently following through on her "parental requests," she not only showed respect for herself but also taught her son to respect her and her authority.

Impulsive-addicted criminals are individuals who know the laws and occasionally respect authority but sometimes give in to impulses they cannot regulate or control.

Such individuals failed to learn how to regulate their emotions. They have a good knowledge of the rules or laws and most of the time are obedient to them. Under certain emotional conditions, however, they cannot control an emotional impulse and at that moment they are disobedient. Our task as parents is to help our children regulate the excessive displays of emotions that appear destructive or are deviant to a family or social rule. We can do this as part of routine family life by insisting that children take "time out" and leave the situation, placing them on a chair, and insisting they stay there until they are calm. We can show in our own behavior examples of emotional control, praise their improved ability to exert control, and teach an overall impression that exercising self-control is the mark of a more mature person.

In summary, children's attitudes about law and order are learned first in families. As parents we have a real and significant role in helping children know the laws or rules and developing a positive attitude about being obedient to them. If we respect proper authority ourselves and teach our children to cooperate with us in forming family laws that benefit all family members, then we can expect our children to learn similar attitudes and skills.

Teaching Children What to Do When AuthorityIs Used Immorally

We work hard trying to teach our children to be obedient, so it may seem strange to teach them that there may be a time when they need to be disobedient in order to be moral. During their lives, their chances are good that they will have experiences with people who use authority immorally. Sometimes, to be moral, we are responsible to disobey authority that is being used immorally and in some cases to end the authority of those who use it wrongly.

Remember Milgram's famous study in which individuals were told that a laboratory supervisor would take "full responsibility" for whatever happened. Then, looking authoritative in white lab coats and acting the part, these "supervisors" asked the subjects of the experiment to increase the voltage of the shocks even to the point of giving what they thought to be a lethal amount to the person who was the confederate of the supervisor. In this research, if people wished to stop, they were told (1) "It is absolutely essential that you continue," (2) "You have no other choice," and (3) "The lab supervisor will be entirely responsible." Milgram and his associates demonstrated that many individuals would administer what they thought were lethal shocks (in other words, do an immoral thing) if certain conditions were created.

Kohlberg (1983) wanted to learn why some of the individuals in Milgram's study obeyed and why others disobeyed the instructions of the supervisor. He found that people were more likely to disobey this immoral authority when they had a highly developed sense of how their actions affected others. These people understood a "universal principle" of morality that human life is more important than obedience to authority.

London (1980) gives us additional information about people who are willing to disobey immoral authority. He interviewed people who disobeyed the Nazi authorities and helped many Jews escape. London described these individuals as having a very strong attachment to at least one parent. As children they had been forewarned that they might have to make some difficult decisions in the future but always to make the right one. He quoted one man as saying, "My mother said to me when we were small, 'regardless of what you do with your life, be honest. When it comes the day you have to make a decision, make the right one. It could be a hard one. But even the hard ones should be the right ones.' "

We can apply what others have found in order to help our own children know when to disobey authority used immorally. Schulman and Mekler (1985) proposed that parents avoid telling their children, "You should always obey the authorities." Such flat, fixed rules can prevent children from developing the flexibility necessary to respond morally to requests by people in authority over them. It is better for parents to teach their children that each person will be responsible for his or her actions, regardless of who is in authority. Coincidentally, there is a strong connection between having a sense of personal responsibility and being willing to help others.

Next, these writers suggest, we should help our children develop confidence in making their own decisions. Parents who use anger and threats to control children and parents who always make children's decisions are less likely to rear children who have confidence in their own decisions. In contrast, parents can build confidence by asking children to voice an opinion about some matter, accepting their answer without criticism, and asking them to justify their decision or opinion by explaining why they think as they do. Occasionally, we could ask our children questions about the consequences of different choices in order to help them clarify what they think. If we question them with great love and warmth, our children will come to feel that they can make choices without threat to themselves. Parental warmth is very significant.

Many parents have difficulty with their children because they tell them too much of the time what to do, and they often react harshly when children are allowed to choose and then make a mistake. One mother, starting when her children were young, told them, "I will tell you what to do, and you do it!" A man tried to keep a close relationship with his children by never letting them disagree with him or his wife. Ironically, of course, he created more conflict than if he had allowed for disagreement and discussion. Another man asked his children why they had done what was done. After hearing their answer, he replied, "That was stupid. I'll do the thinking around here." Another said that he could not express his feelings very well, so when difficult issues came up between him and a daughter, he pointedly and heatedly stated his opinion about what she should do. Then he withdrew from the conversation, telling her, "I can't make up your mind for you." Of course he hoped that his raised voice would convince her to make the decision he favored. Events in her life proved that she often had difficulty making even the simplest decisions, and many decisions she made were not good for her. It would have been better for everyone had the parents seen decisions as the result of interchange, which may take time but which helps children identify what they themselves think and also learn their parents' opinions.

The more confident children are in themselves, the more likely they will rely on their own judgment when it is time for them to make moral decisions. It is helpful for parents to see children's decisions as part of an ongoing conversation in which we participate with them. We can ask questions, we can ask to make suggestions, we can even point out mistakes in their thinking. After we do all that, we can ask them to state what they have decided in order to make clear both the decision and the decider. In many cases when they themselves have chosen, and chosen well, we can encourage them to do what they have decided.

If they make mistakes, the mistakes need to be understood and talked about rather than only condemned. We can ask children to evaluate their own decisions. We can ask them to find the mistakes, and we can warmly approve of their thinking and encourage them to improve.

Lastly, Schulman and Mekler suggest that parents help children evaluate things on their own. We can teach children to define words they hear by asking, "What does that person mean when he says ---?" Or, while watching a news program on television, for example, we might ask them to evaluate a criminal's statements, a politician's speech, or a schoolteacher's language to help them identify signs of people who can be trusted or mistrusted. Further, we need to help our children ask questions about the statements or behavior of others. Moral authority is usually asserted in the bright light of public opinion and can stand questions. Immoral authority usually is secretive, and those using it often will avoid questioning from others.

We can help our children evaluate the intentions of others by teaching them to ask questions. Asking questions will also help children identify arguments or objections about what those in authority might try to do. We can also help our children evaluate by teaching them that nearly all plans have advantages and disadvantages. Being able to determine both the arguments for and the arguments against something will permit children to make a more reasoned and more moral response.

Helping Children Learn to Use Authority

Responding to authority is only half the authority relationship. Applying authority is the other half. Our children need help also in learning how to use authority in a moral way. They exercise authority during play, at school and other organized activities, with friends, and in other relationships in family and at work.

The moral standard for authority is control or power used to benefit people. Children learn this standard bit by bit. Authority comes into play when children choose games they play, share toys, decide where to play, and so on. Young children, for example, often use decision games to select who is "it." One familiar decision game involves two individuals alternating their hands on a baseball bat with the one getting the top spot being the one to choose. Another is "one potato, two potato," and so forth. These games or rituals help children use authority with a sense of fairness.

As children grow, however, they will be in situations where someone takes, is elected, or is given positions of authority over others. They may become class president, or den leader, or club officer, or patrol leader. In these official positions they must make decisions that affect others, and, to be moral, they need to do so in ways that will help and not hurt. That requires that they know some ideas about people and what people need, what helps others, and how to organize to bring helpful things into reality.

A group of Scouts met to select their activities for the next month. Some wanted to go camping in the nearby mountains, others wanted to go swimming, and some wanted to visit a new planetarium. The group could do some of the activities, but they could not do all of them and still carry out the other parts of their program. The thirteen-year-old senior patrol leader, faced with the conflicting proposals, asked the adult leader what to do. The adviser suggested a vote to see what the majority wanted to do. Most wanted to go camping. A couple of boys looked discouraged by the vote, however, and the adviser realized that they did not have camping equipment. He suggested to the senior patrol leader that he hold a meeting with the other patrol leaders during the next week to work out the details. During that leadership meeting, the Scoutmaster told about the two boys without camping equipment and presented the problem to the youth leaders. They discussed how to help the two boys find some equipment. By borrowing a sleeping bag from one boy who had two and by using some equipment owned by the troop, they were able to solve that problem. The Scoutmaster, however, raised others. He asked, "How are you going to get the food organized, the transportation arranged, and a schedule of activities drawn up?" He suggested that the leaders divide up the assignments by asking instead of telling and that they set a time when the assignments should be completed.

This Scoutmaster understood how to help the Scout learn to apply authority in a moral way. He helped the boys get information from those whom the decision would affect. He helped the leaders be sensitive to others' needs, and he gave them a method to involve others so everyone could participate. These same principles can be made a part of families, especially when we are preparing to make a big decision that will affect our children. A family meeting, or council, can be called. We can ask children for their opinions, select an option, and involve each child in the preparations. If we use this process repeatedly, our children will learn this method of applying authority in a helpful, moral way.

Bossy and Clinging Children

Young children have ways to express their feelings about authority. Two of the most common are bossing and clinging.

Bossy children exert control by verbally regulating other children and occasionally their parents. The emotional root of bossy behavior is fear of being controlled. When this fear is accompanied by the example of a controlling older sibling or parent, bossiness is an obvious result. When children between three and seven years of age begin their quest for friendships, they often select friends who will do what they ask. In the case of a bossy child, finding someone to boss around is the primary way they participate in social exchanges.

One six-year-old girl I know of is an excellent example of a bossy child. She told her five-year-old neighbor what to say to her parents, when to speak, how to walk, how to dress, and what the rules were of the games they played, and she required that the five-year-old girl join certain "clubs." Her parents became acquainted with the true nature of this friendship when the five-year-old came home and announced she was a member of the "nasty" club. Their interest piqued, they learned that the six-year-old would not play with the five-year-old unless she agreed to join. The idea of the club seemed innocent enough until the father overheard the friend state that she would be the leader and his daughter would be the follower. The bossiness was so overwhelming in that game that the parents decided to intervene and prevent the two girls from spending much unsupervised time together. Later the parents found that to be in the club, each child had to take down his or her pants in front of the other children. Obviously the parents were happy they had acted earlier.

Bossy children are anxious. They require the response of someone else to feel significant. In the bossy child's early years, bossiness is a form of immoral authority because the bossy child's goal is to find self-gratification (security) rather than to help someone else. This situation deserves attention so that neither the bossy children nor the bossed children are hurt.

A possible solution to bossiness can be to require children to learn methods of cooperation: sharing some plaything or toy, doing small child tasks such as cleaning a bedroom or washing dishes, taking turns in a game, sharing communication by both talking and listening, and taking turns being the leader and the follower.

In some instances bossy children may not learn from cooperating with others and will need to be told directly about bossy behavior and the need to change it. Such a conversation is best held alone with the child in a calm, not an agitated, state. Otherwise, such criticism risks increasing the child's anxiety. Parents can help the bossy child by using speech that is not bossy, such as questions and requests. These can be practiced at meals and at other times until the children have learned them thoroughly.

Clinging children are also anxious, but they manifest their feelings by excessive physical contact and demands on parental time and attention. Clinging is often accompanied by whining and complaining. Often to avoid the guilt or annoyance of these emotional manipulations, parents become unwitting partners in maintaining the clinging behavior. Sometimes we push clinging children away from us because we feel oppressed by their behavior, and we try to anticipate their demands so they won't whine or complain. Children pass through periods of fear and will usually grow out of exaggerated dependence. In such instances, we can make the clinging worse by our own pushing and anticipating behaviors.

When the clinging persists, however, that is an indication that we are too powerful, too volatile in our behavior, or unjust in our discipline. If our evaluation finds these conditions existing in our children, we can understand why they want to stay in our presence for fear we will reject them or leave them unprotected or unprovided for.

Perhaps the best solution for clinging is to recognize that children's fears can be overcome by helping them achieve more on their own. That will require that we examine ourselves and eliminate our own frustration and anger so that they will not be too frightened by us. We can then ensure that we give them enough affection and warmth. Then we can begin to help them gradually move away from us.

At first we insist that clinging children stay close by us, even grasp our legs for thirty minutes each day. This attachment needs to be just as exaggerated as their demands for our attention. Whether you move across the room or to another room or just stand still, require the children to stand close by and touch your leg. Clinging children will soon tire of this and move away. That is exactly what we want. Repeat this procedure a few times, and eventually children will be glad for time alone.

This method works fairly well because clinging children are moving away from us rather than we from them by pushing them away or trying to escape them.

Giving clinging children little projects to do will keep them occupied and involved. One mother of a clinging two-year-old kept some beads and bottles handy so that when her child decided to leave her, he could find these toys and spend time with a familiar activity. Soon he was playing with other toys rather than spending so much time with his mother.

Bratty and Bullying Children

As children grow older, difficulty with authority changes from clinging and bossiness to the rude and insolent behavior we know as bratty and the overaggressive behavior of bullying. Since these behaviors indicate an inappropriate or undeveloped understanding of authority, they too require change to ensure that children better adapt to situations when authority is applied. If we are certain that our use of authority is clearly moral—that it is used to help and not to hurt—then we can fairly, and without hypocrisy, correct our children's behavior.

Bratty children are usually quite talkative, having participated in numerous verbal exchanges with parents. These conversations usually take place when parents tell children to do something the children do not want to do. Their reluctance to obey is shown in their attempt to distract parents by disagreeing and arguing. Such disagreement can become habitual and may be accompanied by rudeness in an attempt to avoid an active, compliant response to the parent's request. When we see rudeness and try to reason with the children, they simply become more adept at countering our explanations, eventually developing a large vocabulary for explanations, reasons for not obeying, and insinuations that we do not have the "right" to tell them what to do. As they grow older, they find additional ways to "show us" that we cannot control them. They often pick out the very things we try to get them to do just to refrain from doing them. If we require combed hair, theirs is messy. If we want them to act appropriately in social situations, they break social rules. If we want chores done, they mess, dawdle, distract, and only comply if forced.

Usually the best way to correct bratty behavior is to recognize that lengthy explanations from us and dialogue with them is not effective except to obtain compliance in the immediate instance. Begin by asking bratty children only twice, and then take steps to begin their movement toward compliance. With younger children, after asking twice, we can take their hand, leading them to the place where they are to perform the task we have asked them to perform. While the task is being done, parents can engage in distracting conversation of their own, telling wild stories or unusual tales so the children have no parental words to react to with words of their own. Sometimes pointing to the work, leaving, and then returning often at brief intervals to inspect is all that will be needed for a younger child to learn that bratty language will not prevent them from having to comply.

If children are very practiced and advanced in their brattiness, more extreme measures may be required, measures that do not involve conversation or traditional forms of punishment. If we attempt to talk with children who are rude and insolent, they will see it as an opportunity to retort and reply, continuing the behavior we want to get rid of. If we use ordinary forms of punishment, bratty children see the punishment as unfair and often seek revenge without having learned to adapt and adjust to authority.

One successful way to impose control that does not involve conversation or a traditional form of punishment is to give the bratty children authority in some task that requires them to be a supervisor and get someone else to perform. School or some other public setting is usually better for this measure than home is. Siblings usually dislike having another supervise them; however, if more than one child is involved, this authority can be given to a different child each week or some other time period. Most bratty children sense that having authority places them in a more powerful position and will willingly accept the authority first. Quite often they learn more trust from having authority and learn to comply more willingly when they have to apply authority to others.

This approach worked well with eleven-year-old Sue, who was mistrustful and argumentative with her mother. Sue was assigned to work with two children at school. These children, younger than Sue, had mild behavior problems in the classroom and often did not complete their assignments. In cooperation with a teacher and school counselor, Sue was placed in charge of the two children for an hour of tutorial work each week and was expected to consult with the teacher for help. She was told she would get a reward when the two children made progress each week.

At first, she was very kind to the children, and they, hoping to impress her, worked effectively. Everyone was pleased. Then the two "students" became tired of the routine and started to balk. Sue became frustrated and asked the teacher for some help. This experience helped her mature, and she became more respectful to her mother.

If this strategy does not work, sometimes another, equally direct and effective, will. Billy was eight years old, very bratty and disrespectful, the oldest of three children who lived with their single mother. She worked full-time outside the home and was often tired. As is the case for many of us, she had tried to get Billy to perform by talking, explaining, pleading, and yelling. He was immune to all these techniques. He spent most of his time arguing, insulting, and refusing to perform. A few fights had taken place, and both mother and son had hit each other. She was afraid of him and disliked him. He was afraid of her and disliked her.

Because the mother was quite large and physically strong, I suggested to her that she make a sandwich and pour a glass of milk, and then grab Billy and sit on him for forty-five minutes while she ate her lunch. She could sit on him without hurting him by exerting enough weight to demonstrate that she could physically control him.

He, of course, would struggle, but she was to sit on him until the time elapsed. If he had to go to the bathroom, she was to make him beg and only let him up if he promised to return. She was to do this for two or three consecutive days. When she left my office she had renewed hope, a lighter step, a firm glint in her eye, and confidence in her ability to cope.

The next time I saw Billy, his hair was combed and he sat quietly without interrupting. When I asked him if he had made his bed, he nodded assent. Then I asked him what would happen if he did not make it. In very respectful tones, he said with some awe and trepidation, nodding toward his mother, "She will sit on me." Eventually she did not have to sit on him. Along the way he learned such other benefits from complying with authority as warmth and appreciation from his sister and brother.

Like bratty behavior, bullying is also an inappropriate form of responding to authority. It usually stems from unjust or abusive authority having been imposed on children. Children feel very insecure as a result. Bullying is their attempt to increase their self-worth at the expense of a smaller or weaker child. Bullies are often not fully aware of what they are doing, thinking that the force and pressure they apply is "deserved."

We need to be prepared for two cases: first, when our children are the bully and, second, when our children are bullied by someone else.

When our children are the bully, we begin by examining the type of parental authority we ourselves apply and adjust it if necessary to make certain it is not unjust or abusive. We may be abusive if we frequently yell, hit, push, or shove while disciplining our children. We may be unjust if our punishments—spanking, grounding, and so on—are excessive, do not fit the misbehavior of the child, or are imposed without explanation. If abusive parents are unable to change their own behavior, they need to find someone to help them—perhaps a neighbor, a schoolteacher, a minister, or a professional counselor could help. Abusive behavior is destructive and should be changed.

Then parents need to help bullying children feel more secure. The best way to help them is to teach them empathy and concern for others. That can be done by teaching such positive verbal skills as giving compliments, asking attentive questions, and sharing. If we do these things too, they will soon learn that bullying is not as much fun as getting along with others and helping them.

Jacob was a ten-year-old bully. He was large for his age and could be found intimidating other children during recess and after school. He was a difficult child to control at home. One day, after some effort to help him talk freely, his counselor learned that Jacob's father kicked him when he didn't do what he was told. His mother yelled and made him do extra work if he disobeyed or argued with her. During a conference with his parents, they agreed to use other methods of discipline, such as restricting privileges, which Jacob could avoid by practicing doing correctly what he had earlier failed to do. For example, if he fought with his brother, he could be restricted or he could avoid the restriction by playing together with his brother and doing some friendship things. Further, for every problem that arose, Jacob's parents agreed to use conversation as their first attempt to find a solution. That meant that Jacob and one of his parents would sit and discuss what happened and then Jacob would be asked to decide what he would do to improve. He would not be permitted to do anything or go anywhere until he made a choice. The parents also worked with the school counselor to find ways of getting Jacob to help other children. Two weeks later, the bullying had disappeared.

When our children are being bullied, we need other techniques. We should instruct our children to tell us when anyone bullies them. Then, knowing about the situation, we can see if our children contribute to the problem by talking back to or taunting the bully. Next, we can explain that the bully actually needs help and enlist our children's help in finding ways to help the bullying child find more social and emotional support. Taking a child to school and discussing the situation with a schoolteacher, for example, are good ways to let children see that we are attempting to help the bullying child, who is insecure and in need.

If these or similar attempts to help do not work, then it is advisable to inform someone who can help the bully's parents. Usually, unless we believe the parents are constructive in their approach to teaching their children, it does not help to go directly to the parents of the bully. They may already feel great pressure and after learning about the misbehavior of their child, they may apply even more unjust and abusive discipline to the bully. It is best, therefore, to begin the process by talking with someone who can help the parents. A schoolteacher or school counselor is such a person.

One man had tried all these measures and found that his child continued to be bullied. The bullying took place when the children were waiting for the school bus at the beginning and at the end of the school day. He decided to be there at both times, and sometimes he took cookies with him. He gave the cookies to the bully to distribute to the other children and complimented him whenever it was appropriate. After a while he gained this boy's confidence. He talked with the boy about the feelings of the children he bullied and asked if he wouldn't rather be liked than feared. At first the boy denied he had done anything wrong, but this man kindly and warmly continued. After seeing he would not receive harsh treatment, the boy continued to talk and learned to help rather than to try to control or hurt other children.

Rebellious and Overconforming Children

Two improper responses to authority appear during adolescence in the form of rebellion and overconforming. Rebellion is quite well known to many who see their children use chemicals, break laws, and ignore and attack family rules. Overconformity is less well known but appears often enough to be of concern.

Overconformity exists when children drift along without apparent purpose. They may get into trouble because they follow other more aggressive peers. They spend a considerable time in such passive activities as watching television. We are concerned about this behavior because our children seem unproductive, weak, and vulnerable. They are vulnerable, of course, but they often are not weak. Overconforming is a calculated response to parental authority that children believe to be dishonest, hypocritical, or overcontrolling. When children seem excessively compliant, it is usually a message of resentment shown without the risks of open frustration.

Overconformity is immoral because the children exercise no will or initiative and therefore sense little responsibility for what they do. They merely place themselves in situations or are pulled into them and then go along with excessive compliance. Such children express neither opinions, desires, nor preferences. "It's all right with me," their actions say. "Whatever you say." On the surface such agreement might seem pleasant. But these same children must be prodded, pushed, reminded, and retold in order to get them to actually do what they have earlier "agreed" to do.

Overconformity is often difficult to change because it is safe, requires little risk, prevents parents from being harsh (until we can't stand it any longer), and it works. That is, it works as a form of retaliation. When it seems necessary to help children out of overconformity, we may try to encourage or coerce them, give them more freedom, ignore them, wait them out, lecture to them about being "weak," and then find that none of these tactics work.

We must approach the problem of overconformity without focusing direct attention on the overconforming behavior of the children. If we do give attention to it, we may actually reinforce what we don't want. If we tell children they comply too much and that we want them to change, they will agree to change and conform to our new request—which, of course, is a continuation of the old problem. Instead, we can use the cause of the problem of overconforming to help solve it.

The best solution is a form of paradox and confusion— we do something different from what we say. This solution requires a little acting, but if it is done with warmth and concern, it will not hurt. The goal is to get children to act on their own to make their own way in life. Several forms of inconsistency may be used. We can make two contradictory requests of them and then act as if we are unaware that we have done so. If and when they point out the contradiction, disagree at first, ask for explanation, and then make an adjustment without pointing out that they have acted responsibly. Sometimes we can say one thing— "I want you to work in the yard today"—and later tell them to do something else. Overcompliant children like to point out our inconsistencies. To invite continued conversation, we can mildly disagree and get them to add proof. Finally, when "cornered," we admit our mistake, but we do not point out that the children are doing something responsible.

Because overcompliant children like to notice our faults, we can announce to them that we think we are the possessors of an obvious trait—for example, hardworking, generous, happy—then act in ways that contradict the trait we have said we have. This intentional hypocrisy invites overconforming children to step out of their passivity in order to correct our hypocrisy.

We can ask them what they would "like to do," which most often will receive the answer, "I don't know" or "I don't care." Then we can act as if we do know exactly what they want and appear as if we are going to supply it. Usually overconforming children will respond to our actions by telling us what they really do want. When we make exaggerated assumptions with overconforming children, they quickly act and become responsible in order to correct our opinion.

Occasionally, overconforming children do things that are deviant and do them with their friends. Their excessive compliance allows them to feel that they are not as responsible for what happened as the others are. At such times it is often difficult to avoid lecturing when we attempt to tell them what will happen if they get into trouble. It is wise, however, to reduce "telling." They will learn about consequences only if they actually experience them. If they break the law—usually they commit misdemeanors at first—then let the law run its full course. If they break a rule at school and receive some punishment, it is usually best to allow the school authorities to fulfill completely the terms of any consequences.

Overconformity may require some professional help to change. It is wise to recognize it as a problem that will not go away by itself and may have scarring effects on the moral development of children. To resolve overconformity, children must feel an improved sense of security and be able to talk about their anger and their disrespect for parents. Then children can be helped to appreciate the need to have a greater sense of personal responsibility.

Rebellion, like overconformity, is a complex and complicated problem. It is often an attempt by children to communicate that they angrily reject parental authority because we use it too much or use it too little. We accelerate our efforts to control our children because we think they need it, but then we discover that they accelerate their attempts to avoid control by doing the very things we wish they would not. In some cases, parents are joint creators of their children's rebellious behavior. Most often, however, rebellion stems from family conflict when children have friends who encourage them to deviate or rebel against family rules. To help children develop a moral response to authority, we need to fully understand how to prevent the family conflict that promotes rebelliousness. Parental authority associated with rebellion is harsh and abusive, inconsistent because parents vary excessive power with overindulgence, or uncertain because parents disagree and children cannot discover what family rule to follow.

Authority can be made reasonable, consistent, and united when parents express warmth to children and use conversations to solve problems, plan activities, and correct mistakes. Parents can read books to get new ideas about child discipline and seek professional help in attempting to regulate children who are erratic or explosive. Further, use of authority can be adapted as children mature. Some parents find these suggestions easy to apply because they experienced them as children. Others find showing warm affection and "talking" with children very difficult. There is, however, a fairly direct and effective way for motivated parents to develop the ingredients of parental authority and prevent rebellion.

It begins by recognizing the relationship that exists between us and our children. This relationship is filled with feelings for one another because we are important to our children and they are important to us. Except for the very hardened and indifferent, this relationship grows naturally through the many shared moments of family life from a child's birth onward throughout our lives. Children are affected by us and we are by them.

As children grow, we prevent rebellion by adapting our relationship with them. In their early years, we impose authority in the form of consistent expectations, consequences, and some family rules. As the children mature and we talk with them and teach them, our imposition of authority needs to be adapted so that they are required to make choices themselves and participate responsibly in a pleasant and positive relationship with us.

Mark and Janice developed a parental approach based on these ideas. When each of their children reached puberty, the parents held a private conversation with them in which the parents asked, "Would you rather have a lot of rules or have a good relationship with us?" Even without being able to articulate what a good relationship with parents might mean, they chose that option because, like most children, they were tired of school, family, and social rules. Most children do not usually realize that parents are tired of rules also because we have to enforce them or make decisions about them. Parents, too, prefer a good relationship.

Mark and Janice Thompson told their children that a good relationship involves communication to keep the people in the relationship informed and making decisions together; trust, which is created and maintained by people saying what they will do and then doing what they say; affection and respect, which the people in the relationship show to one another; and time they spend together. The rules of the relationship, the children were told, are a little more difficult to learn than the rules they had lived by previously, but in a good relationship they will have more freedom and so will the parents.

From this point, the parents assumed the children must learn how to be participants in such a relationship, and they used family events to teach them. For instance, when children asked to go somewhere or do something, they heard, "Well, let's sit down and talk it over together and decide what to do." During these conversations the parents asked the children what they thought and then shared their own thoughts, too. Through questions, they learned what the children planned to do, when they planned to be home, who they were going with, and how they were getting from one place to another. A decision was made together. Sometimes, of course, children could not do what they wanted. Then the parents stated their opinion, gave reasons for it, and maintained it. In a good parent-child relationship, parents and children are not equal. As parents we are still responsible to use our wisdom, and sometimes we must regulate what the children do.

Jenny Thompson was old enough to drive and had taken the car to a high school basketball game. She told her parents she would be home by 10:30 p.m. She called at that time and told her parents that her plans had changed. She was at her friend's house and "having a lot of fun." She wanted to stay longer. Earlier Jenny and her parents had agreed that if anyone changed plans, to promote trust that person should tell the others as soon as possible.

Mr. Thompson asked what time Jenny would be home. Since it was Friday, she said, "Twelve o'clock." He suggested, "Twelve-thirty," but she insisted, and so he agreed. When she was not home by the time they had agreed upon, he went to get her. He was in the garage getting into their second car when Jenny drove in. Seeing him there and assuming he was angry, she said, "I guess I won't be able to drive for a while, huh?"

"I don't know why not," he replied. "You are a good driver."

"Then why are you out here?" she wondered.

He reminded her about the relationship. "I was coming to get you. You made a promise to me. Our relationship is based on trust, and I just wanted to see if you cared about it."

Jenny said that she did. They talked for a minute and then each went to bed. The next week, Jenny asked to use the car again. Her dad asked her about her plans. They were similar to the ones of the previous week. He then inquired, "When will you be home?"

"Twelve o'clock," Jenny answered. Rethinking, she quickly adjusted and said, "Twelve-fifteen."

"That would be all right with me," he answered.

When 12:15 a.m. came, Jenny was in the house. Her parents thanked her for being someone they could trust.

All this may seem somewhat impractical until we appreciate that the Thompsons were very serious about teaching their children to participate in this relationship and using it as a means of exerting control. They understand that control goes both ways, and children have control, too. Such two-way control prevents children from feeling mistreated and ignored because they can get many of the things they want by consulting with their parents rather than by rebelling against them or manipulating them.

The key to their success was that the Thompsons told of their own feelings in a very personal way and asked their children to do the same. There was a genuine attempt by both parents and children to understand and be understood and to show warmth and affection. The information collected from these personal conversations was often used in making decisions together.

The day Johnny was cut from the basketball team during tryouts, he came home discouraged and angry at the coach. He would not talk with anyone at first, but later he told his parents about it. The next day, Mr. Thompson left work, picked up his son from school, and took him to lunch. They talked about the situation. The father had a chance to give support and show his concern and love, and Johnny didn't go out and get drunk to show his displeasure or do something to gain revenge. They handled his disappointment together.

The Thompsons were successful in teaching their children to participate in this relationship, even though it took several years to make it work smoothly. We can see the advantages for the children's future as well as seeing why the children would not want to rebel from this form of parental authority. Further, this method did exert control and allowed both parents and children to influence each other.

Having a good relationship with our children requires us as parents to satisfy its conditions, too. Obviously it takes conscious work and patience for us to show our children that we want them to have this sort of relationship with us and enjoy it. It is unfortunate that we often do not show this commitment until our children have made it impossible to ignore them and what they do by performing rebellious acts. Then we must pay for counseling, pay for damages, and pay emotionally by watching them do destructive things. It is wiser—and easier—for us to prevent rebellion in the first place by paying attention, giving warmth, learning to participate in conversations, expressing our feelings in words, and learning to trust and be trusted. But no matter what stage of development our children are in, we can start now to improve our communication with them, build mutual trust, express our affection and respect for them, and spend more time doing things together.
