A. Lynn Scoresby, Bringing Up Moral Children ( 1989)

CHAPTER 11

WORK: AT HOME, AT SCHOOL, OR IN THE MARKETPLACE

When we use our physical strength or mental faculties to achieve a certain objective or result, we call what we are doing work. Experiences with work present moral circumstances to our children, and children learn their first ideas about work at home.

Attitudes toward work and work-related behaviors are first learned when families divide the labor that must be done in order to survive and succeed as a family. Such family activities as cleaning the house, doing the laundry, preparing food, cleaning up after meals, and doing yard work all present opportunities for parents to expect children to contribute to the common effort and to assign work to them so they do contribute. Experiences at school are a very natural extension of such experiences in the family because children are required to do work there, too, and, perhaps for the first time in their lives, their work is judged by someone outside the family. When children later enter the work force as adolescents or adults, many of the attitudes and working skills they first learned at home and in school are applied in the marketplace to jobs and careers.

As children grow up, work helps them develop concepts about responsibility and dependability. Work gives them opportunities to tell the truth and give honest effort or to cheat and lie. It leads to their developing a standard of excellence that will motivate them to a high level of performance, or it leads them to an attitude of just "getting by," by apologizing and giving excuses to look acceptable to others. Children may learn to work independently, starting and finishing work by themselves, or they may always require some supervision to work effectively at all. Some may concentrate on the result of their efforts and disregard other aspects of their work such as co-workers, friends, family, and enjoyment of the work itself. They may even hurt others in order to achieve a valued goal. Others may be so distractable that they fail to develop constructive plans and so produce little in their lives.

I was very impressed when I heard somewhere that three characteristics of a mature person are being able to start and finish work without being supervised, being able to carry money without spending it, and being able to withstand an injustice without seeking revenge. I have mentioned these characteristics to many others, and they too have seemed impressed. Once I asked someone what impressed him about these ideas, assuming that he would be most interested in the third, as I was. I was surprised that he focused on the first. That one, he said, gave him the most difficulty with his children.

It gives employers much difficulty, too. American retailers, for example, estimate that 20 percent of potential profits are stolen from them by their own employees. Time management consultants have found that many individuals working in offices near several co-workers actually work effectively only six hours of each eight-hour workday. The rest of the time is spent on breaks, social conversations, and other distractions. It has been estimated that employee absence, much of it for invalid reasons, costs business and industry thirty billion dollars a year. (Johns, 1987.)

Students' behavior in schools indicates similar attitudes. Most students in high school confess to cheating by using crib sheets for exams, handing in papers written by others, copying one another's homework assignments, and feigning illness to gain more time.

If we assume that children first learn work habits and attitudes at home, then what we teach them about being responsible, dependable, and moral in their work will have a lasting effect on them. Such habits and attitudes will in large part influence the quality of their work at school and on the job. A Standard for Work

Most of us could easily identify the community standard for work. Much in our national character is related to initiative, hard work, productivity, individualism, dependability, inventiveness, and creativity. As a result, most Americans believe it is good to be hardworking and responsible, to complete work without supervision from others, and to give honest, dependable effort and time in return for wages received. We also recognize the immorality of not giving honest effort, of wasting time, of embezzling or other forms of stealing from employers, or of hurting others in order to advance ourselves.

As parents we can set a standard of work for our children that includes independence, so that children can see the results of their own efforts; thoroughness in doing work well and completely; dependability, which includes a sense of duty to perform work; and responsibility, which suggests that work is a reflection or an extension of the person who does it and that work itself can be enjoyable and satisfying.

Current social conditions can make teaching this standard somewhat difficult. Affluence and complexity of work can make it difficult for children who are forming work habits to see the importance of the work they do and to see connections between what they do, how they do it, and the results they achieve. I was reared on a farm, and I learned at a very early age that the work I did was important to my family. It was work that needed to be done, and if I did not do it, someone else had to. If I had been assigned something, it was obvious to me and to my parents whether I did it or not, and how well I did it was obvious, too. Very few children nowadays have a chance to see connections this direct between work and "important" results. Large classes in school and complex business institutions tend to hide individual efforts. When people believe that others will not notice what they do or when they think that what they do has little importance, they can have difficulty learning a moral standard for their work.

Then, too, parents are somehow extra busy these days. We may be single parents working long hours to provide for children and then coming home tired and having to face cooking and cleaning. Even if there are two parents, it is likely that both have jobs outside the home. To teach our children effectively and to make certain they follow through with their assignments, we have to communicate with one another in the midst of busy schedules. If one or both parents get caught up in other demands, children may be left to their own devices, which usually do not include doing "work." Even if one parent does not have an outside job, the rounds of carpools, children's activities and lessons, civic duties, church and volunteer responsibilities, and the like also press upon us, and we may hope that someone else in church or school is compensating for what we are not teaching our children about work. Nevertheless, taking enough time consistently to teach and reinforce moral standards will prevent our needing to spend even more time later to correct immoral behavior that results from what our children do not know. Examples of immoral standards about work abound in our society, and our children will be hurt by them and will hurt others by following them if we do not prepare them to do otherwise.

Since much of our own work probably takes place away from the observations of our children, they might not be able to learn morality in work merely from our example, even if we live by a high moral standard on the job. We must find ways, then, to share cooperative experiences with our children so that they can learn honest effort, responsibility, and dependability in a setting where they can see what we do, show us what they do, and learn that what we all contribute is important to our family.

Anyone who knows a person who can work but refuses to, or a person who has grandiose plans for getting rich quick, also knows a spouse, children, and possibly many others who suffer from such a person's behavior. In one instance I know of, two businessmen made unreasonable promises to shareholders who were persuaded to take second mortgages on their homes in order to reap promised rewards of high interest. The deceit of these two businessmen combined with the investors' hopes of quick financial gain cost these investors millions of dollars. Six hundred fifty families were affected. Many lost their homes, uprooting their families and forcing them to adapt to a much different standard of living.

Situations such as this one are dramatic evidence of the need for renewed effort in teaching the basic value of honest, responsible, and dependable work that will help and not hurt others. That standard of performance takes time to teach, but the result is certainly worth the effort.

Work and School

School probably provides the first opportunity most children have to work for someone outside the family. At school, children have "jobs" to do and are "paid" (in recognition, awards, grades) for their efforts. They have to report on time and stay till "closing"; they have "breaks" (recess, lunch, class breaks) and vacations. Because school is such an obvious preparation for later work not only in content but also in structure, we can reasonably expect that children whose performance in school is dishonest and irresponsible will carry the same lack of personal standards into their paying jobs.

And these paying jobs can come quite early. There is a growing trend for teenagers to combine paying jobs and school. This attempt brings them to choices that can themselves become moral issues. Teenagers who have cars, for example, often must choose between spending time studying and spending time working to pay for car expenses. Other children work to have money for clothes, dates, tape players, and so on. All of these children are making decisions that illustrate their values about the importance of learning relative to the importance of possessions.

A disturbing trend in students' values is that instead of university study being seen as the way to improve one's mind and character, to acquire knowledge about ideas, people, technology, and the world, schoolwork seems to be seen by the average college student as the way to get things, to acquire attractive and impressive possessions. The goal for many students, then, is not to "know" but to "get"—good grades and a good job afterwards. If such students have little appreciation for the value of honest learning in order to be well informed and well educated, it is easy to see how they can rationalize cheating and lying as a legitimate means of achieving grades and graduation. What kinds of behavior can we expect from such people later in their jobs or careers?

Responsible and Dependable Work

Although some children seem naturally to value and appreciate their own accomplishments, such attitudes are not universal. Many children will just as naturally think it is all right to be lazy or to spend all of their time playing.

I don't know what I would have valued "naturally." Life on my father's farm was mostly work, and that is what I learned. Growing up, I assumed that everyone else had to get up early and often work late. During my first year at college I learned otherwise. Many slept in until late morning or early afternoon, missing classes and assignments. This, they said, was because they were up late the night before. Their statements surprised me because I had learned that farm work must be done whether one stays up late or gets to bed early: animals must be fed and crops and fields must be tended. To fit in with my roommate, I tried to sleep late sometimes, but I was never able to sleep much past eight o'clock, and I had to work hard to sleep until then. I just "naturally" woke up at 6:00 or 6:30 a.m., as I always had. When they found out this fact, some of my friends in the dormitory began to avoid me.

Children can learn early that work is a regular part of life and, in my opinion, they are better off for knowing that. Because work and achievement are significant building blocks of self-esteem and self-confidence, we can include work in our moral training of children by giving them chores, especially those that require them to care for themselves. Cleaning bedrooms, helping to prepare meals, and helping to keep their clothing organized are appropriate chores. Whether or not children comply with our requests to perform their chores depends on our doing several things:

Make the work significant and important. We need to show our children how their efforts will help others and will help them feel good about themselves.

Show the children how to do the assignment successfully. We often only have time to tell children what to do, and we fail to teach them a standard of how to do it well. We can best help them to do something well by showing them in small specific steps how to do it—for example, making their beds one sheet and one blanket at a time—until the final result is achieved.

Use incentives or positive reinforcement and avoid excessive criticism. Children often enjoy earning rewards for what they do. We can begin teaching a new task to children by associating a reward with it. Children will keep their rooms clean in order to earn a family activity such as a picnic, a movie, or an outing. These incentives can be gradually removed as work efforts become habits.

Put undesired work before desired privilege. Bedmaking,

homework, or dishwashing can precede reading for pleasure or watching television.

Avoid distracting arguments from children by being calm and knowing how to get compliance. If we ask children to do something and then they argue and demand reasons, we should either walk away or state encouragement: "You may think you can't do this, but I know you can," or "I know that you might be unhappy now, but you will feel better when you are busy." In extreme cases of refusal to perform, children may need to spend time sitting on a chair because they "cannot control themselves" and perform their tasks. They can get off their chair when we think they are ready to comply.

Build a worker's identity in children. We tell our children about their ability to get things done, and we tell others, too. We help children understand that achievement is a highly valuable part of what they think about themselves.

There are, of course, many other techniques that may be tried in order to get children to work. Most succeed at least some of the time as long as they do not involve abusive anger and harsh punishments, which might get children to work but will not teach them moral work behavior.

Independent Work and Task Completion

We can teach children to work responsibly on their own and to finish tasks without supervision. We can begin teaching this concept when they are very young. At age two or three years, most children begin to want to do things for themselves and push us away in order to dress themselves, tie their own shoelaces, and the like. We can encourage and promote those actions. Some children, however, seem to like having us do things for them and will make concerted efforts to bring it about. For these children, we might do a few things as a cooperative gesture, but if they want more and more from us and a pattern of asking

develops, we should begin to make our help cost them something.

One young child wanted her mother to dress her for school every day and refused to get ready on time unless her mother helped her. The mother dressed the child but created some discomfort by putting the child in an uncomfortable position in order to dress her and by dressing her incorrectly—buttoning things improperly, putting pants on backwards, and so on. After a few days, the child stopped asking for help. Because the mother could not be relied on to dress her the way she wanted to be dressed, the child had to learn to rely on herself.

Too often, children will train us by working only when we are near and attentive to them. In that way they can prolong our contact with them, which they value. If we reinforce them in this behavior, we should not be surprised to find that they might only work when the schoolteacher stands by them or gives them individual attention. These children are not self-starters. They need help in learning to work independently, and we need to learn how to give them this help.

Independence in work means being able to start and finish without excessive supervision. We are interested in teaching them independence because we want better performance from our children and less hassle getting it. In addition, helping children to start and finish work independently is the primary means of teaching them responsibility and dependability, two other parts of our moral standard for work.

Two techniques effectively teach independent work habits: "leave and return" and "unexpected reinforcement." "Leave and return" is easy. After starting children on some task, we tell them we are leaving and will return in a few moments to see how they are doing. We leave the room, usually for a few seconds, and then return. If they are working, we praise them and hug them and look at what they are doing. Then we repeat the procedure. We gradually lengthen the time between leaving and returning and vary it so that children cannot accurately predict when we will return. Always we show interest in their work. If they are not working when we return, we simply direct their attention to what needs to be done without criticizing them for dawdling or being lazy and leave again. Doing this when children are young will help them learn to work by themselves.

Unexpected reinforcement is a little different. When children are working, and only then, we interrupt them at their work and reward them unexpectedly. One parent starts her daughter at piano practice. She leaves for a few minutes and then waits until she hears her child playing. Then she returns with some reward, perhaps a small piece of candy, a loving embrace, a compliment. These unexpected rewards encourage children to continue working; if they are not working, they receive no reward. Persistence will come to have pleasant associations for a child, and eventually the rewards will be less important.

Children also benefit by learning that responsibility often means finishing what they start. Some tasks, however, are not worth finishing, and children will need help in knowing which are and which are not. Some of us tell children they must always finish what they start, so they feel pressure and guilt if they quit. The father of a Little League baseball player tried at first to make his son finish the season when he announced he wanted to quit. But after listening to the boy tell about the coach yelling, swearing, and shoving the boys, the father went to a practice to see for himself. What he saw helped convince him that his son would be better off away from the situation.

Instead of requiring that children finish everything they start, we teach them to make responsible choices about when to continue a task and when to quit. We can help them take the following things into account: What are the expectations for a task? Are they clearly explained? What promises were made at the time the task was begun? What are the consequences for the children and other people involved if the children finish? if they stop? By helping children answer these questions, we can teach them to make good choices about completing tasks or quitting before they have finished.

Competition and Cooperation

Most of us grew up with the idea that we would have to compete—for grades in school, for positions on athletic teams, for the jobs or careers we want. We read motivational stories about people who successfully competed in business, had the "winning edge," and won. We temper this emphasis on competition by emphasizing "teamwork," so that the pressure of competition stays within useful limits. Children are asked, for example, to be good "team members" on their athletic teams and in learning groups in school. The same team effort will be required later in the work place.

Competition and cooperation are thus mixed in a curious way. In some situations we are expected to compete as individuals—in playing golf, for instance, and for grades in school. In other situations we cooperate as a small group to compete with other groups. There are also times when we cooperate individually with others to achieve together, as in a school project or when several people help a neighbor in need.

As a result of these experiences and others like them, most children learn both competitiveness and cooperation. A problem arises when some children learn excessive competitiveness, so that every task is begun with the idea that there will be one winner, and the one with the best performance will be it. Many parents unwittingly contribute to this mindset in their children. For example, because parents understand the importance of grades in the competition for scholarships and admission into the best colleges, they may put great pressure on their children for high performance. Schools can add to this pressure by grouping children according to achievement levels and making children aware of status difference based on performance ("turtle" and "bluebird" reading groups, for instance). Schools may also publicly rank students, which further emphasizes competition and adds pressure. If competition is excessive or is expected in many different situations, children may come to feel that their worth as human beings is related to winning, and they may fail to recognize the kinds of performance that will build lasting self-esteem.

Such children have a sense of rightness based on winning and in some cases are willing to cheat themselves and others to attain that goal. These individuals may compete even when cooperation is called for. They may ignore the idea that if they always compete and win, then others will always lose. They may suffer from a lack of friends and social success. They fail to understand how to combine individual performance with consideration for other people.

Competition thus becomes a way of life for some and may affect close or emotionally intimate relationships. Overzealous competitors will, for instance, act as if there are limited amounts of love and warmth and will compete for these because they want to be the ones to get them. They are surprised when their competitive approach produces suspicion and resistance with the result that they receive less love and warmth than they would otherwise have received. Such competitive people live with excessive amounts of performance anxiety and look to find life's rewards from the thrill of beating someone else.

Competition among children has been justified by the assertion that it seems to motivate them to higher performance and is effective at teaching individual responsibility. Alfie Kohn (1987), however, has suggested that the facts do not support this assumption. According to Kohn, competition is a less effective motivator than enjoyment of a task and an internal standard of performance that children are trying to reach. Children will perform better, Kohn says, if they believe that their performance will help others and that others depend on them to do well. These cooperative efforts increase self-esteem and build better social relationships.

One objection to cooperative efforts is that group accomplishment often depends on the efforts of a few hardworking individuals while others sit back, give less, and benefit from the work and efforts of others. When children are expected to work together or cooperate to clean rooms, wash dishes, and solve school problems, some will do less than others but expect the same reward. For that reason, parents, schoolteachers, and employers tend to be somewhat afraid of cooperation. If parents and teachers accept a moral standard of work, however, and are dedicated to teaching it to children, they will be able to help children learn that taking unfair advantage of the work of others is not cooperation. It is possible to use even those situations that are unavoidably competitive to teach the kind of responsibility and dependability that cooperation demands. One form of that is "good sportsmanship." When they are faced with problems at school or work, people who know how to function only in a competitive mode often assume that they must work everything out alone. They fail to see other people as potential helpers, and they fail to understand how one's own happiness and self-esteem can be built by helping others achieve.

There is some evidence that failure to cooperate results in lower performance both at school and later at work. Kohn (1987) describes how learning situations that require children to cooperate result in higher performance as well as increased self-worth and better social skills. Researchers studying the effectiveness of cooperation in Japanese work organizations reach the same conclusions: cooperation results in a high level of worker satisfaction and productivity. The key both in school and at work seems to be learning how to cooperate in order to develop a real sense of making a contribution and a desire to act responsibly so that others will be helped rather than hurt.

It should be obvious to us as parents that we are preparing our children to act morally when we teach them that they have a significant contribution to make to other family members and must act responsibly in making that contribution. Both schools and workplaces are moving toward increased cooperation as the means of improving students' and workers' performance. We are seeing increasing emphasis on including in the individual preparation of students and employees the skills to cooperate with others in learning and producing.

We have many opportunities to teach children cooperation. A warm and loving family life depends upon our taking advantage of these opportunities. Members of families that do cooperate have a sense of belonging, an appreciation of individual importance, and a strength not found in the families who exclusively emphasize competition. The following suggestions will help parents teach children to cooperate:

Every individual is important and has something to give everyone else. When parents take time to talk with children about the abilities of all family members—at mealtime, for example—it is possible to help family members identify what each one contributes to the family. In my family, Jeremy brings us a happy sense of humor, Jennifer contributes sensitivity, Jon gives determination to whatever he attempts, and Ashley brings warmth and fun. Dad and Mom provide love and security. We also tell our children that each one can give what the others give, too, so no one is held back or limited. We often have a short program on Monday nights called family home evening. We organize these evenings so that every person contributes something. One leads us in a song. Another offers a short prayer. Someone is assigned to teach us a short "saying" that we all repeat. These sayings are usually motivating and teach a sound idea—for example, "A smile is a curved line that sets things straight." Another person demonstrates a "good manners" technique—for example, a boy standing to show respect when a woman enters the room. Someone presents a short lesson or a game to play, and someone else chooses and prepares refreshments. Everyone has a part in the program. We hope each one learns that he or she makes an important contribution.

Cooperative work. Children can be assigned chores that require each of them to do some part in order to complete the whole project. One family, for example, requires that children help with the evening dishes: one sets the table, one clears the table and sweeps the floor, another rinses the dishes and then washes them or puts them into the dishwasher, and another cleans the pots and pans and puts them away. Together they all share in completing a task that would be more difficult if only one person did it. Each one depends on someone else, and each one makes a contribution.

Cooperative planning. Shared family time is something that each family member can make a contribution to. Parents can begin some activities by discussing what each person, including the parents, would like to do for a short trip, a long vacation, or just one evening. (The conversation itself shows cooperation as much as doing whatever activity is chosen.) Then, after a decision is made, all can be asked to do part of the work. A picnic, for example, can involve some in preparing the car, some in buying the food, some in fixing it, and some in organizing games. After a few practice sessions like this one, children readily accept the morality of cooperation.

Noncompetitive motivation. We should not use competition to motivate children. Trying to get children to do routine things is often a hassle that some of us tire of, and we may use competition to motivate them. Getting two children to race to see who can be first to brush their teeth or get their pajamas on works to get the teeth brushed or the pajamas on. The children will run to avoid losing; however, there is always a loser. If competition between children is used to motivate them, we can expect them to argue, be less cooperative, and separate themselves from one another because of the tension they feel. It is generally better to motivate in ways that permit everyone to win, with a race against the clock, for instance, instead of against one another. We can also tell children to achieve one thing (brushing teeth), so that they can participate in the next thing (reading a bedtime story.)

If we apply these other "cooperative strategies," we will generally find that children begin to work better alone, as well as together. They will have a sense of cooperativeness, enabling them to go to school and feel like they belong.

When we do not teach cooperative strategies, our children may develop characteristics like Ronnie Hamilton's. One day his second-grade teacher asked all the children to divide into groups of five. She gave each group a strip of butcher paper and asked them to draw five turkeys. She told the children that each member of the group was to draw a part of every turkey. The children talked among themselves and decided who would draw the head, the body, tail feathers, legs and feet, and who would add color. Most groups decided to take turns so that each child could draw his or her part of each turkey. Everyone knew how to cooperate except Ronnie. He insisted that he draw his own turkey. All of it. The other four children in his group were frustrated at first, but eventually they let him do what he wanted—they could not do otherwise—and they went to work on the other four turkeys. Ronnie worked alone while the others talked with each other about what each was doing.

When they were asked to show the drawings to the other students, Ronnie made a big point of telling which was his turkey. Although he was accepted by some of the children, it was possible to feel tension and discomfort for him with those in his group. When it was time for recess, he stayed behind the others, almost as if he knew he did not quite belong.

When Children Don't Complete What They Start

As parents know, most young children can easily be distracted. When they are preschool age, their being distracted is more acceptable than it is when they reach the age of being asked to perform school tasks or family chores. Then we want them to be able to give attention to the task until it is completed.

Behavioral scientists have noticed that from birth children differ in the amount of sustained attention they are able to give something. This ability is called "selective attention," meaning that children can focus on one thing while disregarding others. As the human brain develops and becomes more effective, selective attention usually increases. Some children, however, remain distractable and cannot easily finish what they start. In more extreme cases, these children may be diagnosed by a doctor or school psychologist as having Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD) or as hyperactive.

Whether their condition is extreme or not, children who cannot work to finish what they start are not only frustrating to us and disadvantaged when asked to perform, but they are also somewhat more susceptible to temptations that lead to immoral behavior. If children can forget to finish a school assignment or family chore, they can forget they have a moral standard of some kind when confronted with a pleasurable distraction. In the interest of promoting morality, it is important for us to help children acquire the ability to finish what they start or at least to reduce their distractibility.

Parents can use some specific techniques to increase children's task-completion skills. First, we can emphasize the importance of finishing by making certain that children know what the finished product of their work looks like. We can, for instance, show them what a clean room looks like, what a completed homework assignment is. Then we can reinforce children when they complete their work. "Work until you finish," we might say, or "Finish what you start." Praise and affection are usually enough reinforcement, but more tangible rewards, such as books to read or toys to play with, are also helpful.

Second, we need to recognize that children can learn selective attention by developing some related cognitive skills. These include vigilance, or paying attention to the details of a task. Teaching vigilance simply requires that we ask children to notice what they will need to complete work. We can, for example, give children milestones to notice when they are one-fourth completed, one-half completed, three-fourths completed, and completed. We can also help them identify the tools that are required to complete their work. School work requires pencil, books, papers, crayons, and the like. Chores at home require specific steps, which might be written in a list to begin with.

Third, children can be punished for being distracted by having to rehearse doing it right. Sam's mom used this approach. One day when Sam did not complete a chore that he was asked to do, his mother talked with him about the importance of finishing what he started and then asked him to perform some simple sorting tasks (paper clips from safety pins). After he had demonstrated that he could complete that task, he was asked to return to his original chore and to work until he finished.

Fourth, self-commands are useful. When showing children how to do something, we can request that they whisper instructions to themselves. "Make your bed; pick up the clothes and put them in the hamper; vacuum the floor; put toys away." When children whisper these commands over and over, they become self-commands that can influence behavior when we are not around to supervise.

When Children Cheat

As children grow they are faced with many more performance opportunities. These necessarily involve supervision by parents, teachers, and, later on, employers. Sometimes children mistakenly learn that the approval of others is more important than what they are to learn or the work they are asked to do. In cases when children have not been responsible, they may dishonestly try to gain approval by cheating. The two most common forms of cheating are lying to give an acceptable excuse and claiming someone else's work as one's own.

We can help children learn a standard of performance that precludes cheating and lying by following some simple procedures. One is to have the children evaluate their own performance, explaining what was good or not so good about it. That will help them acquire the notion that they must be concerned about their own actions as much as they are about the opinions of other people. Children between the ages of six and twelve can easily learn to examine their own work and tell how they feel about it. We might ask them to tell us what they have done well, what they did not do so well, how they feel when they do something well, and how they feel when they do less well.

Another procedure is to help children predict what level of achievement they think they can obtain by their efforts. Instead of telling them what we think they can do, we can ask them to tell us what they think they can do. That helps them understand that they are to live up to a standard they set themselves. Then, after they have evaluated what they have done, we can ask them to make a prediction on another task.

For example, when they are working math problems, we might ask, "How long do you think this will take you?" "How many problems do you think you will get correct?" "Do you like to make your work neat?"

After they have finished the task, we can ask them how their performance matches their predictions. In some cases we may need to show a standard of performance and let children know we want them to admire it.

The times when children are caught cheating are useful times for us to emphasize our opposition to it. Researchers have attempted to investigate why some children cheat and why others do not when they are given the same opportunity. Children who did not cheat reported that they knew cheating was wrong, that their parents would disapprove, and that they would feel guilty if they did it. That tells us that we should spell out for our children exactly what cheating is and be very clear about its being wrong. We can also tell our children, as often as it is useful, about our happiness when they act honestly and about our disappointment when they cheat.

Finally, we can tell stories about children or adults who were honest and did not cheat when they could have. Usually these stories abound in schools and work. One of our family's favorite stories is about a schoolteacher who gathered test papers, took them home overnight, and corrected them without marking the grade of the papers. The next class period, he gave the children their papers back and read the correct answers, asking them to mark and grade their own papers. He then called for the grades to be given orally by each student. Only one student reported the same grade as the teacher had given her when grading the papers himself the night before. The teacher named this student publicly and praised her. He talked with the other students about honesty, telling them he would give them another chance to be honest.

When Children Lack Initiative and Self-Confidence

Certain technological products, such as television, videocassette recorders, and video games, have a passive

role in helping our children learn. This training in passivity has a telling effect on some children. Researchers in California found that as television watching time increased, children's grades went down, in both elementary school and high school. One teacher explained it this way: "We are pitching knowledge to children, much the same way we used to, but there are fewer who want to catch it, let alone get involved enough to go after it."

Lack of initiative and low self-confidence are related to immorality. Often, when children have a passive approach to learning or work, they are motivated more by the thrills of sensory experiences than by the satisfaction that comes from earned achievement. Because real, lasting satisfaction cannot be found in the thrill of sensory experiences, children keep trying to repeat and increase the sensations. They may try violent (gory, terrifying) movies, fast vehicles, drugs, alcohol, sex, and any other excitement that presents itself.

If we want to promote morality in our children, we need to promote initiative and self-confidence in our children by encouraging and expecting activity instead of passivity.

Jean Piaget's well-known work on cognitive development (1952) suggests what parents can do. First, of course, we must be willing to restrict the amount of time children spend in passive roles. If we are willing to help our children be active in their approach to life, we should help them explore and be curious about the good things they find in the world. Then we should praise them abundantly for their efforts to learn, and we must eliminate almost all criticism. (Many parents still mistakenly think that criticism is an effective means of motivating children.) Initiative comes from doing, and being encouraged leads to stronger beliefs that more can be done. Cultivating children's initiative usually requires much more praise and other positive reinforcement than most parents are used to giving.

If we are positive enough, our children can learn initiative and self-confidence through the opportunities provided in our homes by family, by friends and

relatives, and by necessity when they find that life is unhappy when they do nothing.

Many adolescents benefit by working in groups and feeling a part of something everyone accomplishes. They may also require opportunities to work side-by-side with us until they feel enough support to try on their own. We can help this process by organizing genuine success experiences. I have a friend, for example, who has for years hired teenaged boys who have little initiative. At first they do not show up for work on time and do not do much. After finding that others are expecting them to do their share, they often try to quit. At that point he interviews them and tells them, "You are not going to be fired. The only way you will leave this place is if you choose that yourself. We will work with you. Work with us and learn." Given this opportunity and this confrontation, many of the boys he has hired have turned their lives from indolence to responsible, active work.

Occasionally, more extreme measures must be taken. Some parents send their passive children to such work settings as ranches and camps. There children learn to work because they have to. After these experiences many return to school and normal life more excited to try. In the western United States, many children participate in "Outward Bound" or survival programs. The organization and planning of these programs are interesting. From them we can get some ideas about what to do with our children. Groups or teams are formed, and several activities are required. Some of these, such as rappelling down a cliff or building or walking a rope bridge, involve real risks. The children go through "confidence building" experiences together—getting acquainted with each other and building trust between them by taking one another on walks blindfolded—before they move on to other, more "real" challenges. In some cases, every member of a team has to perform in order for everyone to get a reward. If any one fails, all fail. These programs involve rather drastic and forced cooperation, but if children have developed an intractable passivity and show very limited initiative, such activities can help.
