A. Lynn Scoresby, Bringing Up Moral Children ( 1989)

CHAPTER 12

SELF-DESTRUCTIVENESS

According to our definition of morality, it is immoral for people to hurt themselves. Some people are surprised by this part of the definition, having considered immoral only those acts that involve one person hurting others. Stealing, for example, is thought of as immoral because the thief hurts other people by depriving them of their property. But by our definition, self-inflicted harm must certainly be considered as immoral as anything that hurts other people. If our children are self-destructive—that is, if they willfully inflict hurt on themselves—we need to take steps to help them learn a moral standard that will prevent their hurting themselves, just as we help them learn to help and not to hurt others.

Even though we might nod in sad acknowledgment when we hear of someone's eating disorder or attempt at suicide, we may be less likely to intervene than we are if we hear of one person physically hurting another. In a certain sense that reaction may be useful, because self- destructive children are more deserving of sympathy and support than of condemnation. But increasing numbers of children are turning to self-destructive behavior, harming not only themselves but also the people who love them and the society that suffers from the loss of what they could have been. Our indifference to the self-destructive behavior of others may be as immoral as the self-destructive acts themselves.

Such self-destructive behavior as excessive fear of failure, anorexia, bulimia, compulsive overeating, alcoholism, drug addiction, anxiety, inferiority, and suicide are problems difficult to solve. I believe that the unity, even the survival, of our human communities is affected by these problems as much as, and perhaps more than, by any other immoral act. And even though public consensus has not yet decreed that self-destructive acts are deserving of concerted energies and concern, parents of children whose lives are damaged, perhaps even ended, by acts of self- destruction certainly feel the urgency for more attention to this problem.

In our attention to individual freedom, we tend to explain how people can be free to have different, equally acceptable values by asserting that what someone does is "all right" (not immoral) if it "doesn't hurt anyone else." Although that can sometimes be true, it often keeps those who use it as an excuse for their own behavior from appreciating how their acts do affect others. In fact, there is very little that any one person does that does not affect someone else.

The differences of opinion in the matter of individual rights and the collective rights of others have played an important role in American life. But these differences are not an obstacle to a universal morality. The individual differences among us will show in how we participate morally in certain situations. There is more than one way to be helpful (moral) in any situation, and we need not judge everyone alike or expect everyone to behave in exactly the same way. It is not necessary, for example, that we all share the same religious beliefs in order for us all to recognize that when someone hurts himself or herself, others are hurt, too.

We can't do anything to help a child who has starved herself to death; we should have helped her before she became anorexic. We can't bring back a boy who has died from drug overdose; we ought to have helped prevent his drug addiction. By the time it appears, self-destructive behavior represents a conclusion, not an idea in the formative stages.

Self-destructive acts mean that children have made judgments about themselves and have concluded that hurting themselves is the "best" thing they can do in light of their thoughts about themselves and others.

If we have never met a self-destructive child, we might be unable to imagine why anyone would decide to hurt himself. Experienced observers know that children who make this immoral choice have had many struggles and may have been so hurt themselves that they have lost their threads of relatedness with others and have turned inward. Convinced that they are not cared for, that they do not belong, or that their life is a mistake, their self-destructiveness is a statement of ultimate despair. Children in this state are unaware that they have the power or the right to make choices for themselves and would not admit that they do what they do because of choices they have made.

I remember an account of a college student plucked from a bridge in Minneapolis, Minnesota. He was there thinking about jumping into the Mississippi River far below. The police took him to a counselor who expressed great concern at the boy's indifference to his own life. "No one cares," was the reply when he was asked why he was going to take his life. "I do," the counselor replied. "No, you don't," came the denial. The counselor wisely and calmly said, "Notice my hands. See how they are shaking." The boy looked and was willing to believe this obvious indication of caring when he disbelieved the counselor's words. For a few moments, at least, he was willing to believe that some other person cared, and so he, too, would care a little.

As we know—or can guess, if we didn't already know—it is children's actual experience that gives rise to their conclusions of pessimism about themselves and bewilderment about their worth. For such children, life may be one angry round after another. When their decisions lead to self-destructive acts, the way back to happiness, if they ever find it, may be long and arduous. It would be far better for these children to have been kept from reaching those conclusions in the first place. Certainly, that is what we will want for our own children.

Our efforts to help children actively maintain self- respect are made more difficult when our children are hurt by others. These hurtful experiences, which we call by the general name of abuse, are increasingly part of many children's lives. Children are hurt by relatives or friends. They might be hurt by our mistakes. They might be delicate and turn away when confronted with what they fear. Even if we prepare them well, we will not always be able to prevent our children's being hurt by others. But if we do prepare them, it is more likely that a harmful experience will not leave a permanent impression that leads to self-destructiveness.

To help our children be moral, then, we need to prepare them both to develop and maintain positive relationships so that they will have an enduring sense of self-respect and to learn to recover when they are hurt by others or by themselves.

Morality and Self-Respect

Self-respect is an attitude, in fact, the moral standard to which our efforts in preventing self-destruction should be aimed. Self-respect is not an attitude of arrogance or superiority. It is a sense of personal power, an appreciation that one's thoughts and acts have a place in the world equal with those of any other. It is an awareness of one's talents and flaws, strengths and weaknesses. Its close companion is humility. Someone who has self-respect seldom needs to prove it by demonstrating it to others. Those with self-respect have their own ideas about personal success and are more interested in fulfilling personal goals than in seeking the approval of others.

The six characteristics of a moral person are the characteristics of a person with self-respect. We remember that those characteristics are autonomy (a sense of self-control and a sense of responsibility for one's acts), empathy for others and willingness to help, acceptance instead of prejudice, a positive emotional style, the ability to converse with others, and an active orientation towards achievement. Children without self-respect are those who feel vulnerable with no sense of self-control, who are defensive and fearful, negative, prejudicial, passive, and isolated from others. If we want our children to have self-respect, a good approach is to help them develop the six traits of moral people.

Self-respect depends on self-awareness. To have self- respect, children must have a great deal of information about themselves. Children without self-respect seem to be aware only of their weaknesses and problems. They are less aware and less appreciative of what there is to love about themselves. In addition, the social mingle of one with another sometimes makes it difficult for individual children to know what part they play or have played in any group event. If we allow our children always to attribute both blame and success to others, then we are missing an opportunity to help them be aware of their own contribution to what goes on around them. If we let them always assume a sense of total responsibility, even when it is not fully deserved, they will come to feel arrogant about successes and overwhelmed about failures.

A Little League football coach I know begins each season by showing all the players how each one is important to the success of the team. "Every play is designed to make a touchdown," he says, "but only if everyone does his job." He describes what a player at each position does to help everyone else. Then he describes how it is not possible to make a touchdown every time because the players on the other team will force some of us into mistakes. "That is why," he explains, "each of you will need to learn your own position and how to help one another." His efforts to form a successful team are based on the idea that each player has to feel self-respect based on his importance to the other players. He successfully produces self-respect in another way as well. He tells the boys that each will make several mistakes during the course of the year, but all will not make mistakes at the same time. No one, he says, has the right to be critical of another's mistakes. Further, since mistakes are going to be made, he convinces his players that a mistake is not a failure and that the proper response is simply to get back into the flow of the game as quickly as possible and not spend much time worrying. The boys who play on his team learn as much about life and self- respect as they do about football.

The ties of feeling and attitude that bind us to others are worth thinking about. There are many who maintain that individuals have no connection to others and are free to live in pursuit of purely personal aims. But to teach morality and self-respect, we need to create a feeling in our children that they are important parts of families, schools, congregations, teams, towns, and countries. A sense of self-respect depends in part on feelings of relatedness, on a sense of obligation and significance to others. Paradoxically, if children feel no tie or responsibility to others, they can, through excessive blame, criticism, and threat, assume too much burden for others and live impaired lives because of guilt when they forget to think about how their actions reflect on others. No one has self-respect who carries an inordinate burden of guilt and obligation.

Balance is the key. Freedom from the pressure of inappropriate obligations to others must be balanced with an appropriate sense of concern for others in order for a child to develop self-respect and true moral character. We can help children develop both healthy concern for self and healthy concern for others, though each requires different experiences.

Concern for others is called altruism and is expressed in what is sometimes called prosocial behavior. Altruism motivates people to do something to help another without thought of a reward. Children learn this by following someone's example and by actually doing service to be helpful. Sub-for-Santa programs at Christmas or giving to neighbors in need are examples of prosocial behavior that arises from altruism. When we lead children into serving others, we help them develop empathy and a sense of caring.

Concern for self is similar to autonomy. It requires that children identify their own goals, thoughts, feelings, and motivations and feel a sense of responsibility for the consequences they bring into their own lives. Healthy concern for self does not mean selfishness or superiority; rather, it means separateness, individuality. Fully developed, individuality means that a person can express thoughts and feelings, clearly separating them from what others think or do.

In conversations with our children, we can help them balance these two aspects of a healthy personality. We point out to them, for instance, the need to have concern for others, and we talk with them about the need to achieve personal goals. "Be concerned about her and take care of her," we might say to a son as he leaves on a date. Next day we might say, "You need to work hard at school so that you can achieve your goals, even if your friends don't." Over and over we reinforce this balance in our conversation and by our example, so that our children's sense of morality will be manifest both in their respect and concern for others and in their respect and concern for themselves.

When Children Have Been Hurt by Others

Children are easily exploited by others. They do not have sufficient power to prevent it. They cannot overwhelm someone older or stronger, nor can they leave an exploitive situation and successfully fend for themselves. They are often made vulnerable by the belief that they must submit or be rejected. In some cases, submission is brought about by threats. In one recent incident of sexual abuse involving a case in my professional practice, the abused children were made to watch a live cat being disemboweled in front of them. The abusers threatened the children by saying that the same thing would happen to them or their parents if they ever told what had been done to them.

It is not surprising that after being abused, children may be unwilling to accept help because the threats they have heard make them afraid of everyone. There is often a real risk that children who are hurt and threatened by others will not find hope again, at least not enough to try to overcome what was done to them. In some cases, they simply do not believe in anyone anymore. Our first challenge with children hurt by others will always be to find a way to give them hope and to bring faith back into their lives.

An increasing number of us, I believe, are going to be faced with the necessity of helping children when they have been hurt, and sometimes hurt severely. They may be children in our neighborhood, or perhaps friends of our own children. In most cases, these children will have been hurt by uncaring, insensitive people, and they will need caring sensitive people to help them. As we begin to help them, we must be willing to be steadfast and patient. Injured children may resist us at first, watching and waiting. It is not uncommon for this suspicion to continue for months without lessening. But a child's hope may depend on our willingness to show patient caring.

Patience is not always calm, however. After I had worked with one girl for a long time to show her that I cared and that others cared, she still failed to believe. One day when I thought my feelings of concern had been amply demonstrated, I took a risk. When she accused me of not caring for her, I jumped to my feet and stormed around my office, indignantly reminding her of the times when she had seen evidence of my caring for her. I hotly explained that her refusal to believe was one of the most selfish and immature things I had ever seen and that it was time for her to grow up and get off the track she was on. I told her of my genuine feelings, and I reached out and grasped her hand. "I cannot help you, if you will not receive my help." I told her it was time to try trust. She became angry at me, accusing me of being a "crummy and stupid psychologist" who couldn't understand her. She began to shake and then to cry. Since I was standing, she stood, walked into my arms and soaked the sleeve of my suit with her tears. The change she made after that was not sudden or dramatic. But in the ensuing days there was more trust.

After instilling in an injured child some hope or belief in our concern, we can proceed to help the child talk and reason about what has happened. We can focus on the following:

What actually took place, as the child remembers it?

What part does the child feel responsible for?

How were people (everyone involved) affected by the experience?

What feelings emerged then and are now felt about the experience? (It is useful to ask in detail and talk at great length about them.)

How can a new trust (not the old) and new concern be developed for others?

As part of these conversations, we will probably need to help change what the child feels. Helping a child change feelings of fear and anger and resentment into feelings of forgiveness, for example, is useful because the change frees the child from entangling feelings toward the abusers. Sometimes we will find that we ourselves have more difficulty forgiving than the child does. But helping a child use faith in our love, and faith in God, by first thinking about forgiving and then finding some way to show it, will help a great deal in the process of healing. Children who are hurt by others generally feel a great sense of shame, a sense of worthlessness, guilt (which is fear of the disapproval of others), powerlessness (which is a sense of vulnerability to someone's control), anger at themselves and other people, and fear-depression from the loss of trust in others and overriding suspicion of them. These emotions are often difficult to change, but when children are able to change them, it is because they have been understood. Children can be motivated to change their feelings by realizing that they have been hurt and that they do not want the abuser to cripple them permanently.

Children who have been hurt by others often hurt in return. One of the most difficult things to help hurt children see is that they can overcome their own pain by helping others. After learning that their nine-year-old daughter had been sexually molested by a neighbor and frightened by threats of awful things if she told, the parents first reacted with hostility to the teenaged boy. They instigated a campaign to have the boy and his family move from the neighborhood. The boy's parents went to them. After they met and talked, their feelings changed, and they stopped the hostility and began to help their daughter. They involved their entire family. They bought a new puppy, gave it to the daughter and asked her to care for it. They asked all the children to participate in "family hugs" and other demonstrations of love for one another. Over a period of time they were able to talk with their daughter about what had happened and her feelings about it.

They went even further and found ways to give service to others. The mother cooked food and had the children take it to neighbors. The family put on a party for several children. They sought professional help and learned how to help their daughter be assertive (to express verbally what she thought and preferred, rather than allowing others to exert excessive control). When the daughter tried to avoid playing with friends, the parents had to be stern in their requirement that she play a reasonable amount of time. Gradually, she overcame some of the shame she felt. For these parents, their initial shock and anger was followed by compassion, and this change greatly benefited their injured daughter.

Those of us who have not been required to face a situation like this may yet have to. And if we do, we will face a moral circumstance. If we have learned our lessons well, we will be able to choose to help, perhaps even help those who have harmed us.

Stress, Childhood Depression, and Self-Mutilation

Early childhood, from birth to age six, is a time when children are governed by impressions, emotions, impulses, and images, which they often cannot think consciously about and which they will not remember in detail. Many child psychologists have suggested that children's experience during this time is recorded without any narrative to go along with it. Therefore, children may not be able to speak about these feelings or remember them after a few years. Once recorded, however, the early feelings and impressions often have lasting effects. Many adults, consciously unaware of their early experiences, have problems that seem at first to be without explanation. But it is now quite firmly established that many anxieties and such problems as eating disorders may be tied to emotions about early abusive experiences. These findings should indicate to us that our children will not be able to tell us in words but will show us if they have feelings that limit their self- respect.

Some early warning signs help us know something is wrong even if there has been no abuse. When we are committed to teaching morality, these symptoms signal that we must correct something or a lack of self-respect will make our teaching task more difficult. Usually, the earliest signs of disorder will be the signs of stress. For children under the age of six or seven, stress is most commonly displayed by depressed emotional states, shown by both overactive and subdued behavior, excessive teasing, difficulties with eating and sleeping, irritability, and self- mutilation, usually in the form of picking small sores on the face, legs, and arms.

When any of these signs appear, we know that children are feeling enough stress to create doubt about their worth. To help in this situation, we might first look for tensions at home, such as family conflict, parental anger, or problems between siblings. In some cases, we might uncover the fact that the child showing the symptoms of stress has been neglected or abused in some way. Children showing these signs of stress are often the ones most susceptible to disturbance by the pressure of family troubles. At early ages, recurring illnesses such as allergies, asthma, and headaches may be symptoms of such susceptibility. Such children will benefit greatly when family problems are resolved. It is important to remember that these symptoms are not a normal part of childhood unless they appear rarely and quickly disappear. If they appear often or do not go away, we can be reasonably certain that something is wrong. If we cannot reduce the conflict or tension ourselves, we would be wise to seek professional help.

When I first met her, Beth was seven years old, freckle- faced, of average height, with a sunny, pleasant disposition. She had small sores on her nose and cheeks. Some of them were freshly made, open, with no scabs; others were older and had begun healing. She readily admitted that she had picked them. Her mother told me of times when Beth sat for an hour or more and pulled the lining from old couch cushions and quilts through very small holes. Further questioning yielded more information. Beth's mother reported that Beth was often quiet, spending two or three hours alone every day. Occasionally, though, she would be "hyper" and in such an elevated mood that she was difficult to calm. During these periods she would get angry, tease, yell, and have to be placed alone or put on a chair before she would calm down.

I asked her mother other questions about the family. There were several family problems, including marital conflict, problems with older teenaged children, and the threat of the father's losing his job. I asked about the possibility of sexual molestation, because the symptoms Beth showed are often related to this problem. The mother reported that Beth had no older brothers, relatives, or neighbors who had been spending any time with her. "What about times when you are away from home, or when she sleeps over with friends?" I asked. Beth's mother ruled out these possibilities. She also indicated that she had no reason to suspect the father. Later I talked to both parents and found them to be extremely intense with each other. Their comments were sharp and often critical and accusing. I inquired about the warmth and affection expressed in the home, about family games, enjoyable vacations, and so forth. Both parents said that there was very little of that.

We made a plan to decrease the family tension by increasing family fun. Both parents were willing to alter their schedules to create time for some enjoyable activities. Beth's mother cut Beth's fingernails, and we worked out a reinforcement program to help get rid of the sores. Because Beth liked gummy bears, her mother put some in a jar. Every time Beth picked at a sore, her mother took a gummy bear out of the jar. At the end of the day, Beth could have the bears that were left. In three weeks, most of the sores had disappeared. Beth picked no other sores for nearly three months. Then her father lost his job, marital tension increased, and Beth returned with sores on her face and two or three on her legs. They did not disappear until we were able again to reduce the stress she felt from her family.

Thinking that Beth's family situation was very unstable, I proposed to her parents that we involve her in some achievement activities. They arranged for some summer classes in sculpture and arts and crafts. In addition, they enrolled her in a swimming class. At home they made her daily chores simple and specific. Together we planned a system of rewards for all her accomplishments. As time passed she seemed to grow stronger emotionally as she concentrated on the things she was doing. It was apparent that the focus on achieving had distracted her from some of the family problems.

In this case, it is fairly easy to see how achievement, greater autonomy, and positive experiences reduced the stress she felt, alleviated her depression, and helped her feel more positive. During our last conference she bounced in, gave me a "high five," and chattered about what she was doing. Self-respect had returned.

Obesity and Isolation

Such symptoms of self-destructiveness as stress and depression that appear in early childhood can extend into middle childhood as well. But ages seven through eleven is a period when other symptoms of destructiveness may also appear. In the main, these will be related to body size and shape, experience with achievement, contact with other people, and health.

Children aged seven through eleven are not usually able to understand themselves in terms of personality traits, such as cheerful, dedicated, etc. They usually think about people (including themselves) in terms of what they can see and feel. That is why children in the middle years of childhood think about what is physically obvious. Those boys who can run fast, throw far, hit balls hard, for example, will usually have higher status than those boys who are physically less able. Girls may use other physical criteria to evaluate themselves and others, such as prettiness or thinness, but they, too, are focused on the shape, size, and abilities of their bodies.

We recognize that not all children have the same abilities, and we might regret with tender sensitivity when it is our children who are less popular. There is wisdom in our recognizing two or three things about children's self- respect and their bodies. For one thing, relying just on physical abilities for self-respect is a mistake. Physical abilities can be changed by illness, injury, or just growth; their importance can be challenged by better competition. And as children mature, other things, such as social skills and talents, will play a greater role in their attractiveness to others and in their own feelings of worth.

We can be alert to our children's feelings about their bodies, and we can notice whether they have high or low status among their friends. All children are able to pay a certain amount of attention to caring for their appearance and to keeping clean. They can appreciate being able to walk, run, see, and hear. Children who dislike themselves because they are unable to succeed at being fashionably thin, handsome, or beautiful, could be asked to work for an hour or two with handicapped children. With their perspective restored, they will probably complain less after such an experience.

Childhood obesity is a physical condition that deserves our close attention. Overweight children are sometimes disadvantaged because they are not able to achieve positive status; they may be ridiculed and may struggle for self- respect. Obesity in children may result from hereditary tendency combined with low activity level, overeating, and rapid food intake. In this case, part of the solution is first to help our children increase their activity level and regulate their food intake and then to help them feel as comfortable with the body heredity has helped give them.

Obesity can also result from eating as a form of self- destructiveness. In this case, eating is an emotional crutch for depression and anxiety. Unfortunately, the "crutch" brings on a physical result that may lead to social isolation and further discouragement, depression, more eating, more weight gain, and more ostracism. A vicious cycle is begun that, if unchecked, can leave a permanent imprint.

Obesity from any cause makes it difficult for children to develop self-respect. Overweight children may miss or be hindered in many physical activities with other children (most children's games and activities involve them physically), and they are more likely to be extremely self- conscious and form negative attitudes about themselves because they know their size is obvious to others, whom they assume are disapproving.

In helping children lose weight for any reason, caution is necessary because the attention we give to our children's eating and weight can easily be interpreted by them as additional criticism, adding to their feelings of rejection. Some strategies can be helpful if we apply them with discretion. We can, for example, make certain that our children have skills other than physical skills to rely on as a basis for self-respect. We might help them develop skills in music or art; we might help them develop talents for writing or woodworking; we could encourage them with suggestions and praise to get involved in some social activities, such as Scouting. We should remember that school programs usually do not provide sufficient exercise and must be supplemented by such physical activities as jogging, playing physical games, karate, swimming, or weight lifting.

Instead of making a pointed issue of children's overeating, we can examine and adjust our family's eating habits. Just changing a few foods can help alter obesity without giving too much emphasis to dieting. Limiting the availability of foods with high fat and sugar content and reducing intake of such foods to small amounts help out more than we or our children may realize. In some cases, a more strict diet may seem warranted, but we should seek competent medical supervision before placing a child on a special diet.

If overeating cannot be brought under control by these measures and if it seems to be a means to self-destruction, we may need to seek help from a child psychologist or psychiatrist. Obesity related to self-destructiveness is a psychological problem. Doing nothing about such obesity is a mistake because the problem will not go away by itself. We must begin by recognizing that the obesity is a symptom of an underlying emotional cause, stemming from things that have happened to the child that are being used to form the child's emotional conclusion that "no one cares," "it doesn't matter," so "why not eat?" Very often, change will take place if the underlying events are talked about. When children face their hurts and talk them out, a foundation is laid for changes to be made.

We can search for these experiences by telling our children that we know something has happened and then ask questions. If gentle questions do not yield good results, we can become firmer, though always loving, in our insistence that the children talk about what has happened that is related to their weight. There will be more than one experience, so we must listen without too much reaction until the children have talked through several experiences. We must avoid challenging what is said, but we must make certain that the children report the experiences in some detail and display the hurt, anger, and resentment toward others that have resulted. We should not be surprised if they are angry at us. Children are often irrationally angry at parents for "not preventing or understanding the hurt" they feel. Then, it is wise to help the children explain how those harmful experiences were channeled into the desire to hurt themselves by overeating. Once this point has been reached, some of the children's self-destructiveness will be reduced and some plan of action will make itself apparent.

I offer one note of caution here. From my experience I have determined that any attempt to solve the problem of obesity needs to be met with some immediate success. It is usually unwise to start by designing big programs with delayed reward. Rather, we need to start by doing something simple, even unrelated to eating, just to bolster the children's courage and confidence.

Obesity presents a moral crisis partly because it so often results in social isolation. But obesity, of course, is not the only cause of social isolation. In fact, social isolation in itself can be a form of self-destructiveness. It is fairly easy for us to see when children avoid others and spend long periods alone. If such isolation is temporary, we can assume that it is related to some specific event, and it might clear up if we talk with our children, understand what has happened, and encourage them to try again. Friendship problems, school failure, or sharp words with a parent are examples of specific things that result in temporary isolation. But, suppose children use isolation or withdraw without talking to anyone every time something disappointing happens. Or suppose children come home and spend most of their free time alone in the bedroom for several days or weeks. That is the kind of isolation that offers potential for self-destructiveness.

Children who use withdrawal as a response to such hurts as embarrassment, disappointment, or frustration use isolation to punish other people. They often become extremely defensive and blame others for their problems. Failing to learn conversation as a means of solving problems and testing reality, such children are unable to determine whether or not they think and believe what other people think and believe. If they are allowed to continue this pattern, there is a chance they will develop unreal, even strange, ideas about themselves and others. Prolonged isolation may at first represent a crushing, profound hurt, but can become something even worse—a mental or an emotional disturbance.

Sometimes professional help should be sought for this condition, especially if we think that the reasons for the isolation involve unusually strong or traumatic emotions associated with experiences or events. But we still must find ways to help children change the feelings that prompted the action of withdrawal. As usual, we first examine ourselves, this time to see how easy or difficult we are to talk with. If we have been critical or indifferent, we can apologize and ask for an opportunity to improve as a listener. We can make an agreement with children to talk about ourselves, in a personal way, and tell about our feelings and activities, hoping they will do the same.

If some traumatic event has precipitated the withdrawal, then it must be confronted and dealt with. Being able to talk with someone about the experience and its accompanying feelings is usually very helpful. In one extreme case I know of, the child had not spoken for several months. Her parents took her to a therapist who was as mystified about the child as they were. There did not seem to be any specific cause for the behavior. One day the counselor began to tell a story about a girl frog who used to sing and croak with other frogs. He made the story very detailed and noticed that the child had become engrossed in it. "One day," he said, "the girl frog stopped croaking, and no one knows why." As he paused for a breath, he heard the little girl say, "It was her birthday party." He went on with the story and stopped periodically to let her fill in the spaces between his words. He learned that something very unhappy had happened to the little girl at the party. Once she had talked about it with someone, she left her self-imposed isolation and began to speak again.

If we suspect some specific cause for a child's isolation, it is important to learn as much about it as we can before talking through it with the child. That may require talking with other people, visiting the place where the event occurred, and tracing all that led up to the experience until we have a good idea about what happened. When the withdrawn child notices that we are learning more about the traumatic event, he or she may become agitated and want us to leave it alone. But we cannot leave it; we must find out what happened and tell the child we know, or the child may create of withdrawal a permanent, maladaptive way to live.

Failure and Illness

Some of us have children who, after trying, even trying hard, will experience repeated failure. Under certain conditions, some of these children will give up entirely and try no more. They may be so frightened of failing that they will do only what is guaranteed to succeed and avoid trying at all. One solution to this problem is to examine and explore the "audience," the people who, the child believes, witnessed the failure. The other solution is to learn how the child interprets the meaning of the failures.

Sometimes children try things just to please someone. The failures that result in no further efforts may be accompanied by the notion that so much disapproval, shame, and embarrassment create risks too great for trying (and failing) again. Helping children have the courage to try again may depend on clarifying their thoughts about what others think, changing the "audience" to a more supportive one for the next trial, or helping them feel more autonomy by setting personal goals and teaching them to be less concerned about what others might think.

While I was watching one of my sons during a Little League baseball game, I noticed that some parents made rather intense comments about players and coaches. My son came to bat in the last inning, the bases loaded, and one run behind. "You can do it," some parents yelled. "A hit's a run," someone else yelled. His coach called him over to give some private but pressure-packed advice. Some people were still yelling, "You can't do it." The opposing players taunted him. As I sat there, I wondered how anyone would be able to achieve anything in that kind of situation. Attempting to relieve some of the pressure for him, I waited until he stepped into the batter's box and yelled, "It's all right with me if you don't get a hit!" People in the stands quieted and looked around to see who had shouted such heretical words. My son recognized my voice, smiled just a little in my direction, and turned back to face the pitcher. As I recall, he got a hit.

Some children do not have a good understanding of mistakes and failures. They believe that success and failure clearly represent their complete value as human beings. As parents we need to help such children accurately interpret the meaning of their failures. Is the failure something important that should signal to the child a need for change? Or is it just a minor mistake of little consequence? Does the child feel responsible and crushed by the failure ("crummy, stupid, and will never be any good")? If we have loved our children well, they will be able to sense their worth even with the mistakes. If we have not, then we will have some recovering to do. We may need to "start over and do it right." We may have to apply the pressure of encouragement to try again. We may have to help them try in another area where success is more likely. We may need to tell stories of great people who failed but kept trying and succeeded at last. (Abraham Lincoln and Thomas Edison are notable examples.) And we may have to develop sayings that help carry our children along. My favorite is "Success is usually on the far side of failure."

The best solution, however, is to insulate children with real achievement and help them form "achievement motivation." That is accomplished when parents set reasonable expectations for their children's performance, involve children in choosing and deciding what they will accomplish, and give abundant positive reinforcement of children's successful effort. (McClelland, 1953.)

Another form of self-destructiveness common among children is using ill-health, actual or feigned, as a mechanism of avoidance. Many children use phony sickness as a means of avoiding responsibility. Most parents have experienced at least one or two attempts by children to miss school this way. Each time a child does this, however, self- respect suffers. Even children who have real, prolonged illnesses lose respect for themselves because they miss social reinforcement and opportunities for achievement. So complaints about illness create a dilemma for us: we want to provide good care if the illness is real; on the other hand, we don't want children to use the complaint as a means of avoidance.

Some psychosomatic complaints, with real pain and physical symptoms, but without a specific, identifiable physiological cause, are probably related to school and may represent such problems as missed assignments, social rejection, or stress. When children complain of headaches, sick stomachs, "flu," or other symptoms before school or some other event, the chances are good that they are anxious and wish to avoid the situation. Most of the time the feelings they complain about are actually felt. Thus it usually is unwise to argue with children, threaten to expose them, attempt to shame them, or just ignore the problem. The first time this happens it is usually all right to care for the children as long as the symptoms remain, as shown by their staying in bed, sleeping, or lethargy. If the illness or complaints are repeated, however, and we are certain that avoidance is involved, then the next step is to attempt talking children into facing what is being avoided. That may require us to find out about the situation and how children think about it. Then we may be able to intervene on their behalf to change the source of the fear.

If talking doesn't help, some other things might. We can use techniques similar to those we would use to discourage overdependence. We can, for instance, start caring for the children's "illness" in a way that causes discomfort. Spilling juice on the children is effective. Simply insisting that children stay in bed and lie still for long periods "to get well" also helps. If children are made uncomfortable enough, they are usually ready to face the feared event the next day.

In instances where the complaint about illness persists, it is wise to get children a physical examination and consider seeing a professional therapist to help out. What starts out to be a technique to avoid some single event, such as an exam at school, can become a way of life. Our brains are so quick to respond that it is entirely possible for a child to act sick, complain about symptoms that originally have no physical basis, and eventually actually develop those problems. In these cases the illness will not go away, and the child will develop a pattern of using illness to manipulate and avoid. That is self-destructiveness. It may call for a radical change of environment, such as going to live with relatives, attending another school, and acquiring new friends. In some cases, a solution may come only from counseling.

A young teenager I treated had been in an automobile accident and sustained a few minor injuries that doctors expected would heal quickly. But after three years, she would still not go to school, play, or do much that was active. She could not, she said, because of her injuries. Her physicians referred her to me because she showed no physiological problems. Her parents had told me about the automobile accident in which she had received her injuries, but at first she could not remember much about the accident. As I reminded her with what I had learned from her mother, she began to talk more about it.

I learned that after the initial impact she was unconscious. She regained consciousness in time to see the other car catch fire and the occupant burn to death. She could not get out of the car to save him. As she talked, I could tell she felt responsible, and I could understand why she felt obligated to retain her "injuries" as a form of self- punishment. We talked until she disclosed her feelings about the accident. We discussed the extent of her responsibility for the death she witnessed. She could not shake the feelings of guilt, so I asked a geneticist who works with rare and unusual plants to give her some plants to care for. That required her to inform herself about the plants and set up a detailed routine of watering, cultivating, and providing light. As she succeeded in keeping the plants alive, the pain she felt from her injuries decreased.

Anorexia and Bulimia

It puzzles and frightens us that some teenaged children, who are for the most part beneficiaries of our hard work to make life good for them and who themselves have so much to give the world, seem to deny all this and give it all up in dramatic gestures of self-destruction. We have already discussed the widespread self-destruction in alcohol and drug abuse. Three other common ways modern adolescents demonstrate their hopelessness and emptiness are anorexia-bulimia, cultism, and suicide.

It is stark symbolism when children starve themselves. We can see in their behavior a wish for some part of them to end or a terrible drive to deprive themselves in some way. Anorexia means loss of appetite. It refers to a behavioral disorder in which food is avoided because of anxiety, and it is related to depression. It is treated much like an addiction to drugs, but that approach does not fully address the problem. It does not explain why children begin in the first place to starve themselves, and why, even in the face of evidence to the contrary, they think of their problem as a small thing, easy to stop if they wish.

Anxiety and depression related to food also takes another form, called bulimia. This disorder involves starving and then bingeing and purging. When children have starved themselves into extreme hunger, they will eat large quantities of food and then make themselves vomit until the stomach feels completely empty. I have known girls with this disorder who have vomited ten to fifteen times a day.

Children who develop these eating disorders (they are usually girls) are susceptible to anxiety, often from birth, and they may have family backgrounds that include harshness expressed several ways. They may have received criticism about eating habits and the possibility of weight gain. They may have been physically abused by parents. Perhaps they have been neglected or denied emotional support. In some cases the cause is simply raw anxiety about being overweight. Quite literally, eating makes such children ill.

One overly thin fourteen-year-old, with sallow skin and hollow eyes, told me how she hated her dad and mother. She was very likely hyperactive and undoubtedly difficult to rear, but she thought only of her parents' harsh treatment. After listening for a while, I said to her, "You are succeeding." "At what?" she asked, surprised. "You are certainly punishing them," I replied. Caught off guard, she could not prevent the corner of her mouth from turning upward in the small grim smile of the exposed.

Like others I have treated, she worries about being thin enough, she is anxious, and she has some deeper underlying emotional problems. Among those who have the problem of anorexia, about 34 percent will overcome the problem without help. Another 40 percent will benefit from counseling, and the rest, more than 25 percent, will die. (Berger, 1986.)

To help such children, parents must recognize the problem as soon as possible. Many children are embarrassed and will lie about it, so recognizing early warning signs and diligently investigating them is essential. These include exaggerated efforts to lose weight or stay thin, irregular eating habits, defensive responses when asked about food and eating, disappearing after eating (in order to vomit), mood shifts between anxiety and depression, and food that was planned for meals disappearing.

The next step is, once again, to learn as much as possible about the problem: How long has it been going on? Are friends involved? To what extent do children starve or binge? If children often refrain from eating or if they binge and vomit daily, the problem is serious enough to warrant immediate professional help. We will be better able to help if we try to understand the problem and learn how to respond constructively to it rather than assuming guilt for causing it. Special emphasis on love, warmth, and patience will help children know of our care and concern. It usually takes a long time and a great deal of love and support to help children overcome serious eating disorders and gradually regain the self-respect they have lost because of the disorder. In most cases, successful treatment will consist of enforced eating schedules, which may require hospitalization, and participation in a support group that exerts pressure and concern, in addition to steady parental love.

Cultism and Suicide

Another very disturbing form of self-destructive behavior among young people is their tendency to affiliate with bizarre and obviously harmful social groups. Many children are not anchored to religious values, family love, and strong friendships. These children are often susceptible to offers of membership extended by what appear to be small, tightly knit groups of people who feel disenfranchised by mainstream society. Sometimes these social groups are based on fashion and fads of the day—"punkers," for instance, whose group cohesiveness involves a certain kind of music and the life-style it promotes. The basis for membership in such groups is an "anti" feeling, an emotional opposition to whatever is established.

These groups vary in what they profess to be against— traditional dress, music, religious values. At a deeper level, however, which usually is denied by the participants, the groups are very much alike in that the leaders usually exert considerable control, bordering on possessiveness, and demand strict submission from their members. In some groups, children who are members are free to leave if they wish to, but may have difficulty doing so. In other cases, pressure is put on children to retain their membership and demonstrate their loyalty by espousing unusual beliefs or performing some acts of loyalty. These groups are called cults.

Membership in these kinds of social groups, or cults, harms children in two important ways. The first harm is the pervasive negativism, the "anti" feelings created and expressed by members, who are often unwilling to hope and work toward something better. Being against something one judges to be bad is not the same thing as being for something good. The result of this negativism is confusion, depression, and despair. The accompanying loss of self-respect is exploited by the group leaders. The second harm is the perverted form of morality the groups engender and maintain. Satanism, an all-too-prominent form of cultism, not only is negative but also actively promotes a morality of spiritual bondage instead of freedom, secrecy instead of openness, destruction and doom instead of uplift and support.

Children who become involved in cults most often have little autonomy and self-control to begin with. After becoming involved in these groups, they demonstrate even less. If they are to be helped, their involvement must be discovered. Indications are depressed moods, deception, extreme emotional intensity, withdrawal from other balanced activities, and intense reactions to pressure to participate in them. Once the involvement is discovered, children may have to be forcibly removed from contact with the group if they will not discuss their situation and cannot demonstrate the benefits of membership. A full solution requires that children learn a set of positive cohesive values that will replace the negative. These beliefs and values must be maintained by an organization that generates feelings of belonging—church or family, for example—and children must be surrounded by love and warmth as they rejoin their family and the larger society.

Participation in negative, twisted cults and other less extreme but still deviant social groups is self-destructive. Like other forms of self-destructive behavior, participation in such a group can increase a child's confusion about values. This confusion, combined with family discord, instability, and loneliness, can lead to the depression or impulsiveness that are the antecedents of the ultimate form of self-destruction. The increasing number of young people who are taking their own lives is shocking and saddening, and it should motivate us to learn how to help our children stay far away from whatever might lead to such tragedy.

Suicide victims are often depressed, but, surprisingly, some die when they are feeling better, not worse. They express their hopelessness in words and actions long before trying to take their lives. They may make unsuccessful attempts before they actually do it. They may withdraw from conversations with others and express a strong negativism similar to that displayed by cult members. We can be alert to these signs, and take them seriously.

Having told his thirteen-year-old son that he could not go to a high-school basketball game, a father settled down to read the newspaper. After a minute or two, he felt a strange silence. He ran to his son's room and found him hanging by the neck from the closet rod. The boy was unconscious but was saved by his father's quick action. I went to the hospital to see the boy. During our conversation, I asked what he had done the day he tried to hang himself.

He told me that he had spent the day listening to heavy metal music. I am not proposing that hard rock music is the cause of suicide; however, hard rock music is a factor in nearly every suicide of young people. As I talked with this boy I felt his loss of hope, nihilism, alienation. This loss may be demonstrated in depression, in angry rebellion, or in silent certitude, but however it is manifested, it will usually be acutely felt.

If we are to prevent suicide, we can renew our appreciation for the vitality we all gain when we belong, holding membership with groups of moral people and feeling that we contribute. If the family is in trouble or dissolves, if children fail in school, if they are not encompassed by a circle of friends, if they are not anchored by standards or values, then they are at risk, for they can find little to hope for and little to believe in.

Teaching children to reason, judge, and act morally is both the prevention and the cure for this condition. If children have moral standards, they will find that the principles of morality are also the key to membership in many beneficial and enjoyable social groups. They will have something to hope for and believe in outside themselves, and they will believe in themselves. At the very moment when children can choose to live or to die, it is their moral training that increases the probability they will choose life rather than death.
