A. Lynn Scoresby, Bringing Up Moral Children ( 1989)

CHAPTER 13

DIFFICULT CHILDREN

Healthy children are born with fairly well developed sensory capabilities and more than one hundred reflexes to help them survive. Every child undergoes an identifiable pattern of mental and physical growth, but different children mature at different rates. Right from the beginning, some babies thrive, are healthy and intelligent, and are easy to care for. They seem to be calm and relaxed. Other babies do not grow up so easily. Some are handicapped by physical problems, and others have social and moral problems. We do not know exactly why that happens, but we do know that children differ in so many ways that just knowing about the course of child development does not explain why some children develop more readily into mature, moral individuals and some do not. So, in their attempts to better understand this phenomenon, scientists have begun to seek for explanations from sources other than children themselves. The family is an obvious source of information. By studying how individual children react to and interact with other family members, we have gathered a great deal of information that helps us better understand how moral thought and behavior develop. This information, added to what we know about child development, has enabled us to find better ways to help children grow into moral adults.

It has become very clear that children differ from birth in the way they approach life. These biological, inherited differences have many implications, but one very important implication for parents to think about is this: if all parents treated all children alike, with unfailing wisdom and great skill, some of the children would still turn out "better" than some of the others. That would happen because some children are born with characteristics that help them benefit from parental influence and some children have limitations that prevent them from learning.

Children who thrive seem to have a kind of inborn mental filter. They use this filter to limit the pressure and distractions around them, giving them a natural sense of autonomy. They are able to direct their thoughts in a way that enables them to concentrate on what they learn. They are able to work to apply what they learn and are relatively calm in their approach to life. Murphy (1987) describes such children as resilient. Generally speaking, these children—

Have trust and hope sufficient to withstand rebuffs and disappointments.

Use verbal and nonverbal communication, imitation, and identification. (They can be seen trying to be like someone.)

Have the capacity to communicate, cooperate, and love in their relationship with their mothers.

Display a range of emotion, including joy, curiosity, playfulness, and creativity.

Are able to keep on trying after failure.

Can forgive and forget.

Can delay gratification.

Can adapt to differing conditions in several environments.

Other children appear to have a weak filter and cannot mentally screen out enough of the world around them to concentrate on any one thing for any length of time. These children are likely to be impulsive, highly distractible, and very reactive to what they see, hear, and feel. They are less able than other children to work and learn effectively; they often fail in their attempts to achieve. Consequently, they receive less praise for success than other children do. Since caring for them and teaching them requires a great deal of energy, they are less satisfying for parents and teachers to work with than are children with well-developed filters.

But even this information does not fully answer one particularly perplexing question: why do some children in strong families with competent parents grow up troubled and immoral? And why do some children with neglectful, unstable parents become highly competent, moral adults? These conditions contradict tidy theories of how family life generally influences children. We would like to be able to say that if parents are kind and warm and use effective and appropriate discipline, children will always turn out the way parents want them to. But though this very often happens, other influences make rearing successful, moral children more complex than that. It appears that promoting the positive development of children requires some knowledge of children as individuals, knowledge about the effects families have on children, and an understanding of how the environment influences the family.

Our children's environment is made up of friends, conditions in the immediate neighborhood and community, school, fashions and fads, and also of what is brought into their lives by movies, television, magazines, and books. Many of us learn firsthand about the role the environment plays when we are forced to struggle against people who entice our children into destructive activities and ideas that compete with our own values.

Because we are concerned with helping our children develop moral character, it is important for us to combine our knowledge of children and families with some ability to manage their environment. That will help us adapt to the unique traits of a particular child we are trying to teach and will greatly improve our influence. Some children will develop morally with what appears to be little help from us. Others will require more help but will succeed because of our efforts and love. Still others will be at greater risk because they have inborn characteristics that make it truly difficult for them to learn morality. They are vulnerable to all sorts of external influences and seem immune to our efforts to teach them what we want them to know to keep them from hurting themselves and others.

We call these children "difficult." We love them, and we ache for them, but they try our patience, often making us feel helpless and triggering anger that makes us feel ashamed and guilty. They may lead us to places we would rather not go, make us see what we would rather not see, and force us to face life and ourselves in ways we would rather not. They are our children, however, and even though they seem to require something more than our best, we feel responsible to do whatever we can do to teach them. And so we will.

What Children Inherit

Ideally we will identify difficult children early in their life. That way, we can apply our understanding of family and environmental influence to make sure that we do not make things worse for the child than they need to be. But whenever the identification is made, we can organize strategies for helping them, based on our knowledge of each child's particular personality.

The role of biological inheritance in the makeup of the human personality is shown in the work of Thomas Bouchard (1983). He conducted research with identical twins separated at birth and reared apart who did not know of each other's existence until they were adults. Bouchard's findings were astonishing. Those individuals, who have the same genetic makeup but who were raised in totally different environments, are amazingly alike in personality and preferences. Constance Golden (1985) described identical twin brothers who discovered each other at age thirty- nine. Both had law enforcement training and worked part- time as deputy sheriffs. Both vacationed in Florida; both drove Chevrolets. Both had dogs named Toy. One had a son named James Allan; the other a son named James Alan.

These findings suggest that parents are not the sole cause of what a child becomes; a great deal is determined by biological makeup. That does not mean that a particular child is genetically destined to be bad or good and that parents can do nothing about it. Neither does it mean that we can blame our children's problems on their genes and default on our parental responsibility to them. It does mean, though, that emotional, mental, and social characteristics may be inherited that make it easier or more difficult to learn moral behavior. And just as we should not feel totally responsible for all the good our children do, we should certainly not feel totally responsible and guilty for our children's mistakes. That kind of objectivity will help us be more effective parents.

I have often worked with parents who have difficult children to rear, but sometimes the parents are more difficult to deal with than their children are. These parents assume guilt for their children's problems. They feel exposed to public disapproval because of their children's actions, and they appear helpless to do anything constructive about it all. Sometimes the parents are so angry at their children's inability to learn quickly and easily that they shut these children out by withdrawing affection and attention. As a result children are hurt and confused. In one case, a mother grew so frustrated at her daughter, who was a difficult child, that she told the girl she would no longer be her mother and tried to shut this child out of her life. She learned, however, that her desire to be free from the hard work and frustration did not remove the child from her thoughts and her feelings. Even if the daughter had been sent to live elsewhere, this mother would not be able to escape memories, guilt, and a sense of failure.

It is better emotionally, and more effective practically, if we assume that children are biologically responsible for what they bring with them into the world as babies but that they cannot succeed without our help in becoming mentally and morally responsible adults. With that in mind, we can divide our responsibility from theirs. That separation will allow us to give them their share of responsibility and prevent us from assuming too little or too much responsibility ourselves.

Labels for Difficult Children

When parents have problems with children, it may be that little thought is given to whether children can or cannot learn morality. Therefore, children who have difficulty learning to be moral are given other kinds of labels, depending on who is working with them. At school or at home, these children may be said to have learning disabilities, such as an attention deficit disorder (ADD), formerly known as hyperactivity. This diagnosis may first be made when children have difficulty learning in school because they are distractible and unable to finish tasks. Further, boys may have problems with reading or math and boys or girls may have inappropriate moods and social behavior. These children may also demonstrate volatile emotions, which often take the form of anger toward others or tantrums. Such children often seem emotionally electric and impulsive, which adds pressure and tension at meals, during playtime, and at school.

Some children may be labeled as oppositional. Oppositional children may not have learning problems but are intense and insecure. When asked to do something, they oppose the request and resist with great intensity. Oppositional children are not very adaptive, and when asked to change (for example, to stop watching television in order to eat), they refuse to comply. Some observers have referred to oppositional children as engaging in power struggles. To prevent themselves from being controlled or swallowed up by others, these insecure children oppose instructions and directions, often doing exactly the opposite of what they are asked to do. This behavior may be accompanied by tantrums, anger, and disagreements in conversation. If a parent says, "It's going to be a beautiful day," an oppositional child will say, "No, it's going to be a bad day."

A less intense but still extremely insecure child may be labeled as withdrawn. These children show their insecurity by shyness, avoiding social contact, and extreme defensiveness. Such children complain excessively, are pessimistic, blame others for mistakes, and may periodically erupt in sudden anger. Withdrawn children feel ineffective and powerless. Their anger is usually unexpressed outwardly, but it can be expressed indirectly through self- destructive actions to punish those who they think caused their discomfort.

As they grow older, withdrawn children become increasingly dogmatic and show prejudice and limited concern for others. They insist that they are right about the ignorance or incorrect opinions of others. Usually these beliefs are narrow and extreme and may be manifested in fanaticism of many kinds. Their dogmatism allows them to shut out competing ideas so that they will not have to adjust their own views. They often are not aware of how their actions affect others but harshly judge and condemn the mistakes they see others make.

Withdrawn people may have negative, unhappy moods and be prone to sulking. These emotional states are accompanied by statements indicating that they believe they deserve things from others, and they may express frustrations and resentment when they don't get what they want. They may remove themselves from contact with people because they fear and suspect the intentions others have for them. Thus it is difficult for them to maintain close friendships, except with those who believe as they do. In extreme cases, such individuals isolate themselves in the name of self-protection or comfort. If their isolation continues, they will feel alienated from others, confident that they are not understood or appreciated. This extreme condition exists in many people who commit dramatic crimes to draw attention to themselves.

There are still more labels for difficult children. Autism is the name given to a broad category of communicational disorders characterized by difficulty in receiving and interpreting visual, auditory, and tactile sensation. The condition varies in severity, and extreme cases usually require institutionalization. But less severely affected children who are not able to deal competently with what they see, hear, and touch are not able fully to participate in emotional communication with others. They may learn language, may even be more intelligent than average, but they have gaps in what they hear and speak. Their inability to communicate with others makes them difficult to live with and to teach. They yell when frustrated and may eventually swear excessively or simply be indifferent to what they are asked to do. It is hard for them to learn how they affect others, and they usually demonstrate a lack of sensitivity and empathy. In some cases, they may be excited by someone else's pain or difficulty, smiling or laughing at displays of violence they see on television or elsewhere. This lack of regard for others may be manifested in excessive aggressiveness that leads to fighting and arguing. Children with communicational problems may not show a normal wariness and apprehension about risky or dangerous situations. They charge off into action with little or no thought of physical harm that might result.

Occasionally, this communication problem is related to thought disorders involving fear of others or strange, illusionary notions. Such a condition may be diagnosed as childhood schizophrenia. Most often this condition can only be modified somewhat by medicine and psychotherapy.

Sometimes it is difficult to assign a precise label to a child who has difficulty warming to others or being responsive to comfort and care. Some children have congenital physical or sensory handicaps; some have been injured by a traumatic birth; some have been abused and neglected by parents who themselves are troubled or handicapped in some way. But regardless of how we label them, we have judged them to be difficult because they are vulnerable to many distractions, prone to impulsive acts, and tend to be locked into emotional immaturity. They may also be defensive, shifting blame to others; they may be unwilling to openly disclose their feelings and ideas. Their guardedness may appear as prejudice and negative moods. They have difficulty complying with rules and completing tasks. They may be disruptive to others and have a difficult time making and keeping friends.

Although some parts of these descriptions can apply to all children at some time or another, difficult children consistently demonstrate many of these characteristics at once. Even if parents do not know the exact nature of the problem, or the label for it, any parent who has a difficult child knows there is something wrong, because they and the family are so affected and disturbed that they are unable to ignore what this child does.

Difficult Children and Moral Behavior

Children who have emotional or cognitive limitations have more difficulty than usual in learning moral behavior. There are many reasons. For one, we can see that they might have a difficult time learning about and understanding the parts of a moral circumstance. These difficult children do not easily complete tasks or develop task-oriented skills. They are highly anxious individuals who are likely to misperceive or misjudge other people because they do not correctly interpret or understand such cues as facial expressions, emotional reactions, or voice tones. Parents may take for granted that these important cues are available and clear to everyone. For these children they are available but not clear.

In some cases, children at risk know they are not understanding correctly and become afraid. They may, for example, make certain that a teacher does not like them; they may intentionally alienate friends. They may show intense reluctance to participate in activities where social skills are going to be required. Some avoidance of school, for example, can be related to children's inability to understand the interpersonal events of classroom and playground.

Difficult children tend to be controlled by whatever circumstance they are in because they do not conceptualize and recognize the situations that require rule-governed behavior. When knowledge of a moral standard is needed, they may be focused mentally on some other aspect of the situation and fail to evaluate correctly what is right and what is wrong. A ten-year-old child told me of throwing mud balls at the school building during recess. After he told of the details, I asked him what was right or wrong about throwing mudballs at the school building. His answer revealed his thought process. He said, "Anyone who hurts me [meaning his teacher] is going to get hurt." I asked again, "What is right or wrong about throwing mudballs at the school building?" He replied, "My friends and I were just having fun."

Every time I asked, he told of friends, being mad at a teacher he thought had hurt him, or trying to see who could throw the farthest. He never explained what was right or wrong because these ideas were not useful or relevant to him. He described virtually any situation the same way. He knew about people in some limited way, and he could describe what he had done, but he could not identify any standard of right or wrong.

Difficult children also are limited in their ability to carry out the moral tasks. They usually have difficulty in reasoning about ideas and integrating the information that comes from several sources (moral standard, other people, the tasks of a situation). They are often impulsive rather than deliberate in making decisions. Their emotions are so intense and variable that they often cannot manage or adapt them. And it is difficult for them to sustain a course of action to completion.

Although this long description may seem negative, even hopeless, there is much we can do. We can gather information and learn new skills. We can adapt our parenting styles to fit the special needs of these children. We will have to be patient instead of frustrated, understanding instead of judging. We can magnify and extend our ability to love them, for they will require all we can develop.

Parental Strategies for Difficult Children

The usual family group has parents (perhaps two parents, a single parent, or an older relative) who give some form of discipline, basic physical care, affection, and warmth, and who have other strong emotions. Difficult children stretch and pressure these normal family conditions. That is especially true if any child's behavior makes us organize or adapt our family life to deal with special needs.

As parents we can make some very specific adaptations that will help us teach such children. First, we can reduce their anxiety rather than just try to control their actions. Ordinarily, parents try to get children to do something or to stop doing something without worrying too much about their feelings. But when we set up a plan of discipline or attempt to teach children, especially difficult children, it is helpful to begin by communicating to them that we understand the need to help them be calm. That means we can talk in calm tones, use affection (if they will allow it), and ask them to calm themselves, before we correct them or teach them something.

Next, we need to focus on one situation at a time. When children make many mistakes in many places, we tend to want them to correct everything at once. But we will be more effective in helping them if we temper our urgency and work on learning and succeeding in one situation at a time. We can, for example, work on friendship skills until a child is reasonably effective in friendships. Children can learn, for instance, what to do when a visitor comes to the home, how to answer the telephone, how to eat properly, what to do when leaving home to play, and how to come home on time. One mother, for example, purchased a digital watch for her son and had a training session with him every day until he could leave and come back in fifteen minutes, a half hour, and so on. We can teach children to follow through on one chore instead of several. We can help them handle one hour of school instead of an entire day, adding time until they have learned to do it all.

It will help if we can concentrate on small successes. Realistic expectations can prevent much frustration. Learning to say, "I'm fine, thank you," or doing one chore better, is not the same thing as becoming a model child, but any improvement deserves our attention.

And always it is very important that we do not withdraw emotional support from difficult children. Sometimes the frustration and embarrassment associated with their behavior is so great that we want to hide or at least disassociate ourselves. When that happens we may find that we feel less close to them or less loving. Moreover, difficult children may have difficulty loving us. We, however, are the teachers of love and support, and so we must give love and support in a sustained and consistent way. Children often do not understand why they do what they do, and they will only be hurt and confused, not motivated, if we withdraw our love in an attempt to discipline them.

In addition to these special adaptations, some specific strategies will help children to function better and to learn morality. They are based on recognizing children's emotional style. Some children are very intense; others are mellow. Some are insecure; some are confident. Combinations of the two types of intensity and the two types of security produce four emotional styles. Understanding all four emotional styles and how to respond to each of them can help us further adapt to our children.

When children's emotional style is secure and high intensity, children—

Are socially aggressive.

Show leadership among friends.

Make such social mistakes as talking too much or saying inappropriate things.

Are adventurous.

Challenge authority, often asking why or asking for reasons.

React quickly but calmly.

Can talk openly with parents.

Have fluctuating moods but are usually cheerful.

With children whose emotional style is secure and high intensity, parents can—

Show examples and require children to talk calmly about their reactions.

Require children to develop a strategy for what they want to accomplish.

Show high levels of affection, which quickly increases emotional control.

Require children to make choices about how they will act in a situation and then hold them to their choice.

Ask children to identify their emotions and talk about their feelings when they are talking about themselves.

Use strategies of positive reinforcement to improve children's responses.

Help children be aware of how to act in many different social situations.

Actively teach children ways to control their emotions by talking about ways to develop self-control: thinking about something else, using self-commands, realizing that parents expect self-control as a disciplinary measure, or take time out to cool off away from the situation.

When children's emotional style is secure and low intensity, children—

Have mild fluctuations of mood.

Are generally cheerful and pleasant.

Are sometimes very passive and unresponsive.

Will play tricks or perform secret acts of deceit.

Occasionally say what people want to hear to remove pressure on themselves.

Avoid confrontations but will carry emotions for longer periods—for example, hold a grudge.

With children whose emotional style is secure and low intensity, parents can—

Expose them to social opportunities.

Actively teach children ways to control their emotions by talking about ways to develop self-control: thinking about something else, using self-commands, realizing that parents expect self-control as a disciplinary measure, or take time out to cool off away from the situation.

Use emotion words—happy, sad, angry, calm—and engage children in many conversations about feelings.

Ensure that children feel affection (it is easy to ignore these children if they do well).

Use routine discipline—systems of rules and consequences work well.

When children's emotional style is insecure and high intensity, children—

Are emotionally explosive (have tantrums).

Respond impulsively to external stimuli.

Talk excessively.

Lie to avoid responsibility.

Fail to follow through on tasks.

React oppositionally when they are told what to do.

Argue when told no.

Adopt excitement shown by others.

Express anger more readily when they are tired or hungry.

With children whose emotional style is insecure and high intensity, parents can—

Emphasize the children's need to control their emotions and to have strategies for how they will act in specific situations, to delay action while they think ("stop, look, and listen"), and to watch vigilantly for how people act and for the cues of social situations.

Use structured techniques for positive reinforcement to control behavior.

Remember to calm children before talking to them or correcting them.

Ignore their tantrums.

Rehearse with them how they should act in situations they may face in the grocery store, for example, or in church, at school, and so on.

When children's emotional style is insecure and low intensity, children—

Are socially inhibited (isolate themselves).

Show fear in many situations by shyness or blushing.

May have long periods of depression.

Avoid challenges and fear new situations.

Have difficulty talking to others.

With children whose emotional style is insecure and low intensity, parents can—

Involve them with groups of children and reinforce them when they get along well.

Work to create conversations (and it can be real work to do that).

Use pantomimes or charades to teach emotions.

Help them develop a talent that can be used socially (playing a musical instrument, for example, or reciting poems).

Use praise abundantly.

While we are learning to make adaptations, we can remember some additional things that will help us. One is that morality is learned over a long period of time, and though at any one time children may not seem consistently able to behave morally, the influence of our efforts to teach them may be seen later. Furthermore, they deserve to learn all they can in order to have the best chance for their own success. We can help them do that.

Successfully teaching difficult children is not easy. As parents we live in a world that requires more of us than rearing children. When children have needs beyond the ordinary, our lives are unavoidably affected and the decisions we face are often not easy or enjoyable to make. If we are not well prepared mentally, difficult children can provoke marital problems, raise the family tension level to maximum, and stimulate us to be our worst selves rather than our best. Our effectiveness in teaching children moral behavior will be diminished if we have difficulty exercising family leadership, if we fail to be unified as parents, or if we are poorly organized. We will be further hampered in our efforts if we face life with rigid, inflexible rules or expectations, if we suffer from excessive stress or pressure in our personal lives, or if we have low tolerance for the frustrations and exasperation children present to us.

Teaching morality to children requires us to learn and apply strong leadership and loving commitment. We can begin by being mature enough to adjust our expectations and recognize that children do not have to turn out a specific way and at a definite time for us to be successful parents. We need to appreciate that our children's actions often represent their own struggle with life more than they reflect on our parenting. Besides, it takes many years for children to mature. It is a bad idea to decide that any particular child has turned out badly at any point or age. Human development is unfinished as long as we live. Even if we are alone in trying to help a child when no one else can or will, we can better maintain the hope that fuels our efforts if we have a long-term perspective.

Robert and Ryan: More Parental Strategies

Cheryl and Max Simons adopted twin boys and later found that they both had attention deficit disorders (ADD). As infants they were intense, difficult to comfort, overactive boys. When they went to school, they could not follow rules or finish work, and they did not progress. Max and Cheryl decided to hold them back a year, and the boys repeated the first grade. Their pediatrician prescribed medicine, which helped the boys regulate their own behavior. Their classroom behavior and school work improved, but the boys were disruptive and aggressive in social situations. They broke family rules, swore vehemently when angry, and fought between themselves and with other children. Further, there was little evidence that they were developing any sense of right or wrong or concern for other people.

When they came to me for counseling, Max and Cheryl were often so exhausted and filled with stress that they wanted only to know how to maintain themselves. So our visits together were balanced between propping up the parents and developing plans to teach and control the children. We had to develop a rationale so that Max and Cheryl could feel good about leaving their sons in order to be alone and could avoid filling their entire lives with helping with homework and otherwise supervising them.

The boys seemed never to rest. They could not follow such simple routines as getting up, getting dressed, making their beds, and cleaning their room. They worked only with help and supervision. There were the problems in school to overcome and also in church. The boys were disruptive in Sunday School, jumping around, yelling, and refusing to obey their teacher. Most troubling to their parents, however, was that the boys stole things, lied, broke rules, and seldom showed remorse for what they did.

Together we worked out a plan that has seemed to help both parents and children. This plan was designed to achieve two goals: to help the boys develop self-control and improve their performance at school and home, and to help the boys develop morality.

The parents adjusted what they expected from their children. These boys were not going to develop in some areas at the same rate as other children did, so if the parents compared them with other children, they would feel discouraged and impatient. The school counselor arranged for Max and Cheryl to get in touch with parents of other children in a similar situation so that they would better know what to expect.

The parents avoided yelling, scolding, spanking, and other common displays of frustration. Children with ADD have elevated emotions and are tense and in turmoil. If parents yell and scold, the children will be hurt and confused rather than understand their parents' frustration. Both parents kept charts of the times when they "lost it" until they could go one full month without exploding. Sometimes they had to take turns dealing with the boys, each warning the other, "Your turn!" when the end of the rope had been reached.

The parents structured a few chores and family rules. They told the boys how to perform a few chores, showed them how to do those chores properly, and practiced doing the chores with them. Consequences were related to each task or rule so that if the boys failed, they lost a privilege such as playtime, going to a game with Dad, and so on. It was hard at first for Max and Cheryl to be as firm and definite as necessary. When they wanted to let the boys make it up or try again, I explained, "If you make a rule, enforce it, or get rid of it."

The parents used incentives. To begin with, each task was associated to a reward or incentive the boys could earn, such as a family activity, points that could be used toward buying a new toy, etc. After they had performed a task several times, the boys were rewarded if they did it without being asked. Then the rewards were no longer used every time.

The parents met and communicated frequently with other adults who worked with the boys. Max and Cheryl visited with schoolteachers, church leaders, Scout leaders, and neighbors. They found these people understanding and willing to help by sending notes, making phone calls, and keeping one another informed.

The parents saw to it that misbehavior was followed by conversations and practice of the correct behavior. When either boy misbehaved, he was first calmed down and then required to talk with his parents about what he had done. He was asked to discuss his feelings, and the parents talked about their own. The goal was to help the boys assume responsibility for their acts, identify what was wrong or right, and let them know they were cared for. Then the boys were required to practice the correct behavior until they got it right. For example, if one did not come home on time from playing, he had to put on a digital watch and practice going outside and returning in five minutes, then ten, and then fifteen minutes.

The parents anticipated new situations and practiced in preparation for them. Rather than wait for the boys to enter new situations and fail in handling them because they were excited and out of control, Max and Cheryl helped the boys practice what to do. In a weekly "family night," the parents used pantomimes and charades to teach correct or successful behavior for new situations the boys would face the following week. These practice sessions helped the boys realize greater success.

The parents taught their children to use self-commands. When either boy could not control himself in some situation, the parents had him practice what they wanted him to do. While he was practicing, he would whisper self- instructions. "Close the door," "Put my shoes in the closet," "Walk quietly into the school building," and "Do not talk until the teacher calls on me." The self-commands were especially useful to control impulsiveness. Each boy was taught to "stop, look, and listen" and to "go slow" to help him think before acting.

The parents provided opportunities for their children to help other people. To teach empathy and awareness, Max and Cheryl asked the boys to help each other and other children. On family night they reported what they had done to help. Sometimes the parents and the boys worked together to help someone. When one boy came home and told about a boy whose father had lost his job, the family planned a helping program that included giving food and money.

The parents conscientiously taught that there is a right and a wrong. Cheryl and Max asked each boy, usually at meals, what was right and wrong about many different acts, in many different situations. The boys developed clearer ideas about right and wrong. When they were asked, they could say what was right and and what was wrong about many actions. They accepted that doing right would be rewarded and doing wrong would result in teaching conversations and practice. These discussions, together with actions linked to consequences, helped them recognize the first level of morality: there is a right and a wrong. From that level they could progress to more complex reasoning, judgment, and conduct.

Melissa: Still More Parental Strategies

Bob and Heather Sunquist wanted a well-organized family that ran like clockwork. Bob expected Heather to have dinner at regular times, the children to do homework at specific times, and each child to do family chores at a prearranged time during the week. Bob's engineering background appeared to influence his concept of family leadership and organization. When their daughter Melissa had difficulties at birth, they were relieved when she seemed normal. But as she grew, she displayed signs that all was not well. The Sunquists were worried about her extreme emotional reactions, including yelling and screaming, tantrums, and oppositional reactions. When she grew older, she began to insult people and to swear.

Thinking their daughter was simply disobedient, they first attempted to find some way to control her. They tried to set rules and pressure her into following them. They told her what she should do and when to do it, reminded her often when she did not, became angry and sometimes used physical force to make her comply. They grounded her, scolded her, yelled at her, spanked her, and isolated her. Nothing seemed to work.

Melissa fought back. She resisted them in many ways. She did her chores, for example, only when forced or supervised; she sulked and pouted around the house and misbehaved at school and in the evening with friends. She tried different insults on her parents to see if she could get them to argue. When she did, even if she lost the argument and was punished, her parents reported that she smiled with satisfaction. As Melissa grew, the confrontations between her and her parents became more intense, so that by the time she was fourteen they had yelled, sworn at, and hit each other several times.

The parents were frustrated that she would not obey them and fit into their family plan. They began having difficulty with their other children because of Melissa's example in often not doing what the other children were required to do. Melissa was hurt and angry that she was treated "so badly." She was also extremely defensive, blaming others for her behavior and unable to express her own thoughts and feelings. She was certain that most people would hurt her if she grew emotionally close to them. As a result, she did not have close friends, and even though she spent time with girlfriends and boyfriends, she displayed suspicion toward them as she did everyone.

She often lied. Once when her parents had restricted her from school activities, she wanted to go to a school ballgame, so she arranged to visit a cousin who lived nearby and spend the night. Her boyfriend picked her up at the cousin's house and took her to the game. They stayed out most of the night. Melissa enlisted her cousin's help, and they both said they had stayed home and watched videos the whole evening. Lying was associated with several other forms of misbehavior, including shoplifting, skipping school, and drinking. By age thirteen, she had developed an eating disorder. When her parents learned she was bulimic, they placed her in a hospital for a thirty-day program of regulation and therapy. While there, she performed well, adjusted her eating habits, and became calmer. When she returned home, her tension increased and her bulimic symptoms returned, as did the conflict with her parents.

Bob and Heather wanted to help Melissa and sought counseling for her. I explained that working with her alone would probably be necessary but not sufficient. They too would need to participate to reduce family conflict and teach Melissa a sense of morality.

Resolving defensiveness. Melissa was so angry, hurt, and afraid that it took several conversations before she would speak openly with me. I often sat in silence while she decided whether to speak to me at all. Gradually she began to voice her feelings, which at first were some anger at me and very intense anger toward her parents. These feelings were followed by frustration and despair with her situation, and then hurt and sadness. As I worked with her parents, they began to listen more than they explained, criticized, or regulated her. It was very hard for them to ask questions and listen attentively while she said things they thought to be untrue and that often hurt them. Over time all three formed an uneasy truce.

Reduce tension. It took a while before these parents were willing to understand that open conflict might be more harmful than a child's disobedience, especially if the disobedience was minor. Then it took them a while to learn to avoid conflict situations, whether they themselves provoked them or Melissa attempted to. About the same time, they agreed to do some enjoyable things with the whole family. To their surprise, Melissa readily agreed to participate.

Adapting some family rules. I explained that the condition they wanted in their family would be better achieved if they used a method other than setting an explicit, rigid rule and pressuring their children to comply. In Melissa's case, this was an invitation to oppose and resist. We examined the rules, dropping some and making others flexible, such as mealtimes. (Flexible meant that times and expected conduct were not always rigid and fixed.) I suggested that we could help Melissa be less oppositional if we helped her go through a process of making decisions at every possible opportunity. When the parents asked Melissa to do some task, if she opposed, they were to tell her she was perfectly free to do her work and feel worthwhile about it, or she was perfectly free not to do her work and receive the consequences. That was the first step in helping her make decisions. When Melissa wanted to know what the consequences would be if she did not do as she was asked, her parents said, "If you cannot be trusted to do some small task, when the time comes that you want something from us, we will not be able to give it to you because we haven't been able to see you be responsible for yourself." Then they were to ask her again to decide.

Making children earn what they want by participating in relationship events. Melissa was informed that allowance or other privileges depended on whether or not she was able to join in family activities, participate in conversations, and manage herself respectfully and cooperatively with other family members. This reinforcement system soon helped her become more constructive in her relationships with others and helped her feel more like she belonged.

Increasing the number of parental refusals in connection with children's extreme oppositional reactions. When Melissa became overly incensed at being refused something she wanted, her parents told her that her next request would automatically be refused also. If she could adjust to being told no, then they would try to give her permission as often as they felt they could do so.

Eliminating harsh words and physical punishment. To improve family relationships, everyone agreed to eliminate swearing, insults, and physical punishment such as hitting, hair-pulling, shoving, and kicking. We developed a penalty that each person would have to pay if any of this took place. For example, if the father did any of these actions, he agreed to take his wife, Melissa, and other family members out to dinner, or else to pay everyone some money.

Engaging in conversations about what helps and what hurts people. I asked the parents and Melissa to discuss how people are helped and hurt. These conversations gave them a chance to practice listening to each other and helped them focus on something other than arguing or blaming each other for past mistakes and hurts they had experienced. These conversations helped them become more aware of what helps and what hurts people.

Helping others. Melissa's parents began a program of helping others. Each family member drew the name of another. For one week each agreed to do helpful things for that person. The family also performed service for a neighbor and with their church. Curbing violent emotions, reducing tension, and starting positive and loving experiences helped these parents alter the course of life for their daughter. The great amount of effort required from them is not fully expressed in these paragraphs, nor is the frustration and emotional pain, but I believe they felt rewarded for their efforts when they watched their daughter begin to do more constructive things and gain some measure of control over her own life.

The two preceding examples illustrate techniques that work with some children. Because parents, children, and family circumstances vary considerably, these particular suggestions may not work in every case; however, they are based on the following principles, which can be adapted to suit many different families and many different difficult children.

Taking the offense. Difficult children are usually unstable and will cause people to react to them. Teaching moral behavior is usually most effective when parents have a plan and expect our children to participate in it as much as they want us to respond to them. We only need to balance our plan with healthy doses of what is reasonable to expect from them.

Taking our sails out of their wind. Children's verbal behavior is often mean and insulting. It provokes us because they are hurt, angry, and want to hurt someone. If we get entangled in it by arguing and blaming them, we will discover that the verbal arguments expand rather than solve problems. It is better to smile, ignore, walk away, or do virtually anything other than be drawn into a verbal tangle by an angry child.

Remembering that love is an end in itself. Many of us link the expression of our love to correct performance by our children. It is best to separate love and our expressions of it from anything else. We need to commit ourselves to express love often and regularly without regard to what children do. We love children who lie, who don't do their chores, and who insult us. This love may force us to be tough or gentle, firm or flexible, but never rejecting, withdrawn, or bitter.

Arranging for strategic separations. Family life can be strenuous under the best of conditions, but with difficult children the strain is magnified. If we recognize that, we can take time away from each other occasionally to give us a chance to rest and to give children a break from us. Many parents feel like prisoners in their own homes and fear leaving because of what their children might do. When parents can find adequate sitters, leaving will help them to get a different perspective. If there are two parents, they can also benefit from time alone together to renew their marriage partnership, but it is often even more important that single parents occasionally retreat to renew themselves. We just need to remember that bad things happen whether we are at home or away.

The World Outside the Home and Family

When difficult children are present in a home, it is generally wise to assume two things. First, the children will be susceptible to whatever influences they find outside the home, whether good or bad, because they are less able than most children to control themselves. Second, parents will usually have to interact with people outside the family to keep their children from getting involved in what might hurt them and to ensure that they will learn positive and useful things. The following practices have been developed by parents who have found them useful when dealing with children difficult to teach.

Organize groups of parents in the neighborhood, and establish some common ground rules for social activities. These groups can make rules governing how late children should be out, the number of activities they can join in each week, what activities are acceptable, and rotating parties or other constructive activities for them. Having such groups of parents will prevent children from using the leverage that "other kids have different and better," or more lenient, "rules." Knowing that other parents are following similar rules will strengthen us in our attempts to help our children.

Create participation in positive activities. Many parents help their children take piano, gymnastics, karate, dance, and other lessons. Difficult children also benefit from participating in Scouts, school plays, athletics, and any activity that brings adults and young people together for useful purposes. The trouble and inconvenience of helping them participate is usually less than the frustration of letting difficult children do nothing. We may have to become a leader or otherwise participate with our children for them to join in. Or, in some cases, we may need to stay home for them to feel free to participate.

Get acquainted with children's friends. We need to know the friends our children spend time with and ask to meet them. If we bring them into our home, unless they are truly deviant, they will be affected by our influence. When they are around, we can talk to them and listen to them. They will usually appreciate our attention to them.

Know high-risk situations. Difficult children are usually vulnerable to anything that provides them sensory stimulation. Pornography, drugs, alcohol, thrills (including shoplifting), and sex provide such sensory stimulation. Rather than assuming that we will be too restrictive if we prevent our children's going to places where these are available, it is best to explain proved alternatives and reduce their freedom. There is a point at which children get beyond our control, and then there may be less we can do in this regard. While they are young, however, it is usually best to be firm, even definite, about the issue.

Manufacture success. Difficult children have many struggles that contribute to feelings of failure and inadequacy. For one thing, they bring failure on themselves because of undeveloped social skills and inadequate performance skills. Whenever possible, we can encourage them to participate in activities we think they will succeed in. One set of parents enrolled their son (who was an ADD child) in a karate club and took him to his lessons. They all benefited from learning the philosophy of nonviolence, and the boy was able to succeed at something important to him. The secondary benefits of recognition he received from his friends also helped.

Arrange public displays of helping. In church, school, and civic programs, children can participate in public helping activities. These group activities make it legitimate for children to develop the desire and skills necessary to help others. One group of teens makes lap robes for aged women at a nursing home. They go to the home and deliver the robes and then visit and talk to the residents. Another group provides entertainment at a home for older people. Still another group cleans the litter from a two-mile stretch of nearby interstate highway. Other examples abound. Caring and concern for others is learned as a group and felt by individuals.

Identify social service agencies. Many organizations can help with the task of helping a difficult child learn to be moral. They can provide teaching materials, help impose consequences when children behave improperly, and they are usually concerned, too. To find these organizations, we can check with a church leader, school counselor, or government youth agency.

Communicate with anyone having regular contact with our children. When difficult children go out into the world, they may have difficulty with others. Often, our children are in a continuing cycle of frustration and failure because we have not communicated with others who are faced with teaching or training them. That means we need to visit schools, school counselors, teachers, church leaders, Scoutmasters, and so on. They are going to have the task of helping our child. In most cases, they are willing to help, but we make their burden lighter by letting them know we are interested and involved. By getting to know them and communicating regularly with them, what we and they do can be coordinated, making it less likely that our child will be treated carelessly or improperly.

The Best We Can Expect

Difficult children teach us as much as we teach them. If nothing else, we learn how precious childhood is, and we learn the power of love and devotion. Difficult children may try us, but they make us enter into the drama of life. No parent who cares can stand on the sidelines merely observing. Difficult children require that we confront ourselves and grow in ways that we would not otherwise grow. We may one day appreciate what we have shared together.

The core of parenthood is not so much in developing a child's talents or promoting academic pursuits as in preparing a child to live a mature, moral life. The formation of character is the enduring part of our work, and in this we find the dream and the power of being fathers and mothers. In a world filled with enticements, pressures, and opportunities, there are many who avoid rather than seek the challenges of parenthood. We who have difficult children may wish we had done so. But if we persevere with children we know are at risk, and if we do our best to teach morality to these difficult children, we will know better than most parents that being good parents is the best thing we have ever done.
