A. Lynn Scoresby, Bringing Up Moral Children ( 1989)

CHAPTER 14

HYPOCRISY

Young children surprise and delight us because they show us humanity in its innocence, its beginning. We see their thoughts represented in very obvious actions. If children are looking at a cookie or a little red ball, we can, if we watch, see their intentions revealed in their actions. Childhood is a sincere and trusting time. Little children do not hide things from us because they cannot. What we see is what they are.

As they improve their language and other cognitive skills, children improve their ability to have inner experiences that are not shown in their outer behavior. They and we learn that they can show one thing but be feeling or thinking another. The age of innocence has been traded for the age of magic, where children's first attempts to live in a sometimes confusing world are both humorous and serious. They say words that do not fit the time or meaning. Their actions may not fit what is appropriate, but we do not care much; we enjoy what we see because it is evidence of life and growth.

As children grow up, they meet a greater variety of social situations, and more requirements are placed on them; they encounter more evaluations, more approval or disapproval. It doesn't take long for children to discover that appearing or seeming appropriate brings as much approval and avoids as much disapproval as actually being appropriate. Perhaps that is the birth of hypocrisy, when children find that protecting themselves from the disapproval of others is more important to them than saying honestly what they think, feel, believe, or have done. Thus it is important to protect our children from harsh judgment until they gain confidence in themselves and in those who evaluate them. If they are reared in love, acceptance, and warmth and have firmly set limits, most children will learn the peace of mind that results from integrity. If children are themselves anxious and fearful and if they are reared in harshness, they may learn that their safety depends of their ability to deceive and misrepresent.

We understand, of course, that keeping information from others is not always wrong. For example, we may rightfully and properly keep disappointing or embarrassing experiences private to protect ourselves or others from public criticism. As long as this hiding is not immoral— that is, as long as we do not hurt ourselves or others—we are not deceitful. The kind of hiding that leads to hypocrisy is the deceit of creating or maintaining a reputation or image before others that is not based on truth and accuracy and is designed to cover immoral or hurtful things that someone has done or intends to do.

When an insecure child fears the judgment of others and pretends or tells a white lie as a form of self-protection, that is not yet hypocrisy. When children have not acquired the ability or confidence to express themselves accurately and yet are confronted with people and situations that seem to demand certain beliefs and behavior, their "hypocrisy" is more incompetence than intentional deceit. They may not even know that they have done something other than what was called for. Adolescents may sometimes pretend in order to prevent their private thoughts and acts (which they are hiding to give themselves a sense of freedom) from being exposed. This pretense is an attempt to adjust the difference between what is expected and a child's less-than-acceptable behavior.

Hypocrisy is one moral issue that has received considerable attention. For parents, pretense and deception in children are moral issues because failure to grow out of them keeps children from learning morality. If we do not understand this well, we may unwittingly teach exactly what we do not want to teach. We may overreact when we see what appears to be hypocrisy in our children, even when their deviations from the truth may be a normal part of their development. By the same token, we may underreact and fail to appreciate how truly damaging many forms of deception can be. Further, if we don't understand the kinds of deception that are the roots of hypocrisy, we cannot teach integrity, the moral opposite of hypocrisy. We may fail to help our children learn how to succeed in life as moral people. Failing to teach them the significance of integrity may be thought of as permission for them to continue through life believing that something other than integrity is acceptable and good.

Values and beliefs are not stronger than actions. If children persistently behave contrary to their values, their values will change. They will not learn that hypocrisy is wrong or inappropriate. They will come to see it as an effective tool to use to get along in life. Many people assume that all criminals know what is right but that they choose to break the law. These people might be shocked to learn that many criminals believe that crime is the most effective way of living and believe in it just as strongly as law-abiding people believe otherwise. Similarly, many truly believe that hypocrisy is necessary, perhaps more important to life than integrity.

Some believe that they can get what they want from life only through deceit. These people use hypocrisy to acquire. Others are hypocritical to achieve recognition. The desire for reputation stems from the notion that being well known is synonymous with personal success and significance. All of us know of public personalities who pretended something to achieve their fame. Hypocrisy may be used as the means to acquire power over others when people think that position and authority stamp them with worth and importance.

To the degree that people are hypocritical they will lack a true sense of belonging with other people. Hypocrisy inhibits feelings of empathy and acceptance. It creates lives that are emotionally shallow rather than deep and rich, barren rather than fruitful. We want, then, to be aware of how pretense and deception rob children of their emotional membership in families and groups of friends, even if their friendships are based on deviance from the moral standard.

Pretense and deception serve numerous individual purposes. We may feel the need to pretend when a family problem is exposed to others. We may feel that someone's arrogance justifies our exaggeration of our own qualities. When we think our actions are being scrutinized by others, we may feel great apprehension and pretend in order to reduce our anxiety. All pretending may be dangerously close to the sinister deception of hypocrisy and therefore the enemy of moral character. If we wish to teach morality to our children, we must help them avoid the path to hypocrisy. We can do that if we have integrity ourselves and help our children learn that success, however defined, will always be more than just pleasing others or achieving reputation. When children work toward any goal, we can help them understand that their satisfaction will be incomplete unless their efforts have been honest and true.

Adult Examples

Most parents acknowledge the power of example in several ways. If we are aware that our own actions are not what we want our children to do, we tell them, "Do as I say, not as I do." We hope that making this statement will offset the times when our actions do not match what we say or preach to them. It is a weak rationalization for parents who cannot or who will not rearrange their example so that it matches what they say.

Children are vulnerable to the influence of adult example for at least two reasons. First, they are developing and changing. They are growing toward some goal that they think adults have achieved. If they think we are what they are striving to become, they assume our example is what they must learn in order to make progress. When they do as we do in many situations (in religion, for example, or in social settings, sports), they are highly reinforced when they see our pleased and happy response. Second, children are not able to tolerate much confusion. If they see two contradicting examples, they will shut one out of their minds to reduce tension or frustration. When they are confronted with actions that do not match what they are told, children usually shut out the words they hear and respond to the actions they see.

James Bryan and his colleagues (1969) supported the idea that children follow what they see people do. They organized a bowling game for third- and fourth-grade children. If the children scored high enough, they received certificates that could be redeemed for money. The children were then shown a box where they could contribute donations to poor children. Adult supervisors talked to some of the children about the importance of giving to others (generosity). Other children listened to adults who talked about the importance of keeping money and using it for personal needs (greed). The results of the study showed that if the adults gave money, the children were more likely to give also, regardless of what the adult said.

Interestingly, in some conditions children were not affected by hypocrisy. Even when adult models told children to give but did not give themselves or preached avarice but gave donations, the children continued to be self- sacrificing. Children exposed to models who preached goodness, but practiced avarice were not less likely to sacrifice their winnings than children exposed to a consistently generous model. In this case, the children had learned that giving was important whether the adults told them to give or not to give.

Another important result of Bryan's research is that the children liked the adult models who consistently talked about generosity and acted generously. They disliked the adults who talked about generosity but acted greedily. These children, eight or nine years of age, showed that they were willing to trust in those whose actions matched their words. In summary, then, children in this study were not put off by adult inconsistency but tended to do what they saw adults do; however, they would not enter into affectionate relationships with adults who were inconsistent.

Thinking about this finding as it applies to our relationship with our own children should give us pause. We understand that children are more influenced by those with whom they have emotional ties. One act of giving or not giving may be an isolated event, but moral character forms over a long period in relationships with trusted people. If our examples fail to match the words or exhortations we give children, they will find us less attractive. Once we lose their confidence, we will lose our ability to teach and influence them. They will have removed themselves from us.

Arnie Rochik learned this lesson the hard way. His son, Arnie Junior, was caught shoplifting at age fourteen. The boy had already gone through the juvenile court system and had made restitution for a previous crime. This time, Arnie Junior received a harsher sentence from the juvenile judge, but he continued to steal. Later he was caught breaking into a store. He and his parents were required to seek counseling.

During one of their family sessions, Arnie pleaded with his son to stop. "Why do you keep doing this?" he asked. "You're ruining your life." Turning to me, the father said, "He has everything he wants or needs. I don't see why he does this."

The boy sat stonefaced, looking at the floor. With mixed frustration and fear, Arnie Senior continued. "Why won't you listen to me and your mother?" The boy had shown no response to the first question, but now his head came up. He looked hard at his dad, but he still said nothing.

I realized something was on his mind and spoke to him. "If you can tell us, Arnie, I would like you to say why you won't listen to your parents."

His answer was a classic. "Dad tells us to go to church and to be good, but he's a crook." Startled, Arnie Senior protested. I quieted him and asked the boy to continue. "Yes, you are!" he defended. "You don't get the cars inspected, and you make your own sticker every year. You tell us how you weaseled money out of some guy at work or how you got some guy to buy more than he wanted." I could tell from the stricken look on Arnie Senior's face that his son was telling the truth. His wife sat in silent condemnation.

This conversation revealed that the family had two problems. One was that the boy was breaking the law and refused to stop. The other was that he was beyond his father's reach because the father's hypocrisy had disqualified him as a source of influence. The second problem is by far the worse. Arnie Junior might have made an unwise choice to steal, but if he had trusted his dad, he might have been willing to stop stealing when his father begged him to. But his father's pleading washed off, not felt. The boy was truly out of control.

Although it may be true that children tend to do what they see others do, example being more powerful than preaching or telling, it is consistency as part of integrity that determines whether or not we retain influence with our children. Over time, as we know, this emotional leverage may be the only thing that permits us to give direction or teach an important idea. Our consistent, or congruent, acts and words are like investments in a savings plan. They accrue with interest until the time comes when we need them to reach, teach, or influence our children. Over time, a child's moral future may depend on whether we have invested enough congruent acts and words.

What to Do When Children Are Deceitful

Children can learn hypocrisy as readily as they learn integrity, and they are influenced by the consistency or inconsistency of parents' words and acts. Now we need to identify the signs of hypocritical behavior in children, understand some reasons for it, and think about how to correct it.

To begin with, it is important to distinguish between the normal inconsistency of behavior that marks childhood and harmful, hypocritical behavior. Young children lie. They may impulsively say what they think will win them approval without regard for what they actually do, intend to do, or do not do. And, of course, they pretend in many ways. We accept much of this for a while because we assume it is a part of growing up.

If there is not a gradual change so that children get better at telling the truth, if the correspondence between what they say they do and what they actually do does not increase, then we suspect a problem. Most children, especially those who are young and inexperienced, have difficulty disguising their real feelings. We may see that their facial expressions do not match what their words mean, and even though we may not know what is true, we can at least tell that there is a discrepancy or conflict. It is this incongruence that cues us to trouble. Usually we are curious enough to suspect and to get more information than we are first given.

I learned about some difficulty one of my sons had had with a friend. I was not overly concerned, but I happened to watch him quite closely as we talked, and I noticed his nonverbal reaction to my question. He quickly tried to erase all emotion from his face, and a little too quickly he said, "Everything's all right now." His attempt to show no feelings meant to me that he still had some rather strong feelings. Rather than put pressure on him to tell me more about the problem, I decided to wait a while and talk to him about the importance of telling his true feelings. He never did say more about what had really happened with his friend, but he did admit that sometimes he had a hard time letting people know what he really felt. We decided that sometimes it is hard even to know our own feelings, but, if we are to feel good about ourselves, it is important to make our words match what we feel and think.

Living in the privacy of our homes and families, we get a pretty good idea about how our children ordinarily act and feel. There will be times in the company of other people when children's behavior is different from the usual. Children may want to impress others and put their best foot forward, so to speak. But if the change in children is dramatically different in the company of others from what it usually is at home, children have begun to learn hypocritical behavior. In this case, hypocrisy may reflect low self-esteem, an impulsive response to the situation, or fear of others. But any of these reasons indicate that we need to give increased attention to helping the child be more comfortable in expressing himself authentically.

Around home and with her family, Heather was somewhat pessimistic, quiet and somber. During a birthday party at their home, her mother overheard Heather make exaggerated statements to several of the guests about her family, her clothes, and her summer plans. As she listened, it seemed clear that her daughter felt it was necessary to pretend that things were more exciting than they really were. At first the mother thought the child might be a little embarrassed about her family, because earlier she had made some apologetic comments about the living room furniture being too old. Then it seemed more that Heather was exaggerating to compensate for her own sense of inadequacy and was trying to find reassurance through the acceptance and approval of her friends.

When the girls left, Heather went to her room. Her mother went after her to talk. She first asked Heather if she had had a good time. Then she complimented her about the way she had dressed and the gracious way she had entertained her friends. Then she told Heather what she had overheard. Heather was about to disagree or tell her mother to go away, but seeing that her mother felt concern instead of criticism, she did neither. Instead, she nodded and said quietly, "Yeah, I guess I did."

"Do you know," her mother asked, "why you thought or felt it necessary to do that?" This question led to an exploration of the feelings of inadequacy Heather had around her friends. After talking this over, they came up with some more honest ways for Heather to win acceptance. Heather said later that the most impressive thing about the talk was her mother telling her, "If you gain acceptance from your friends by telling a lie, they might think you are neat, but it won't help because what they think is you is not really you."

Not all situations turn out as well as this one, and even this mother and daughter had more to do to solve the problem. The important thing to note, however, is that the mother in this case did not ignore this situation but attempted to help her daughter correct it before it led to something much worse.

A more harmful form of pretense is accompanied by lies. There are several reasons why children lie. Young children exaggerate. Older children lie because they fear exposure; they intentionally mislead to cover up some- thing. Adolescents lie to overcome self-consciousness or to intentionally deceive. Although we may not be able to discern the truth immediately or the first time this happens, living with children allows us to detect when something recurs. When a child repeatedly lies, something is seriously wrong.

It is important first to analyze whether we ourselves are so aggressive and critical that our children lie because we have made them fearful. Loud, angry voices spewing accusations and criticism can make most children so afraid that lying seems a good alternative. If we are like that, we must make our conversation calmer and less critical before our children will feel free enough to speak what is true.

The next step is to identify the situations in which the lying takes place. Are they usually related to children's activities with friends? Do children lie about chores or schoolwork? Are the lies about family relationships? Knowing when lying takes place or what the lies are usually about moves us closer to understanding the real problem. If friends are involved, for example, it is reasonable to assume that they are up to something our children think will not be acceptable to us. And they are usually right.

Greg and Barbara Peterson went away for a weekend. They told their daughter Ann that she was not to have any friends over while they were gone, and they asked her to care for her younger brothers and sister. When they returned, one of the younger boys commented about a party Ann had had with her friends on Saturday night.

When confronted, Ann hotly denied that her friends had come over at all. Then, faced with a few facts, she acknowledged that they had come just for a visit, but had left early in the evening. After being told that her parents would call her friends in order to get the truth, Ann admitted that her friends had come over, brought some food, and stayed until early morning hours.

At this point, many of us would have reacted angrily and punished our children to show our displeasure. Ann's parents did a very wise thing. Greg and Barbara told her they wanted to talk with her again.

As the parents talked together about the problem, it occurred to them that Ann had lied other times about her friends. These lies involved how late they had been out for the evening, what friends she was with, and where she and her friends went. They also remembered that Ann had restyled her hair and insisted on getting some clothes that were extreme compared to her usual style but that were like clothes her friends wore. The parents had allowed these changes, thinking it important for Ann to be a part of the group.

During the talks they had with Ann, Greg and Barbara learned that Ann had not asked her friends over. But because her friends knew that Ann's parents would be gone, they arrived, uninvited, around nine o'clock Saturday night. They went into the house, began playing music, and eating and drinking. One couple found a bedroom and went in alone. Ann knocked on the door and told them that she didn't want them to be in the bedroom alone. "We're only talking," was the reply. Ann told her folks that she didn't know what to do after that, but the boy and girl soon left the house.

Then the parents learned that a water fight had been started and Ann was unable to stop it. Finally, around one o'clock, the kids began to leave, telling each other they would meet Monday at school. After hearing these details, the Petersons recognized that Ann was unable to maintain her standards around her friends. When caught up in the pressure to do something with them, Ann gave in, even when she knew it was not the best thing.

Then Greg and Barbara took a creative step. They called the parents of the other children who were involved and asked them to come over one evening. During their short meeting, the parents all expressed concern about what their children were doing. Together they decided to set some rules that all could and would follow. One was to decide how often they would allow the friends to get together. Another was to decide what activities they would give permission for the children to participate in. Because all the young people were thirteen and fourteen, they also decided on a curfew time.

Life returned to normal for the Petersons. In a few days, Ann told her parents that her friends were going to a dance at a place the group of parents had decided was off limits. Greg and Barbara told her she could not go. Ann got angry and asked, "Why not? Everyone else is going." "No, they aren't," she was told. "Just call them and see." Ann took the challenge and began to call her friends. To her surprise, she found that none of her friends could go because their parents wouldn't let them. Ann didn't protest anymore.

Similar things happened in the next few weeks. One day Ann fixed her hair almost the same way she had worn it before. She also seemed to lose interest in some of her friends and began to meet new ones. These changes were viewed as positive by her parents. These results were achieved by wise parents who recognized that often when children are together, no one person is in control but each child thinks the others are.

The Public and Private Lives of Teenagers

For some parents, their children's teenage years are some of the best times of family life. Other parents have different experiences, and their horror stories about adolescents make us nervous as our own children enter into this complex stage of life. If we view our teenaged children with sensitivity and compassion, we can notice that they are faced with particular and striking challenges. There is pressure to perform, to belong, but not to make waves. Many adults do not take teenagers seriously but expect them to understand very serious things. Teenagers are part of several groups or relationships that compete for time and effort. They are often pulled between friends, who accept them and offer little judgment, and adult authorities, who do judge and evaluate them.

Furthermore, adolescents are passing through puberty. Most develop physically at about the same time and experience the usual self-consciousness, social frustrations, and mixed happy-sad, excited-worried states. Some children, though, develop earlier than others. Boys seem to benefit from early development, from being better at throwing, running, jumping, and being more emotionally mature than their age mates. In our culture, girls who develop early are not so fortunate. Their more mature bodies often increase their self-consciousness and increase their sense of inadequacy. Boys who develop later than others are often emotionally immature, and they often have problems with self-esteem and difficulty with authority. Late-developing girls have more pleasant social experiences, and they tend to find satisfaction in achievement, but they may be quite insecure about themselves.

Children find various ways to adapt to the complexities brought on by physical development and other aspects of adolescence. One way is to develop a private and public life. Being private—doing things alone or with same-age friends—allows children to feel separate from the scrutiny of those who regulate. Being private—not communicating with others—also helps children test and evaluate parental rules against, or according to, their own experiences. That may help adolescent children achieve a sense of independence. Being private also allows children to experiment with new ways of acting, allowing them a sense of security that what they do will not be judged by others.

Having a public life means meeting and interacting with people outside the private realm. That requires children to avoid disapproval of those in authority in order to protect their private life. Usually a public life includes those activities that impress others (courtesy and conversation), as well as joining with others in socially approved events (going to church, getting decent grades, doing volunteer work). These are important to children because they build a positive reputation.

Some teenagers live a public and private life successfully and in this way find a modest sense of freedom and growth toward increased maturity. Others have a wide discrepancy between what they do privately and what they do publicly. They discover that public life seems to satisfy those who judge as well as to disguise what they do privately. That gives rise to the idea that they can experiment widely with many things, including things that are forbidden, and still avoid the attention of anyone who might regulate or disapprove. That is the beginning of lifetime hypocrisy.

John Mitchell (1980) writes that adolescents display four types of hypocritical behavior that are associated with their dual public and private lives: (1) to pretend to be what one is not; (2) to pretend not to be what one is; (3) to say negative things about someone in private but say positive things in public; and (4) to act or say what is expedient or what others want to see or hear.

We can see how these behaviors prevent positive moral development. Pretending to be something they are not enables children to impress someone in a public sense and achieve a good reputation even when private acts do not really earn them the reputation. Then, even though their private acts are immature or devious, it is possible to maintain their reputation and thereby satisfy parents and others by continuing the pretense. As a part of such pretense, speaking positively in public to or about someone perpetuates the reputation but permits private opinions to exist even if they are negative and critical. Finally, saying or doing something purely to satisfy others can protect children from having private acts exposed. Mitchell writes that the adolescent who says only what the school principal wants to hear, who behaves only in the way the gang leader expects, who feigns sincerity to win the confidence of a sweetheart, can be likened to an imposter, a con man, or a charlatan. These labels apply because saying or doing what is expedient manipulates others to achieve selfish results.

While some parts of the private-public life duality may be healthy and advantageous to our children, it is also apparent that this duality is dangerous. Therefore, one important task we have as parents is to distinguish for ourselves what part of this duality is healthy and what part is not. Then we can adapt what our children do.

That is not as easy as it may at first appear. Most of us support our children, have strong feelings for them, hope for them, and wish them well. We are not looking for signs of deceit or deviance. Even when the signs are obvious, so obvious that everyone else can see them, many of us refuse to accept the meaning of what we see, preferring instead to hope blindly that our children are not doing wrong or immoral things. Yet, if we fail to act, we will make a mistake worse than those our children make. We will have failed to confront the issue, allowing it to continue and probably get worse.

Many parents, for example, finding pornography under children's mattresses, do not speak of it when, instead, we should take it immediately to our children and ask directly about it. We might pass it off as a minor thing when we hear children speak harmfully about others behind their back. We might see skipping school or minor scuffles with the law as insignificant, instead of recognizing that these acts may be part of a larger problem. We might think of insincerity and manipulation as a necessary part of adolescence and consequently fail to bring our children to an awareness of the harm they do to themselves and to others by such action.

Many of us can look back with the sad realization that had we acted when we first saw the "early warning" behavior in our children, we might have prevented the much more serious problems that appeared later.

That was the case with Hal Michaels. He was a single parent who loved his kids. His teenaged daughter Robin was upset at the divorce, the move away from the family home, and the reduced financial circumstances that resulted. She fought with her mother, and so she lived with her dad. Hal was attentive to her and her brother, but he worked full-time and as a result was often tired. Robin started to date, and she spent excessive time with her boyfriend. When Hal talked with her, she agreed to stay home more often, but things didn't change much. Her grades at school were still pretty good and she worked at her part-time job, so he thought she was doing okay. She was often silent around him and walked away when he tried to talk. He decided that trying to talk would only cause problems, so he didn't push it. He once overheard Robin say on the phone to a friend, "No one really knows me." At other times she talked about girls or women at their church who thought she was "neat" when she felt she really wasn't. She also said such critical things about her friends that he thought she would never be friends with these girls again. Later these same friends would show up, and Robin would act as though she liked them very much.

One evening when Hal was out, Robin had a few friends over for pizza and videos. She had asked in advance, and Hal had agreed. During that evening, Robin and her boyfriend had sexual intercourse for the first time. Robin had a strong religious background, and she felt much guilt and shame. The next day she found some pills and took an overdose in a genuine attempt to kill herself. She failed, however, which gave the father and daughter another chance. This time, Hal would recognize the danger signals and do something about them.

All of us face times when it is difficult to tell the truth. These moments are the touchstones of integrity. Our children deserve our help in learning to meet such moments with courage. If our children have grown to adolescence without having changed their immature tendencies to protect themselves by some form of hypocritical behavior, they will need our intervention so that they can develop more integrity. If we see our children handling the public-private duality of adolescence with all four types of hypocritical behavior noted by Mitchell, if we see that our children usually lie for the sake of convenience or self-protection or self-aggrandizement, if our children attempt to cover up or lie about immoral or improper acts, then our children are at risk, and we need to act immediately.

Using Children's Misbehavior to Teach Them

Not one of us wants our children to misbehave. We find, however, that they do it without coaching or instruction. Sometimes we become angry because we think our children's misbehavior reflects negatively on us. Sometimes we are disappointed, having expected more from our children. Sometimes we are indifferent, knowing that others do not know about the misbehavior and hoping that it will not happen again. Catching children in misbehavior is an emotionally charged experience for them and for us. We can be sure that they will notice and remember what we do at such a time.

The important part of correcting misbehavior is to do it in a way that helps children understand the consequences of their actions for themselves and for other people. Other guidelines for correcting misbehavior include matching punishment to the wrongdoing, keeping calm so that children will not be tempted to blame us instead of recognizing that they are responsible for their own actions, and, finally, getting children to practice doing right what they have done wrong.

When children are old enough and mature enough to know that they have done something wrong, their misbehavior not only violates some rule but also alienates them from family and friends. This sense of alienation, of not belonging, increases the risk of further immorality. Children are more likely to do wrong things when they believe that no one cares or that they do not matter than when they feel that they belong with people who love and support them.

The times when children misbehave and are found out are the times to help them learn the benefits of integrity and openness and the harm of deceit and secrecy. If children have misbehaved and been found out, we should remember that they will have thoughts and feelings about what was done and will be alert to what we do and say when the wrongdoing is discovered.

Before we act, we need to consider the actual wrongdoing and children's motives or reasons for the behavior. And if we are to teach morality and prevent the development of destructive hypocrisy, we need to consider the issue of deceitful secrecy itself. That means that we examine what children do to perpetuate the secrecy or deceit associated with their actions. We consider whether or not our children are willing to admit their responsibility and honestly tell what they did. When our children willingly confess their misbehavior, we must recognize the action of confessing as more responsible than if we learn about their actions another way and then have to pry facts out of them. An honest confession resolves the discrepancy between private and public acts and rids children of deceit.

When children are accused of wrongdoing, or when we learn of their misbehavior from someone else, we need certain skills to correct the misbehavior and teach children the pitfalls of secrecy and deceit. If we react too quickly or too harshly, they may bury their acts deeper in excuses and further deceit. We also prevent them from having the emotional time necessary for them to bring their private acts willingly into public knowledge. They may instead learn that hypocrisy is safer than making themselves responsible and honest.

Children do not need to review and retell every detail about their actions in order to move away from secrecy. But wrongdoing creates alienation, one aspect of hypocrisy, and we need to help our children correct their misbehavior in a way that also helps them regain their sense of belonging. Otherwise we may respond to a specific misbehavior but fail to address secrecy and alienation, which are even more damaging.

We need to be sensitive to the importance of helping our children return to us and feel a part of our family. Then we need to develop a method of helping them correct their behavior that accomplishes this important goal. It is not a simple, step-by-step process but one that must be adapted to the level of children's confidence, or lack of it, and we must continue to adapt it as we proceed to bring correction about. The method can be described as a series of stages.

Gathering information. During the initial confrontation, we talk with our children about what we know of their actions and ask them to tell us what they did. We begin by setting an emotional climate that is warm but factual and honest. We cannot discover deceit all of the time, but there are some things to look for to help us recognize it. One is the amount of information children tell spontaneously in contrast to what they withhold. If we ask a question and get either a terse answer or an elaborate explanation, we may suspect they have a motive to hide facts. If children talk on their own and include descriptions of their own actions, they are being more honest. Another clue to honesty, of course, is whether the description children give matches what we know. A third is the mannerisms displayed by children while they are talking. Honesty is usually indicated when children talk with some eye contact, and their voice tones fluctuate within ordinary limits, neither too loud nor too soft. Additional cues of honesty may be that they show emotions that fit the situation they are in, and their attempts to control themselves are not excessive. Dishonesty is usually indicated when children obviously force facial expressions, tell facts contrary to what we already know, and show extreme or confusing mannerisms when they are talking.

The phase of information gathering continues until we are confident that we have accurate information and have helped our children be more honest than dishonest. This process may require more than one conversation. If we see that our children are unprepared to talk freely, or if we believe they are dishonest, it is generally better to suspend the conversation by saying something like "I can see that you are not quite ready to talk about this." We can encourage our children to be honest and tell them the importance of it, but accusing them of dishonesty is usually not helpful except as a last resort.

The admission. Entry into any group requires some price of admission. In our case, reentry into the emotional bond of our family requires that children come close to admitting honestly what they have done wrong and indicate in some way that they want to belong.

The purpose of setting the emotional climate and gathering information is to encourage that admission. Our saying, "Can you tell me . . . ?" or "I want to know about . . . " can give children the feeling of freedom to be honest. In cases where children have a history of lying, we may need to be more aggressive in our approach by asking, "Who did . . . ?" "When did this happen?" "Who else was involved?" or "What did you actually do?" We can even say we cannot believe them but we want to, and then plead for them to tell the truth.

In the admission phase we ask our children to tell us honestly what part they had, or believe they had, in the wrongdoing so that we can find out whether they will accept and admit responsibility for their choices and their actions or shift this responsibility by blaming others. If they blame or deny, then we must continue questioning, because they are demonstrating that they are not ready to be fully honest. Usually, by exercising patience and showing an understanding attitude, we can help them get to the point where they will state what they did and that they were responsible for it, blaming no one else.

Consequences. What happens after children admit what they did and accept responsibility for it? For us, an important result has been achieved. They are no longer hypocritical, and we need to direct their attention to that point. Now we can help them examine their feelings as we share our feelings, and we can invite them to talk about the difference between having the truth known and carrying the burden of maintaining a lie.

Then we need to help them understand the effects of their actions on themselves and others. We can ask them, "What do you think this has done to you?" and we can share our own thoughts. We can follow that by talking over other consequences that fit the situation. We can decide if there was faulty reasoning about who could be helped or hurt. We can go over the moment of choice and ask them about each decision they made and why. Then, for every wrong or immoral thing they have done, they can do something moral, something that helps themselves and others. Feeling the freedom and happiness that comes from behavior that bears up under scrutiny, they will find that morality is more inviting after all than hypocrisy.
