A. Lynn Scoresby, Bringing Up Moral Children ( 1989)

CHAPTER 15

LOVE AND MORALITY

In hidden picture games children are challenged to find figures or diagrams embedded in other pictures. At first glance the pictures seem to contain only the obvious objects—a house, a tree, a car, some children. The instructions, however, say that it is also possible to find, by looking more closely, a lion, a bicycle, an ice cream cone, a bird, a trumpet. The children look again and may still not see what is hidden, but careful scrutiny reveals first one embedded shape and then another. Soon most are found. If children have difficulty finding all of the hidden pictures, they may come to us for help. We read the instructions and begin to look for the hidden pictures. Sometimes we are better at discerning detail, and we find the pictures our children have missed. Sometimes our children will discover them on their own while we are helping. After all the hidden pictures have been found, it is no longer possible for us or the children to look at the obvious house, tree, and car without also seeing the lion, ice cream cone, and trumpet. What was once hidden has become an integral part of the overall picture.

This example represents a truth about life. As children grow, their innate tendencies combine with instruction and experience to increase the realm of the obvious as more and more of the world becomes familiar. Children continually discover that there is more to life than they used to think there was, and each new discovery becomes a lasting part of the picture thereafter.

Children start out in life motivated to learn or to become more competent. Babies urgently and insistently attempt to become better at moving, sitting, crawling, standing, walking, and talking. Healthy children are curious about their world—touching, tasting, looking at, and listening to things in it. Inborn curiosity and motivation to achieve competency move children to increase their effectiveness in knowing about the world and living in it. Their senses are supremely adapted to life; children seem to want to know when and where to look, what and how to listen, and how and why to touch. Newborns seem to have an inborn understanding that the more they discover, the better off they will be.

Interestingly, children are more motivated to learn about some things than they are about others, and they show at an early age that they prefer to learn about people. Brazelton, Koslowski, and Main (1974), for instance, demonstrate that given a choice, infants prefer to look at the human face. Children do find stimulation and happiness from their discoveries about people. In his book The Brain (1984), Richard Restak cites a report by Alexander Luria, a Russian psychologist. Dr. Luria had worked with a patient named "S" who could remember remarkable details from his infancy. From the writings of Dr. Luria we can see the development of an infant's ability to perceive what at first were "hidden pictures." Dr. Luria wrote that "S" once gave the following description.

"This is the sense I had of my mother: Up to the time I began to recognize her, it was simply a feeling—'this is good.' No form, no face, just something bending over me from which good would come . . . pleasant. . . . Seeing my mother was like looking at something through the lens of a camera. At first you can't make anything out, just a round cloudy spot . . . then a face appears, then its features become sharper." (P. 221.)

Later the newborn's natural interest in other people takes new forms. Researchers find that infants learn to initiate more than 80 percent of the contact between themselves and their caretakers. (Berger, 1986.) By learning different styles of crying, smiling, and noise making, infants stimulate watchful adults to give attention to them. As children grow, they learn many other things. Where once we thought children's Why? questions indicated their curiosity and interest, we now understand that these questions perpetuate contact between them and people around them.

Another indication of children's considerable interest in people is shown in parent-child relationships. The mutual bond between parents and children is enduring. If children become too dependent at an early age, they tend to remain that way throughout life. Rather than independence being the natural condition, easily attained by children, it must be developed in children. In its best forms, independence is seldom complete separation and indifference. Children and parents retain good feelings for each other throughout life, despite the anger or frustration they once may have felt toward each other.

Several important implications of these ideas relate to the moral development of our children. Children's contact with their parents often determines what children come to see and understand about themselves and others. That in turn determines the quality of life for them. Children who experience happy things seem to expect happiness and believe that life is made up of happy experiences. Children who experience emotional pain and unhappiness often seem to see pain all around them and believe the world is an unhappy place.

Parents must recognize another truth, a less obvious one but even more important. Children may look for but not find many things about life unless they are actively helped to discover them. We all know people who have lived for years, perhaps their entire lives, having failed to understand something, even something others take for granted that everyone knows. I can think of men and women who have found so little warmth in life that they believe they will never receive it from anyone, and so they give little of it themselves. I have asked parents whose children are not doing well in school if they can recall happy memories of their own school days. Often, there is no response to my question. One woman, after I coaxed her a bit, told of a time she had slipped on the ice and bumped her head, and the school nurse was nice to her. If these parents never "found" excitement in school, how could they teach their children to find it? The low performance marks of their children, who were just as intelligent as the high performers, seemed to show that the parents who did not find excitement in learning were teaching their children to see the world in the same way they saw it.

If, as parents, we accept our primary role in teaching morality, if we have decided that we will teach our children moral standards and moral skills by precept and example, what else do we need to know and do that will make children more receptive to our teachings?

First, we can understand that all children have an inborn or inherited sense of right and wrong. Arnold (1960) and Osgood and others (1974) report research findings suggesting that in every culture, primitive or advanced, children's first judgment is the judgment of good and bad. Children are not empty or blank pages waiting for life's experiences to fill them. Rather, children have a mental structure that exists at birth, or is developed shortly afterward, that functions for survival and is the foundation for morality. That innate tendency is refined and enlarged simply as part of maturing. But the fundamental sense of right and wrong does not reach its fullest bloom in mature morality without another element, which will be unseen and unlearned by children unless we teach it to them. That essential element is love.

Love has a unique role in teaching and learning morality. It unifies the separate conversations, lessons, consequences, lectures, and examples that children are exposed to. When love does not exist in their lives, children have more difficulty comprehending that morality is of great value. Love motivates children to integrate moral values into their actions. The presence of love in children's lives helps them weave single or isolated moral thoughts or acts into the wholeness of a moral person. This integration is found in the ideal of a moral character. Without love, children may at times help one another, and they may at times avoid hurting themselves or others. They do that because it is expected or a situation might determine it. But they will not form the abiding sense of concern for one another that can be found in virtually every significant act of the mature and complete moral individual.

If children do not learn love, will they learn that humans are base, weak, animalistic, and prone to destructiveness? Will they learn to manipulate and despoil, thinking that humans are gullible and that there is a sucker behind every tree ready to be taken by anyone crafty or shrewd enough to do it?

People who are highly moral believe that they are linked to others in a way that is necessary for a happy life. Therefore, they must be concerned about their associates and be prepared to help. When such individuals act, they consider whether their actions will hurt others or help them. On their own initiative they act to help, to give, to nurture. Why? These people have learned about themselves and others, but what they have learned has been accompanied by love. Therefore, they know that people are worth sacrificing for, that people are more noble than base, more filled with potential than stunted. They know that people can always grow and improve if they are helped and loved.

Children will not see and learn about love without someone's help. Love is embedded in the flow of life like a hidden picture and will stand out sharply to be seen, understood, and felt only if it is pointed out in a variety of ways and at numerous times. If we fail to help our children know love, we will also fail in teaching them to be moral. This lesson is often learned by tyrant parents who teach moral standards enforced by fear. Their children need only to know the rules and follow them to avoid displeasure and disapproval. But since their motivation to be moral is fear of authority, when strong authority is absent, so is morality.

Love can be expressed in many forms. It may be displayed in affection, in compliments, in companionship, and in the desire for romance. In its truest sense, love is expressed in caring and sacrificing for the welfare, especially the spiritual welfare, of someone else. Though this definition of love is easy to write, it implies many things not obvious at first glance. To contribute to the welfare of others, a loving person must recognize a commitment of time, because human life is expressed in time. Contributing to someone's welfare requires some idea about human growth. Someone who has no knowledge about human potential cannot direct or encourage anyone else to a better place. We have a tendency to become more loving as we grow older. Is it simply age that makes that happen? Or is it our growing awareness about where we humans are going and the perspective that allows us to see children at one point and ourselves at another point, but all on the same path?

The love that makes morality possible is more than a few specific things we do. This love is a general intention, an overall attitude integrated in the character of a loving person who can almost always be relied upon to express it. This reliable love shown by parents over many years helps children see love in the world and believe in it. This love enables our children to make sense out of our attempts to teach morality. Learning to see love this way, children cannot thereafter consider life without looking to find love.

People Are More Important Than Things

If more years mean more experience and wisdom, then adults should know that things are not as simple as they seemed when we were children. Younger people may think that affluence and possessions are highly desirable. Older people may have had experiences that taught them that other things may be more valuable than affluence and possessions. Money is useful only if we treat it carefully and make it a tool to accomplish worthwhile things for people. It can bring food to starving people and medical care for the disadvantaged. It can bring opportunities for education and cultural enrichment that would not be possible otherwise.

Unfortunately, children do not naturally know that money is good only if it is used morally. Children see many demonstrations of wealth that appear to suggest that the wealthiest people are also the happiest. With so much affluence visible in our culture, it is understandable that many of our young people formulate materialistic attitudes. Their goals are to make money and possess attractive things, and their time and efforts are directed to these ends without consideration of the responsibilities related to money. When they develop such materialistic attitudes, possessions become more important to them than people.

Morality is a system of standards that encourage us to act toward one another in ways that sustain us individually and perpetuate the common good. Materialism is inherently selfish. It is a philosophy that fails to take into consideration the relationships we have with other people, because in the pursuit of money, people are less important than achieving the material goal.

A high-school counselor in Seattle gave this moral problem to the forty members of the student council: A large boat loaded with cocaine lies at anchor off the coast of Florida. Someone offers them one million dollars to bring the boat to shore. That is all they would have to do for the money. A person would meet them at the dock and pay them then. Would anyone do it? Only one of the forty said no. This solitary student said he wouldn't do it because he knew the drugs would harm the people who purchased them. The other thirty-nine said that was not their responsibility. What happened to the drugs after they were brought to shore was up to someone else. For them, morality in this situation meant doing what they were paid to do.

That kind of thinking is not uncommon. Researchers at the University of Utah surveyed high-school seniors in the western United States about what made members of the opposite sex attractive. More than half the girls indicated that the amount of money boys had determined whether the girls found the boys attractive or not.

Remember that children start life finding other humans more fascinating than anything else. When we think about teaching children to love themselves and others, our first task is to encourage their fascination with people. That will help them grow in the understanding of the relative value of people and things. It will help them see, for instance, that it is a mistake to think of themselves or other people in the same way they think about a toy or a pet. What makes a person happy or sad? What hurts people or helps them? What motivates people? What are the highest and best qualities in people? What are the worst? Why does a person act a certain way in one situation and act a different way at another time? What helps someone grow intellectually? emotionally? physically? We can help our children learn to love by helping them learn to ask and then to answer these important questions.

The love that blends with moral values relies on other people and on an understanding of how our own behavior helps or hurts others. One of my colleagues requires students to secure a fresh, unboiled egg with a string, tie the string to their wrist, and carry the egg wherever they go for one full week. That includes sleeping and showering or bathing. Some wrap the egg in a protective cover. Most hold the egg in their hand and carry it everywhere. These students report that they learn a greater sensitivity to the requirements of protecting something fragile and how much attention can be required to care for something important.

This example can remind us to show attentiveness and sensitivity to our children. When we do that, we show them we regard them as unique and interesting. We can listen to our children, acknowledge their desires and needs, and accept what they do as part of their stage in life. A couple I know placed a crib for a new child at the foot of their bed. The father noticed many things about this child that he had missed with his older children. Certainly the proximity of the new baby made a difference, but essentially he noticed more because he was more practiced—he had sharpened his observation skills with his older children.

We ourselves need to be reminded to understand people as more important than material things. One study of what schoolteachers thought about their students asked two thousand teachers across the country to rank fifty items according to their own perception of their importance to education. Twenty-five items were related to students' characteristics, such as self-esteem and integrity. The other twenty-five items were related to material things, such as textbooks, salaries, and school boards.

No teacher placed any of the twenty-five "human" or student items higher than the mid point. (Frymer, 1972.) All apparently thought that the material or physical trappings of education were more important than the students themselves, the people who were being educated. These teachers were demonstrating the all-too-human tendency to think that the things that influenced their comfort, security, and status were more important than the people they themselves influenced.

This condition need not exist in our families. We can help our children develop the perspective about people and things that makes morality possible. That perspective is love, and it is a challenge to teach children to believe in it. But we can do it. The experience one twelve-year-old boy had with his parents will illustrate one way to try.

Derrick Hansen was ordinarily a pleasant and cooperative boy. One morning he failed to get up in time for breakfast. He did not get up at the first call, and his father, Don, had to go to his room and shake him awake. When he arrived at the breakfast table, Derrick was at first quiet and then made cutting and sarcastic statements to his brother and sister. An argument followed, and Don's attempts to stop it led to his telling Derrick to leave the table. Derrick did, yelling back, "You're all alike. No one cares." After things settled down, Don asked his wife, Mary, if she knew anything about Derrick that would explain his behavior. She didn't. Don asked the other children if they knew anything. His brother said that Derrick had gotten into a fight at school, and his sister told of catching Derrick up late at night watching television.

The next night, Don got up around 1:30 a.m. and found Derrick watching a movie. Derrick's explanation was that he couldn't sleep. When Don asked why not, Derrick said, "Get off my back!" and ran to his bedroom. Don told Mary what had happened. Both parents were confused. When Derrick did not appear for breakfast again, the family had another discussion about him. Derrick's brother told how Derrick's favorite pigeon had recently been killed by a cat. Because this event coincided with the change in Derrick's behavior, the parents guessed that this might have been the reason for Derrick's actions.

When Derrick came to breakfast, Don told him he knew what had happened. His voice hushed in sadness, Derrick whispered in reply, "She was sitting on some eggs, and a cat broke into the cage and killed her." This revelation let Don and Mary respond to the real problem with affection and understanding instead of punishing Derrick for his unruly behavior.

Don and Mary did something about teaching love. They taught by their example that human beings are worth understanding before being judged and that they deserve to be understood with love. Their continued efforts will help their children learn the same sensitivity.

In great contrast to their example is the father who was referred to counseling because he had severely beaten his two sons. This man asked me, "Do you ever hit your children?" I told him that I might on rare occasions spank them, but I never hit them in the way he was talking about. "Why not?" he asked. "First," I replied, "it doesn't help anyone to do it. Second, my father loved me and never hit me."

Certain as he was that his way of thinking about children and disciplining them was at least as good as mine, he saw no need to change. In his mind, he, as a father, was within his rights to reinforce his parental authority by abusive beatings. To protect her sons, his wife had to divorce him and use the courts to keep him away from them.

How different from the message this man gave his sons is the message of a sign in a Catholic Youth Center: "God don't make no junk." If the young people who go there believe in God and believe that God created them, then there is only one possible conclusion. They are of great value themselves, because their Maker made them. Sometimes it is hard to keep that in mind in the face of racial prejudice, insensitivity, insults, and other demeaning behavior. But if children regularly find the tender caress, the warm attention given in companionship, the gentle embrace, and the sensitive inquiry to understand, then the idea that people are more important than things, that they are more important than some thing, is easier to believe. The gestures of love that teach our children their importance to us help them understand that promoting human happiness and well-being is more important than other things they might do.

Overcoming Fear and Jealousy

Fear and jealousy prevent children from learning to love. Most children feel fear or jealousy at one time or another, and we can learn to help them overcome these feelings and learn to love instead. Many theorists believe that fear is inherited by all children. Some have studied fear as a cross-cultural phenomenon. They write that fear first appears around six months of age and is a part of life that must be managed thereafter. Because children differ in their levels of emotional intensity, some learn to love quite easily and others have more difficulty. In their exhaustive research about infant temperament, Thomas and Chess (1977) found that some children respond easily to parental affection, are warmed by it, and are easy to care for. Other children have more difficulty participating in loving experiences. Still others exhibit qualities of temperament that make them even more difficult to love and to learn love. These children stiffen at affection and return little of what they receive. Although some of these conditions change as children grow older, children reflect individual differences about love throughout life.

Knowing that some children require more effort than others helps us adapt to the differences we find between our own children. Excessive fear, for example, can prevent children from learning to love. Frightened children see the need to protect themselves as greater than the motivation to care. Fear leads to caution and a defensive inability to give of themselves, and such children mistrust what others give. Jealousy, an extension of fear and mistrust, is often expressed in the desire to diminish someone else who is feared and thought of as a threat.

Childhood is an opportune time for fear to grow. Children see, hear, and participate in new things. They imagine and dream about frightening things. They may feel fear when separated from their parents. When school begins, many children feel pressure to perform and feel afraid of teachers who judge and of other children who may also judge. They may also express fears without any identifiable cause. These feelings are simply a part of life, especially a life that is changing from month to month.

One morning before going to school, fifteen-year-old Jimmy Swenson complained of headaches. The pain seemed to be intense, so his mother kept him home from school. The next day Jimmy went to school but called at noon to tell his mother the headache had returned. When his mother picked him up, he looked pale and in pain. Their family doctor examined Jimmy and diagnosed his headaches as migraine headaches. The doctor prescribed some medication that helped him. During that year Jimmy missed so much school that he was far behind in his homework. Ordinarily he did well, though, so the teacher assumed he would do all right in the next grade and passed him. The last day of school, however, was the last day Jimmy had a headache—at least for three months. Just as school was starting in the fall, the headaches returned. The school counselor advised Jimmy's mother to consult a psychologist.

In my interviews with Jimmy and his parents, I learned that Jimmy had an older brother who excelled in school. His parents were excessively performance oriented and exerted great pressure on their children. They extolled the virtues of the older achieving son. They nagged all their children about getting work done. They talked more often about high grades, awards, and scholarships than about anything else. Jimmy had no friends at school, and when he was alone with me he told about unhappy and embarrassing experiences with his teachers. His mother added that he spent much time alone daydreaming and reading science fiction. While she was talking to me, Jimmy picked up a book and began to read, tuning us out of his thoughts so that she had to say his name three or four times before he raised his head and paid attention to the conversation.

Jimmy was very bright. He talked often about the books he was reading. In addition, he was a computer whiz and had inventive, imaginative ideas about electronic devices he hoped to create. None of his interests, however, in- volved other people. He appeared to be comfortable only when he was alone or with some mechanical device.

We did several things to help him overcome his fear. First, we developed a plan to help him make friends. Getting him to invite an acquaintance to a movie was a major task, but once he was over that hurdle, other things came more easily. Soon he had someone in each class whom he considered a friend. Then we started on friendships with girls and dating. Though he was scared of girls, they were fascinating to him. He first went on a group date with some of his friends, and he eventually went out alone with a girl for an evening without any friends. The success of these social occasions could be seen in his improved mood. He was animated when he told about the girl and what they did on their date.

The family went out together more often. They went on short trips so that Jimmy could be exposed to more social and cultural things. His parents were asked to anticipate what he would find to be new and prepare him for newness by talking over what would happen. Later they practiced meeting the new people and seeing the new sights. They held family meetings in which the children gave simple performances by telling stories, giving small speeches, reading aloud, or singing. His parents used many compliments and much praise.

Jimmy's headaches stopped. He was learning that he could go out into a wider world and be successful. He was less afraid and felt more insulated from the pressure he had once felt from his parents.

Schulman and Mekler (1985) give other helpful suggestions for overcoming childhood fears. Children should seldom be forced to participate in anything they are frightened of, and parents should prepare them before they participate. They also remind us to avoid ridiculing children about their fears. Instead, we can model what children are afraid of while giving them specific reassurances. We can talk over a frightening situation and talk about the frightening parts of it. When each part is discussed, parents can then reassure their children. When children are afraid of something, simply saying, "There is nothing to be afraid of," will rarely produce calm. Modeling children's fears also means to put into words what the parents think the children might be feeling. For instance, if children are afraid of being left out of a game by friends at school, a parent would voice that fear: "Oh boy, I'll bet no one chooses me." Then parents can give specific suggestions for what children might do, such as saying, "I want to play, too." Using the information we gather about our children's specific and routine activities, we can be specific and concrete about what we model and what reassurances we give.

Many fears can be resolved by close contact and warmth. Children benefit from our affection, attention, and time we take to understand them. When we see their fear, if we respond first with contact and warmth, we will usually be able to comfort them. If we see them afraid of other people—usually shown by an exaggerated motivation to avoid new people—we can tell children that most people are "nice and will not hurt them," "Most new situations are fun because they are exciting," "New friends can be made and kept by learning to ask questions and listen," and "Fear need not prevent happiness and love."

Fear about oneself in relation to others often takes the form of jealousy. Helping children overcome jealousy requires different skills from those that help them overcome other kinds of fear. Most jealousy, for example, manifests itself in competitiveness and intense concern about whether another person has or does something better. Usually, jealousy is diminished by increasing the sense of confidence children have in themselves combined with the ability to avoid judging others. Jealousy in childhood can be resolved by individualizing and customizing children's clothes, chores, and bedtime routines to preserve each child's sense of uniqueness. Giving each child an individual plan will help each one focus on his or her own schedule and set of tasks rather than worrying about someone else. When children display jealousy, it is useful to remind them to think about what they are doing rather than what someone else is doing as well as on how their own actions might make someone else feel.

Ingrid and Tom Stauffer had difficulty with their children, who claimed that they as parents were not fair. These complaints came when they treated any child differently from the others by buying clothing or a toy for one and not for the others. The parents said they felt guilty and sometimes tried to make it up to the other children.

This method didn't seem to be working because the children continued to complain about their parents' unfairness. I suggested that the parents admit that they were not fair and had no intention to be fair, at least as far as fair meant treating each child the same. Then they could show how they treated each child differently in some respects, as their age and needs required. That was a new idea to the Stauffers, but they found it effective in reducing jealousy.

Another way to combat jealousy is actively to build confidence. Children benefit from confidence-building experiences. We can help them develop talents, praise them for successes, communicate with them about traits or characteristics we admire, and help them overcome obstacles. One father took his son on several camping trips and taught him how to succeed at that. Later, when his son went on trips with the Scouts, this boy was recognized as a good camper. Other parents have taught cooking, carpentry, reading, writing, music, and sports for the same reasons.

Finally, children's jealousy can be reduced by loving explanations of what they are feeling and pointing out times when they display it. This procedure often takes time and a willingness to be patient, but it will help us help our children know what to do instead of acting jealously. A man I know has two daughters who are about the same age. They are quite different in looks and personality, and they are often jealous of each other. Their mother is working with one in an attempt to help her share, give, and do things for the other. Their father is working with the other to help her do similar things. It is fun and satisfying for each parent when "his" or "her" child explains what she did instead of feeling jealous of her sister. Each has, for instance, let her sister go first at the bus line. Each has learned to express delight in her sister's successes. Each has also been excited when her sister received recognition during such times as birthdays and Christmas. Someday the parents will tell their daughters what they have done to help them along in life, but right now, they are keeping secret that each girl is being helped to love instead of being jealous of the other.

Giving and Receiving Love

When we teach children to love, it is useful to think of love as a circle. Love can be stopped either by the failure to give it or by the failure to receive it. Usually, however, we are so concerned about teaching children to give love or show it that we do not help them learn to receive it. During one of our family gatherings we talked about this as a family. I went over to one son, told him I loved him, and kissed him on the cheek. He returned this gesture by squeezing me back. Then I turned to the rest and asked, "What would happen if Jeremy had not received my demonstration of love for him?" Even the younger ones understood that I might be unhappy and that maybe I would stop giving demonstrations of love to him.

If the circle of love is to be big enough to gather every member of a family into it, then every family member needs to learn to receive it as well as give it. We can read stories to our children about the kind things people have done. We tell them about gratitude and appreciation, and we demonstrate in our actions the importance of showing both. As parents, we want our children to receive much more love than hatred or neglect. Because gratitude and appreciation reinforce the person who gives, we can teach thank you's and other expressions of gratitude to our children, both by our words and by our actions.

Tough Love

We ordinarily think of love as soft and kind, warm and gentle, honest and giving, patient and pleasant. But sometimes love requires us to be hard and unpleasant, withholding and abrupt. When we are trying hard to express the love that is pleasant and warm and worrying about whether or not our children actually feel loved, it is easy to forget that love sometimes means we must be very tough if we are to contribute to the welfare of our children.

All children make mistakes, but some of those mistakes are not isolated events. Breaking a vase is a mistake; a drug habit supported by theft is something else. Children who are out of control for one reason or another may hurt others repeatedly unless they are stopped. There are times when our children try to manipulate us to get what they want. They may devise ways to get for themselves some of the money we bring home. They may want us to feel guilty so that we will give them more than they ask for. They may present us with difficult situations between themselves and others, hoping we will choose their side. These situations require a toughness that many of us find foreign because we have always thought of love as being warm and gentle.

I know parents who learned that their son forged checks to pay for his excesses. After they told me what the money was used for and the many months they had been struggling with him to no avail, I suggested that they call the police and turn him in. Silence followed. Finding the words that matched his feelings, the father said, "What will he think of us, if we do that?" My answer was, "What will he continue to do if you don't bring him under control?" After some additional discussion, they called the police. He was picked up and placed in youth detention. He was convicted and placed on supervised probation. He was embarrassed; so were they. He stopped his drinking binges.

Many drug-dependent children have parents who could be called co-dependent because they seem to give or do anything to make their children "happy." In one case, a father and son occasionally argued about what the son was doing. Their verbal battles were very heated. At the end of each one, a truce of sorts would begin with the father giving the son some money to go out and have a good time. Getting the son into a drug treatment center was not as difficult as getting the father to correct his own habit.

In some ways, this part of parenthood is the most uncomfortable part, but our being able to be tough at the right time teaches children about love in ways the other forms cannot. One father allowed his son to drive the car to and from school with the provision that he never use the car to do anything to hurt himself or anyone else. If he did, the keys would be taken without a second thought. The boy handled the car and disciplined himself very well. One day the parents received a notice from the school that the boy missed a class five times. When asked about it, the boy claimed that he had been there but was late and the teacher had failed to give him credit. Since he was usually honest about things, his parents had no reason to disbelieve him.

When the second notice came from the school, there was a direct and forthright discussion between father and son. When confronted with the evidence, the boy admitted he had skipped the class. "Why this class?" the father asked. "It is boring, and besides, I don't know what is going on." His father asked, "What did you do when you skipped?" "We went into town and got something to eat," the son replied. "How did you get there?" came the question. "I drove the car," was the answer. After a long look of joint realization, the father said, "Get me all of the keys."

They did not speak for several days. Then, after another discussion, they arranged a way for the son to earn the use of the car again. A few years later, I heard the son tell about this incident. He said that moment was when he knew his father loved him.

If we keep in mind that love is sometimes tough, then we can keep from being manipulated and make ourselves do what is necessary to help our children avoid pitfalls and correct their mistakes. It may hurt us to be tough, but that pain is less than the pain we would feel when our children hurt themselves or others further because we failed to prevent it.

Our Decision

Maturity includes the wisdom that we do not have to do anything in particular to have problems or challenges. We can do nothing special, and still they confront us and our children as a normal part of their growing up. We must, however, do something to help our children avoid problems and survive their mistakes. Part of that active role is to teach them the principles of morality, which make greater sense to them when we do it in the climate of love.

Most books about child discipline that I know of place parental behavior after the child's behavior. That is, while explaining disciplinary techniques, the writers suggest several possible parental responses to several types of actions by children. This discovery made me uncomfortable, because just responding to what children do does not give parents a creative, inventive perspective on parenthood. We are older than our children. We hope we are wiser. We have learned things children do not know. Without being tyrants or even overcontrolling, we have the privilege, perhaps obligation, to help our children learn what we believe will enhance their success. We need not impose our beliefs very much to help them discover and consider what we believe to be right and wrong for them. It is not intrusive for us to help them understand what will help them or hurt them and others. It is not too demanding for us to help them make wise choices and learn to apply a set of standards that contribute to self-respect and self- esteem. None of that is excessive if we do all of it out of genuine love.

Sharp differences and confrontations are part of relationships between parents and children. We do not look for confrontations, but we ought not to fear them either, if we love our children enough to declare that they should stop something they are doing or start something they are not doing. These times may be painful, but the pain of these moments is usually less than the long-term pain we and our children have when they are not able to make their way in the world, when they have wasted their lives, or when we have failed to teach active morality in the name of love. The emptiness and sadness of these conditions are the real sources of pain, because they mean that we are all living with something less than what might have been.

Teaching morality and love is the way we increase our chances and our children's chances of avoiding that pain. Love and morality are also the means by which we may restore happiness when we or our children make mistakes. Love and morality are active, not passive, parts of family life. They are things we can do rather than be on the sidelines confused and wondering.

Guiding children, teaching them, and helping them grow involve many different choices. Whether we are aware or unaware, we decide how much freedom we give them, the opportunities we expose them to, how to help them in school, how much to control their activities, and we influence countless other aspects of their lives. In the midst of all the tumult, happiness, fun, and struggle that is childhood, we are granted the power to choose whether children will know or not know about love from us. If we want our children to be moral and know about the significance of life, we will choose to love them so that they will choose to be moral.
