Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Charity ( 1986)

Preface

"Okay, now we've got to get serious!" we thought as we sat down to start writing the third book in our teaching children series-the book on teaching children charity.

When we began, it occurred to us that writing this book would be more difficult than the first two in the series: Teaching Children Joy and Teaching Children Responsibility. To be truthful, our first thoughts were that teaching joy to preschool children is fun and teaching responsibility to elementary-school-age children is challenging, but teaching adolescents and teenagers charity is . . . impossible!

How can you convince a daughter who used to spend all her time helping with little brothers and sisters and now spends most of it in front of the mirror crying because her hair "won't go" that she should be sitting at breakfast with the family and helping with the dishes—regardless of how "horrible" she looks?

How can you help another daughter who sits in Sunday School class wondering why everyone hates her to realize she should be looking around to see who needs her?

How can you teach a son that the most satisfying relationship in the world does not exist between him and his computer?

This is undoubtedly the greatest challenge in the saga of parenting. The sweet, teachable, moldable characters to whom we've tried to teach joy and responsibility are beginning to show the symptoms of age—becoming set in their ways. Their excitement in the realization that they know certain things just about matches their knowledge that their parents are getting dumber every day (of course they still respect us because we're so old).

We are convinced, despite the difficulties, that charity is the thing we should strive to teach our adolescents, and we believe that there are some good, constructive ways to do this teaching. The first thing to realize, as we will soon point out, is that charity begins with us! (That's the hardest part.) Often our biggest problem with teenagers is our inability to put ourselves into their shoes—to see the world through their eyes and to laugh at ourselves. if we could, we would often see ourselves as parents being intolerant and insensitive, anxious and angry, nagging and nasty.

Being parents of teenagers is one of the hardest, most serious jobs around. As we move on from the physically and mentally exhausting job of having little children, we realize that parenting becomes even more difficult mentally and emotionally as our children become adolescents and struggle to reach adulthood. Because it is so hard, one of the greatest assets we can have is a sense of humor.

The hard job of learning where to draw the line can often be softened with a good laugh—privately as husband and wife, or together as parent and child. Often great teaching moments can occur when we can learn to laugh at ourselves.

We have discovered through our own children, our six hundred missionaries in England, and our work with countless numbers of parents and youth that it is possible to teach these young people charity. The principles and methods in this book don't work every time with every adolescent. There may be several failures for every success—but that one wonderful success can get parents through the next few crises with a smile and with the insight that sometimes failure teaches as much as success.

Perhaps the most important key in teaching children charity is to remember: When you get to the end of your rope, tic a knot and hang on. It also helps to remember Winston Churchill's widely applicable advice to "Never give up . . . never, never, never, never."
