Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Charity ( 1986)

Section I

Charity: The Ultimate Solution

Charity comes as a gift from Christ. If we can accept it and gain its qualities, it can be returned to him and it can be given to others.

The Apostle Paul wrote, "If I have not charity, I am nothing." Conversely, if we have charity, we can become everything that we (and God) want ourselves to be.

Charity is the ultimate solution because it is the purest form of love. It overcomes the "leaves" and "branches" of jealousy, rebellion, shyness, depression, immaturity and various forms of sin by attacking and destroying the "roots" of selfishness and self-consciousness.

So let us explore together the meanings of charity, and the magic of it, and the means whereby we can teach it to our children while learning it ourselves.

Chapter 1

The Purpose

"Charity is the pure love of Christ, and it endureth forever; and whoso is found possessed of it at the last day, it shall be well with him." (Moroni 7:47.)

There is a window, a brief season when children are old enough to be accountable yet young enough to be pure. That window is the best time to teach charity.

This book is based on a belief that a great many of the problems and concerns of preteens and teenagers are based on their self-centeredness. If we can get our adolescents to get their minds off of themselves and their worries, most of their problems are solved. If we can get them to get their minds on to the needs of others, they cease to be part of the problem and become part of the solution. Perhaps the best name for this ability to think about others rather than self is charity.

This is not a psychological or analytical book on teenage behavior, nor is it a book of generalizations about what happens or should happen at each age or phase of adolescent development. Rather, it is a method book, an exercise book aimed at the objective of learning and teaching charity. It is an organized, categorized list of techniques to help you increase the charity and extra-centeredness of your children . . . and of yourself. (Extra-centeredness is the ability to think of and feel for other people. The opposite of self-centeredness.)

Charity is made up of several elements: the ability to see and observe, the ability to feel and communicate, the ability to empathize and give service and encouragement to others. The goal is not necessarily to make children into "good Samaritans" or people who spend their full time doing good turns and serving others. Such a goal with busy, volatile, moody teenagers would be unrealistic. Most of their service to others will come after the teenage years as they become missionaries and parents. The attitudes and skills that go into service and charity, however, can best be developed in children while they are in their adolescence. It is these charity-related attitudes and skills that this book is about.

We feel that charity must be learned, one element at a time. We also know that it is difficult for busy parents to concentrate on learning or teaching more than one concept at a time. Thus we have written about one element of charity in each of twelve chapters. We suggest that parents concentrate on one chapter each month, making the book a one-year program for developing charity in themselves and in their children.

Before we get to those one-a-month chapters, though, let's think together about ourselves and our children. The simple fact is that teenagers are tough—tough to raise and tough to live with. To say they are a challenge might win first prize in a contest of understatements! A friend of ours says that the only thing she can think of to compare her teenager with is a werewolf or a Mr. Hyde. The daylight of his sweet childhood was transformed by the full moon of adolescence. He grew fangs! He started to bite!

There aren't any perfect teenagers, but then again, there aren't any perfect parents. There aren't even any perfect solutions for teenage problems. But there are some things that help.

Whom the Book Is For

Though this is a book for all parents of teenagers, it is especially for parents of young teenagers and preteen adolescents. It is a simple fact of life that ten-year-olds are more teachable than sixteen-year-olds. Many parents will find that some of this book's methods work well with eight-year-olds and even younger children. We have called the book Teaching Children Charity rather than Teaching Teenagers Charity for two reasons. One is to emphasize that charity should be taught to eight-year-olds. The other is to remind us of the precious principle that our offspring continue to be our children—God's children—regardless of their age.

In the method section of each chapter, we have attempted to suggest a range of ideas, some particularly suited to preteens, some aimed at mid-teens, and some for older teens.

This book is not written for parents of children with severe problems such as drug addiction, serious criminal activity, or even total alienation from family. We leave such problems to experts who are far more qualified to deal with them than we are.

Rather, it is for parents who want a program to avoid those problems. It is for parents who want to act rather than react, who prefer the positive notion of "parenting by objective" over the negative approach of solving problems when they grow too big to ignore. Our belief is that the best defense is a good offense, that parents who seek to give their children greater capacity for charity will, in the process, give themselves freedom from many problems that would otherwise arise. We believe that service, empathy, and charity are preventive medicine.

But don't get the idea that you can come around to the Eyres' house looking for examples of perfect teenagers. What you would find instead are the normal hassles of a house full of children and a couple of amateur parents trying to keep their heads above water. We wrote the book for ourselves along with other struggling parents like ourselves. We wrote it because we want our children's teenage years to be the happiest time of their lives—and of ours.

Joy, Responsibility, Charity

Many years ago, when our older children were still small, we decided that we needed clear, specific objectives for our parenting. The problem-solving, defensive approach of many parenting books didn't appeal to us, and we began to ponder the question, "What do we want to give to our children?"

From the beauty of the Latter-day Saint perspective, our children really are God's children. We are stewards over them, and they are, in fact, our brothers and sisters. Thus, we can go beyond the question, "What do we want to give them?" and ask, "What does God, their Father, want them to have?"

And he has told us the answer. In 2 Nephi he says that joy is mortality's purpose. Throughout scripture he tells us that this life, with its agony and its veil of forgetfulness, is designed to help us become fully responsible for ourselves and our actions. And he tells us directly through his apostles that no matter what other gifts we possess, we are nothing without charity.

These thoughts have been the basis for the teaching children series: Teaching Children Joy, for parents of preschoolers; Teaching Children Responsibility, geared to the capacities of elementary-school-age children; and now Teaching Children Charity. We feel that the three books are, to some extent, tied to each other. We believe that a small child who obtains the joy of self-esteem, confidence, and security can understand and accept responsibility as it comes to him. And we believe that a secure, responsible adolescent is well prepared to learn and develop characteristics of service and charity.

This book then, like its two predecessors, is an attempt to understand one of God's goals for his children, and to present methods and techniques for teaching those objectives to the children he has sent to us.

Why Charity Is So Important—and So Challenging

Scripture treats the word charity with singular importance. Peter, in one place, refers to it as the final great virtue to add, and in another place says it is important "above all things." (2 Peter 1:7; 1 Peter 4:8.)

Moroni teaches that we cannot inherit God's kingdom without charity. (Ether 12:34.)

Paul, who calls charity the "bond of perfectness," says that it is greater than faith and hope, and that it is the "end of the commandment." In his most awesome characterization of the word, Paul says that even if he speaks with the tongues of angels, has the gift of prophecy, understands all mysteries and all knowledge, and has the faith to move mountains, he is nothing without charity. (See Colossians 3:14; 1 Corinthians 13:1-2, 13; 1 Timothy 1:5.)

Why is charity so vital? Simply because it is the ultimate solution. There is no problem in the world or in any human heart that could not be directly or indirectly solved by the exercise of charity. Charity, as we will discuss in the next section, is the pure love of Christ. The power and magnitude of that love is a greater factor and force than anything else that exists.

But can it be learned by parents, let alone taught to children? Can it penetrate teenagers who sometimes seem unlovable as well as unteachable? Can such an ethereal concept as charity really solve the gritty, frightening problems of the real world?

Let's look at what parents are up against and at why the preteen and teen years are usually the biggest challenge a family faces. There are some very definite reasons.

When the changes of adolescence, the changes of mid-life, and the changes in our world and our society come together and converge within our families, we feel the pressure. Sometimes it feels like an explosion!

Can charity neutralize the pressure? Can charity become a practical, day-to-day atmosphere and pattern of life that prevents some problems and solves others? We think it can—see if you do.
