Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Charity ( 1986)

Chapter 3

The Prescription (Windows)

"Above all these things have fervent charity among yourselves for charity shall cover the multitude of sins." (1 Peter 4:8.)

Charity provides its possessor with confidence, with humility and with sensitivity to others. These are tools that fix any break, prescriptions that cure any ill.

Mirrors—Windows

Some of our older church buildings still have cry rooms just off the chapel where parents can retreat with extra-noisy babies. Many of these cry rooms feature a pane of one-way glass that is a mirror to those sitting in the chapel and a window to those sitting in the cry room looking out.

Metaphorically, all of us are surrounded by such one-way glass. Turned one way, the glass is a mirror, causing us to view all of life as a self-centered reflection of ourselves. But we each have the power to reverse the glass, to turn mirrors into windows. Doing so is an important step in the obtaining of charity, and the "windows" of charity are the solution to virtually every adolescent and teenage difficulty.

What Charity Is and How It Works

Before we can begin to apply the solution of charity, before we can start talking about teaching charity to our children (or even to ourselves), we need to understand what it is.

The dictionary says charity is "Christian good feeling, kindness, lenience in judging others, alms giving." When asked for synonyms, some would say "compassion," "empathy," "welfare," or "relief."

Restored scripture gives us a definition of charity so complete that it justifies the prophets who have spoken of it as the greatest of all qualities. Charity, says Mormon in Moroni 7:47, is "the pure love of Christ."

What does that mean to you? Could it mean Christ's pure love for us? Could it mean our pure love for Christ? Could it mean loving others with the same pure love with which Christ loves them?

Could it mean all three?

Perhaps these are not three separate interpretations of the definition, but three aspects of one interpretation. Perhaps they are the three corners of the same triangle or the three legs of one stool.

One who truly feels Christ's love for him cannot help but love Him back and love his brothers and sisters with the same pure love. One who loves Christ cannot help feeling his love in return and giving that love to others. And one who loves his fellow man with a pure love comes directly to love Christ and to feel Christ's love for him.

Thus the pure love of Christ (or charity) is not one-dimensional or one-directional. It flows in all directions. It goes and comes out of each person who has it. It surrounds and engulfs. it lifts and refines. It heals and humbles.

Think of the word charity for a moment and of the triangular definition of "the pure love of Christ."

Now think for another moment of the natural consequences of the triangle.

With these results in mind—the results of these three aspects of pure love—we can relabel our triangle.

What we are saying is that the pure love of Christ produces within people certain qualities of character, qualities of soul that are the ultimate solutions to problems on all levels.

Christ himself was the epitome and example of all good qualities, even those that we often think of as opposites or mutually exclusive. For example, Christ had broad vision and lofty goals and yet was completely interested in "insignificant persons." He had in abundance the "masculine" qualities of strength, resolve, and purpose, and yet epitomized the "feminine" virtues of sensitivity and gentleness. Lao Tsu, a Chinese philosopher who lived six centuries before Christ, taught that the whole universe was held in balance by the yin and yang—the two great opposites—the light and dark, the hot and cold, the masculine and feminine. He also said that if a being ever came to the earth who was both the yin and the yang, that being would not be man, he would be God.

Such a being did come to earth six centuries later.

If Christ himself was the perfect incarnation of all good qualities, even those that seem opposite, then likewise the pure love of Christ builds within us qualities of good that might otherwise be mutually exclusive. This can easily be illustrated by running the sides of our triangle model together. We create a person with "extra-centered, confident humility" even though we have often thought of confidence and humility somewhat as opposites. We can see how, in the pure love of Christ, they are complements to each other, both stemming from our relationship with Him. (Who would not be confident, knowing he has the love and assistance of such a brother. And who would not feel humble in relation to such a brother?)

The words can be combined in any order. Think of a person who has humble, extra-centered confidence, or confident, extra-centered humility, or humble, confident, extra-centeredness.

Any way the words are arranged, they create a balanced, model human being, the kind each of us wants for a friend, the kind each of us wants for a son or daughter, the kind each of us wants to be!

Some Stories Revisited

Think of the fruits of charity according to our triangle model: one part confidence, one part humility, one part extra-centeredness. Then let's take a quick look back at some of the children mentioned earlier.

Remember thirteen-year-old Allison, painfully shy; sixteen-year-olds Becky and Kelly, and fifteen-year-old Larry, trying to "find themselves" through rebellious friends or immorality or drugs; and Jeremy, the lazy fifteen-year-old. The confidence aspect of charity would do a great deal for each of them. You may want to reread their stories and realize that their solution is confidence. A teenager who learns the true principles of charity will have the confidence that is the root solution to these problems.

Remember critical, know-it-all Patsy; talented, unfocused Norm; intellectual Tim; and confident but insensitive Diedra? Each needs the humility effect of charity.

All of the children mentioned, particularly missionary Bill, immature Conrad, sloppy Glen, dishonest Lisa, and inconsiderate Jill would be happier if some of their self-centered thought patterns were replaced with the extra-centeredness of charity.

The solution to the problem of each of these teenagers in each of these stories lies in the principle of charity. Charity would turn their mirrors to windows, removing the self-centeredness that produces shyness in some, laziness and immaturity in some, and rudeness and rebellion in others.

The children are not the only ones who need to turn mirrors into windows. Some of the problems discussed in the stories resulted from a lack of charity not in the children but in their parents.

Self-oriented, mirror-gazing parents may become aggravated by minor amounts of normal teenage nonconformity because of its impact on their own image or reputation. Or they may become personally hurt or offended by the new independence and strong opinions of an adolescent rather than understanding that such breaking away is a normal and healthy part of growing up.

Parents who had acquired the qualities of charity would be able to understand the need for independence being expressed in various ways by the teenagers in the stories. They would think more of the evolving needs of their children and less of their own inconvenience or embarrassment. And as they tried to teach their children the principles of charity, their own charity would allow them to look for the unique and real character of their own children rather than to try to make them over into their own preconception of what their children should be.

Charity, then, as it is developed by parents and taught to children, becomes something of a panacea. It becomes a solution for some problems, an elimination of others, and a preventer of still others.

But charity is not easy to learn or to teach. Some would argue that it can never be learned or earned, only received as a gift from God.

Whether it is earned or given, charity does involve certain capacities of understanding, seeing, feeling, communicating, and doing. It is these capacities at which this book takes aim, suggesting methods, techniques, and ideas through which they can be given and gained.

How to Read (and Do) the Rest of This Book

The capacities or abilities or skills that go into charity are like the facets of a well-cut stone. Each supports and enhances the others and contributes to the beauty of the whole.

As in an equation, five elements must be added together to equal charity. They are best learned (and taught) in sequence. First, we must understand the pure love of Christ and how it can work within us. Second, we must learn to observe with equal depth, to perceive what is going on around us, and inside us, and inside others. Third, we must school our feelings, tuning them and learning to apply them to the needs and circumstances of others. Fourth, we must learn to lovingly communicate both what we see and what we feel. Finally, we can form habits of doing something about what we feel, of giving and serving, and of doing it anonymously.

This charity equation becomes the outline and the sequence for the twelve "months" of this book. The equation is:

The remainder of this book is composed of twelve "months" because, like its predecessors, Teaching Children Joy and Teaching Children Responsibility, it is designed to be absorbed and implemented one facet per month over the course of a year.

You may (and we hope you will) read entirely through the book first, but then we hope you will return to Month One and spend a full thirty days on it with your family, then a second month on Month Two, and so on. We believe that a key to effective parenting (and to effective living, for that matter) is to concentrate on one thing at a time. In a month, behavior patterns can be established as good habits that will continue after the teaching emphasis has shifted to the next facet.

Most of what follows in each "month" is methods, ideas, and techniques on how to gain certain elements of charity and how to teach them to your children. Some of the methods will appeal to you and work with your teenager. Others will not. Pick out the ones that ring true for you and read right on past the ones that don't. Use the shoe store approach: Look at all the ideas, try on those that you like, and keep the ones that fit and feel the best.

You will notice that some methods are used in more than one month. For example, certain writing techniques, perception games, and even the use of "ancestor experiences" are introduced in one chapter and then reused (but with a different emphasis) in another chapter. Certain concepts and words such as "mental effort" and "serendipity" are also repeated.

This repetition is intentional, because the methods work in more than one way and the concepts apply to more than one skill. Most importantly, they are repeated because they are so relevant to true charity that they benefit us more each time we use them.

Each of the twelve "months," while dealing with a different aspect of charity, has the same format and the same five subheadings:

Getting Started

Before beginning with Month One, call a family meeting with all children eight and older. The ideal time to do this is at the beginning of a month, on a fast Sunday. Drawing on your own understanding of charity and on what you have read in the first three chapters of this book, discuss the following points:

Our challenge to you is to read this book and implement it a month at a time, to use the methods and suggestions that you like and add your own ideas to them, to invest a year in the pursuit and discovery of charity and in the teaching of it to your adolescent children.
