Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Charity ( 1986)

Section II

Understanding

The Book of Mormon defines charity as "the pure love of Christ." It is a beautiful definition and a most interesting one, because it lends itself to three separate and compelling interpretations. It could mean his pure love of us. It could mean our pure love of him. It could mean to love others with his pure love.

The first step in the cultivation of charity is to understand that it means all three; to understand that any one of the three leads inescapably to the other two; to understand that each of the three can be taught to our children.

Month 1

His Pure Love for Us

Understanding Observing Feeling Communicating + Doing_______________ =Charity

"Now I know that this love which thou hast had for the children of men is charity." (Ether 12:34.)

I. Illustrations and Stories

I took a shortcut through a dark alleyway one day in the middle of a large city. As my eyes adjusted to the dimmed light, I noticed a boy hunched in a dingy corner with a bird cage in his hands. As I drew closer I noticed a sneer on the boy's face and saw that he was tormenting the small birds inside the cage, poking them with a stick.

Feeling the helplessness and terror of the birds, I approached the boy and asked, "Where did you get those birds?"

"I caught them in the field," he replied.

"What are you doing with them?"

"Oh, I'm just playing with them. If I poke them just right I can make them fight with each other."

"What are you going to do when you're done playing with them?"

"I'm going to kill them!"

Startled by the boy's cruelty, I responded, "I'd like to buy those birds."

"Oh, you don't want these birds, mister. They're ordinary old field birds. They can't sing or nothin'. They're only good for pokin'."

"How much will you take for the birds?"

The sneer deepened across the boy's face. "Okay," he said, "I'll sell 'em, but the price is all the money in your wallet."

I paid him what he asked. I took the birds out into a clearing, opened the door of their cage, and set them free.

Long ago, a dark spirit set out to trap mankind. Through his intellect and cunning, he succeeds often.

If one were to ask him what he is doing with these children, he might say, "I'm poking them, trying to wound them, trying to make them turn and hurt each other." And when asked what he wants to do with them ultimately, his chilling answer is "to kill them."

Into this situation steps one who says, "I want to buy them; what is the price?"

The answer: "All of your blood, all of your tears."

He pays the price. He buys us. We owe him our lives, our freedom, our chance to return to God. (Note: This is a paraphrase of a story told on the radio by Paul Harvey.)

A friend of ours had a dream that she has never forgotten. Unlike most dreams that fade, this one somehow grows stronger. In it she was sitting on a mountainside overlooking a blue lake and listening to one who stood, speaking, holding his audience spellbound. She became aware that it was Christ, that he was giving the Sermon on the Mount. The feeling she remembers is one of awe and of fear: fear that he would look at her, that his eyes would meet hers, and that he would see into her, through her, discovering all her faults. She prayed that he would not look.

And then he did look at her, directly into her eyes. In an instant her fear was transformed into love. She knew that he saw all that she was, all that was inside her. But she also knew he would always love her. She was warmed and softened and lifted by his gaze. She prayed that he would never look away.

A small boy was walking home with his younger sister. The driver of a speeding car failed to see them. The boy tried to pull his sister out of harm's way but the car struck her a glancing blow and spun her to the pavement. The ambulance took them both to the hospital. Doctors operated on the girl while her brother waited. A doctor emerged to ask the boy a question: "She lost a lot of blood, son. Since you're her brother, your blood will probably match and might save her life. Would you give some of your blood to your sister?"

The boy swallowed hard, then looked directly into the doctor's eyes and said, "Yes."

Much later, when the operation was successfully over, the doctor went into the room where the boy was lying on a cot. When he heard that his sister was fine the boy smiled warmly. He was still very pale, though, and when he looked up again he asked, "Doctor, when do I die?"

A popular short film produced by the Church attempts to graphically portray the overpowering love that our Heavenly Father has for us. It is the story of a man who operates the switching mechanism of a railroad track. just before the train arrives, he spots his only son out on the bridge, standing on the tracks. He must choose between the life of his son and the lives of those on the train. He throws the switch and sacrifices his son.

Feeling Heavenly Father's and Christ's love, and trying to understand it, is the first step in gaining charity. It is the first step because as we feel this love, we can return it and extend it to others. It is always easier to reciprocate love than to initiate it. Therefore, as we learn to be more conscious of Christ's pure love for us, we will better understand what it is and how it can be returned to him as it is extended to others.

II. Approaches for Parents

We suppose that anyone who believes in Christ believes in his love—knows of that love, at least academically. But do we feel his love for us, and does that feeling transform us, warm us, lift us? The answer to this question, of course, lies in the extent and depth of our relationship with God. And the pursuit of that relationship is a personal and individual matter. Nevertheless, there are some approaches that can make us more aware of his love.

A. Count your blessings. It's an old phrase; we hear it often, we even sing it. But it works. We have a friend who occasionally has trouble sleeping and yet looks forward to his insomnia because he has learned to count blessings instead of sheep. He relaxes his body, closes his eyes, and literally counts his blessings, picturing each one in his mind. He claims that he enjoys it so much that he is always a little bit disappointed when he falls asleep.

Try this when you're wide awake, too. Try it anytime you want to replenish your appreciation and awareness of God and of Christ. Be specific and particular about your blessings. Your awareness will grow, and you will never run out of things to count.

B. Offer a "gratitude only" prayer. An extension of the first approach is to thank the Lord for your blessings as you count them. Whenever we had a depressed missionary in London, we challenged him to kneel down for a full fifteen minutes and do nothing but thank the Lord for every blessing he could think of. The method never failed, and no missionary ever ran out of blessings to count (or at least none dared tell their mission president that they had).

C. Ask for the Holy Ghost. One of the most frequent admonitions in scripture is to ask. It is interesting to ponder why this is so. As a loving Father, there is so much that God wants to give us. But his commitment to our agency prevents him from automatically giving us the things we need without any thought or request on our part. Therefore, he asks us to ask.

In 3 Nephi, chapter 19, we are told that Christ's apostles, as they prayed, desired one thing more than any other: the gift of the Holy Ghost. The gift of the Holy Ghost, according to Parley P. Pratt, "quickens all the intellectual faculties, increases, enlarges, expands, and purifies all the natural passions and affections . . . inspires, develops, cultivates, and matures all the fine-toned sympathies, joys, tastes, kindred feelings, and affections of our nature. . . . It invigorates all the faculties of the physical and intellectual man." (Key to the Science of Theology [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978], p. 61.)

The Holy Ghost also conveys the love of God and of Christ to our hearts. In the presence of the Spirit, we feel that love and begin to be able to return it and to pass it on to others.

It is a mistake to think that we can earn the Holy Ghost. We must strive to be worthy of his presence, of course. But it is well to remember that the Holy Ghost is a gift. We need to ask for that gift sincerely and often. Then, as we feel the Spirit's enlightening, calming, love-conveying presence, we must act in accordance with its peace in order to retain it.

We must learn to practice those two three-letter words that begin with "a." We must ask and act.

D. Implement the next two chapters of the book. We must remember that the best approach in seeking to understand the Lord's love for us is to show love for him and to try to emulate the kind of love he had for others.

E. Stewardship. Reminding ourselves that God owns all and has given us stewardship over so much is another way of trying to grasp his love for us. He has put this wondrous earth in our care, given us incredible physical bodies, even allowed us the Godlike privilege of procreation through which we become stewards over others of his children. In simple terms, God loves us enough to give us all that he has.

F. Use the priesthood. One of God's greatest gifts to us is his priesthood. In addition to being his power, the priesthood is a thrilling manifestation of his love. The more we use it, the more we feel that love. Fathers who hold the priesthood should bless their wives and children not only in times of crisis, but in times of need. Children should be encouraged to ask for blessings when they feel deeply troubled or worried or when they face a problem or opportunity where they need strength beyond their own.

G. The sacrament. The sacrament time, as we renew our covenants, can also be a regular time for reflection on Christ's love for us. As we quietly consider his atonement and try to ponder what he suffered, the extent of his love becomes clearer in our minds.

H. "Sweet prayer." Sometimes our personal prayers can tend to become somewhat routine and superficial. Other times, usually not as often as we wish, our prayers take on a certain sweetness as we feel the Lord's love for us. In routine prayers we are often anxious to finish, to climb into bed at the end of the day, or to be on our way in the mornings. In sweet prayer we have the opposite feeling. We do not want the prayer to end; we want to prolong it, to keep the warmth and spirit as long as possible.

Sweet prayer happens when we want it to happen badly enough, when we stay on our knees a little longer, thank the Lord a little harder, ask him a little more deeply for his forgiveness.

It might be unrealistic to expect every prayer to be deep and "sweet." But it is the most direct way of all to feel God's pure love, and it is a way that is always open and available to us.

I. Reflect. Think about the love you feel for your children, what you would do for them, the sacrifices you make and are willing to make for them. Use the emotion you feel as a small indication of God's love for each of his children and Christ's for each of his younger brothers and sisters.

J. Your own methods. Take a moment, before going on, and list other ways that lead you to feel the Lord's love more directly and personally. Think back to some specific times when you have been particularly aware of his love, perhaps in the temple, or in filling Church assignments, or in quiet reflection or meditation. Take the time to make a short list.

III. Exercises to Teach Children

A. Fast Sunday discussion and pretest (to establish the goal of better understanding Christ's love for us during the month ahead).

Note: in all twelve "months" or chapters, the first method is a fast Sunday discussion. In this way, fast Sundays become the transition time when you shift your focus from one aspect of charity to another. The aspect for the coming month can also become the subject of the day's fasting and prayer.

Carry on with the introductory discussion outlined in chapter 3. Refer to the "equation" you have written on a blackboard or chart and point out that the first thing we must do in developing charity is to understand as much as we can about Christ's love for us.

Then build a brief concluding discussion around the following points:

Then say, "To help us measure how much we learn this month, we're going to take a short test today on how much we understand and how much we think about Jesus' love for us. At the end of the month (next fast Sunday) we'll take the same test again to see how much we've improved."

Have each family member (include yourself) write his name on a blank piece of paper and draw a line down the center. Tell them that they will only be using the left column today. Have each person write the numbers 1, 2, and 3, evenly spaced, down the left margin and attempt to answer the three following questions:

After everyone (including parents) has answered all three questions, collect the papers and tell the children not to worry about how well they did on the questions. Tell them that everyone will take the same test after a month of thinking about Christ's love.

B. Example (to let them see and emulate your understanding of Christ's love). As with every principle, example is the best teacher. Be open and verbal about your own understanding of Christ's pure love. Let your children see and observe your gratitude. Look for opportunities to mention things you are thankful for and to connect that gratitude to God. Take every chance to testify to them of God's love and to let them hear you speak of it to others.

C. Gratitude (to help them connect their blessings with God's love).

D. Discuss the atonement (to help them understand this most dramatic and important manifestation of the Savior's love).

E. Increase children's perspective (to help children understand the wisdom and intelligence of God's love).

Ask the children what the story is a metaphor for. Then discuss the wisdom and restraint of God's love.

The best name is "ten ways to be happy." Discuss how laws and commandments make us happy and how they are therefore another manifestation of his love.

F. Convey how personal Christ's love is (to help children feel their individual importance to Christ).

G. A symbolic game (to help children grasp how much love God has given and realize that they can repay him only by giving love to others).

In a family home evening or similar setting, give children a large number of marbles (or Lego blocks, or toothpicks, or any small object that you have several hundred of). Tell them that the marbles represent God's love for us. Ask them to name some of the specific gifts the marbles could represent that show God's love. They may name any sort of blessing or opportunity, from material things to the teachings and insights of the Church to the atonement itself.

Then ask, "When someone gives you so much love, what does it make you want to do?" (Answer: be grateful and give love back to the giver.) Then ask, "How can we give love back to God?" (Answer: by obeying him, respecting him, and showing love to others of his children.)

Have children represent this "return of love" by giving a marble to another person or back to you and saying what it represents. (For example, I help this person with a task, comfort this person who is old, I'm friendly to this child who looks lonely, I am honest in a difficult situation.)

As a child gives a marble back to you or to another person, give him two more to replace the one he has just given. Explain that this is the way God's love works. We keep getting further in debt to him because every time we do something right he rewards us with more love, with more good feelings, and with the warm feeling of the Holy Ghost.

Read together Mosiah 2:20-25 where we are told that we are ungrateful servants because no matter what good thing we do to repay God's love, he immediately rewards us with more of his love. Ask the children, what does it mean to be a servant? an unprofitable servant?

Pursue the discussion in any way you are able that underscores to the children how all-encompassing Christ's love for them is.

H. "Star Story" (to help children sense more accurately their individual importance and God's personal love for them).

On a clear night, point out the Andromeda galaxy to the children. If you know where the constellation of the Pegasus Square is, Andromeda is a faint spot of light-mist just beyond the lower left-hand comer of the square. Explain that the speck of light is not another star (like all other lights that we see with the naked eye) but another spiral galaxy as large as our Milky Way Galaxy. Andromeda is 750,000 light years away, so the light we see as we look up actually left that galaxy 750,000 years ago. Andromeda is composed of more than one hundred billion suns, and although it is the only other galaxy we can see without telescopes, there are hundreds of millions of other galaxies of equal or larger size.

Continue the discussion, pointing out that the creations of God are so vast that we cannot comprehend them and that our own earth is just a tiny speck in this seemingly endless universe.

Then, in your own words, give the following punch line: "When we look out on the night sky, we see God's handiwork; we see what he has made and organized. But when I look at your face, I see one of God's actual children who is more important to him than all of the stars and other creations combined."

Emphasize to a child that not only is he, God's child, but he is also a unique child. God has none other exactly like him, and never has and never will. And God, who knows everything about him, loves him completely and totally.

I. Your own methods. Think for a moment of other ways to make your children more acutely aware of God's love for them. Think of recent experiences that illustrate it. Think of how you can express your own sense of his pure love for your family. Jot down anything that comes to mind that you can use during this month's focus on Christ's pure love for us.

J. Post-test (to review and reinforce what has been learned).

On fast Sunday, at the end of the month you spend on this chapter, get out the papers on which you took the "pretest" last fast Sunday. Retake the test, writing the answers this time in the right-hand column of the divided pages.

Discuss how much more aware everyone has been of Christ's love during the month. Discuss how you can stay aware, and bring up the "family focal point" that follows.

IV. Family Focal Point

Sunday dinners (to keep the perceptions of Christ's love vivid in our minds on an ongoing basis). To stay aware of his love, it is important to have some kind of recurring yet simple procedure that serves as a reminder.

In our family we have found that building certain traditions into our normal pattern of activities on Sunday can accomplish this. They all occur at our Sunday dinner table.

What we are saying, then, is that the Sunday dinner table can become a valuable focal point for this first dimension of charity. The environment can be set by removing the phone from the hook, using the best dishes and tablecloth, playing some soft, sacred music, and perhaps eating by candlelight. Children of all ages respond well to traditions, and the traditions built around the Sunday dinner can be among the most memorable of all (and among the most useful in focusing a family's understanding of Christ's love).

Summary

The skills of observing and listening, feeling and communicating that are taught later in this book do not become integral parts of charity unless those who learn them have a basic understanding and conviction of Christ's love for them and of the ability to return that love and spread it to others.

If adolescents can be made more aware of God's love for them, two very important things will happen.

First, they will want to reciprocate that love, and the desire to return love is the basic seed of true charity. It is easier to return love than to initiate it. As children feel Christ's love and see it illustrated around them, they will begin to think of obedience and of kindness to others as ways of reciprocating his love.

Second, they will feel the heightened sense of self-worth and self-esteem that being loved always creates. Adolescents (and indeed all people) can become good givers only when they feel the security of loving themselves. Their self-love is enhanced as they are made more aware of the love of God who knows and understands them completely. It is for this reason that this chapter, while more theoretical than some that follow, comes first.

The Apostle John tells us that "perfect love casteth out fear." (1 John 4:18.) As we work to help our adolescents feel Christ's perfect love, we can literally drive fear out of them—fear of peer pressure, fear of insecurity. Love casts out not only fear, but also jealousy, hate, resentment, bitterness, pride, and a whole host of other problems that adolescents are particularly susceptible to.

One final reason for beginning with this chapter: Becoming more aware of the love Christ has for our children makes us more aware of our own love for them. The level of success we will have in teaching our children charity will be in direct proportion to the level of love we feel for them.
