Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Charity ( 1986)

Month 2

Our Pure Love for Him

Understanding Observing Feeling Communicating + Doing____________ =Charity

"Now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of these is charity." (1 Corinthians 13:13.)

Lord, might I be but as a saw, A plane, a chisel in thy hand. No Lord, I take it back in awe; Such prayer for me is far too grand. I pray thee, rather let me lie As on thy bench the favored wood; Thy saw, thy plane, thy chisel ply And work me into something good. George McDonald

"The more we ponder where we stand in relation to Christ, the more we realize that we do not stand at all, we only kneel." (Neal A. Maxwell.)

I. Illustrations and Stories

George McDonald, Scottish philosopher, writer, father of fourteen, and Christian thinker par excellence, whose writings are enjoying a swell of new popularity, possessed a way of capturing the true Christian spirit of humility in a few words. His "prayer" at the opening of this chapter holds the key to how we can love Christ. It is not by trying to "repay" him, for we could never do that. It is not even by being a tool in his hands, for that notion implies too much self-importance. Rather, it is by giving ourselves to him, by letting him do with us what he wishes, by submitting our "wood" to his tools so that we will become what he wishes us to be. We can make this gift of self through our words, our actions, and our thoughts.

Ammon, eldest of the sons of Mosiah, who experienced a miraculous conversion after years of rebellion, demonstrated his love for the Lord by giving up any opportunities for earthly power, position, or wealth and placing himself fully and unconditionally in the Lord's service. He placed no time limit or other conditions on that service, nor did he hesitate to commit himself verbally to this unconditional gift of self. Nowhere is this better illustrated than in Alma 17:23 where Ammon approaches the Lamanite king and says "I desire to dwell among this people for a time; yea, and perhaps until the day I die."

In the opening quote by George McDonald, he uses the word awe. C. S. Lewis, who thought a great deal of McDonald's views on Christ, said, "Beware of anyone who calls himself a Christian but possesses insufficient awe of Christ."

The scriptures tell us that we should both love and fear the Lord. Fear may be partially defined as awe.

There is a tendency at times within the culture of the Church to familiarize Christ too much. We say, "He is our brother, therefore we are alike and similar." Too much familiarization can destroy our awe and our worship of Christ. True, he is our brother, but He is also our God. He has all power. He has created this very earth. The differences between him and us are the differences between perfection and imperfection.

Part of the process of loving Christ is thinking about him. I observed a bishop in a ward in England during the passing of the sacrament one Sunday. He was a convert of only a couple of years. His head was nodding, his eyes closed, and I wrongly judged him to be asleep and unaware for the moment of the purpose and commitments of the sacrament.

Then, as I watched, I saw a tear flow out from under his eyelash and roll down his cheek. I knew then that he was deep in thought, deep in contemplation of Christ and the sacrifice he made for us.

I turned my judgment toward myself and resolved to think harder and deeper about the Lord and about my love for him.

Those who think frequently and deeply about Christ are those who have the best chance of loving him deeply enough to know him. Study alone will not accomplish the task because there is a wide difference between knowing about him and knowing him.

The story is told of three men who died and found themselves beyond the veil. They were ushered in turn into a white room where they were to be interviewed. The first man entered and the interviewer asked him a single question, "What do you know of Christ?" The first man said that he knew little, that he attended church only a few times and was not as religious a man as he wished he had been.

The second man entered and, when asked the same question, responded by saying he knew much. He had attended church and studied religion all his life. He gave the interviewer a lengthy description on all that he knew of Christ.

The third man entered the room, looked into the eyes of the interviewer, and dropped to his knees, crying out through his tears of joy, "My Lord, my God, how long I have waited to see thy face."

Many years ago, while I was serving as a missionary in New York City, a knock came at our door late one evening as we prepared for bed in the high-rise apartment building where we lived. Opening the door, I was surprised to see the General Authority who was visiting our mission. He was staying that night in the same building. He told us he was alone that night and asked if he could join us for prayer.

Being the senior companion, I invited him in and asked if he would offer the prayer. He thanked me but said he would prefer for me to say it.

I did so. We knelt around our battered old coffee table and I attempted to give a thorough prayer, not wanting to leave anything out in this man's presence. Partway through my lengthy prayer, I heard the unmistakable sound of a pencil writing on paper. Not daring to look up, I went on, assuming that my companion, new in the field, bored with my inflated prayer, and perhaps not even realizing who our visitor was, had decided to begin his nightly letter to his girlfriend.

But when I finished and looked up, it was the General Authority who held the pencil. I glanced furtively at the writing on his yellow pad and in my nineteen-year-old mind wondered if he had done an evaluation of my prayer. I could imagine a B on content, a C on delivery, and perhaps a D + on brevity.

He said nothing other than to thank us and went straight to the door. Then, just as he was leaving, he turned back and said (in the most matter-of-fact way) "You see, when I pray, the Lord often gives me answers, but I am somewhat forgetful so I try to take notes on what he says."

Loving Christ is the natural consequence of feeling his love for us. There are certain attitudes and practices, however, that can extend, magnify, and purify the love we feel for him. This "month" attempts to mention some of these ways, both as they apply to us and as they apply to our children.

II. Approaches for Parents

As with almost everything else, children learn to love by watching others love. Your own love for Christ, and how you manifest it, will be the greatest teacher your children will ever know.

A. Prayer. We love those with whom we spend thoughtful, mutually interested time. When our prayers are real and intense, we are spending time with our Heavenly Father and with Christ in whose name we pray. When prayer becomes a literal dialogue, as it was with the General Authority in the earlier illustration, we mill find that we are talking to and listening to the Lord—and therefore able to both feel and express our love to him more deeply.

Couples who wish to make prayer both more meaningful and more uniting may find it helpful to both speak to the Lord within the same prayer. The partner who starts the prayer, instead of closing when finished, squeezes the other partner's hand and the spouse continues the same prayer. The hand-squeeze alternating may go back and forth several times before the prayer is ended. Such a practice can turn a couple's prayer into a literal three-way partnership with God. It can also, as any deep and sincere prayer, intensify their love for him.

B. Scripture study. Once again, we love those with whom we spend time. When we read the scriptures with concentration and with an effort to project ourselves into what we are reading, we are spending time with the prophets and with the Lord.

It is not the quantity of scripture that we read, but the quality of the reading that counts. One or two verses, thoughtfully (and lovingly) read, can mean more than two chapters read through to reach some "number of pages" goal.

Read thoughtfully, the scriptures are like a trigger that can shoot into our minds the very reassurance, the very idea, the very comfort, the very insight that we need at the time. Children will observe not only the practice but the result (the effect of the scriptures on us).

C. Discussion. To learn more of Christ is to love him more. One of the best vehicles for learning is a discussion or study group. We are impressed with people we know who have formed small scripture reading and discussion groups with stimulating friends—particularly when the objective of such groups is to seek greater insight into Christ.

D. Attitude. Children are rarely fooled (or influenced positively) by what happens on the surface or by parents who "go through the motions." They often learn more about our love for the Lord from our attitudes than from our actions. A grudging payment of tithing does not teach our children much about loving God. Nor does the half-hearted or resentful or even dutiful filling of any Church calling or assignment. On the other hand, if we take every opportunity to show our love through our gifts, our callings, and our obedience, children will see it and emulate it. We should watch for chances, in attitudes and actual words, to express the perspective that we enjoy even the slightest opportunity to return to God a tiny measure of all he has given us. Three key words can help with this attitude.

E. Sacrifice. Historically, a way of showing love for God was to make sacrifices to him. Today, one of the key sacrifices asked of us is our time. In addition to the time required to fill callings, we should sacrifice more TV time, newspaper time, even sleeping time to gain more spiritual nourishment (and express more love) through prayer and scripture study.

F. Worship. There are many different kinds of love. We love a child by nurturing and caring for and teaching him. We love a spouse by romancing, by supporting, by sharing. We love a friend by listening, respecting, helping. And we love God by worshipping him. Worship includes obedience and sacrifice, but it also includes things like praising, thanksgiving, singing, and making frequent, prayerful commitments.

To those who know the beauty of God's plan and the opportunities given by Christ's atonement, worship should be a sort of celebration. There should be joy, even ecstasy, as we think of the Lord's perfection and therefore of his predictability and reliability and of our own ultimate safety as we lean on his understanding rather than our own.

No time is more opportune for worship than during the ordinance of the sacrament. We can make this time, if we wish, a frequent and regular expression of our love for Christ and a moment when we come to know him more and more by thinking about who he is and what he has done for us.

G. Your own methods A. Fast Sunday discussion and pretest (to establish a goal for the month ahead in the minds of family members—the goal of developing a deeper inner feeling of love for Christ).

Gather all family members age eight or older together for a discussion. After retaking the test for Month One (see page 44), hold a brief discussion built around the following points:

Then say, "Our goal this month will be to gain ever deeper feelings of love for Christ. To help us measure how much we learn this month, we're going to take another short test on how much we think about our love for Jesus. Next fast Sunday, we'll take it again to check our progress."

As you did last month, have each family member draw a line down the center of a blank page. Number the left column from 1 to 4. Then present four questions and have everyone write out his answers:

Keep all the papers so you can use them again next fast Sunday.

B. Connecting all Church and spiritual experiences to Christ (to help children's emotional and spiritual feelings center on the person of Christ rather than on the organization or institution of the Church).

A friend of ours, a professor at one of our Church universities and also a bishop there on the campus, did an informal survey of his ward members regarding what they mentioned most in their testimonies on fast Sunday. The thing the students testified of most frequently was their roommates, second was the Church, third was the university, fourth was the President of the Church. Christ himself was not mentioned nearly so frequently; in fact, he barely made the top ten!

We are sure their intent was good, and that love of Christ was implied by much of what they said. Still, there is real benefit in more conscious references to Christ and more direct acknowledgment of him as the source of all blessings.

Nephi, writing anciently of those who love the Lord, said, "We talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ." (2 Nephi 25:26.) The connection is still true today. Loving Christ does cause us to talk and testify of him, and to rejoice in him and in his love. The connection works in both directions! Talking of him and rejoicing in him increases our understanding and our love for him.

At every opportunity, help turn your children's attention toward Christ himself. Help the "Joseph Smith story" to become, in the minds of your children, the story of Christ, returned to the earth to reestablish his church. Perceive the Book of Mormon to be not so much the story of Lamanites and Nephites as the story of Christ, the prophecies that preceded him, the changes he wrought in the world and in mankind, and the second witness of his divinity. Be sure that you talk of faith as being not in some general set of beliefs but in the Lord Jesus Christ. Teach your children to view the Church less as a building or an organization or even a set of commandments and doctrine, and more as Christ's kingdom and as the vehicle which contains information about the Lord and seeks to spread that joyous insight throughout the world.

Seek to concentrate your children's spiritual capacities on what Elder Maxwell calls "the glorious and desperately needed gospel truths and doctrine pertaining to Jesus Christ, our Savior, on whom all else that really matters greatly depends. He and His atoning sacrifice are the operating center of our Father's plan of salvation, and if we would be truly happy, He must be the operating center of our lives."

The "Sunday dinner activities" mentioned in the family focal point of the previous chapter are one practical way to create this sharper focus within your children. Other ways will come to mind as you think about it and as you strive to refocus your own thoughts and beliefs.

C. The joy and freedom of obedience (to help children perceive God's commandments as loving counsel from a wise Father, and to perceive their obedience as a privilege and as a way of returning that love).

As mentioned earlier, strive to speak often of your own callings, of your payment of tithing, of your observation of commandments as a joy. Paraphrase the following story to illustrate:

"A great being who mastered all the secrets of the universe wanted to help a group of his friends to be as happy as he was. He made up a list of the things that bring happiness and called them 'commandments.'

"Some of his friends thought the commandments were restrictions to their freedom, so they did not keep them. But the wiser friends realized that the commandments were ways to extend and expand their freedom. They kept them and became more free and happy."

Then ask what we are made free from when we keep the commandment of chastity, of tithing, of truthfulness, of the Word of Wisdom, and so on.

D. The book and film "Jesus of Nazareth" (to help children form more specific visual images of Christ, and to give their love for him a sense of historical reality).

Of all the films or pictorial attempts to illustrate Christ's earthly life and times, we think the most beautiful is Franco Zefferelli's Jesus of Nazareth. It is a six-hour movie, now widely available on videotape. Still photographs from the film are collected in a book with text by William Barclay.

We think the best way to use both the book and the video is to bring them out only on Sunday, letting the children handle and enjoy them only on that day (when other television as well as secular books or magazines are "off limits").

If you have a videocassette player, you may want to rent the video and then decide if you want to purchase it. We know some families who bring the book to church and allow smaller children to thumb through it during the sacrament to concentrate their thoughts on Christ.

E. Devotionals (to regularly focus children's attention on Christ and their love for him).

We greatly admire all families who hold regular family prayer and who couple it with some form of scripture reading or "devotional." Sometimes these are as simple as reading a verse of scripture prior to a prayer. In other families, an early morning service is held daily, including a song, prayer, scripture, and counsel by parents.

In our family, the time before breakfast has traditionally been used for music practice. We all group at a specified hour before any individual practice to play ensemble music together, to read a verse or two of scripture (or to ask a family member to summarize a scripture he read the night before), and to have family prayer. We also encourage and challenge each other to memorize certain passages of scripture, as well as selected poetry and quotations.

Whatever form it takes, and whether it is daily or less frequent, a family devotional can be of great value both in teaching and sharing the love we feel for Christ.

F. Church literature focusing on Christ (to deepen children's knowledge—and thus their love—of Christ).

With the vast quantity of Church books available today, it is interesting (and in a way disappointing) that there are not more works specifically about the Savior. One positive reason, however, that there are so few is that those that we have, written by latter-day apostles, are so comprehensive and so beautiful. James E. Talmage's Jesus the Christ and Bruce R. McConkie's three volumes on the Messiah lend their detail and scholarship. Boyd K. Packer's The Mediator gives deep but simple insight into the atonement. J. Reuben Clark's Our Lord of the Gospels (though now somewhat difficult to find) gives a chronology of all ancient and modern scriptural reference to Christ. Neal A. Maxwell's We Talk of Christ, We Rejoice in Christ provides intellectual and poetic perception of Christ and His personal connections to all facets of Heavenly Father's plan and program.

Standing far below these, both in authority as well as in perception, are other LDS books that aim at an expanded awareness of and love for Christ. My own (Richard's) book What Manner of Man is largely a collection of the insights of others arranged in a way that allows a person to ponder a different aspect or facet of Christ each Sunday as he partakes of the sacrament for an entire year. The thesis is that we come to know and love someone a little at a time, one dimension after another.

As our children become old enough to read (individually or with us) about Christ, we can call on the words and feelings of others to supplement our own as we try to communicate the love of Christ.

G. Your own ideas. List other ways that would help increase your children's awareness of their love for Christ.

H. Post-test (to review and reinforce what has been learned). On fast Sunday, at the end of the month you spend on this chapter, get out your test papers from last fast Sunday and answer again the four questions, putting answers this time in the right-hand column. Discuss what everyone has learned. Let family members express their feelings for Christ. Ask if it is important to keep thinking actively about our love for Christ. Then present the family focal point which follows as a way to stay aware of this love.

IV. Family Focal Point

Sacrament observance (to focus attention, every week, directly on our love for Christ).

As mentioned earlier, we have a remarkable opportunity each week in sacrament meeting to feel and to demonstrate our love for Christ. This opportunity comes as we partake of the sacrament and renew our covenants to always remember Christ, to take upon us his name, and to keep all of his commandments.

The "rebaptism" that the sacrament can provide is the most regular if not the most comprehensive way we have to express our love. With effort, it can truly be the key to deepening our children's feelings for Christ.

Without preparation and concentration, however, it can be a meaningless ritual. Consider the following suggestions:

A. Read a scripture, watch a video portion of Jesus of Nazareth, or look at the book or at other favorite pictures of Christ before leaving for church. Bring some pictures of Jesus (or the Jesus of Nazareth book) for smaller children to look at during the sacrament.

B. Decide on one specific aspect of Christ to think about during the sacrament (such as his love for little children, his optimism and positive attitude, his gentleness and patience, his courage and fearlessness). Use the book What Manner of Man as a guide, or find a certain scripture or other "image" of Christ to focus your thought each week. Discuss (it can be very briefly) as a family what you will focus your minds on during the sacrament. This can be done in the car on the way to church, at the door of your home before you leave, or early on Sunday morning before any of the commitments or responsibilities of the day come into play.

C. On the way home from church or at Sunday dinner, briefly discuss the feelings that accompanied your partaking of the sacrament. What did each person think about? What ideas or images or feelings came to mind? Was the partaking of the sacrament itself a meaningful experience?

V. Summary

If the saying were true that "we love those who love us," then loving the Savior would become the easiest and most natural thing in the world.

Unfortunately it is not true. By human nature, we all too often use and take advantage of those who love us, or we reject their love in various ways. The love that comes in our direction is too often either absorbed or ricocheted, too seldom returned.

What is true to say is, "We love those whom we serve and with whom we spend meaningful time."

Thus, there is no shortcut to developing our love, and that of our children, for Christ. Knowing that he loves us is not enough. Only the process of being with him (through scripture study, prayer, and meditation) and the practice of serving him (through magnification of callings, acts of service, and joyful obedience of commandments) can result in a blossoming of the love we feel for him.
