Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Charity ( 1986)

Month 3

Loving as He Loves

Understanding Observing Feeling Communicating + Doing____________ =Charity

"Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart." (1 Timothy 1:5.)

"Love of one's neighbor is the only door out of the dungeon of self." (George McDonald.)

I. Illustrations and Stories

Serving with us in England was a sister missionary who believed that proselyting was essentially a process of loving. For her, missionary work was not an all-or-nothing proposition in which you either gave someone the whole gospel and baptized him or gave him nothing at all. Her attitude was to give whatever a person could accept.

She and her companion knocked one day on the door of an older woman who lived alone. "No," she said, she had no interest whatever in hearing their message and began to close the door.

"Then might we help you in any way?" said the sister, and her tone of voice left no question that she wanted to do just that.

The older woman hesitated and then asked timidly, "Would you wash a window for me? It is the high one in the entry hall and I can't reach it. I'm afraid if I get up on a chair I might fall. It's the only dirty thing in my house."

The sister washed her window, gladly—with enjoyment.

A month or so later, she was again in the neighborhood and stopped by again to wash the window. She went back every few weeks, asking each time if she could teach the woman of the purpose of life or the restoration or the Book of Mormon. Always the answer was no.

Some time after returning home, the sister received a letter. The writer introduced himself as "a son of the woman whose window you washed." He then said that he and his wife, as well as his sister and her husband, all living in America, had joined the Church. They had contacted the missionaries because of letters from their mother in England who had told them of a sister who had "taught her more of Christ than anyone she had ever met."

"The faith He asks us for is not to understand Him but to follow Him. By that and that alone can man convert the tragedy of human life, full of disappointments, disillusionments, and with so-called death ever looming ahead, into a most glorious place of honor, worthy of the dignity of a son of God. What Christ asks is that we shall try it out. He actually dares us to follow Him. In that way, He says, you shall win that prize in life for which any man can, with perfect reason, afford to give everything else." (Wilfred T. Grenfell.)

We met one winter with some old friends whose three oldest boys were in their mid-teens. We had some of our younger children with us and were staying at a hotel that had an indoor heated pool. Our friends sat with us on a balcony above the pool while their boys joined our children for a swim.

During the course of our visit, I glanced down occasionally at the children below. What I noticed was that these three were not typical teenage boys. Most seventeen-, sixteen-, and fourteen-year-old boys, placed in that situation with a bunch of younger children, would either ignore them or tease them. These boys did neither.

They introduced themselves to the younger children, got acquainted, asked them questions, gave them swimming pointers, and even humored them when they started asking if they could jump off their shoulders, if they could "ride them" across the pool, and so on.

I finally changed the course of our balcony conversation by asking the mother just how she had developed such extra-centered, happy, natural teenagers.

She said she wasn't sure, that the boys had, somewhere along the line, picked up a certain commitment to service, that they almost competed with each other in visiting widows in their neighborhood, shoveling snow for elderly people, and just stopping in to talk to two sets of shut-ins that needed someone to listen.

All three boys were musical, she said, but none of them were very athletic and some of the kids at school called them "wimps." Still, they were well liked, the oldest having just lost the election for student-body president by only ten votes.

We spent the rest of our visit trying to pinpoint what it was that made these boys so different from their peers. The answer, we concluded, was service; it was loving others for the sheer joy of loving.

Corrie ten Boom, in her remarkable book The Hiding Place, recounts her experiences and those of her sister in Nazi concentration camps. In one instance she tells of her sister observing a brutal beating of a Jew by an SS officer and tearfully expressing how sad she felt for him.

Then Corrie ten Boom explains how she suddenly realized that her sister was speaking not of the Jew but of the German officer. She felt sorry for him because he had lost his humanity, lost his soul, which was more than the Jewish victim was losing.

The sister's love was pure enough to include even her persecutors.

Indeed, Christ redefined the very meaning of love. Before his life, in most societies, love meant friendship, loyalty, affection for one's own. Christ added the difficult, self-sacrificing elements of love to the easy, self-serving aspects. He said we should love our enemy as well as our neighbor.

In many earlier philosophies, revenge was as noble a trait as love. Xenophon, a favorite disciple of Socrates and Plato, praised and eulogized his hero Cyrus by saying, "No man ever did more good to his friends and more harm to his enemies."

Jesus upended the western world's concept of love. His instructions to "turn the other cheek" and "love your enemy" were revolutionary when he gave them, but they now have counterparts in most behavioral codes. Even governments and constitutions now take the posture of reform rather than revenge.

If we are to love as He loves, we must learn to love unconditionally, unselectively, purely, and without self-interest.

A school-bus driver observed a small but significant example of "difficult love." A new child had moved into the neighborhood, a twelve-year-old girl who was rather small and shy, and who didn't have the "in" clothes or hairstyle that would have matched most of the other kids on the bus.

She had been riding for a couple of days now. The other kids teased her a bit, tried to trip her as she went down the crowded aisle, but mostly they ignored her. She sat at the back of the bus, by herself.

What the bus driver observed was this: As the new girl got on the bus the third day, she was tripped again, and called a name. There was a tear in her eye as she took her lonely back seat. Then a girl in the front of the bus, one of the most popular, quietly stood up, stared a dagger or two at the boy who had done the tripping and the girl who had called the name, and walked back and sat down by the new girl, put her arm around her shoulder, apologized for her friends, introduced herself, and began to ask questions, making friends.

The bus was silent for a moment and then returned to its normal noisy din. But the driver said he thought he noticed a new light in some children's eyes that day—and he said he felt a new light in his own heart.

"We never live so intensely as when we love strongly. We never realize ourselves so vividly as when we are in the full glow of love for others." (Walter Rauschenbush.)

II. Approaches for Parents

Learning to love is, of course, a lifetime process—indeed it is the goal of life. But it is helpful and genuinely interesting to concentrate your thoughts for a month on how you love other people, how you respond to them, how you think about them.

Too often we find ourselves jealous of others, or competing with them in a "win-lose" manner where our successes are enhanced by their failures. Even more often, we are simply unaware of others and of their feelings—even of our feelings for them—because we are so busy and so occupied with our own lives and what is required of us.

What follows is a short list of a few approaches we can take to school ourselves a little in the divine act of selfless love and extra-centeredness—a beginners' attempt to love both our children and others in a more Christlike way.

A. What would He do? Everyone we learn of who has read a book called In His Steps, by Charles M. Sheldon, has been affected by it. It is the story of a group of people who made a pledge to each other that they would live an entire year of their lives by the guideline of asking (before every decision and even every action or comment), "What would Jesus do?" The book tells how dramatically that question changed their lives.

The most interesting thing about that question is that we almost always know the answer. It is rarely difficult to know what Christ would do. But it is difficult to ask the question, especially in the moments we need to ask it most, the moments of anger, of jealousy, of frustration and self-centeredness. It is also difficult to do what he would do once we have asked the question.

Think of it that way: a hard thing, then an easy one, then another hard one. Hard to ask, easy to answer, hard to follow. Hard, but worth it. Those of us who try it for the month will find ourselves able to teach it to our children. And we may be forming the greatest habit of our lives.

B. Consciously put relationships above achievements. We are all confronted daily with little, subtle decisions that are, in essence, choices between a person and a thing. Too often we choose the thing: to get the work done instead of paying attention to the child who is asking us something, to finish writing the memo instead of responding to the person sitting next to us who starts a conversation. An achievement, when chosen over a relationship, is always the wrong decision.

C. Practice giving. A friend of ours often tells us of his experiences in a part of the world where people want to give you anything you admire. He has to be very careful about saying he likes a painting, or a flower pot, or anything, because the people will say, "Then it is yours!"

Theoretically, within the Church it should be easy to give, because we know that whatever we have is not really ours anyway, but God's. We covenant to live the laws of stewardship and of consecration, but when it really comes down to giving, especially if it is something as precious as our time, we find it very difficult.

Again, the best way to learn how to do it is to practice. If we consciously try during this month to give gladly, to make a point of sacrificing something we want or not doing something we want to do in order to do something else that benefits someone else—if we do this, we will find ourselves loving as He loves.

In this connection, while it sounds funny to say, we should take advantage of the opportunities the Church gives us to practice our giving. Just to reiterate once again, we should pay tithing gladly, give fast offerings generously, thinking of it all as what it really is—an opportunity.

We can also give the gospel, taking our opportunities to share beliefs with others. It is difficult, and our own inhibitions may prevent us from the kind of thing Elder LeGrand Richards did when he borrowed the microphone from a surprised stewardess as the crowded plane took off from Salt Lake City and said, "Any of you on this plane that are Mormons, please raise your hands. Now, the rest of you, please look at these people because they are going to tell you about our church during this flight."

But as difficult as it is, missionary work is a form of love and, as we practice love, it will, as the scriptures say, cast out all fear.

D. Attitudes toward children.

And we are sometimes told that our children are lumps of clay in our hands, that we can shape and mold them into anything.

All these views are incorrect. In fact, our children are the most valuable stewardship and the highest priority we have. They are basically good, not evil. They need to be trained to live in the world, not isolated from it. Their importance far surpasses the things we sometimes think they get in the way of. And they are anything but shapeless, interchangeable lumps of clay that we can mold at will.

Perhaps the best analogy for children is that of a seedling. Already within them are the gifts, talents, the intelligence gained through an eternal premortal existence. While they are young it is not completely clear what kind of a tree they will grow into, but whatever kind it is, they already are. We cannot change them from a poplar to an oak, nor should we want to. What we can do is cultivate, nourish, straighten, so that they will grow to be the best of the type of tree they are.

We were on a trip not long ago with a special Church leader who was accompanied by his wife and ten-year-old son. We noticed that, in private conversation, he called the boy not by his name, and not "son," but "little brother." There seemed to be a special tone of respect and love in his voice, as though the term represented a fact, a reality that he wanted to remind himself of.

E. Work on "wise" love. Christ's love was always wise in that its expression helped and benefited the person it was directed to. He gave people what they needed, not always what they wanted. And he gave for their benefit, not for his own.

Parents' love for their children, although completely genuine, is sometimes counterproductive and even harmful because it is given unwisely. We all know parents whose misdirected love has spoiled children, or has tried to turn them into something they are not.

Wisdom is more related to the effort of thinking than it is to intelligence or vast accumulation of knowledge. If we take the time to think about our children we usually find wise and effective ways to express love.

Most couples need a "prompter" or an organized time and place to do some thinking. The best method we know is the five-facet review. We have suggested, in other writings, that couples go on a monthly date to a quiet restaurant and confine their discussion or agenda to their children. By asking, "How is Johnny doing physically? socially? mentally? emotionally? spiritually?" it is possible to have a surprisingly thorough review of each child in a relatively short time. By focusing their minds on one of their children at a time, a couple generates the kind of mental effort that constitutes faith and opens the channels of inspiration. Most five-facet reviews yield two or three areas of concentration for the coming month and allow parents to focus their attention on the most critical problems or the most timely opportunities.

Many parents grope around, looking for general answers or panaceas that will solve everything. Specific answers come with remarkable ease when problems and concerns are specifically defined. Parents who can put their finger on a well-defined emerging problem can, with mental effort, think of a clear solution.

For example: Our fourteen-year-old was undergoing some difficulty making new friends during her first few weeks at high school. For a while, we floundered around with her, offering general suggestions like, "If you want friends, you have to be a friend," or, "Just be yourself and everything will work out fine."

But in a five-facet review, we focused some mental energy on the concern. We discussed it and shared our individual observations. We decided that what was needed was an ice-breaker, a way to get her together with some new friends in a setting where relationships could get a start. A little more thought and brainstorming led us to the idea of setting up a surprise party for her. We decided to call it an "unbirthday" since her birthday comes in midsummer when we are usually away and thus she is unable to have a party.

Setting up the party was relatively simple—and fun. We opted for a slumber party where everyone would have lots of time to talk and get better acquainted.

It worked. It turned out that all they needed was a chance to get together. But what really worked was the five-facet review, the time we had taken to think together.

In D&C 9:7, the Lord reprimands Oliver Cowdery for taking "no thought save it was to ask." The key to loving with wise, Christlike love is thought. And that same mental effort is also the key that unlocks the channels of inspiration and gives us access to guidance from the real parent of these children: their eternal Heavenly Father.

F. The "L.O.V.E." formula for communicating with teenagers. Every parent of teenagers knows the frustration and difficulty of trying to communicate with stubborn, headstrong, opinionated, peer-influenced, moody, overdramatic, emotionally volatile teenagers. At times they clam up and say nothing. At other times they make their points with powerful drama and impish logic.

The parents' options, it seems, consist of ignoring them back, imposing authoritarian parental-martial-law, or sending them to some sort of counselor who can "deal with these things more objectively."

Actually, teenagers are most often quite easy to communicate with if parents remember the "L.O.V.E." formula.

"L" =Lightness (avoid "heavy" communication; use a little humor, don't take yourself too seriously).

"O" =Offense (don't let yourself be put on the defense). Act rather than react. If you feel upset, pause and reflect for a moment. Listen carefully, decide what is best, and take the offense—do what you've decided is best. Deep down, what each teen and preteen needs most is the security of a parent who listens and cares, but who knows what is right and holds to it.

"V" =Visualize. Keep in mind a positive image of your teenager. Separate the behavior or comment you are displeased with from the person whom you love unconditionally. Learn to visualize what he can become and what his most positive potential is—at the very moment that his actions or words are most disturbing. This will preserve your respect for him and will help him keep respect for himself. Get angry at what he is doing if the action merits it, but make sure that anger is directed at his action and separated from your love for him.

"E" =Empathize. Make a genuine attempt to remember what you can of how it felt to be his age. Do this while you are talking. Make a real mental effort to put yourself in his shoes and feel what he is feeling. Tell him what you can understand and what you can't.

G. Your own methods. List any other thoughts you have on how you could better emulate Christ's kind of love during the following month.

III. Exercises to Teach Children

A. Fast Sunday discussion and pretest (to establish the goal for the month ahead of better understanding and better emulating Christ's kind of love).

Once again, gather all family members age eight and older. After retaking the test for Month Two, discuss the coming month (Month Three) along the following points:

Give everyone a piece of paper and have them use the left-hand side.

a. Thought about someone's needs and tried to think what you could do for him?

b. Asked yourself, "What would Jesus do?"

c. Sacrificed something you wanted to do in order to do something for someone else?

d. Made a specific plan to help someone or give something to someone?

Remember to save the tests for reuse at the end of the month.

B. "Think service" (to begin the process of training children's minds to notice needs and to look for opportunities to serve). Families that get involved in various kinds of service together tend to become the closest families we know, and they also teach each other, through example, to love as Christ loves. The entire balance of this book leads up to the goal of giving service, but now (in Month Three) is the time to begin forming the right attitudes.

Giving service exposes children to different life-styles, different family situations, and different kinds of needs. Such exposure increases children's appreciation for what they have and puts their own smaller problems in clearer perspective.

We recently heard a parent say, "I'd like my family to be involved in some kind of service but we're all so busy, and there really isn't anyone around who needs that much help. Everyone in this community is pretty similar; even the kids look like they all came out of the same cookie cutter."

Such thinking contains more excuses than facts. There are elderly people, there are lonely people, there are students from foreign lands, there are new move-ins, there are people out of work, and there are always ordinary, everyday people whose lives would be brightened by a good turn or a spontaneous favor.

Sit down with your children and get them involved in the thought process that precedes service. Brainstorm together and make a list of people you know of who could use a visit or some assistance of some kind. Make a second list of others you could contact who might know more about people who need help (such as the foreign student office at a university, the Salvation Army, various community service organizations). Pick some targets. Decide what to do, and do it!

C. Traditions (to further increase children's perception of themselves as service givers). Forming service-oriented traditions within a family can have great positive effects on the attitudes of children.

Each family member folds the slip and puts it in the box so that no one else sees it. Do this now, regardless of what month it is. Next Christmas, the box will be opened and everyone will read his gift aloud, discussing how he has done on it during the past year.

D. Variations on the Golden Rule (to get children thinking about how dependent people are on each other and how much we all need each other). Hold a discussion (perhaps some evening at dinner) on the Golden Rule. Ask what it means, why it works, why Christ was the greatest example of it, and so on.

Then read the following list of similar codes of conduct that have evolved in other societies. After reading the list, discuss why the same rule sprang up in so many different places. Then ask for personal examples during the past week where family members used (or should have used) the Golden Rule.

Variations of the Golden Rule

Do as you would be done by.—Persian

Do not that to a neighbor which you shall take ill from him.—Crecian

What you would not wish done to yourself do not do unto others.—Chinese

One should seek for others the happiness one desires for one's self—Buddhist

Let none of you treat his brother in a way he himself would not like to be treated.—Mohammedan

The true rule of life is to guard and do by the things of others as they do by their own.—Hindu

The law imprinted on the hearts of all men is to love the members of society as themselves.—Roman

E. Give responsibility. Sociologists have demonstrated through cross-cultural studies that there are strong and direct connections between responsibility, maturity, and extra-centeredness. In societies where children are given little responsibility, they become self-centered and insensitive. Where they have more responsibility they also have more awareness and interest in and concern for other people.

Another deep dimension of this principle is the fact that children who have responsibility over something become better able to understand Christ's love for us, as we are, in a sense, his responsibility. Farm children, for example, who have charge over an animal, learn to love the animal in a special way because it is dependent on them.

As we give our children responsibility for certain things, from a portion of the house or yard to the baby-sitting of a younger sibling, we are expanding their capacity to love and to care.

F. One-on-one "need search" (to tutor your children personally in the skill of seeing needs). Look for opportunities to go places with one of your children (to the store, or on a walk, for instance). Decide together to try to "spot needs" during the trip. You might find something as obvious as an elderly person needing help crossing a street or a woman lifting something heavy or a ragged child selling newspapers on a street corner. More likely, you will see people who look as if they need a smile and a "hello," or who need a compliment, or who need help reaching a can high on a grocery store shelf.

Each need you spot is a chance not only to teach by example but to start or further a discussion about Christlike love with the child you are with.

G. Your own methods. List any other thoughts you have concerning how you can assist your children this month in finding ways to love as Christ loves.

H. Post-test (to review and reinforce what has been learned). On the fast Sunday that ends this "month," retake the test from last fast Sunday. Then discuss how much more aware family members have been during the month of the needs of others and the opportunities they have had to help. Discuss specific instances when family members have asked, "What would Jesus do?"

IV. Family Focal Point

Awards and awareness building (to give children an effective weekly reminder to do what Jesus would). Children of any age, right through the teenage years, tend to do what they are recognized for and what they receive attention for.

This is the first of several family focal points that center on a weekly "award" given to one family member following a discussion at the Sunday dinner table.

This award is called the "What Would Jesus Do" award. It consists of a sheet of paper with the initials W.W.J.D. artistically arranged like a logo and then mounted on cardboard. The family member who earns the award posts it on the door of his room for one week until it is awarded again the following Sunday.

At the Sunday dinner table, say, "Who is in the running for the 'What Would Jesus Do' award?" Everyone then thinks back over the preceding week (including mom and dad) and tries to remember an incident when he acted or reacted as Jesus would have. For a smaller child, it might be not retaliating when someone hurt him or called him a name, or letting a friend go first in line, or helping around the house without being asked. For an older child it might be stopping to visit a widow or a shut-in, or talking to someone in school who looked lonely or shy, or leaving someone an anonymous note of compliment or praise.

During the discussion, children may either mention things they have done or nominate other family members whom they have observed doing what Jesus would do.

The value lies in the discussion. As children think back and remember, they also program themselves to look for the same kind of service or helpfulness opportunities in the future. Some teenagers will be a little skeptical of the award at first, and may call it silly or immature. Surprisingly quickly, however, especially as they see their parents participating enthusiastically, they will get themselves "in the running" (and into the discussion) every week.

Father or mother determines who is to receive the award each week after the discussion, taking care to give lavish praise to everyone who is in the running.

V. Summary

Washington Irving said, "Love is never lost. If not reciprocated, it will flow back and soften and purify the heart." Families that consciously look for ways to love and serve each other as well as others seem to develop a softer, more peaceful atmosphere and attitude.

As Dante said, "In thy will is our peace." Without question, God's will is that we strive to learn to love as he loved.

Developing love within our children is not as simple as loving them, and the fact that we love them is no guarantee that they will become good at loving others. As mentioned before, the truism says, "We love whom we serve." It does not say, "We love those who love us." Thus, we must provide opportunities for our children to serve us, to serve each other, and to serve others.

As we do, their self-centeredness will fade away, carrying with it many of the ego-centered problems of teenagers. What will remain is children who know how to love others, and who are therefore more capable of loving themselves.

This chapter concludes the "understanding" part of the charity formula. In some ways, this is the easiest part, and it prepares us for the rest of the book. These first three "months," properly implemented, can raise a family's awareness of what charity is and of why it can be the solution to nearly all problems. It is hoped that this awareness makes us all more anxious to develop the actual skills of charity, and it is to the development of these skills that the rest of this book is devoted.
