Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Charity ( 1986)

Section III

Observing

We begin to turn mirrors to windows only as we learn how to see realities rather than reflections, to see people instead of prejudices, to see others rather than ourselves.

In time, and with practice, we come to see with our ears as well as our eyes and to listen with our eyes as well as our ears and to involve our spiritual perceptions in both.

Month 4

Seeing

Understanding Observing Feeling Communicating + Doing_____________ =Charity

"Only that day dawns to which we are awake." (Henry David Thoreau.)

Charity is both a feeling and a skill. The feelings motivate the development of the skill, and the development of the skill deepens the feeling.

I. Illustrations and Stories

Marcus Aurelius said, "We ought to do good to others as simply and as naturally as a horse runs, or a bee makes honey, or a vine bears grapes season after season without thinking of the grapes it has borne."

Unfortunately, what we ought to do is not what we usually end up doing. It is possible to have service and charity come naturally and easily to us, but not without a long process of conditioning.

As we master the skills of seeing, of listening, of sensitivity and empathy, we develop the habits of service; then, and only then, will we do good to others as naturally as a horse runs.

The skills and habits that lead us to acts of service and the feelings of pure love that constitute charity are like chicken and egg. One who deeply feels the pure love of Christ will find it natural to care, to listen, to empathize, and to serve. on the other hand, one who consciously and conscientiously learns these observing, listening, and empathizing skills and develops habits of service will find that they lead him to an even deeper and more pure love of Christ.

The first three "months" of this book concentrated on feelings—feelings that hopefully strengthened both your family's desires to give service and your interest in gaining skills that better enable you to serve. The remaining nine "months" focus on these skills, with the belief that their exercise will strengthen your feelings of charity and eliminate or cut down the self-centeredness of teenagers which is the cause of so many of their problems.

We learn to love by loving. It is the doing that develops the feeling. St. Francis De Sales said it well: "There are many who want me to tell them of secret ways of becoming perfect and I can only tell them that the sole secret is a hearty love of God, and the only way of attaining that love is by loving. You learn to speak by speaking, to study by studying, to run by running, to work by working; and just so you learn to love God and man by loving. Begin as a mere apprentice and the very power of love will lead you on to become a master of the art."

So, how does one apprentice at the art of loving?

He thinks more about other people and about their needs, and less about himself

How does he think more about others?

He notices them more. He learns to observe others—with his mind as well as his eyes, with his heart as well as his brain.

Seeing is the first skill in the formula of charity?

Yes!

Most people have had the experience of watching a movie that was filmed in a place they were familiar with. Yet they notice things in the movie that they did not see when they were there in person.

Often, in fact, movies seem more graphic to us than real life. We observe beauty, colors, characteristics about people, and subtle messages in facial expressions. Part of the increased awareness may be due to the skill of the cinematographer and the actors, but part of it is due to the very interesting fact that we see more when we're not able to be seen by those we're watching. Since we are not aware of or concerned with what others are seeing in us, we can focus all of our attention on them—thus we see more, notice more, understand more.

We have only a certain amount of awareness. If a portion of it is focused on ourselves, there is less left to observe others with.

There are people who have learned to become "transparent," to become invisible enough to themselves that they can see through themselves—and out at others—using all of their attention and awareness to do so.

For them, life is somewhat like a movie, not in the sense that they are not involved and "present," but in the sense that they are able to see and observe fully without the distraction of self-consciousness.

We have a friend who is a doctor in a small Idaho town. He practices every kind of medicine on every kind of patient. He told us once that he occasionally runs onto someone who has become such a proficient observer that he can detach himself and watch everything, even himself. Such patients, says the doctor, can rise above not only their emotions and self-consciousness, but even above their pain. They observe the pain. It is, in a way, interesting to them. They wonder if the pain will increase, how much it will increase, how they will react if it does increase. It is as though they were watching a movie of themselves.

We once knew a basketball coach who talked in much the same way about some of his best players from over the years. In pressure situations, instead of clutching and becoming stressed and tense with self-awareness and with the possibilities of being a hero or a failure—instead of this, they become interested in how they will respond, what they will do, whether they have what it takes to make the right play. They watch everything, even themselves, with the interested, entertained, insightful eye of the trained observer.

It is ironic that we say, "Don't just be a spectator, an observer of life—get involved." In reality, those who have learned to truly observe are the very ones who do become meaningfully involved.

There is a best-selling tennis book called Inner Tennis that applies many of the techniques of Zen and of meditation to the game. One of the most interesting points the book makes is that if we can learn to truly watch what is happening, including what we are doing, we will know exactly what to change, what to do, where to improve. Tennis players, in other words, have seen enough good tennis to know how to hit shots properly. Their body, their inner self, knows how, but their mind is telling them, "Pull your racket back, don't overhit, keep your knees bent, watch the ball," so insistently that they become nervous and self-conscious.

Just learn to watch, to observe, the book says. When you see what you are doing you will make your own adjustments.

Life is the same. When we are always judging ourselves, comparing ourselves with others, wondering what so-and-so thinks of us, concerned about how we look, we become unable to observe: unable to see what is happening around us, unable to notice what others are doing, thinking, needing, and even unable to accurately and objectively see ourselves.

A law of mathematics is: "If you can clearly and accurately see and define the problem, you can solve it."

A law of baseball is: "If you can see the ball clearly as well as the spin that's on it, you can hit it."

A law of life is: "If you can see people clearly, you can love them."

There is an ancient Persian fable about the three princes of Serendip who go out into the world to seek their fortunes. As the story unfolds, none of the three actually finds the fortune he was seeking, but each, through his own awareness and through a certain amount of luck, finds something better. One finds love, one finds loyalty, one finds truth. All find opportunities to be of service and to help others, and thus, all find happiness.

Horace Walpole, the eighteenth-century British writer, once read the fable and became so impressed with the principle involved that he coined a new word. "Serendipity," he said, "is that ability, through sagacity and good fortune, to find something good while searching for something else."

Those who develop their sagacity, or their powers of observation and awareness, end up gaining the almost magical quality of serendipity. They see not only things that most people miss, but also opportunities: opportunities to achieve, to progress, to learn, to help, to serve, to be charitable.

"If I had influence with the good fairy who is supposed to preside over the christening of all children, I should ask that her gift to each child be a sense of wonder so indestructible that it would last throughout life, an unfailing antidote against boredom, disenchantment, preoccupation with things that are artificial." (Rachel Carson.)

II Approaches for Parents

A. Write poetry. This may seem, at first glance, like a rather strange suggestion, particularly to put at the top of a list, but the writing of poetry, even the attempt to write poetry, is one of the most dramatically effective ways we know to sharpen awareness and observation skills.

Good poets are essentially people who look at the same things everyone does, but who see more. They see inter-relationships between things; they see intense form and color; they see (or at least the good ones do) the inner, unexpressed feelings of people around them.

We are convinced that many of these "watchers" have not learned to be poets because they can observe—rather they have learned to observe because they are poets.

Attempts to capture beliefs or beauty, sentiments or situations, in a small number of carefully chosen words—such efforts are efforts at poetry, and they cause one to look hard and to really see.

We are not suggesting that parents must write the kind of poetry Emily Dickinson spoke of when she wrote: "If I read a book and it makes my whole body so cold no fire can warm me, I know that is poetry. If I feel physically as if the top of my head were taken off, I know that is poetry. These are the only ways I know it. Is there any other way?"

No, the poetry we amateurs write doesn't have to take anyone's head off; it doesn't even have to be shown to anyone! It can be private. The benefit is in the process of writing (and observing).

Try an experiment. Start modestly. Decide to write two poems a week for the next month, about anything. Just the commitment to do it will cause you to start noticing more and to start thinking about what you observe.

B. Journals. An alternative to writing poetry (or better yet, a companion to it) is journal writing, particularly if you attempt to describe your experiences and philosophies. Description is the fruit of our observation. We can describe only what we have observed. Our journals, in addition to being a living record of our lives and times, can be the evidence of our observations and can actually cause us to notice more in our children and in other associations than we otherwise would.

C. The "blank books." Still another writing method, and the one we like best of all, is the "blank book." Linda decided to get some lovely, hardbound books of manuscript paper, one for each child, and to begin to write her observations of that child periodically, every few months, in the form of an ongoing letter to that child. When the children are married, one wedding present will be this book—containing their parents' lifelong observations and feelings about them.

Our motive for starting the blank books was to create something nice for our children and to cause ourselves to think very thoroughly about each of them as they were growing up. In addition to these functions, the blank books have produced in us a very exciting and very useful byproduct. It is the motivation to notice and to make observations that are thoughtful and insightful enough to be worth retaining. Often what we see, and what we write in describing what we see, becomes a process by which we discover and solve needs.

D. See the humor in life. Next to poets, comedians may be our most observing group of people. One needs to notice and closely observe things before he can be funny about them.

Cultivating a sharper sense of humor and learning to observe more closely are two parts of another chicken-egg situation. Each leads to the other.

Perhaps the most valuable kind of humor to develop is the kind that allows us to laugh at ourselves, to avoid the heavy overseriousness that usually indicates we are thinking (and worrying) too much about ourselves.

G. K. Chesterson said, "A characteristic of the great saints is their power of levity. Angels can fly because they can take themselves lightly. One 'settles down' into a sort of selfish seriousness; but one has to rise to a gay self-forgetfulness."

Take the time to sit around and do nothing with your children once in a while. Change your perspective a little and get on their level. Just talk. Joke with them, laugh with them. Fit in with them. Relax and find some easy, natural humor in the day-to-day situations.

E. Watch children. The simplest method for observing your children is the best one. It is simply to set aside a half-hour to do nothing but watch. Follow them around but stay back so you are not a participant or an interferer, but a non-threatening observer. Then watch, watch! What interests a child; how does he approach different situations; how does he react to others? Think about what you see. Make notes on it.

F. Your own methods. Make a list of other ways that you can become more aware and observant during the month ahead.

III. Exercises to Teach Children

A. Fast Sunday discussion and pretest (to establish, within the minds of all family members, the goal of seeing and observing more closely during the coming month). After retaking last month's test, tell the children that you have concluded the month of focusing on loving others as Christ loved, but that you hope everyone remembers to continue to ask himself, "What would Jesus do?"

Tell them that during the coming month you want to concentrate on a skill that will help you to love others more. It is the skill of observing. Discuss why the power of observation is so important. Make a list:

—adds enjoyment to life

—helps us live more in the present

—causes us to recognize opportunities

—prevents us from missing things

—helps us notice the needs of others

—is the best method of education

—gives us more to talk about

—makes every day interesting

Point out that observing is fun, and that it is fun to have goal together as a family (the goal of improving powers of observation). Mention that the goal can only be reached if family members help each other. Several people can observe more than one person and you can remind each other to observe.

Continue the discussion on the following points:

Test: As usual, take this test in the left-hand column of a divided page.

a. written a poem?

b. described something or written an observation in your journal?

a. the room you sleep in

b. your school room, home room, or office

c. your best friend

d. the most interesting nose you saw last month

Save the tests so you can retake them next fast Sunday.

B. Nature walks (to practice observation skills and create peaceful teaching moments). The best place to practice observing is the place where there is most to observe. Nature is a great teacher. There are things to be learned from everything we see, and metaphors for life everywhere we look.

Dostoevski said: "Love all of God's creations, both the whole and every grain of sand. Love every leaf, every ray of light. Love the animals, love the plants, love each separate thing. If thou love each thing, thou will perceive the mystery of God in all; and when once thou perceive this, thou wilt thenceforward grow every day to a fuller understanding of it: until thou come at last to love the whole world with a love that will then be all embracing and universal." Dostoevski is essentially describing charity—and he claims that observing and loving nature is the gateway to it.

George Washington Carver said, "I love to think of nature as an unlimited broadcasting station, through which God speaks to us every hour, if we will only listen."

You don't necessarily have to go to a national park or a vast forest or to climb a high mountain to experience and observe nature. But you do have to be somewhat alone with a child, and to have a focused feeling of calmness and solitude. A park, a creekside, a stand of trees, a garden, even a backyard or a sunset can provide the proper setting. We don't have to look very hard to find nature. We just have to look hard to really see it.

Take a walk and see what you can observe with your child. Make it a game if you wish, seeing who can point out what to the other. Try to notice things you have never seen before. Think (and talk) about why they are the way they are. Look for comparisons to make between what you see and some aspect of your life.

A short example: We were walking (two daughters and their dad) along a small, narrow trail in a summer canyon. The girls were picking flowers, seeing who could find the most different kinds. We were comparing them, noticing their petal structure, trying to decide where each kind would grow, observing how strikingly different each flower type was from every other variety. We came to some large dandelion-type flowers that had gone to seed and started blowing the tiny parachutes into the blue sky and watching them float on the breeze. The twelve-year-old picked a large, perfectly round one, held it up to the sun so that the knob in the center of the radiating parachute seeds covered the sun in her eye. She showed us how the sunlight dazzled the white seeds, turning the flower into a shimmering round crystal. The fourteen-year-old said she thought each dandelion had over a hundred seeds and that each one was just slightly different from all the rest. That led us into a little discussion of individuality and of how every person is completely unique.

C. "Close eyes and describe" game (to make family members more consistently aware of their surroundings). Form a little family tradition of spontaneously asking a child (or letting him ask you) to close his eyes tight and describe what is around him.

Play the game whenever you are in a new place to see how much of his environment a person has observed. If you are eating in a restaurant, for example, can someone (without preparation) close his eyes and describe the carpet, the wallpaper, the lighting, the waitress, the plates and utensils, or the table?

D. The "interesting things" game (to encourage children to observe—and to share what they observe). At the dinner table, or at some other opportune time, take turns thinking back and relating the most interesting thing you saw during the day.

Another variation on this is to have a book of blank paper at some prominent place in the home, called an "interest book." Instead of money or bank interest, the book is for people's interest. Any family member, upon noticing something interesting, can write a sentence or two about it in the interest book. Other family members, especially when feeling bored, can pick up the book and read about these discoveries.

E. Poetry writing (to improve observing skills and descriptive ability). Just as it helps parents become more observant, an attempt to write poetry can greatly increase children's ability to see. Take a poetry class together if you have a chance. Or invite someone who does some writing to come to dinner some evening and have him give you a little instruction.

Read to your children a poem or two that you have written. Explain to them the connection between poetry and your objective of becoming more observant. Encourage them to give it a try. Give lavish praise for any effort they make.

F. "Perspective trips" (to increase children's opportunities to observe). As time and resources allow, travel with your children. Trips need not be long or expensive to accomplish the purpose of giving children a broader perspective. Children who grow up in one single place may have the advantage of security and "roots," but they also have the disadvantage of limited perspective and of getting the impression that "all the world is just like this."

As you travel, make observation and conversation your goals. Notice new things, new ways of doing things, different styles, and so on.

G. Looking into eyes (to help children begin to learn the art of observing feelings). Teach your children that the very most interesting place to watch and look is into someone else's eyes. The eye really is the window to the soul, and those who learn to look directly into the eyes of others tend to observe more about other people and to be less self-aware and self-conscious. Have a family tradition of looking at each other's eyes when you talk, and in any one-on-one conversation.

H. Optical illusions (to increase interest in observation and to teach children that quick, careless observation can fool people). Look in any library for books with interesting optical illusions (such as the old woman/young woman picture where some see one face and others see another, or pictures where two equal lines appear unequal). Such books can promote lively interest and discussion and can open opportunities to talk about observing and looking carefully at things.

Hold the glass (or frame) up in front of a family member's eyes so that he sees another person. Ask him to describe the person: what he is doing, what it looks like he wants, and so on. Then pretend that the glass (or the frame) is a mirror instead of a window. Have the person describe what he sees now (himself).

Point out that we can't have it both ways. We either see ourselves or we see others. We can't be observant if we are thinking about ourselves. We will miss much of the beauty in the world (as well as the chances to help others and make them happy) if our glass is always a mirror.

A quote from George Bernard Shaw helps make the point: "This is a true joy in life . . . the being a force of nature instead of a feverish, selfish little clod of ailments and grievances, complaining that the world will not devote itself to making you happy."

Those who see through windows are a force of nature, a force for good, a force that enjoys life and helps others to do the same. Those who see into mirrors are the "selfish little clods" of which Shaw speaks.

J. Game: "Observing Noses" (an enjoyable way to practice observing skills and to impress children with how much variety and uniqueness there is in the world). Pick a certain day and have everyone in the family observe noses. Tell the children that you will discuss that night at supper the most interesting noses each person saw that day. Have them look for long noses, hook noses, "ski-jump" noses, pug noses, and so on. Ask them to remember the noses they find interesting so they can describe them. You might also teach them a little lesson in discretion before they embark: "Subtle glances, please."

K. Your own methods. Once again, as you finish this "month," take a few moments to think of other ideas that would teach your children to be more observant.

L. Post-test (to review and reinforce what has been learned). On the fast Sunday that ends this "month," retake the test from the beginning of this section. If you have done most of the exercises for children during the month, they will find that they do far better on the test than they did last fast Sunday.

Then talk about the need to continue to observe and be sagacious even as you shift to next month's goal. Discuss the family focal point that follows as a way of continuing what you have learned.

IV. Family Focal Point

The serendipity planning system (to make observing skills a daily habit). It's hard to practice what you preach, and there are certainly many things we have written about and recommended to other parents that we don't do a very good job on ourselves.

One thing we have been very consistent with (perhaps because we enjoy it so much and learn so much from it) is the practice of Sunday goal-setting sessions. We just sit down together and everyone plans his or her coming week. For smaller children this consists of a couple of simple goals and of deciding when they will do them.

We are now, with our children age twelve and older, also using a very simple form of daily planning. We call it "serendipity planning," and it consists of a blank piece of paper on which a child writes out his schedule for the day. He do this on the left-hand side of the page, leaving the right-hand column to write the things he has observed, and the things he did differently than he had planned because he observed and noticed another (greater) need or opportunity. The left column is labeled "plan" and the right column is labeled "serendipity."

Remember that serendipity means "finding, through awareness, something good while looking for something else."

Children, by the time they are twelve or so, and particularly as they get to the midteens, can understand and have a lot of fun with this principle. A fourteen-year-old, for example, might have had a plan for a given day to get up early, study for a test, go to school, come home and practice piano, call her friend, do homework, and go to bed. During the course of the day, however, by trying to be observant and aware, she might also make a new friend in her civics class, notice that auditions for the school play had been set, or even discover a new sweater she loved and find out where to get it. She might also observe that a girl in her gym class was feeling left out because she was the "odd number" and had to sit out the volleyball game.

Her planner might look like this:

Plan: Serendipity:

6:30 - study

breakfast auditions for "Mousetrap"

8:00 - school bus start next week

10:00 - math test Suzie's sweater—

(get A) only $18 at dress shop

met Evelyn—just

moved from Boston

3:30 - practice piano cheered up Patty in Gym

walked home with Evelyn—

did homework together

do homework shifted piano practice

to here

Many parents, even if they use day timers or planning books themselves, don't think very much about their teenage children using them—perhaps because they think children should be allowed to be less structured and have more fun.

The serendipity planner really promotes fun, however, and increases children's awareness. The sheets also become a sort of journal as well as a planner. The children can put them in a looseleaf binder at the end of the week if they want to save them.

In the Sunday planning sessions, parents have a chance to look over the planners from the past week and praise the child and reminisce about the serendipity that occurred as a result of observation.

In our family, definitions of a "good day" and of an "even better day" have evolved. A good day is one in which you get done all the things that you had planned. An even better day is one in which you noticed some opportunity or had some "serendipity" that made it a better day than you had planned.

V. Summary

Not many people in the world are consciously or intentionally self-centered. We are not insensitive or selfish because we intend to be that way or because we do not wish to be better.

The reason we do not do more good things is that we don't think of them. The reason we don't think of them is because we don't see the needs or the opportunities that lead to them. If we could see what was wrong in a given situation, and if we could see what to do about it, we would usually do it. But we are isolated by not seeing: by our unawareness and by the self-centeredness that not only makes it hard to see, but also makes us unhappy and self-worried at the same time.

Seeing, then, is the first step, the first skill to be mastered in the equation of charity. We can train ourselves (and our children) to observe. We get good at it by practicing it.

As it becomes a more natural part of us, we can progress to the next level of seeing, which involves listening and visualizing and understanding what is beneath the things that we see.
