Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Charity ( 1986)

Month 5

Listening and Visualizing

Understanding Observing Feeling Communicating + Doing____________ =Charity

"Those who are quick in talking are not always quick in listening. Sometimes even their brilliance produces a kind of stupidity." (G. K. Chesterton.)

"No man really becomes a fool until he stops asking questions." (Charles P. Steinholtz.)

I. Illustrations and Stories

We had spent several days in the Umatilla Forest in Eastern Oregon, in wilderness land, and had observed nature in its most pristine and undisturbed form—sharpening our awareness, as the previous "month" of this book suggests.

Returning to civilization and again surrounded by the noise, the demands, and the judgments of everyday life, we were trying to observe people in the same way we had observed nature. We found it difficult. Unlike in nature, the important and meaningful things in people lie beneath the surface, and it takes more than sharp eyes to see them.

When you're looking at rocks or trees or mountains, they stay put and invite you to spend as long as you wish looking and understanding. People don't stand still at all. They move, their emotions change, their needs evolve, and they may intentionally not show you on the outside what they are feeling on the inside.

We were discussing these differences on the day we returned from our retreat. We decided that the landscape of a personality is much more difficult to observe than that of a forest or mountainside.

But seeing people is the real goal, and it is the portion of the charity equation that we are now seeking to discuss. We can see people, but we must do so with our ears, and with the inner eyes that allow us to visualize what is beneath the surface.

The questions we ask and the interest we show are like the robot arms and pinchers that grasp our subject and turn it different ways, allowing us to view it from various angles and to perceive what it really is and what it contains. Our ears and our thought receptors are like the microscope through which we take in information and zoom in for a closer look.

Wilfred A. Peterson attempted to define awareness:

"It is identifying yourself with the hopes, dreams, fears and longings of others, that you may understand them and help them.

"It is learning to interpret the thoughts, feelings, and moods of others through their words, tones, inflections, facial expressions and movements.

"It is stretching the range of eye and ear; it is taking time to look and listen and comprehend.

"It is discovering the mystic power of silence and coming to know the secret inner voice of intuition."

"Life is what we are alive to. It is not length but breadth. To be alive only to appetite, pleasure, pride, money-making, and not to goodness, kindness, purity, love, history, poetry, music, flowers, stars, God and eternal hope is to be all but dead." (Maltbie D. Babcock.)

We were on a yacht once in the Caribbean with Graham Kerr, gourmet cook of television fame. He told us that he believed all truly good cooks had the ability to carefully read a recipe, and, without so much as touching or mixing a single ingredient, taste the outcome.

Great composers hear music while reading notes on a printed page.

Poets feel the wind they are describing with their pen.

Artists see their picture in their mind's eye long before they have put paint to canvas.

Good bowlers see the path their ball will take before they release it from their hand.

And parents—those who observe their children and listen to them—begin to visualize the type of persons they can grow to become long before the years pass that lead to their vision.

Visualizing is a form of spiritual creation. It is seeing something as real in its future state as it now is in its present state. It is the seed of faith. It is the power of the mind manifesting itself!

II Approaches for Parents

A. Alter social habits. As we seek to improve our own listening and visualizing skills (so that we can be effective in teaching the same abilities to our children), we might first concentrate on some of our social habits.

Much of the socializing we do consists either of "small talk," where the objective is just to keep the conversation going and avoid awkward silences, or of "impressing," where most of what we say is designed to enhance the other person's opinion of us.

If these habits can be altered, great benefits are available. Three guidelines can help:

The three foregoing points are good general social advice—but now try this thought: They all work and they are all important for use with your own adolescent children. Listen to them and find specific things to admire and compliment them on, and let them see your smile as often (at least) as you see theirs.

B. Active listening or "Rogerian Technique." Children (and adults, for that matter) will tell you a remarkable number of important and personal things if you let them. In most conversations (and particularly those with our children) we are too directive. We ask about this or that (our own interests) and fail to let the person get to his interests.

Rogerian technique (named after the great pioneering psychologist Carl Rogers) is to simply listen actively, to repeat what people have said (in your own words), thus reinforcing that you have heard them and are interested. You listen with your eyes and body too, tuned in, focused on the person and on what he is saying.

People will go on and on when put in this secure, "nourished" situation, and what they say will often be much more interesting (and give you much more insight into them) than what they would say if you were determining the direction of the conversation.

With adolescent children, the technique is particularly effective. Just say, "Mmmmm" or "I see" or "so, in other words, you just didn't feel good about . . ." or whatever you can to demonstrate that you are really hearing—and they will go on and on, eventually telling you all you wanted to know and more.

C. A related "argument technique." Next time you are embroiled in an argument with your spouse, try this: Have a rule that before you can make your next point you must repeat or restate his last point back to him accurately enough that he will agree that it was his point. Having done that, you may return to your side of the argument and state your next point.

You will find that the argument is defused and that you suddenly understand each other. Use the same rule when you are debating with one of your adolescent children.

D. Relationship goals—relationship descriptions. Most of us assume that, although our relationships are the most important thing in our lives, we can't really set goals for them in quite the same way as we set goals for the things we want to do and achieve.

The fact is, however, that we can set relationship goals, in much the same way as we set achievement goals. For both, the key is beginning with the end in mind. With a "people goal" we can sit down and describe a future relationship that we want to have. We can visualize it, study its components, fix it in our minds. Then we can go out and make the vision into reality.

Try sitting down with pen in hand and visualizing the relationship you want to have in five years with your ten-year-old son, who will then be fifteen. Describe on paper what you visualize. Read that description over every month or so and gradually it will "program" you right into the relationships you want to have.

E. The husband-wife "detective" game. Many social occasions these days tend to function on a "small talk" level. People talk about the weather or gossip about other people.

An enjoyable way to break this trend, when you attend any function as a couple, is to have a contest between yourselves to see who can accumulate the most information about any of the other people in attendance. To win, you have to be a better questioner and a better listener than your spouse. Each spouse attempts to ask the kind of questions that get them into whatever the real interest is of the person they are talking with. Once they get to that level, there is much to be learned.

After the function, on the way home, husband and wife compare notes, tell each other what they learned about what (and about whom), and see who found out the most.

F. Taking notes. Anyone who has ever made the attempt to be a serious student knows how much careful note taking can enhance and improve and preserve his listening ability. If you could take notes in your personal conversations, you would probably ask better questions and remember much more of what you heard.

Well—you can! Or at least you almost can. What you can do immediately after a conversation, as soon as you have a moment, is to make a note or two in your day timer, on a pad in your purse, or on the partnership planners that will be discussed in Month Seven.

After you meet a new person, as soon as possible after parting company, jot down his name. Do the same when you learn something interesting about someone, or when your listening informs you of any new or significant fact. If you use a day timer or appointment book, try to put whatever notes you make on the day and the time when the conversation happened.

Here is the interesting point. Studies have shown that any form of new information, when it is reviewed twelve to twenty-four hours after it has been learned, will stay in one's mind approximately ten times as long as it would if it were never reviewed. This applies to the notes we make about people—one review several hours after obtaining it will lock it permanently in the memory.

So, each evening (or the next morning) simply review any "after-listening" notes you have made. The information will then become yours and will be available to your memory when you need it.

G. Your own methods. Pause for a moment and writ down any additional ways or techniques you can think of that would help you learn to be and practice being a better listener and a better asker of questions.

III. Exercises for Teaching Children

A. Fast Sunday discussion of month's objectives and pretest (to interest children and get them involved and to make them more aware of the goal and focus of the month ahead).

By now, your children are most likely aware of the objectives of developing a new skill each month. It is not crucial for them to know that the ultimate combination of these skills is charity, although it's fine if they do know that. What they need to understand is that these are skills that you desire and are working on. They also need to realize how valuable and useful these abilities are.

Begin this month with a brief discussion of the importance and benefits of being an excellent listener:

—it will raise your grades in school

—it will win you new friends and make your existing friends like you more

—it will make every day more interesting

—it will make you less self-conscious

—it will give you chances to help other people

—it will make you a good conversationalist—someone that others like to be around

—it will make you more "popular"

—it will help you in your occupation—no matter what occupation you choose

Also define visualization as the ability to see with the mind's eye, to mentally picture things as you would like them to be. Point out its benefits also:

—it can make you an effective goal setter

—it can help you see the best in other people

—it can enable you to become what you want to be

—it is the key to developing true faith

—it can make you more poetic and sensitive

—it can help you discover better ways to help others

Test (on left half of divided sheet of paper)

B. The question game (to focus attention on questions and on the skill and enjoyment of asking them).

Occasionally, when you are in a conversation situation with your children (at dinner, riding in the car, and so on), play the "question game." You mention a topic and see who can ask the best question on that topic. Choose topics that are relevant to the moment and praise every question that is asked, particularly the thoughtful, difficult ones.

Explain when you get the chance (even repeatedly) that asking good questions is even more important and relevant to learning and education than giving good answers.

Questions, children should realize, are also the tools by which we get to know others and discover their interests, their talents, and their needs.

When children think hard enough about a topic to ask a difficult question about it, they become interested—often so interested that they will amaze you by actually looking for the answer in an encyclopedia or other "never voluntarily approached" source.

One effective variation on the question game is to have the topic be a feeling (such as loneliness, discouragement, or enthusiasm), or to hold up a picture that expresses an emotion and have the children pose questions that they would ask that person. Such a variation on the game is a good preparation for the upcoming chapters on feelings and empathy.

C. The listening game (to help children recognize that listening is a learned skill). An alternative game to play in similar situations is the listening game. Tell a story or situation or experience involving as many details as you can think of (but not more than you can remember). Then ask about those details one at a time and see who has been the best listener.

D. The one-two punch of compliment and question: putting people at ease (to help children understand one of the purposes of good questions).

Both through your example and through any discussion you can muster, help children see that they can put others at ease by asking people good, relevant questions and by finding some small thing to compliment them on. Explain that an important skill in life is putting people at ease so that they can relax and talk openly about what they feel. Give some examples of how interest—showing questions and a thoughtful compliment can accomplish this.

A good way to capture children's interest is to present this concept in the form of an equation:

Q + C = AE

Put this equation on a piece of paper and post it on the wall or on a bulletin board for a day where it will get noticed. when someone asks what it means explain (Questions + Compliments = At Ease) and tell him that it is a skill you are trying to learn. Invite the child to learn it with you.

E. "What could you learn from him?" (to teach children a new way of looking at people).

Get in the habit, whenever you are with your children, of pointing out someone (on the street, in stores, on various jobs) and asking, "What might you be able to learn from him? If you could ask that person just one question, what would it be?" (Our four-year-old usually asks, "Where do you sleep?")

F. Argument technique (to teach listening skills at the same time as you solve arguments).

Adapt item C from this chapter's "Approaches for Parents" section to your children's situation.

G. Play "twenty questions" (to hone children's analytical questioning skills).

To play this traditional old game, one person thinks of some object or thing known to both players and tells whether it is animal, vegetable, or mineral. The other player may ask twenty yes-or-no questions to determine what it is. The game teaches children to ask carefully thought-out questions that narrow the field of possibilities.

H. Game: "looking and listening for needs" (to begin focusing the "seeing" and "listening" skills on opportunities for service).

Tell the children that this game is an extension of the "observing noses" game you played last month. But tell them that this time they'll be looking not at people's noses but at their needs. Explain that needs are a lot harder to see than noses. To see needs, you have to look hard and listen hard. Someone might just be feeling a little discouraged and need some encouragement, or a little insecure and need a compliment. Or someone might feel left out and need a friend, or useless and need to be asked to help. Or there might be more obvious needs, such as those of a hungry child or a lonely older person.

Select a day for the game, a day when you can be together for dinner in the evening. During the day, keep track of how many needs you can notice and identify. Take notes. At dinner that night, report on and discuss and compare those notes.

J. Post-test (to review and reinforce what has been learned).

On the fast Sunday that ends this "month," retake the test from the beginning of this section. Then discuss the progress everyone has made in becoming a good listener, questioner, and visualizer.

IV. Family Focal Point

The "Ice Breaker" award (to regularly encourage and reward children in their efforts to ask and listen).

Nothing gives genuine recognition and praise as clearly and strongly as an award. In an effort to have some regular way of discussing our children's efforts to ask good questions and listen carefully to others, we added the "Ice Breaker" award to the "What Would Jesus Do?" award that we had been giving to one of the children each Sunday. (See Month Three.)

The new award consisted of a large I.B. lettered on construction paper and mounted on cardboard. After Sunday dinner we ask, "Who is in the running for the Ice Breaker award?" Children think back over the week and remember the times they took the conversation initiative and asked good questions in their efforts to get to know others. Whoever can tell of the best instance of listening and asking the kind of questions that gave them insights and information about the person they were speaking to wins the award and posts it on his bedroom door for the coming week.

As with the "What Would Jesus Do?" award, the real benefit is in the discussion and in everyone's efforts to think back and recall their own efforts to ask and listen.

V. Summary

Asking and listening is a form of analysis, a form of exploration, a form of discovery! And it is the most exciting form. Our questions and our interest collect the "specimens" of information and insight, put them on slides, and prep them for a closer look. Our listening is the microscope through which we become aware and in tune.

A listener is a learner. And a listener is fulfilling one of the prerequisites of charity.
