Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Charity ( 1986)

Section IV

Feeling

Understanding feelings accurately is at least as important as, and much more difficult than, seeing clearly or hearing precisely.

Congruence is the ability both to know and to admit how you feel. Concern involves taking the same level of interest in the persons you are with. Empathy implies an extension of the sensitivity to those you are not with or have not even met.

Together, congruence, concern, and empathy are the threads in the emotional fabric of charity.

Month 6

Congruence: "How Do I Feel?"

Understanding Observing Feeling Communicating + Doing_____________ =Charity

"Above all these things, put on charity which is the bond of perfectness." (Colossians 3:14.)

As important as it is to observe and understand what is outside of ourselves, the more important realities are within—they are our feelings.

I. Illustrations and Stories

The awareness that makes charity possible is not accomplished by seeing and listening only. No matter how good we become at those skills, they are not, by themselves, enough.

The kind of true, inner awareness that leads to genuine charity also requires feelings that are both accurate and sympathetic. The spur of service, the energy of empathy, and the catalyst of charity is feelings.

Feelings are not vague, whimsical, unreliable imaginings. They are our most trusted and undeceptive sense. Our eyes can trick us, and we often "hear things" that are not really there. But deep and true feelings never lie, and they carry with them our greatest insights into ourselves and into our fellow men.

Before we can become very good at empathizing and knowing how others feel, we must develop and perfect our ability to know how we ourselves are feeling. We need to learn to honestly interpret our own feelings, to be congruent, so that what we do and say and how we think we feel matches perfectly with what we actually do feel. If we can be that congruent within ourselves, then we can become better at understanding how other people feel.

'Tis better to have loved and lost than to have never loved at all.

'Tis better to feel deeply, both the pleasure and the pain, than to have never felt at all.

Teddy Roosevelt said that the place he would least like to be was "among those cold and timid souls who never knew either victory or defeat." He, like most of us, wanted to be among those who dare to live, and dare to feel!

We had a friend once who took everything literally, and it usually worked to his credit. He was the most honest and candid man I have ever met. He was also quite precise. He rarely said, "How are you?" because it was both too trite and too general. He said, instead, something like, "How do you feel after last Wednesday's game?" or, "Is your mother feeling better today?"

When someone said, "How are you?" to him, he took it as a real question requiring a real answer. His real answers usually took ten minutes or so (about nine and a half minutes longer than most people wanted to hear). He told them of his physical health, his moods of late, his family, even his finances.

We may not want to reevaluate every facet of how we are whenever someone asks, but we do need to know those answers within ourselves. We need both to know and to know how to express how we feel. For, as we get to know our feelings, we get to know ourselves!

We were impressed with the story we heard from some parents about their thirteen-year-old son. He and his younger sister had had a nasty tiff—a disagreement over who got to use the home computer one evening—and, untypically, the boy had slapped his sister. The father was about to punish the boy, until he noticed the look on his son's face. The boy was mortified at what he had done. He felt terrible about it, and he was probably suffering more than his sister.

So the father, without really thinking, said, "Why did you do that, son?"

Now, that's usually not a very good question to ask children, particularly younger ones. We say something like, "Why did you pour out that cereal?" and of course the child doesn't know why he did it.

But with this boy, the question was more meaningful. The father really did wonder why he had done it, and so did the boy. No answer came to him, though, and he only said, "I'm really sorry, Dad. I'll make it up to her."

About an hour later, the boy came to his dad and said, "I've been thinking about your question and I think I know the answer."

The father looked at his son, obviously proud of him, and asked him to go on.

"Well," said the boy, "I went to my room to think about it, and I remembered that my math teacher embarrassed me in front of the whole class today. I was so mad at her, but I couldn't do anything about it so I just kept all those bad feelings inside of me all day. I think I just let them out at Sis. I told her all this—what I'm telling you—and she said she'd forgiven me for slapping her."

Teens and even preteens are pretty good at talking about how they feel—and even at knowing why they feel that way and at being able to explain it to others. And they get better at it if we praise their every attempt and ask them often, "'How do you feel?"

We have another friend who delights in putting everything into categories. He likes to mentally "box things up" nice and neat, and he is a little distressed when he finds something that won't quite fit anywhere.

One day he said to us, "You know, I think you can categorize people by what they think first thing in the morning just as they are waking up." He went on to explain that he thought there were three groups. The first group, the real achievers and doers, wake up and say, "What can I accomplish today?" The middle group is people who say, "What do I have to do today?" And the third group (and probably the most common) says, "I wonder what will happen to me today?"

The point he was making, of course, is that it is better to act than to react, and that we really can control our own destinies.

We don't disagree with that conclusion or with those categories. But we think there is a fourth category, a better (and happier) way to look forward to a new day. The fourth type of person wakes up in the morning and says to himself, "What can I enjoy today? What opportunities does this day afford me to feel?"

Such a person is capable of enjoying failures as well as successes, capable of taking joy in someone else's accomplishments and good fortune as well as his own, capable of watching for serendipity or happy surprises, capable of living a rich and full life, regardless of circumstances.

When we stop to think about it, our ultimate goals are all feeling goals. We want to be happy; we want to be fulfilled; we want to be loved; we want to be kind; we want to have inner peace. All these goals are feelings. We may say we want to earn money, to build a new house, to finish college—but these are all secondary goals. The reason we want the money or the house or the college degree is because we believe it will make us happier, because it will make us feel better.

The best thing to say then, when we first open our eyes, is, "What can I feel today?" and "How can I enjoy those feelings?" If it is a day filled with work responsibilities and difficult tasks, we can derive feelings of accomplishment, completion, even purposeful fatigue. If it is a day of relaxation, we can derive feelings of rejuvenation and peace. If it is just a routine, drab, ordinary day, we can resolve to observe more and notice more, thus deriving feelings of interest and appreciation.

Memories are not years or days. Memories are moments. Memories are not sights or sounds. Memories are feelings.

We were cross-country skiing on a sparkling white and blue and golden Saturday. As we glided along, stretching our legs, pushing our poles, huffing our steamy breath, we felt a sense of simple elation. "You know,'" Linda puffed, "this is a pretty good 'now.' "

Since then, we have used that phrase often. Sitting around the dinner table enjoying each other's company, enjoying a conversation with friends, watching a sunset, peeking in on a sweet, sleeping child, one of us will look at the other and say, "This is a pretty good 'now.' "

Learning to identify, recognize, and appreciate our inner feelings is good training for appreciating the "now." Please don't brush off this notion. Don't say, "Well, I think I already know how I feel." Most of us don't, most of the time. We don't know how we feel because we never ask ourselves.

Oh, we know how we feel in those very rare moments when we are struck with extreme sadness or filled with intense excitement. But most of the time we just feel "fine," or "okay," or "all right, I guess," or, if you live in England, "not too bad."

It is a skill to be more consistently in tune with how you feel. To do so, you must be aware and you must be honest—honest with yourself.

There is nothing that gives you more control over your feelings than being able to identify them: "I feel a little bit jealous of Frank." "I feel kind of proud of myself for fixing that thermostat." "I feel intense frustration when the boss asks me to stay for these late meetings."

Just knowing a feeling sometimes makes it your friend rather than your enemy. And, once you're acquainted with it, it is easier to ask the feeling either to stay or to leave.

Back to our laws:

In baseball, if you can see the ball, you can hit it.

In math, if you can define a problem, you can solve it.

In life, if you can see people clearly, you can love them.

Within yourself, if you can clearly identify a feeling, you can either keep it and build on it or get rid of it.

If our goal is to teach our children charity, then the subject matter of the course really is feelings. The place to start (with children as well as with ourselves) is with our own feelings. Once we have a handle on those, we can use them like a net to catch the feelings of others.

Storm Jameson said that happiness came not from comfort but from the capacities "to enjoy simply, to think freely, to feel deeply, to risk life, to be needed."

Of her five "capacities," the middle one, "to feel deeply," is the fulcrum for all the others. Each of the other four produce happiness only as they create within us deep feelings.

II. Approaches for Parents

A. Be real. We ought to learn to drop our facades and be honest about our feelings to ourselves as well as our children.

In fact, when you stop to think about it, the expression of real feelings benefits all concerned. Parents, by articulating what they are feeling, gain training in knowing themselves and also "depressurize" their emotions by telling about them. Children, as they hear their parents discuss their feelings, become reassured of their parents' honesty and of the fact that their own feelings are okay and need not be hidden or suppressed.

In much recent parenting literature, experts have come to the consensus that the best way parents can respond to their children is to express how they feel. Instead of saying to a child, "You're bad for doing this," or "You're good for doing that," we say, "I feel upset when you do this," or "It makes me feel so good to see you do that."

Any alternative to being honest about your feelings amounts to some degree of dishonesty.

We are always troubled, for example, by a father who tries too hard always to act as if he were calm, when he is, in fact, livid or highly upset. This type of parent, when one of his small children has done something flagrantly naughty, takes him in his den and says (as he grits his teeth), "Now, Johnny, Daddy's not mad, and Daddy loves you, but you're going to have a little spank for what you did."

It's more honest to say, "Johnny, I feel very angry at what you did. In fact, I feel so upset by it that I think we had both better just sit here for a minute while I calm down before we talk about what the punishment should be."

So, approach number one for parents is, as usual, set the example! Try hard to recognize and identify your real feelings, and to express them to your spouse and your children.

B. Learn to figure out the source of your feelings. As we practice identifying and expressing our feelings, we ought to work on understanding where they come from. When Mom says, "I feel upset because Billy spilled his milk on my one good tablecloth, and he's old enough to be more careful!" She might want to ask herself why that upset her so much more than when the same thing happened last week. She might find that it's the fact that the checkbook didn't balance that really upsets her, and that Billy's milk just triggered the latent feeling.

Trying to identify the real source of feelings also helps us to be more accurate in naming them and expressing them. For example, you might say in the situation just mentioned, "I feel really upset because I had some frustrations with my checkbook and now I've got this mess to clean up." On the other hand, if, instead of just spilling his milk, Billy had willfully disobeyed you by stopping at a friend's house instead of coming straight home to baby-sit his brother as he was told to do, you might say, "I feel a little angry, Billy, because you broke the family law of obedience and caused me to miss an important meeting." In the first case upset is an accurate word, and the thing you are upset at is the situation. In the second case, angry is a more honest word, and you are angry at what your child did.

C. Separate negative feelings about behavior from positive love for the child. It is so important to be aware enough of this differentiation to make it clear to children. Sometimes the best way to be aware of it is to say it as simply as possible. Say, "I love you, Jennifer, but I'm very aggravated by what you just did!"

D. Be open and candid about positive feelings. Frustration, anger, and irritation are not the only feelings we ought to be honest about. Positive feelings such as pride, love, and concern should be expressed with equal honesty (instead of taken for granted and not mentioned, as is often the case).

When a child does well, gives something his best try, shows sensitivity, or exhibits any other good behavior, we should take every opportunity to tell him how good that makes us feel. Say, "I feel so happy when I see you sharing with your sister," or "It makes me feel proud and excited when I see a test paper like that."

This type of "I feel" expression is much more beneficial to a child than saying, "You are so smart in math." Children need to draw their own conclusions about themselves, and knowing how they made you feel will help greatly in this process.

Perhaps the most important place of all to be real and genuine is in the love we show for our children after we have disciplined them or shown our disfavor with something they have done. No words say it more clearly and directly than those in D&C 121:43: "Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy."

Make no mistake, there are times when children perceive parents as their enemies, or at least as barriers to what they want to do and as constant critics who are forever disciplining, correcting, and finding things to be displeased with.

But when parents make a conscious effort to "show forth an increase of love," it completes the circle, making it very clear that it was the behavior that the parent was displeased with, and that no behavior could ever dilute the love he has for the child himself.

E. Once you can recognize and express feelings, learn how to alter them. Norman Cousins, whose book Anatomy of An Illness tracked his own battle with cancer, concluded (with himself as the evidence) that the mind can control what goes on in the body, even the correction of illness. Mr. Cousins believes the body is a "walking apothecary" that can release any number of different chemicals into the bloodstream, thus altering both a person's physical condition and how he feels.

Feelings are often a somewhat complex combination of the psychological, the mental, and the emotional man and of the situation he finds himself in. Thus we can change how we feel either by changing our situation or by changing something within us.

We can often change our situation by accomplishing something—by disciplining ourselves to get something done. It is remarkable how much even a small achievement can alter how we feel. Many times, though, it is easier to change ourselves than to change our situation.

Some people become experts in meditation, or in a relaxation technique, or in an exercise or aerobics type of activity, or in taking a brief nap, or in praying briefly but deeply—and each of these can substantially alter the mental state, pushing certain chemicals into the bloodstream and changing very dramatically how we feel.

All of us ought to find our own ways of consciously altering or changing the way we feel so that we do not have to endure damaging and dangerous negative moods or depression for long periods of time.

F. At the same time, we should appreciate our moods and realize that most, if not all of them, have a positive side. Our goal to be able to change how we feel should not extend to the point of wanting always to feel happy, optimistic, and outgoing. Everyone needs pensive times, quiet times, times for reflection, for reevaluation, even for sadness and worry.

All of these feelings have their uses. It is often in our deeper and perhaps less pleasant periods that we resolve to improve, search our hearts for real purpose and meaning, and become sensitive to the needs and feelings of others. Christ was the perfect example of one who "descended below them all" and felt the deepest depths of sadness—and yet also felt the greatest of all joy. Usually the depths of a person's "valleys" match the height of his "peaks."

And there is something worse than feeling bad. It is not feeling at all.

The real goal to be worked toward this month is to feel more and to be more aware and more able to define and talk about what you feel.

We have come to the conclusion that no feeling is inherently bad. It's just that some feelings often manifest themselves in negative ways.

One might think of loneliness as a bad feeling, yet it could, if handled right, be the motivation for greater friendliness and more social effort. Anger, if controlled, could produce positive change, as could frustration or even disillusionment.

Practice, this month, learning to: (1) ask yourself how you feel; (2) answer the question to yourself; (3) find the positive aspects of that feeling and appreciate them; and (4) identify the negative aspects of the feeling and try to get rid of them.

G. Relish those moments when you feel moved. We saw a movie during the time we were writing this book that had a particularly moving scene in it. As we drove home afterward, we began to discuss the phenomenon of being moved.

What happens when we hear an emotionally beautiful piece of music, or watch a performance of such excellence, or hear a testimony so touching that it brings tears to our eyes? We feel psychological changes within us. A thrill goes down our spine; we feel a tingling sensation; a lump comes to our throat, moisture to our eyes. Is this a chemical change? Does the sensation received by the mind secrete a chemical into our bloodstream that causes these reactions? Or is it really more of a spiritual phenomenon? Does our spirit, which is used to a more pure, higher realm of perfection and emotion, react to these higher things, to these beauties that seem a little beyond our world? Perhaps when we are moved, it is just that our spirit feels more at home in that brief moment of intense beauty or perfect performance, and we feel the thrill of returning home ever so briefly.

Whatever the explanation is, we all love to be moved because it is the deepest of feelings. And that thought reinforces the goal of this month—to deepen, better define, and better recognize our own feelings.

H. Your own methods. Take a few minutes and list any other approaches or methods you can think of that might help you to be more aware and more appreciative of your own feelings.

III. Exercises to Teach Children

A. Fast Sunday discussion and pretest (to firmly establish, in everyone's mind, the objective for the month ahead of becoming more aware of your own feelings).

As usual with a new "month," begin with a discussion involving all family members eight and older. Build it around the following points:

Test: As usual in opening a "month," have everyone (including parents) take a brief test in the left-hand column of a divided piece of paper.

B. Use the word "feel"—in telling and in asking (to help children become more generally aware of your feelings and of theirs). As you form the habit of saying, "I feel," also form the habit of asking, "How do you feel?"

Move away from asking children so many "why," "when," and "where" questions and start asking more, "How do you feel about" questions. Encourage them to identify their feelings and express them to you, and praise every effort they make to talk about their feelings.

C. Themes and speeches on feelings (to give children additional opportunities to concentrate their thoughts on feelings they have experienced). As mentioned earlier, the best way to focus our thoughts on something is to write about or give a brief speech about it. Ask each family member to give a one-minute speech on a topic like "How I felt when Dad got home from his business trip," or "How I felt when I didn't make the Pep Club," or "How I felt last Wednesday when I finished my midterm test."

Pick subjects where feelings were quite obvious. Later, with some experience, you can pick situations where feelings were more subtle and harder to define ("How I felt yesterday afternoon at school") and where the children will have to think hard to remember and conclude how they felt.

Do the same thing with short, one-half-page themes.

Be sure you participate. Let them (the children) give you your speech or theme topic.

D. The adjective game (to assist children in defining their feelings and to increase their ability to verbalize those feelings).

As a family, make a long list of adjectives that describe how people can feel. Start with the most basic feelings ("happy," "sad," "mad," "frustrated," "embarrassed") and move to more specific and interesting adjectives ("murky," "jumpy," "agitated," "perplexed," "elated").

Try to list at least one hundred words before you are finished. Explain that a good vocabulary helps us figure out our feelings as well as express them. Put the list up in a visible place and invite family members to add to it whenever they think of another good descriptive adjective or whenever they feel a certain way that is not described by any word on the list.

The list will add another dimension to the speeches or themes mentioned in item C and will also be useful whenever the question "How do you feel?" is asked in your family.

E. The survey approach. During your next family meeting have some fun with the insight gained from a family survey. Ask each child to write down a four-word description of each of his brothers and sisters and of both parents. Next ask him to write about how he feels about each one. You will be fascinated and amazed at some of the results. Sometimes the best way to look at the world through your children's eyes is to ask them to write it down. (You may want to have your little ones that don't write verbalize this exercise for you.) You'll find that some aspects of your children's perspective of each other may be very different from your own because of the place where they fit in the family. This exercise may also reveal why some children behave as they do in the family constellation. It will also be excellent practice for the children in deciding and articulating how they feel about others.

F. Humor (to help children see that a sense of humor can modify their own bad feelings and also help others to feel better).

Get in the habit of thinking (and saying) "Was there anything funny or amusing about it?" Ask the question whenever someone is describing a feeling. Learn to look at the lighter side of things.

One formula says, "crisis plus time equals humor." And it is true that we look back on some of our biggest frustrations as rather humorous situations.

By consciously looking for the lighter side, we can inject some of the humor right into the crisis, and we can teach children how to modify their moodiest moods.

Also, encourage the telling of good, wholesome jokes and of laughter in general. The observation and listening skills of the last two chapters often lead to the noticing of something that is humorous and funny. Take the time to laugh and to encourage laughter. It is the nearest thing we have to a cure-all medicine. (Latest studies by Norman Cousins and others show that laughter actually is medicine. It causes chemical charges and secretions that overcome pain and cure illness.)

G. Tracing your feelings (to help children identify the sources of their feelings). After any of the foregoing methods which challenge us to define feelings, ask the question, "What caused the feeling?" Practice with your children the skill of identifying where feelings started and what factors led to them.

Help them to see the connection between physical things and feelings. For example, if you didn't eat breakfast your blood sugar is low and you may be more irritable, or if a woman is pregnant, her hormone balance might shift and rather drastically alter her moods and how she feels.

Tell the two following brief stories to illustrate that feelings can build and can be transferred to unrelated objects or situations:

Mrs. Raymond felt bad because of how her husband treated her and ended up yelling at Billy, who forgot to wipe his feet when he came home from school. Billy was upset so he shoved his sister, Suzy, when she bumped into him in the hallway. Suzy was angry at Billy so she kicked the dog when he walked in front of her as she went outside. The dog yelped and took a nip at the cat that was usually his best friend.

Isn't it interesting how a sick secretary can cause a cat to get bitten by a dog?

H. Poetry and journals (two other ways to use writing as a vehicle to identify and understand feelings).

The writing of poetry, as described in previous chapters, is a truly remarkable way not only to become more observant but to become better at identifying and describing how we feel.

Using the "adjective list" from item D, have each family member write a poem about the feelings he had at a certain moment. As an alternative, describe a hypothetical situation to the children and have them write a poem about how they think they would feel in that situation.

If there is anything even more useful than poetry in the clarifying of feelings, it is journal writing. As discussed earlier, journals can greatly increase both our observing and listening abilities. The privacy of a journal makes it an appropriate place to record the deepest of our feelings, whatever they are.

Encourage children to begin many of the sentences in their journals with the words I feel.

I. Ancestors (to use people the children can really identify with as "case studies" in identifying feelings).

If you have used the "ancestors" methods we have suggested in other writings (telling children stories based on actual experiences of their ancestors), you are well prepared to ask your children to describe the feelings they think a certain ancestor had in any particular situation that he was in. Trying to describe these imagined feelings (verbally or in writing) also serves as a bridge into the next two chapters, which attempt to teach children (and parents) to focus on the feelings of others instead of just on their own.

J. Handling worry (to help children worry less about their worries). Explain that there are two basic kinds of worries, the ones we can't do anything about, and the ones we can. Have a goal as a family to spend any "worrying time" that you indulge in on the second kind. Point out that there are plenty of things to worry about that you can do something about, so there is no point in worrying over those things you can't do anything about.

K. Your own ideas. List any other ways or means that you think would help your children become better at identifying and understanding their own feelings.

L. Post-test (to review and reinforce what you have learned during the month).

On fast Sunday, retake the test you started the month with. Praise everyone for doing so much better on it (as they will) than they did a month ago.

Discuss the benefits (and the enjoyments) of being more aware of your own feelings, and their move on to the family focal point as a way to stay in the habit of identifying and expressing how you feel.

IV. Family Focal Point

Testimonies (to provide monthly an atmosphere in which the deepest feelings can be expressed).

The thing that we call testimony bearing in the Church is, at its best, a truly unique phenomenon. It is people telling other people their deepest feelings—feelings of conviction, of gratitude, even of fear or grief.

Family testimonies can be even more deep and candid expressions of feelings, and a regular family testimony meeting can be a recurring means of finding and expressing feelings.

For our family, fast Sunday is the best time to hold such a meeting. Whether or not anyone has borne his or her testimony in church, everyone does in the family meeting that follows. We encourage each family member to use the words "I feel" as often as possible, and to be as accurate as possible about their feelings and absolutely honest about them.

V. Summary

A person who knows how he feels and who can be honest both with himself and with others is a person of character and strength.

It takes courage to admit feelings to ourselves and to talk about them to others. A person who learns to do so will begin to find life's experiences more meaningful; he will become more sure of himself and of his dreams and ambitions; and he will become far more capable of identifying the feelings of other people—which is the object of the next two "months."

A side benefit of becoming better at understanding what we feel and why we feel it is that we grow to think of ourselves as more responsible for our own feelings. We gain a measure of confidence in our ability to decide for ourselves how we will feel and how we will think, rather than letting other people or outside factors determine our feelings, beliefs, and preferences for us.

S. D. Gordon said: "Shoes define men into three classes. Some men wear their fathers' shoes. They make no decisions of their own. Some are unthinkingly shod by the crowd. The strong man is his own cobbler. He insists on making his own choices. He walks in his own shoes."

As we progress, we learn that one of the choices we can make relates to how we feel. And we learn that our feelings can be unique and individual, made up of our own attitudes and beliefs as well as the results of what happens to us.

Most importantly, we learn that feelings are at the core of people. We first understand ourselves by learning to know our feelings. Then we can attempt to know others by grasping and empathizing with their feelings.
