Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Charity ( 1986)

Month 7

Concern: "How Do You Feel?"

Understanding Observing Feeling Communicating + Doing____________ =Charity

"One of the sanest, surest and most generous joys of life comes from being happy over the good fortune of others." (Archibald Rutledge.)

I. Illustrations and Stories

Ponder the Archibald Rutledge quote that opens this "month." It contains a remarkably simple truth. There are not enough moments of pleasure and personal fulfillment in our own lives to keep us always happy, but if we can learn to truly feel the joys of others—then we can be forever happy.

The other side of the coin is also important: When we are truly empathetic and able to feel what others feel, we have the pain that they have as well as the pleasure.

Yet both are, to us, great blessings because both expand our experience and teach us the lessons of life.

If it is true (and it is) that there is no progress "from ease to ease," and if it is true (and it is) that we progress and grow only through challenge—that muscles strengthen only through use and "pulling"—then we must experience personal crisis, hardship, pain, or despair before we can grow or develop. Right?

Wrong! We will all experience these things, and they will be opportunities for learning and for growth. But there are other ways to grow—ways that involve the challenges and crises and needs of others. As we learn to feel the feelings of others, we not only put ourselves in a position to help—we put ourselves in a position to grow.

As they begin to read this "month" some readers will say, "Ah, now we are coming to a real skill of charity, because charity can't start until we feel what others feel."

In fact, this month is just another step toward charity. It is a step that can't be taken until people have improved their abilities to see and to listen and to be aware of their own feelings. As they learn to do those things, they become prepared to learn the skill of feeling the feelings of others. That skill, in turn, prepares them for the communicating and doing that complete the abilities of charity.

It is not hard to believe in our ability to feel what others feel. All who have truly loved someone know that it is possible to feel for someone. When our child is sick and we feel his pain more than he; when our spouse is hurt and we wish we could remove the pain by taking it on ourselves—in situations like these we do, through our concern, know how another person feels.

The skill to work for is to feel that empathy more commonly and more frequently, to know more accurately how the person we are talking to feels, to be aware on a constant and ongoing basis of the feelings of the person we are dealing with. The literal definition of sympathy is to feel sorry for someone. The literal definition of empathy is to feel sorry with someone.

Remember our earlier reference to Graham Kerr, the "Galloping Gourmet," and his claim that he could read a recipe and actually taste—in his empty mouth—what the completed dish would taste like. The deepest form of empathy is similar. We look and listen to the make-up or symptoms or "recipe" of a person and are able to feel what he feels as though we were inside of his skin.

True maturity is the end of self-centeredness and selfishness and self-consciousness. It is being able to turn the mirrors which surround us into windows.

Angela Morgan, perhaps thinking of empathy, said, "I will hew great windows, wonderful windows, measureless windows for my soul."

The question of "how do you feel" is not as easy as it sounds. Sometimes we think we know how someone feels because we know how we would feel in their shoes. Not often, but sometimes we have to come to grips with the fact that the Golden Rule does not always apply.

When we were first married, I (Linda) remember distinctly learning this lesson when we visited the beautiful home of some older, established friends. Richard settled down to watch a football game and leisurely rested his feet on the coffee table. The hostess was not pleased. Richard felt sorry to have upset her and insisted (to me, not her) that he was only doing what he would want someone to do in his home.

Another example: While my mother would love a surprise visit from a long lost cousin, I would be embarrassed if she showed up unexpectedly on one of those days when things are disheveled everywhere and I'm trying to get a child through a crisis.

We need to consider that people have vastly different perspectives and needs. We need to consider their feelings and try to anticipate what would make them happy, rather than assume that they are "just like us" and would appreciate the same things we would.

We heard a very amusing speaker once who was talking about oxymorons. An oxymoron, he said, is a subject phrase containing two words that contradict each other and that should mutually exclude each other. He gave some examples: "airline food," "military intelligence," "postal service."

There is another oxymoron of a slightly different type, which people use often and usually with good and pure intent. It is when we say, "I know how you feel," or "I see how you must feel." These are oxymorons because you can't empathize or truly identify with a feeling by seeing it or by knowing it. You can understand it only by feeling it. True empathy, accurately expressed, would therefore have to be, "I feel how you feel."

I was coaching a "biddy basketball team" of kids ages five to seven which included two of our boys. A new boy joined the team just before one of the games. His parents dropped him off and left him with us. As a crowd of spectators assembled and the gym became noisy, the new boy started to cry and to say that he didn't want to play. I did all I could to encourage him, but he was afraid. The best I could do was to get him to quiet down and sit on the bench and watch, with the assurance that he wouldn't have to play unless he wanted to.

A little later I noticed my five-year-old, who had been taken out of the game, sitting with and talking to the new boy. I angled myself closer on the bench so I could hear. Our boy was saying, "I felt a little scared the first time, too, because there's so many people, but I got used to it, and now it's fun. Don't worry, you'll get used to it, too."

Even small children can feel and express empathy when the time and the situation are just right (and particularly when they have recently been in the same situation as the person they are empathizing with). Adolescents can go a step beyond this, with effort and encouragement. They can learn to observe and listen and feel what others are feeling even when it is not something that has happened to them. But it is not easy and it does not happen overnight.

George Merriam said: "At the time when you cannot see God, there is still open to you this sacred possibility, to show God. For it is the love and kindness of human hearts through which the divine reality comes home to men. Let this thought, then, stay with you: There may be times when you cannot find help, but there is no time when you cannot give help."

Those who learn to feel empathy and to focus a major portion of their attention on the needs of others and on their own possibilities for meeting or assisting in those needs—such people are not complainers, but doers. As Merriam says, we have much more control over the help we give than over the help we get.

II. Approaches for Parents

A. Desire. The first method for knowing how others feel is to want to know how they feel. Most often, we do not know because we don't want to. This is not to say that we want not to know—we simply don't want to enough to try hard enough to know.

I had an employee once who was unhappy in her work, and it looked as though she might quit. I spent some time with her, talked things over with her, and tried to make her feel better about her job. I was, or so I supposed, exercising some concern and empathy by dealing with her feelings.

As I thought back about the experience later that evening, I realized that what I had been doing was not empathy, at all, or if it was, it was the lowest form of the word. Actually, my concern was for myself. I had realized that, if this person quit, my own life would become more difficult. I would have to train another person; it would be inconvenient and time-consuming.

Now, there is nothing inherently wrong with being concerned about your own inconvenience. But this is not empathy—nor in this case did it give me any real insight into what the employee was feeling.

And thus we are presented with a classic dilemma and question: If you can't feel with others until you really care about them, how do you develop that caring—which itself is a feeling?

The answer, simple as it sounds, is to want to. Want to care! Remember that Alma said that if we want faith we must first simply desire to believe. It is the same with empathy. If we start with a desire to care, that desire alone will be enough to make us try to feel what others feel. And once we really begin trying that, we will feel it.

B. Pray. Tying in with desire is prayer. If you want to feel what others feel, you should ask for the ability or the gift to do so. We believe that this is exactly the kind of prayer God responds most readily to. In essence, you are asking Him to help you do something that He very much wants you to do. This kind of asking is extremely helpful.

Of all the admonitions in scripture, the most frequently repeated is to ask. God, our loving Father, wants to help and assist us in things of righteousness but, because of his commitment to our agency, he does not help us in some things until we take the agency-preserving initiative of asking.

But we must be careful not to ask without accompanying mental effort. If we think hard about others and try hard to feel what they feel, and then ask, we will receive. But if we simply ask without making much mental effort, it may be that the only way God could have us feel what another feels is through having the same things happen to us that happened to him.

Linda had an experience that is humorous in retrospect but that at the moment it happened, provided some insight as to why God asks us to ask.

One Sunday morning when our three youngest children were small, I realized that our two little girls, whom I had just put in the bathtub, needed to practice a song for the Mother's Day program that morning. We had been out of town over the weekend and I soon realized in my search for the songbook that I had left it in the car along with the suitcases after our arrival in the wee hours of the morning.

My step quickened at the touch of the cold cement on my bare feet as I tiptoed to the car, thinking it was better to get half my foot cold than the whole thing. I located the book amidst leftover paper cups and cold french fries and ran back to the door—in a hurry to get out of the cold spring morning air—only to dash my nose into the door. I then realized that my fourteen-month-old baby, who had a fetish for pushing in buttons, had followed me to the door and pushed the "lock" button. He was at an age where he could push, but not turn, and I realized within a minute that no amount of coaching could teach a baby how to turn a knob without at least one demonstration on the same side of the door. I knew that all the other doors and windows were locked.

I looked down at my tattered, old, white nightgown and first thought, "Well, I'll just have to stay here until Richard gets home from his meeting in half an hour." At that moment I also realized with horror that I had left the water running in the bathtub where I had left our two other preschoolers splashing with glee.

Swallowing a big lump of pride, I tiptoed around the house, onto the balcony, and to the bathroom window. I reached the window with no apparent onlookers and heard the water running. Tapping on the window, I tried to whisper in a hoarse voice, "Saren, Saren, get out of the tub!" She heard me knocking and of course couldn't hear what I was saying over the running water, but yelled back, "Mom, it's getting hot." Every time I hissed, "Get out of the tub and come to the door," she replied the same thing, "It's getting hot!" On the fourth try I cast modesty to the wind and screamed, "GET OUT OF THE TUB AND COME TO THE DOOR!" I felt the curtains of the neighbors' homes part behind me but I did not turn around to wave!

At last I saw her appear at the sliding glass door on the balcony, but my joy turned to panic again when I realized that I had never taught her the complicated maneuver of pressing the lever in the right place to open the door. At last she could see me, however, and after two more minutes of going through all kinds of contortions, she pressed the right spot. I threw open the door and rushed to the bathroom, where I found two-and-a-half-year-old Shawni with a toy boat bobbing at about nose level!

With both little girls a little redder than usual and still dripping in their birthday suits, I pulled them onto my knees and I hugged them tightly.

That afternoon, after rehearsing the scene in my mind for the tenth time, I realized in one flash of inspiration that at the second Saren opened that door I felt exactly like our Heavenly Father must feel when he can see us in danger. He is aching to help, but we have to open the door. Another illustration of this is in the famous painting of Christ holding the light at the door. We realize after looking for a few moments that there is no doorknob on his side. The initiative must come from the poor, floundering person on the other side! I understood more fully than ever why he asks us to ask.

C. Mental effort. As powerful as asking can be in helping us to feel what others feel, it is the effort we make mentally that qualifies us for answers to our prayers and that actually gets our thoughts close enough to another person's thoughts that we empathize. Through hard thought we are capable of getting inside the feelings of someone else.

Joseph Smith said, "When we work by faith we work by mental effort rather than by physical force." Our minds actually do have the power to "see" through the eyes and through the feelings of others, but it takes hard mental work. It takes faith!

Form the habit of asking yourself, as you talk to another person, "What is he feeling right now?" Asking yourself will cause you to see and to think in a different way—in a potentially wonderful way.

D. Apply this mental effort to your children. Theoretically, it should be our children who are the easiest to empathize with. We do love them enough that their pain is very literally our pain. And they are enough like us that it should be easy for us to re-create in our minds the thoughts and feelings that are in theirs.

But it is not easy, simply because of the mental effort it takes. We can get good at it, however, if we put forth the effort and practice.

It's worth it! Once we begin to see through our children's eyes, a whole new world of understanding (and of potential to communicate) opens up to us.

We need to learn to think back. We need to ask ourselves, "How did I feel when I was in eighth grade? What experiences did I have that were similar to these? How did the world look to me at that time? What worried me?"

After we go as far as our memory will take us, we have to go still farther by climbing into the child's shoes and imagining his own vision. "How does this look to him? What is he thinking?"

Effort in this kind of thought can pay great dividends. We knew one father who was terribly upset at the argumentative, rebellious attitude of his son. The boy was not doing anything seriously wrong. He was just disagreeing with his father on everything, arguing just to be contrary, putting forth counterpositions about anything, even when they were silly and illogical.

The father decided one day to simply sit down in a quiet room and try to think what his son was thinking and feel what his son was feeling. After less than an hour, the father developed a powerful new insight. He realized that the adolescent was struggling very hard to feel independent, to begin to become his own man. To do this, the boy felt that he first had to separate himself a little from his dad, to disagree with him on some things, to have his own position, to remove himself far enough from his father to have space of his own in which to become his own person. This made him say some things that hurt the father and gave the father sad feelings of not being respected or needed.

Nonetheless, once the father really began to think from the boy's perspective, he realized how natural it is to try to break away from one thing before you can become something on your own. He realized that he wanted his son to be his own man, and that a little independent opinion now and again was an indispensable part of that process.

The point is that many of the problems of our children are not really their problems, but ours. We need to learn to empathize with them before we can really expect them to empathize with us and with others.

E. Find and use one-on-one time for adolescents and teenagers to express feelings.

Our school system brings our high school students home before the younger children. As their mother and one who cares about them, I take that precious time we have alone before the younger kids "bombard" us to ask our teenagers how they feel—what happened at school, and so on—rather than throwing the preschoolers at them so that I can run an errand. The time is pure gold.

Another mother recently changed my opinion about my dreams of a chauffeur to take the kids to and from music lessons, dance classes, and basketball practice. "Oh, I wouldn't give up that time for anything," she said. "We turn on the classical music and talk about feelings." I suddenly realized that one of my trials could become one of my greatest blessings! The time I was complaining about not having was really there if I just set the stage and used the time well for feelings to be expressed.

F. The argument-ending technique. Remember and use the technique of repeating the other person's position first as discussed in Month Five.

For review: A couple sets this rule of communication: In a disagreement, we speak in turn, and one party may not make his next point until he has repeated or paraphrased the other party's last point to the satisfaction of that other party.

This method promotes a kind of communication and empathy (even if it starts as a kind of grudging empathy) that cools tempers and brings people back together.

G. Delay "advice" until after "empathy." Often, adolescents complain about something or engage in some behavior their parents disapprove of and the parents rush to advise them, to set them straight, to correct the situation.

Our twelve-year-old daughter was bemoaning the feeling she had that no one really liked her, that she had no real friends, and that she felt left out of many of the groups at school.

My first impulse was to give her fatherly advice—to tell her she had to quit thinking so much of herself and to "be a friend if she wanted to have friends." Instead, luckily, I just listened, and then sat back and told her of a very clearly remembered day when I was twelve, walking home from school by myself, excluded by three boys who seemed to be shunning me. I told her all I could remember of my own similar feelings I had experienced at her age.

She was interested, curious. I never did give any advice or solutions that day, but she felt much better, and we felt much closer.

Another day our seven-year-old son, Jonah, told me how worried he was about a bully in his class that pushed him every time he walked by and told him he was dumb. I tried to curb my instincts to "solve" and to interfere. I told my son about a boy named Melvin who used to terrorize me in grade school, who told me he was going to beat me up, who took my homework away every chance he got. I told my son that the next fall when we started school I had grown bigger than Melvin and he walked up to me, started to say something mean, noticed that I had grown, and just mumbled a quiet "Hi."

Jonah thought that was funny. It made him feel that he could live with his "Melvin" in the days that followed. I would ask him, "How's your Melvin, Jonah?" and we would smile at each other.

Often we are mistaken in thinking that we can solve our children's problems for them. What we can do is understand them and support them and give them the subtle encouragements that increase their ability to solve their own problems.

H. The "partnership planning system." The most important "you" in the question, "How do you feel?" is your spouse. There is an effective daily planning system that can, when implemented by a husband and wife, greatly expand their awareness of each other's activities and feelings as well as of the sights and sounds and opportunities around them.

The system involves the use of a daily planning sheet similar to this:

Each evening, prior to praying together, take five minutes to plan the coming day. Use a piece of carbon paper so each partner will have a copy.

Each partner lists his or her three top priorities for the day and then writes down the anticipated schedule. Discuss events or situations that need coordination.

As discussed in the family focal point for Month Four, each partner has a "serendipity" column in which to write (the next day) things that come up spontaneously: the unexpected surprises, the happy accidents that frequently happen to people who are trying to be aware and sensitive to what is going on around them. Such occurrences (from a chance to make a new friend to an opportunity to watch a sunset) are consciously chosen over whatever had been planned for that time, and the displaced item on the plan is either rescheduled for later in the day or pushed back to tomorrow. Write the "serendipity thing" on the planner at the hour it occurred so you can share it with your partner before prayer when you review the day and plan the next day.

As mentioned in Month Five, when you use the serendipity columns, the "perfect day" is not one in which you checked off everything you planned to do. Rather, it is the day in which your observation led you to find some things to do that were better than what you had planned.

Adding the partnership aspect to the system and planning together each night stimulates and increases individual awareness, improves communication, lets you share each other's day, allows you to know where your partner is at any given time, and permits you to more consistently answer the question, "How does he/she feel?" (Note: A more complete explanation of the "partnership planner," along with a one-month supply of self-carbon planners, is available from Homebase, 1615 Foothill Drive, Salt Lake City, Utah 84108.)

III. Exercises to Teach Children

A. Fast Sunday discussion and pretest (to establish the family goal for next month of trying to know the feelings of the other people we deal with).

Hold a short discussion with family members age eight and older:

Test: As usual, begin the month with a short test. Save the right-hand column of everyone's paper so you can retake it at the end of the month.

B. The family tradition of asking (and answering) "How do you feel?" (to help children become more constantly aware of how other family members feel).

Assuming that you have spent the previous month working on Month Six ("How do I feel?"), family members will be at a peak in terms of being able to verbalize how they feel when other family members ask.

This month, your emphasis should shift from knowing how you feel to wanting to know how other family members feel.

Set the example by simply asking the question often and being genuinely interested in the answer, and in what you can do to help whenever the feelings you listen to are sad or negative.

Asking other family members how they feel may seem like something too obvious and simple to mention, but it is (against the backdrop of last month's work on knowing and expressing our own feelings) the most effective and useful place to start.

C. Give extra doses of praise (to give children the self-esteem that is a prerequisite for being interested in how others feel). Before a child can become very interested in the feelings of others, he needs to have a certain base level of self-esteem and confidence in himself.

The whole bottom-line objective of this book is to help children worry less about themselves by worrying more about others, but the process involved is a bit of a chicken-and-egg situation. People do think less about themselves as we help them to notice and feel for others, but it is often impossible to raise their awareness of others until their own self-image is strong enough to allow it.

So all along the way, through every "month" of this book, we must seek ways to build and nurture our children's self-image.

The most direct way to do so is praise. Find as many specific little things as you can, every day, to praise them for. And to the verbal praise, add physical touch. A hug, a pat on the back, an arm around the shoulder—this touching reinforces and helps give children the sense of inner well-being that allows them to notice and to care how other people are feeling.

Bedtime is a particularly good time to praise a child and reinforce his self-image. Compliments at bedtime cause children to go to sleep feeling happy, and the security and well-being they bring often carry over into a child's dreams. Try to find time this month to think of specific compliments to give your children as you tuck them in.

D. Role-reversal games (to give another direction to parents' and children's perspectives of each other).

Early adolescent children often enjoy assuming the role of parent for an evening, particularly if parents will play the role of children. If you really get into it, both sides can learn a lot. Let them (children playing the role of parents) ask whether you've done your homework, push you to clean your room, and try to get you to go to bed on time. Respond to them with the emotions that their demands cause you to feel. Try hard to project yourself into what their feelings would be and encourage them to do the same with yours.

After you have tried this role playing for an evening or two, try to use the skills and ideas of it in day-to-day life, and encourage your children to do likewise. For example, the next time your son is out too late, try projecting yourself into how he might feel. (Maybe he's having too much fun to remember the time; maybe he's concerned that he's not home but the other guys he is with are persuading him to stay out.) Perhaps your son will be trying to project, also. (How are my parents feeling? Worried about me—trusting me but wishing I would call if I can't be home on time.)

E. More specific and specialized forms of questioning and answering (to help children discover the enjoyment of finding out interesting things about others). By example, by encouragement, and through frequent family discussion, train your children to find out all they tactfully can about other people—where they come from, what they like to do, what they're interested in, what their plans are, who else they know, and so forth.

Again, example is the most impressive teacher. As we write this chapter, we think back to earlier in the week when we picked up a man high in a snowy mountain pass. (We're cautious, but he looked safe and he looked to be in serious need, with his thin coat on a below-zero day.) During the one-hour ride that followed, we became deeply interested in the man, asked him hundreds of questions, and found several ways that we could offer assistance.

After the experience, several of our children, each in his or her own way, expressed their feelings of empathy and concern for the man, and their very real interest in him. Our nine-year-old said, "Dad, that man was interesting! When we first picked him up I thought he was just a dirty old hobo, but by the time we dropped him off, I felt like he was my friend and I really wanted to help him!" She paused for a moment and then went on, "You sure thought of a lot of good questions, Dad!"

It is fun, around the dinner table or whenever there is a moment to talk, to ask, "Who found someone interesting to ask questions of today?" Get the children interested not only in asking questions, but in telling the rest of the family what they have learned.

F. Game: "Listen, Paraphrase, and Add Feeling" (to improve children's listening and interpretation skills). Explain to children that the listening ability your family worked on in Month Five is just the start of being able to understand other people's feelings. You have to listen, to understand, and then to try hard to put yourself into their shoes and imagine what they feel.

Then introduce the game, in which one family member asks another what happened to him that day. The second person tells some experience and the first person repeats back or paraphrases back the experience, visualizing it as though it had happened to him. He then indicates how he thinks the other person felt.

Example: Twelve-year-old James says to ten-year-old Pat, "What happened today?" Pat says, "Oh, we had a math test and I thought it would be easy but he asked a lot of questions from the chapter I didn't study and hardly any from the chapter I did!"

James says: "So you thought you were prepared for the test, because you did study, but you mostly studied one chapter and when you took the test, most of it was on another chapter that you hadn't studied. I'll bet you felt kind of frustrated, and maybe you felt a little bit mad at your teacher for tricking you, or for not telling you what chapter to study."

It's surprising how much children enjoy this kind of discussion (once they get the hang of it) with their siblings or their parents. And there is no better training for the development of empathy.

G. Visit old people, people from other cultures, and so on (to give children opportunities to empathize with people who are very different from themselves).

When children are around only their peers, it is easy for them to assume that others feel pretty much the same way (and have the same emotions) they do. On the other hand, when they are exposed to very different people, they have wonderful opportunities to expand and stretch their ability to empathize.

As we write, our own family has recently been involved with some young students from Malaysia and with a very elderly man whom we have been trying to help. As the children talk to these people, ask them questions, and try to guess how they are feeling, they begin to see from a very different perspective many of the things they have taken for granted. They learn new ways to feel by feeling vicariously for the other person.

H. "The Bench" argument-resolving technique (to teach children to recognize their own contribution to a fight or disagreement, and to appreciate how what they have said could hurt someone else). Whenever two children in your family (of any age) are fighting or arguing in an uncontrolled or unpleasant way, try the following technique:

Sit them both on a bench or couch or together on two chairs. Tell them that it "takes two to tangle"—that they were both at fault in the argument, and that neither one can leave the bench until he can tell what he did wrong (not what the other person did wrong).

We have a five-year-old who often ends up on the bench but who never knows what he did wrong. He hates to sit there, however, so he always asks the other child (whom he was fighting with) what it was that he did wrong. The other child tells him, he repeats it to us, and gets off the bench!

I. Give more responsibility. We mentioned earlier the Harvard study which found that, in cultures where adolescents are given more responsibility, there is more altruism and extra-centeredness and less self-centeredness among them.

It is in societies like our own, where too much is given and too little is expected, that teenagers show such propensity to be insensitive to others and wrapped up in their own needs and wants. We must recognize this connection and realize that one purpose of giving responsibility is to help children get their minds off of themselves.

J. Your own methods. List other ways that you can think of to help your children feel more interested in the feelings of others.

K. Post-test (to review and reinforce what has been learned).

On fast Sunday, retake the test you started this "month" with. As normal, review everyone's answers and discuss how far you have all come in wanting to know others' feelings, and in asking and finding out what others are feeling.

IV. Family Focal Point

"Collecting friends" (to make children more consistently aware of the fact that finding out about how others feel is the key to making friends and to feeling good about yourself).

We have a big chart by the dinner table called the Friend Chart. On it there is a column for each member of our family in which he can write the name of each new person he meets and finds out about. The rule is that no one can list a name unless he has found something out about how that person feels.

At the end of the year when we're doing greeting cards (in our case it's Thanksgiving cards rather than Christmas cards) we go through the "friends" list and be sure they all get a card.

V. Summary

Deep within us is the potential to see and hear everything and to feel every level of every emotion.

We are stopped from fully seeing, from fully feeling, by the filters and blockades and blind spots that our egos and our self-centeredness put in front of us—by our windows turning into mirrors.

The goal is to become "transparent," to become less and less aware of ourselves and of our problems as we become more aware of everything around us.

As we ask ourselves more often, "How does this person feel?" we will have less time to ask ourselves (or to worry about) how we feel.

Once we gain a little ability in knowing the feelings of those we talk to and deal with, we can move to a higher form of empathy where we try to become aware of the feelings of those we are not in direct contact or conversation with. Such is the focus of the next month.
