Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Charity ( 1986)

Month 8

Empathy: "How Does He Feel?"

Understanding Observing Feeling Communicating + Doing____________ =Charity

"See how the masses of men worry themselves into nameless graves, while here and there a great unselfish soul forgets himself into immortality." (Ralph Waldo Emerson.)

I. Illustrations and Stories

Answering the question, "How do you feel?" with regard to another person with whom you are dealing or interacting is essentially a matter of concern. We have, in the last "month," referred to it as empathy, but concern would be a more accurate word. Through observing, through asking and listening, and through caring, we remove our attention from ourselves and focus it on the other person we are dealing with.

A still higher and somewhat more difficult form of the same skill involves asking, "How does he feel?" of someone we are not interacting with, someone who is riot telling us how he feels, someone whose only connection with us is the empathy we feel for them.

One of Linda's favorite stories (and a turning point in her life) happened when she was in her first year of junior high:

My mother knew I was debating whether or not to go to the first dance of the year. I was afraid no one would notice me, afraid I would have no one to talk to, afraid I would feel awkward and conspicuous. She made a suggestion to me, or maybe it was a challenge. She said, "Go ahead and go, Linda. And when you get there, look all around and find some other girl who looks as though she feels even more miserable and self-conscious than you do. I promise you she'll be there! When you see her, go and talk to her. Help her feel relaxed. Make a friend."

One part of me wanted to go to the dance so badly that I went. And, hard as it was, I did what Mother had challenged me to do. I found her. She looked so lost and lonely that I instantly felt better, just by comparing myself with her.

My mind turned away from myself and toward helping her. I knew how she felt. It was, although I didn't realize it at the time, the beginning of real empathy.

We sometimes forget, as parents, how cruel children can be to each other. We forget until something reminds us and then we realize how important it is to teach our children to ask themselves often, "How does he feel?"

We were reminded rather forcefully of the need one Sunday when we heard a thirteen-year-old girl speak in church. What she said made such an impression that we had her write it out for us.

"When I was in the third grade I'd just moved to Salt Lake and I became friends with a girl named Sharon. We were "best friends" and inseparable at school. By the time we were in the fourth grade we had another friend, Carrie. Carrie, Sharon, and I were the very best of friends. We even called ourselves 'the three musketeers!' We were great friends for two or three months and then it seemed that only Sharon and I were friends, or Carrie and Sharon, or Carrie and I. Finally, it ended with Carrie and Sharon. They would tease me day in and day out. They called me up just to tell me how ugly or how stupid I was. At recess they would call me names and tell me I was dumb, or fat, or ugly. They would constantly tell me that I wasn't capable of anything, and I believed them! The last day of school they called me up and said, "We are so glad that school's out because now we don't have to look at ugly people like you."

"In fifth grade I was in a different class than them, for obvious reasons. Every time I saw them I hated them for what they had done to me. Eventually I forgave them, and I learned a real valuable lesson from this experience: I learned to always listen to your friends, and never put them down; always be there when they need you; and always care, no matter what. When I do these things I have a better relationship with my friends, and I feel better about myself. These two girls taught me to care about people and their feelings.

"My mother has always told me that 'to have a friend, you must be a friend.'

"In every elementary school, in every class, there is a class 'reject.' Well, our class reject was Dora. I was always friends with Dora and as a result people thought I was a reject too. In seminary in ninth grade, we had a thing on Valentine's Day where we could write a note to someone else in another class. Well, Dora wrote one to me and it said: 'Dear Dawn, Thank you for being my only friend.' I was so grateful that I had been her friend even though people thought I was dumb too.

"Christ told us to love one another and I hope we can all remember to do so."

We once saw a movie called Brainstorm that contained an interesting central idea: a machine that could be hooked up to two people and allow one to see, hear, and feel everything that the other person was feeling, as though he were actually in the mind and body of the other person.

The movie was science fiction. But in real life there is a device that allows us to "transform" into the perception and feelings of another person. The device is not a machine—it is an almost magical quality and skill called empathy.

Assuming that others see things the same way we do is as silly as assuming that our eyeglasses would work for everyone else. The Golden Rule is a marvelous, virtually universal code of conduct. Because of the differences in people, however, and the differences in their perceptions and needs, the law reaches its highest and most beautiful level not with the words "Do unto others as you would have them do unto you," but "Do unto others as they would wish to be done unto."

Our daughter Shawni, (age eight) had gone along on her brother Josh's sixth birthday party to "help out." It was a snow sledding party in January and there were about a dozen little six-year-old boys.

We had become occupied with getting the hot chocolate ready and were standing with Josh when Shawni came up, tapped Josh on the shoulder, and in a very concerned voice pointed first at one boy and then at another and asked Josh their names. Then she said, "Well, Billy doesn't look very happy. Two of the other boys wouldn't let him go on their tube and I think he is about to cry. And John looks a little scared. He still hasn't gone down the hill. You should go talk to them, Josh, and make them both feel happy, because you don't want anyone to be sad at your party."

Shawni said all this with the utmost concern, and Josh took her suggestion very seriously. He went right over and talked to John, then got a big tube and went down the hill with him and Billy.

The day and the experience is clear and vivid in our memory because of the simple, sure example it provided of young children's ability to be highly empathetic.

Crabs have an interesting instinct to "pull each other back." When catching crabs on the beach, you don't need a high-sided bucket to put them in. A shallow pan will do—as long as you have at least two crabs in it. If one tries to climb out, the other instinctively will reach up and pull him back. People, especially adolescent and teenage people, behave much like crabs. If someone gets ahead of us, outachieves us, or seems more popular, our instinct is to pull them down in some way—perhaps by gossip, or by rationalizing that whatever they have done is not that important.

Our nature is to think of others as various kinds of Mirrors for our own reflection. People of whom we are jealous often reflect us as inadequate, so we try to stop looking at them, or to pull them down, at least in our own minds.

The ability to shift into "windows" and to see people for what they are, what their feelings and needs are—and to take pleasure in their accomplishments as we would in our own—involves the most profound change of perspective that a man can undergo.

The opposite of empathy is envy. It is much easier to notice what someone else has (that we want) than to notice what he needs (that we could give).

II. Approaches for Parents

A. Visualization. We discussed, in Month Five, the importance and value of the skill called visualization. That skill has even greater application this month as we try to understand how others feel. In various cultures, for widely varying purposes and through widely varied techniques, human beings have proven their ability and potential to visualize or to imagine something in a way that makes it as real as if it were real.

In the myth of Camelot, Merlin the magician taught young Arthur to see all perspectives by becoming the eagle or the stag, or even the tree—to feel what they feel, see what they see, grasp what they grasp.

In the highest form of martial arts, the levels above the black belt, the Ninja masters learn to sense and visualize things their eyes cannot see, to feel and anticipate the energy of movement, even from behind themselves, and to defend against it even before it occurs.

Many popular current writers tell us how to visualize our illnesses as cured, our bodies as healed—and the results are both tangible and remarkable. The advocates of self-improvement, from meditation experts to positive mental attitude speakers, tell us that thoughts can become specific and focused enough to control things. And the scriptures put this idea in its most basic context when they tell us that as we think, so we are.

The gift and skill of visualization is at the heart of our potential ability to feel as others feel. We have the power to observe something (or somebody) closely from the outside and then to transpose ourselves inside of that thing or person to observe what things look like to it, or to him.

Practice this, and see how quickly you get good at it. Observe a tree intently. Look at it from bottom to top, studying its trunk, its bark, its limbs, its leaves. Then imagine yourself as the tree—inside the tree looking out. See the landscape around you, feel the wind blow your branches, feel the sap flowing inside of you. Try this with objects and with people. It is a learned skill, and takes practice. But as you become capable at it, your capacity for charity will grow dramatically.

B. Turn the eye into a camera shutter. It is people's faces, particularly their eyes, that give us our best clues to their feelings and their needs.

Our own eyes, when trained to do so, can "read" a face in an instantaneous glance. One interesting way to train the eye is to walk along a busy street and take "eye snapshots" of each person you pass.

Look at a face—intently—and then blink, fixing the face in your mind as a "still shot," as though you had just pressed the shutter of your camera. Let your mind interpret and analyze the face you just took a snapshot of. What did you see? What was in the eyes? The lines of the face? The tilt of the head? Just think about the image.

Our own minds surprise us when we really turn them loose and simply let them imagine what each person might be thinking.

On a crowded street, your eyes may take a "snapshot" every couple of seconds, so your first impression of a face will be your only impression. Just look at a face, blink, and let your mind give you the quickest interpretation it can make: "worried," "excited," "intense," "confused," "lost in thought."

As with the development of any skill, practice will make you better. Somewhat like a muscle, the mind's interpretive powers strengthen with use. Before long, you will find that one quick glance can give you very strong impressions about what another person is feeling. And you will feel quite sure that your impression is correct. It is almost as though your mind has the power to make quick contact with another mind through some sort of eye contact or wave transmission that we can't understand.

This kind of "snapshot thinking" is hard mental work, but it is the best and simplest form of empathy training we know. As mentioned earlier, Joseph Smith said that when we work by faith we work by mental effort. Perhaps the mental effort required to try to know how a stranger feels just by looking at him produces a certain kind of faith, or brings to us a "higher power" sensitivity that allows us to know.

C. The temple. An exciting and very spiritual form of empathy training is available to us whenever we do vicarious works at the temple. As we do work on behalf of another person, we can try very hard to "be" that other person, to sense how he feels about the work being done for him and what he thinks about what he is learning through the temple ceremony.

In this case, since we can neither see nor hear the person we are trying to empathize with, it is clear that any insights or impressions we are receiving are spiritually transmitted. This insight helps us to realize that all true empathy, even with people we can see and talk to, is really much more of the spirit than of the body.

D. Be an "optometrist." The reason a nearsighted person can see well with his glasses is that the optometrist started with that person's perspective and vision, not with his own.

It is much more difficult to do this in regular, normal life, We rarely start with what the other person sees. Rather, we insist that he should see the way we see.

During this month, try to be an "optometrist"—try to be interested enough in other people that you actually start with what you imagine that they see.

E. Practice putting your desire to understand above your other desires. Picture in your mind a father who is upset at his son for not finishing some tasks he was assigned to do after school. The boy wants to explain. The father is interested in why the boy didn't do anything, but he is more interested in shaping the boy up. Therefore he doesn't really listen.

Often we don't really listen because we have other desires that are much stronger than our desire to understand. This month, make a conscious effort to put your desire to understand above any other wants. It will make a remarkable difference in how much you understand and empathize with other people, particularly with your children.

F. Your own methods. List any other ideas that come to you concerning how to better ask and better answer the question, "How does he feel?"

III. Exercises to Teach Children

A. Fast Sunday discussion and pretest (to shift family focus, for the coming month, to the goal of becoming able to sense how others are feeling, even when we are not with them or talking to them).

As usual, begin this new "month" with a discussion among all family members eight and older.

Test: in writing; remember to save everyone's paper for the post-test next fast Sunday.

B. Fasting (to help children empathize physically and to become more acquainted with the basic idea of trying to feel others' needs).

From age eight, and often earlier, children are capable of abstaining from at least one meal. With the kind of discussion and observations that parents can add, this can be one of the most basic and meaningful early empathetic experiences they have. Talk about the feeling of hunger as it is experienced, and how it might feel if it went on for days—if they, like nearly one-third of the children in the world, went to bed hungry each night.

Occasionally, it is especially instructive to fast for the needy of some specific area or, still better, for a specific person. In addition to their Church fast offerings, some families sponsor a child in a Third World country through one of the reputable relief organizations. This way they can have pictures and letters from a real human being who is being fed by the money they save by fasting.

As children come to understand and appreciate the fast, the physical empathy they have learned can be a good analogy by which to begin feeling their deeper forms of emotional, social, and even spiritual empathy. As you talk about how hunger feels, ask also how they think people feel who have no friends, or whose parents don't care about them, and so on.

C. Example (as always, the best method of all). Simply make yourself more aware of others, and talk about your awareness in the presence of your children. Notice the looks on people's faces and comment on them. Watch things like the posture and mannerisms of people as well as their circumstances and situations.

We observed a mother one day in London sitting on the upper level of a red, double-decker bus with her daughter, who looked to be ten or eleven years old. As the bus picked its way through the crowded city streets, the mother, in a voice that had more interest in it than authority, was saying things like, "Look at that older man, at his face. He looks awfully worried about something," or "Those two girls look like they're having a good time. What would you guess they're talking about, just by watching them?"

D. Lavish praise (to reinforce and bolster even the smallest evidences of empathy so that it will occur again).

One of our daughters came to the dinner table one night with tears in her eyes. We asked what was wrong and she tried to shrug it off and say she was okay. When we persisted, she broke down a bit and said she had been looking at a magazine with pictures of starving children in Ethiopia. She fought back the tears of her very genuine concern and quietly added that she wanted to send a hundred dollars (most of her bank account) to help out.

Her whole attitude was so beautiful that we found ourselves praising her for days—not always in open, verbal ways, but with a look, an arm around her shoulder, a glance of pride, and an added desire to be with her and do things with her.

Thinking back, we realize that our natural reaction to our daughter during that week did more to motivate her brothers and sisters toward similar efforts at empathy than any method or technique we had ever tried.

Watch for extra-centered actions. Listen for comments that indicate efforts to understand others and their situations. Praise these insights and actions with lavish and specific compliments.

E. Game: Put Yourself in the Picture (to let children practice at empathizing with someone they have never met or spoken to). Watch for pictures in magazines showing people in situations that are unusual to you and your children. These could range from a man on a horse in the mountains to a girl in a magazine clothing ad. Almost any magazine has several pictures or advertisements that will work.

The game consists of looking at the picture and attempting to describe how the person feels. This can start on a physical level as you try to imagine what he sees and hears, whether he is cold or warm, and so forth. Then try to go beyond the physical and speculate how he might feel emotionally. Have a discussion, with each person imagining how the subject feels and expressing his own ideas.

A variation of the game is to give each player a different picture to study—then have him give a short speech or write a brief theme on what the subject feels.

F. Broaden perspective with travel and experience (to allow children to observe firsthand the different situations that others find themselves in and to appreciate their perspective). We mentioned in Month Four how much perspective and insight children can gain through travel and exposure to various other ways of life. Travel can go a step beyond perspective and provide empathy.

As interesting as the "magazine perspective" game (item E, above) can be, real people from different environments are much more instructive and educational. Any form of travel, when parents make the effort, can be an "empathy experience" for children. The more different the situation of the people observed (from what children are used to), the more interesting it is to attempt empathy. Simply observe together and ask children the right questions. (How would that feel—to do what that man does every day? What do you think makes that person look so happy? What are the main differences in his typical day and yours?) These same techniques can be employed while watching a TV documentary or in any other setting where you are observing cultures and people very different from yourself.

Be careful not to emphasize the negative or to breed criticism or excess pity in your children through this type of observation. Lean in the opposite direction by looking for the good and the positive. Say, "Yes, it is dirtier here, and the houses are smaller, but what makes that person look like he feels so good?" or "Why do you think these people are so friendly and open?" or "Is our way of doing that really better, or is it just different?"

Our eight-year-old provided a classic example of how profound a child's observations can be as we were returning from a trip to Mexico. "What is the most interesting thing you learned?" was my question. Her answer: "I learned you don't need to have shoes to be happy."

G. Closer-to-home experience (for the same reasons as item F, but without travel, new environments, or even TV documentaries). In almost every community, large or small, there are people who are potentially very interesting to your children because of their different life-styles and perspectives. Again, the differences are valuable because they stretch and develop skills of empathy.

As mentioned earlier, we once "adopted" four eighteen-year-old Malaysian students who attended the university near our home. They needed American friends, and we decided we needed them to broaden our family's circle of acquaintances. We had them over or took them some place with us two or three times a month. Our children had a whole new world opened to them as these students became our friends. They were Moslems. They had different traditions, different styles, different goals and plans. Their curiosity in us sparked our children's curiosity in them and gave us endless opportunities to ask our children, "How do you think they feel?"

H. "Face reading" (to stimulate children's interest in trying to empathize by sight). Explain to your children that just as it takes some time to learn to read letters and words, it takes time and practice to learn to read faces, but it is possible. Tell them of your own efforts to do this and of any experience you had with the kind of "camera shutter" eye blinking suggested in item B of this month's approaches for parents.

Encourage them to practice face reading whenever possible. Do it with them. Discuss together how to do it. Simply look hard at a stranger's face. But instead of just noticing features and expressions and the amount of light in the eye, try to look beyond the surface of the face and see the emotions. Look for stress, for love, for insecurity, for confidence, and for every other observable emotion.

I. Retard your children's social growth (to keep them somewhat out of the peer-group selfishness syndrome).

One of the blessings of "holding children back" on things (such as not dating until age sixteen or not being out late with friends) is that it automatically increases the scope of family influence on them and decreases peer-group influence.

Many of the ways of observing and ways of thinking suggested in this and previous chapters work best and "take" best when children spend major blocks of time with their parents and brothers and sisters.

We were visiting once with a General Authority of the Church and his wife—a family whom we think of as a model. We asked them for advice on rearing children, and their very interesting response was "retard their social growth." We have found many useful interpretations for that phrase over the years, but perhaps the most useful one is limiting an adolescent's social schedule to give him more time to be influenced by his own thoughts and by parents' example.

Attempt to make popularity a "non-goal" among your children. Point out that those who seek to be liked, to fit in, to be like everyone else are thinking too much of themselves and not thinking enough for themselves.

J. Look for motives rather than blame (to help children to shift from their own negative feelings to the more positive mental energy of trying to understand others).

When your child tells you of having been hurt or offended by another child, resist the temptation to overprotect or to become angry or vindictive toward the other child or the other child's parents.

Instead, sit down with your child and try, together, to figure out why the other child would have said or done what he did. Say, "What might have made him angry enough or jealous enough or upset enough to do that?" If no reason is obvious, speculate on what it might have been. (Maybe his father was mad at him today. Maybe he felt left out in some social situation. Maybe he flunked a test.)

Whether you discover the true motive or not, you will succeed in turning your child's attention from his own problem to the possible problem of someone else.

K. The "Interesting Person" game (to bring about greater interest in the "how does he feel?" question by sharing an "interesting face" with other family members).

Start a tradition at dinner of occasionally saying, "Tell us about the most interesting person you saw today." Each person should try to recall his "face reading" activities of the day and describe to other family members the most interesting person he observed that day.

A sample answer from a ten-year-old: "At the bus stop I saw an older lady who had been shopping. She was short and a little stooped over, but she was kind of wide and strong enough to carry two big shopping bags. Her face looked pleasant. It had deep smile lines by her mouth and her eyes. She looked over at me and when I smiled, she smiled and said hello. I think she's probably a grandma with some nice grandchildren. I think she likes her life and I don't think she minds being old."

L. Your own methods. List any other ideas you can think of for training children to watch others and empathize with what they may be feeling.

M. Post-test (to review and reinforce what has been learned during the month).

On fast Sunday, as you complete this "month," retake the test from the beginning of this section. Everyone will do much better on it. Discuss your answers and ask if it is important to keep on looking for others' feelings even as your family goes on to the next chapter. As family members respond positively, you can then introduce the family focal point as a way to "keep us all doing it."

IV. Family Focal Point

"Ask-for things" in prayers (to keep children aware on an ongoing basis of the special needs of other people).

As many parents do, we became concerned with the repetitive, semi-memorized, "low-thought" prayers that our children often offered in our home. A string of "bless-the-needy-and-those-with-cause-to-mourn" and "bless-the-Lord's-anointed-from-the-greatest-to-the-least" began to sound less and less sincere and meaningful.

We decided that we would, at Sunday dinner, decide on one particular blessing to ask for during the coming week that was especially timely and needed.

As it turned out, this involved thinking about people's needs, and trying to come up with something very specific. We would end up discussing several needs that various family members had noticed or become aware of (from very broad things like peace in a war-torn part of the world to very narrow and specific things like recovery for the older lady next door who had fallen and broken her hip).

The point was that the weekly discussion became a weekly reminder to think about "how does he feel?" and the daily prayers, which always included that week's special "ask-for thing," became a daily reminder.

V. Summary

A popular clichÃ© tells us that we can't know how another feels until we have "walked a mile in his moccasins." It is a good saying and a useful one if its purpose is to prevent us from judging another person. It is indeed impossible to know all of the motives and all of the inner thoughts of any other person.

It is not impossible, however, to feel with another person empathetically enough that we know much of how he feels. It is not only possible but productive. Efforts to do so are, in fact, the best training for charity that can ever be devised.

In Alma 7:11 we see clearly that Christ had perfected himself at being able to feel what others feel. Both Christ and many of his prophets empathized so completely that when they healed or helped others they felt virtue or strength go out of them.

In Alma 32 we are told that while all who are humble are blessed, those who reach humility without being forced into it by their circumstances are more blessed than those who are compelled to be humble.

The implications are straightforward: The same blessings and attributes that come through deprivation or forced humility due to poor circumstances can be had without personal crisis if we are willing to "bear one another's burdens" and to exercise deep enough empathy to feel as others feel.
