Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Charity ( 1986)

Section V

Communicating

Observations, insights, and empathetic feelings are of limited use without the ability to effectively communicate them.

The ability to verbalize and express what we see, what we feel, and what we care about in others is what allows us to comfort, to help, to contribute, and to form deep relationships.

Month 9

Expressing What We See

Understanding Observing Feeling Communicating + Doing_____________ =Charity

Communication is the thread that ties all men to each other. Remove it and there is no society, no civilization, and, in fact, no love.

I. Illustrations and Stories

During three years in England, we were consistently surprised (and delighted) by the ability of the British to correctly use their own language. Slang is seldom used in southern England, nor is fuzzy or imprecise speech of any kind. English is spoken clearly and articulately, used with precision and with pride by children as well as adults, and by workers and manual laborers as well as by educated professionals.

I recall standing in the hallway of our children's elementary school ("infant school," as the British call it) waiting for our children and tuning in on several of the conversations that surrounded me in the hall. The children's words were crisp and precise. Their sentence structure was impeccable. Their questions were insightful and specific. And these were second and third graders. It was our first month in England and my first assumption was that all the kids were geniuses. Very soon, as our own children competed well in school, I realized that it was language, not brain power, that the British children were superior in.

Shortly thereafter we needed a plumber to unstop a drain. The fellow who came (dressed in a black suit and tie) was a delightful conversationalist who spoke with such clarity that I kept him for an hour after he had fixed the drain, enjoying a conversation that covered several subjects.

An editorial that ran on KSL television and radio in Salt Lake City captured quite well the overriding importance of learning communication and language skills. The editorial read like this:

"One of the charms of the English language is its constant ability to change and evolve. We add new words and new expressions with relative ease, and we eliminate those which have outlived their usefulness.

"But illiteracy should never serve as the basis for the evolution of language.

"For example, the young starlet who insists on peppering her conversation with "You knows" and salting it with "He goes" is not likely to add to the flavor of the language or detract from the blandness of her thoughts.

"Neither language nor thought are improved by the radio announcer who consistently mispronounces "consortium" as "consorteeum," or who redundantly reminds listeners it is raining outside. (Where else does it rain?)

"These examples seem minor—and perhaps they are—but there is a direct correlation between accuracy of language and accuracy of thought.

"George Orwell once wrote: "A man may take to drink because he feels himself to be a failure, and then fall all the more completely because he drinks. It is rather the same thing that is happening to the English language. It becomes ugly and inaccurate because our thoughts are foolish, but the slovenliness of our language makes it easier for us to have foolish thoughts. If thought corrupts language, language can also corrupt thought!"

"KSL believes language is never far removed from thought. Careless language leads to careless thought, and vice versa." (Used by permission.)

In this book, we have worked first on the skills of seeing, listening, and feeling and are now attempting to add the ability to communicate all of those feelings to other people.

It is well to remember, however, that once again we have a chicken-and-egg situation. The ability to communicate, the striving to gain that ability, and the practicing of that ability all cause us to observe more, to listen better, and to feel more deeply.

Our oldest daughter, partly because her earliest schooling was in England, is exceptionally articulate. As she entered the stormy beginning of her adolescence, she was hit with her share of problems. They ranged from shyness to moodiness to various kinds of rebellion against authority. Many times our ability to help her with her difficulties hinged on her ability to conceptualize her thoughts and communicate them to us. She had (and has) a certain pride in her ability to verbalize things, and it has often been that pride and our confidence in her logical and articulate communication abilities that have caused her to express things, clarify them in her own mind, then give us the opportunity to help.

It is a basic fact of life that we can't do much about who we are or how we feel until we can describe it and communicate it.

This "month" is devoted to the pursuit of the ability to communicate what we observe—what we see and hear and take in and receive through our physical senses. The ability to communicate these things is a prerequisite for Month Ten, which focuses on the skill of communicating feelings.

II. Approaches for Parents

A. Careful speech. Most of us are capable of speaking much better than we do. Conscious effort to precisely say what we mean is the best practice for becoming more articulate.

A by-product of careful speech is that we don't speak so hastily. Once a person forms the mental habit of thinking for an instant or two before talking, two major benefits come about: He avoids saying things he shouldn't say, and he says what he does say more clearly and expresses more exactly what he wishes to communicate.

By "careful speech" we do not mean the use of more big words or more complex sentences. In fact, the opposite is often true. The best communicators (writers as well as speakers) usually use direct, simple language. But their words are well thought out and well chosen.

Simple consciousness of stronger effort to communicate clearly will lead to (1) clearer, more independent thought, (2) broader vocabulary, (3) more honest and stimulating conversation, (4) less slang, less meaningless generalities in language, and (5) children who follow your example and speak well also.

B. Taking time to write (whether you're good at it or not). It is only recently that we have begun telling people just how the books in this "teaching children" series came to be written. They actually were not originally intended for publication. We wrote Teaching Children Joy to ourselves because we needed a philosophy for raising our own children, and we felt that writing was the best way to clarify and complete our thoughts.

Writing has a way of organizing people's minds—of taking random thoughts and ideas and putting them together in ways that make sense.

During this "month" we challenge you as parents once again to devote a few minutes to writing each day. We made a similar challenge back in Month Four. The focus then was on observing. The focus now is on communicating more clearly and precisely about the things you observe. As you accept this challenge you will put yourself in a position to get your children to do more writing, as suggested in the next part of this chapter. Try writing daily in one or more of the following ways:

C. Further develop the "Rogerian" technique of listening discussed in Month Five. As you perfect the active listening method in which you basically repeat back what a child is saying to you in a way that encourages him to go on, you will have the best opportunity of all to improve both sides of the communication skill.

After all, communication involves two things: receiving or "taking in," and transmitting or "giving out." Make it a point this month to listen intently, then to refine what you hear and repeat it back more clearly and more articulately than you heard it.

Example: Your daughter says, "School was the pits today. Nothing but a lot of busy work—stuff the teachers give you to take up the time so they don't have to teach." You say, "The thing you're upset about is that you get assignments that take a lot of time without teaching you very much. And you feel teachers are being a bit lazy to do that rather than think of ways to challenge you and get you to think."

As you practice this "listen hard and repeat it better" technique, several things will happen: Your children will notice and appreciate the effort you are making to understand, and they will correct you and restate what they mean if your interpretation is incorrect. And, over time, they will start saying what they mean more precisely so you will have less chance of misinterpreting it.

D. "Stranger conversion." In almost every facet of our lives and daily activities, there are people whom we rub shoulders with and whom we ought to know, but who remain strangers because neither we nor they take the initiative to convert each other from a stranger to an acquaintance.

Sometimes it is other parents we see at PTA or at school, or people who work in our building or ride the same elevator, or parents of other children on the Little League team.

Part of good communication is the ability to meet such people graciously and pleasantly. Form the habit of introducing yourself, of asking a question or two that places them in your mind, and of seeking and finding something you have in common that can serve as the basis for a friendship.

E. Name, face, and "interest point" remembering techniques. All of us admire people who are good at remembering names and faces. We especially admire such people when they remember us.

The ability to recall names and facts about people is an important part of communication ability, and it increases our opportunities to communicate effectively with more people. Turn back to item three of Month Five's three-step process for a simple technique that can make you remarkably good at this rather unusual skill.

F. Articulate prayers. As the reader has probably gathered by now, the ability to communicate is crucial in real charity for two reasons. First, we can rarely give people the help they need unless we can effectively communicate with them. Second, good communication clarifies and refines our own feelings so that those feelings can motivate us.

By the same token, in personal prayer, if we just think generally about what we're thankful for or what we need, putting it into general words or not putting it into words at all, then our prayers teach us nothing.

But if we approach the Lord with respect, attempting to word our prayers carefully and clearly, we begin to be more clear about how we feel, we begin to better understand our own needs and the needs of others, and we end up asking the kind of specific questions that often lead us to specific answers.

G. Your own methods. Think for a moment about any other ideas you may have for improving your own ability to express yourself. List your ideas here.

III. Exercises for Teaching Children

A. Fast Sunday discussion and pretest (to make children aware of the goal for the month ahead of becoming better at communicating what we observe).

Start this "month" with a discussion based on the following points:

Test: Have each family member take the following test on the left-hand side of a piece of paper.

B. Communication with the written word (vehicles for helping children to communicate effectively through writing). Of the following methods, pick those best suited to your children. Many of these are the same methods used in Month Four (on observing). They are intentionally repeated here with the emphasis on communicating. Think of this month as a second push to develop writing and expressing skills in your children.

In the neighborhood group were several adolescent boys to whom the thought of writing poetry was somewhere between ridiculous and repulsive. We persuaded them to try it—and the results were remarkable.

The teacher explained how "free" poetry could be, how they could write anything they wanted about anything. She pointed out that most things we do are governed by a lot of laws and rules. But in poetry there are no rules. You can spell and punctuate however you please. She got the children into discussions about favorite sounds and favorite feelings. She listed interesting adjectives and metaphors on a big chart and asked them to use some of them.

Not only did the children enjoy the class, but they learned how much fun it is to try to express oneself in a creative way. And we, as parents, gained many insights into the feelings, the perspectives, and even the fears of some of the children as we read their work.

The best way to encourage a child to write a poem is to write one of your own with him and let him see the enjoyment you feel.

But letters are not the same as phone calls. Written words can be more carefully crafted and can say more precisely (and often more beautifully) what we wish to say. On the other end, they can be read and reread, pondered and thought about and cherished by a grandmother or relative or friend.

Some families we know set aside one evening each month to write letters as a family. They make photocopies of children's letters before they send them and thus obtain a valuable, sequential record to go along with journals and other family writings.

Reading good literature together opens all kinds of good opportunities for discussion, not only about the subject matter but about the writing itself and about how the author expresses himself, what styles and forms of writing he uses.

C. Communicating with the spoken word (additional vehicles to help you and your children improve verbal communication ability).

Another debate opportunity presents itself when two children are fighting or arguing. Take the time to sit down with the two of them, formulate with them precisely what the disagreement is about, and structure and supervise a debate to solve it. Point out how much more educational and enjoyable a debate is than a fight or argument.

You can also set up a debate between yourself and your teenager the next time he wants to do something you don't think advisable. It's a good way to get all the facts and feelings on the table. To understand each other's view, trade sides and see if you can debate the other person's position.

Write them down as you become aware of them, and invite other family members to do the same. Have a "vocabulary list" in the kitchen or family room. Use the words yourself, and give lavish praise to the children whenever they use them.

D. "Bedtime chats" (to open up an opportunity for some relaxed communication at the end of the day). Many parents find that bedtime is the best moment of the day to open up and talk about what has taken place and been observed that day. Our earlier books, dealing with younger children, recommend that parents tuck their children in as often as possible and ask, "What was your 'happy' today?" and "What was your 'sad'?" With adolescents the same principle applies.

Sometimes the best way to talk is to just talk! Tell your children what is on your mind (what you are worried about, what you are excited about). As the trust levels build, they will share their thoughts, too, and respond to your questions.

Adolescents and early teens ought to still have a bedtime. And they will accept a bedtime more readily if it is made pleasant by frequent opportunities to communicate one-on-one with one of their parents.

Obviously, you shouldn't feel guilty if you can't tuck everyone in every night. Schedules are not that simple. One or two nights a week, when you have the time to spend a few unhurried moments, produce the best results.

E. Elimination of TV on weeknights (to give children more opportunity to communicate, and to remove bad models of communication from their consciousness). Perhaps no single act or decision contributes more to both the quality and quantity of education in a family than the elimination of television. There is no need here to rehearse the well-known statistics about how much time children waste in front of TV sets. Two things, however, are certain: (1) They see very few examples of articulate communication (and a lot of examples of shabby English); and (2) they don't communicate at all during the big blocks of time they spend watching.

We believe the most effective and reasonable system is simply to allow no TV on weeknights. If you own a VCR, you might consider recording special shows for watching on weekends.

F. "Friend Chart" and name remembering (to increase the number of people children communicate with). The Friend Chart that was discussed as the family focal point in Month Seven can be reemphasized this month. Try to teach children the same three-point method of remembering names that you are using, and encourage them to list on the friend chart the names of new people they have met.

G. Your own methods. Take a few moments and think about each of your own children—how good is each as a communicator? What things come to mind that would encourage them to speak more precisely, to take more pride in their language, and to want to communicate better? List the ideas you have.

H. Post-test (to reinforce and recall what has been learned during this month).

On the fast Sunday that ends this "month" and begins Month Ten, retake the test in item A of this section. You will be pleased at how much better everyone does at describing things.

Discuss the value of communication. Ask who can think of a habit or tradition you could adopt as a family to continually improve your ability to communicate. Then introduce the family focal point.

IV. Family Focal Point

"England nights" (to reward children for their ability to ask questions).

During the three years that our family spent in England, we came to admire (and almost covet) the English system of early bedtimes for younger children. Most English families, partly because of how early it gets dark, feed their young children (those under eight or so) a light supper called "tea" when they come home from school and then put them to bed at 6:30 or 7:00. The parents and older children then enjoy a peaceful "supper" at 7:30 or 8:00, often inviting guests to eat with them.

We try, as often as possible, to have what we call an "England night" where we put our smaller children to bed a little early and invite someone interesting to eat a later dinner with us and our adolescent children. We select guests who have an expertise that our family is interested in. The dinner provides the children with a unique communication opportunity in which they can ask questions and be involved in an adult discussion about a specific area in which they have interest. We have had a couple who were experts in American Indian culture; we've had a doctor, a lawyer, a poet, a native of Latin America. We have a list of interest areas that the children have helped create and we are watching for acquaintances that could be invited to discuss each topic.

The children know that the key purpose of the occasion is to develop their question asking and listening ability. (In fact, they know that if they don't do a pretty good job of questioning and participating in the discussion, they will not be invited to the next "England night.") They write out a list of questions before a guest arrives so they will be well prepared to participate in the discussion.

V. Summary

Communication is most often the vehicle of charity. By communicating well we learn of the feelings and needs of others. By communicating well we are sometimes able to give the encouragement and help that constitute service and the deeds of charity.

On the first level, a good communicator must be able to communicate effectively what he sees and observes and must be able to listen well and converse about the observations and perspectives and expertise of other people. It is this first level of communication that we have dealt with this "month."

In Month Ten, we move to the second level of communication, which involves communication of and about feelings.

The vocabulary, grammar, and clear thinking we have tried to develop through this month's methods are the foundation for the deeper kinds of communication that we will take up next.
