Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Charity ( 1986)

Month 10

Communicating What We Feel

Understanding Observing Feeling Communicating + Doing_____________ =Charity

When we talk about feelings, we use God's language.

It is very hard to describe or define what an artist is, but a good attempt was made by one who said, "An artist is one who can express feelings in a way that others can understand."

"Unexpressed feelings never die. They just get buried and come forth later in uglier forms."

I. Illustrations and Stories

The story is told of a reserved Swedish couple, married for thirty years, named Alf and Anna. During one rare moment of communication, Anna said, "Do you love me, Alf? You never tell me you do." Alf's answer was, "I told you I did, Anna, thirty years ago. And if anything changes, I'll let you know."

Unexpressed, uncommunicated feelings are like bottled-up, unused fuel. They never move anything, and if they are left too long they begin either to sour or to lose their potency. At the very least, they lose the good they could do if they were expressed.

To enhance and refine and recognize our feelings is a good and useful skill, but communication of those feelings is often the actual transaction of charity. When we talk about how we feel, we are reaching deep into our soul. And when these feelings are communicated clearly and effectively, they reach into the soul of the listener.

If feelings could not be communicated, each person would feel only what he experienced or what happened directly to him. But through the transmission of feelings, we can "receive" and actually feel the emotions of the whole range of human observation and experience.

When you stop to think about it, feelings are what all great forms of art seek to communicate. The movies we like most are the ones that make us feel the most. It is the same with art, with music, and with literature.

All of these art forms, along with methods of personal communication (from words to gestures to looks in the eye) are the vehicles by which people transmit feelings.

We would like to suggest that the old clichÃ© "some things are better left unsaid" may be more true for one whose goal is simply to avoid all conflict than for someone who wants to fully live and appreciate life and other people. As one of the quotes that opened this "month" reminds us, unexpressed feelings never die, they live on in the subconscious mind and often come forth later in uglier forms. A better saying might be, "Don't leave any feeling unsaid, but find the right time and the right way to say it."

I have a remarkably clear memory of a particular day in my childhood when I felt a special love for my father because of something he had done for me. I was probably about nine or ten years old, sitting in my bedroom, and my father was in the living room, reading the newspaper. I wanted to go in, give him a hug, and tell him I loved him. But it was hard to get up and do it. I guess I wondered if I would disturb him. And I felt a little embarrassed even though love was expressed openly and regularly in our family.

I remember thinking—analyzing, actually—what the "pros" and "cons" of the action would be. I finally decided that going out there and telling my dad I loved him really couldn't do any harm and would make us both feel happy. I remember making what may have been my earliest mental resolution: "When you feel something good for someone, tell him."

An interesting study done among 371 mothers in the 1950s measured and catalogued the parenting methods, techniques, and attitudes employed in each home. Nearly thirty years later, interviews were conducted among the adults and parents who had been the children in the homes where the study was done in the '50s. They were asked how happy their childhood memories were and how good a parenting job their mothers had done.

The central finding: Good parenting and successful, happy children could not be directly connected to any specific techniques or methods. What they were connected to was how much mothers had enjoyed their children, how much fun they had had together while children were growing up, and how much they communicated with each other about their feelings!

It has been said that parents would do better if they tried less to make their children good and tried more to make them happy. An extension and corollary of this truth is that parents would also do better if they tried less to communicate to their children and more to communicate with them—about feelings.

We have a thirteen-year-old daughter who is blessed with an active conscience and a constantly present desire to have everything resolved and straight in her mind. Two or three times a month she comes to one of us and with a little self-conscious half-smile says, "I've got a problem, could we talk?"

We find some privacy and she begins. She usually begins with the words, "I feel." What follows is always beautiful because it is always honest. And whether or not she learns anything from our advice, we learn from her sincerity and her openness.

One ward held a most interesting social event: It was a dinner to which only adolescents (from age ten to fourteen in this case) and the most elderly members of the ward were invited. The seating arrangement mixed the "oldsters" and the "youngsters." The resulting conversations were remarkable. At most tables, discussions were still going on over an hour after dessert had been served. Each age was completely fascinating to the other age. Questions were flying a mile a minute.

One who listened carefully quickly realized that the real conversation was about feelings—how it feels to be old; how it feels to be young; how it feels to share with each other.

Some marriage partners choose to share only a part of each other, to communicate only a portion of their feelings. The relationship could be diagrammed like this:

The "overlap" or shared portion is shaped like a football, and like the bounce of a football, the marriage is erratic, unpredictable. You never know if it will bounce to you or to the side or over your head.

In a marriage where virtually all is shared, the diagram looks like this:

The marriage is round, like a basketball. Its bounce is straight and true.

Communication about feelings is not only the tool that allows us to serve others, it often is the service we give. For the needs of many do not involve material or physical help, but emotional and social help, which is often given with words.

It is a skill, and it takes time and effort to learn, but one can teach himself to communicate accurately first about his own feelings, then about the feelings of the person with whom he is talking, and finally about the probable feelings of people he has observed but never met.

To communicate about feelings is to understand those feelings, to fully comprehend what they mean.

There is only one way to form a true friendship. It is to share and communicate feelings.

II. Approaches for Parents

A. Discover real feelings instead of scheming to overcome undesirable actions. Sometimes our biggest problem in dealing with teenagers is that we forget to communicate, and instead we scheme when we see undesirable actions.

When one of our daughters started high school, her biggest problem, in our minds, was that she kept missing the bus. She had done this occasionally in junior high, but it was getting worse.

"This is ridiculous!" I (Linda) thought to myself "My morning is timed to the very minute to get everybody to finish their practicing, get their rooms straight, beds made, homework packed up, notes written, and bodies out the door! I just don't have time to drop everything and run her down to the school twice a week, especially when a bus stops for her right outside our door."

My first plan of attack was to tell her that if she missed the bus she would just have to be late for school. I thought she would be mortified. I thought it would be agony for her to enter the classroom late, but she didn't say a thing—just got out of the car with her home excuse and said "thanks" and meandered on in.

The next time it happened (a few days later) I said, "You know, I just can't get you down there today. You'll just have to miss school." ("Surely that will get her," I thought, "she's such a good student and it will be difficult for her to make things up.") Foiled again! She seemed perfectly happy to stay home!

The next time it happened (a few days later) I premeditated, getting good and mad! "How can you keep doing this to me?" I demanded. "I've had it! You just get your things together and get out that door on time from now on," I yelled as I stomped off to get my boots. All to no avail!

The next time it happened (a few days later) I decided to hit her where it really hurt—the pocketbook! "Okay, two dollars every time I have to take you to school from now on," I announced. "That way everybody will be happier." ("At least she'll be giving me something for my efforts. That will make her think twice before she tries this again," I thought.)

This time she was mad! "This is just ridiculous to have to pay my own mother for a ride to school," she raved. "I can't believe this!" (I loved it! I had finally figured out something that worked!)

I held the line, and we both rode to school fuming. When she got out, she leaned over and said with a scowl, "Taxi drivers don't deserve thanks!" and slammed the door.

I was stunned. I couldn't believe she could think of something so smart-alecky to say to me! I immediately flung the door back open and told her to get back in. We had some talking to do!

In the course of our talk I discovered what had really been happening. We had not been communicating our true feelings with each other. I had been scheming behind her back, not telling her how I felt. She hadn't been communicating with me either. I found that she hated going to school! She felt as though she was doing busy work in many classes, and most of all felt desperately alone at lunchtime with no one to eat with or talk to. We spent a good long time really communicating—each being amazed at how the other felt.

"How scary," I thought that afternoon as I contemplated what had happened, and how easily I could have let our communication drift farther and farther apart and chalked it up to rebellion or insensitivity. What we did decide the basic problem was, was self-centeredness on both our parts (yes, me too—didn't I say "How can you do this to me?"). What we needed to work on was feeling with each other and keeping the communication lines open. I don't remember her missing the bus again, except on rare occasions.

B. Observe and describe yourself. It has been said that observation takes place on three levels. First, we learn how to observe nature and "things." Second, we learn to observe other people. Third, we learn to observe ourselves.

As we learn to watch ourselves, it is very useful to attempt describing what we see. This month, in a journal or diary, or perhaps in a notebook reserved for this purpose, try to write about the moods and feelings you have experienced during the day. Describe how you felt and why you felt that way.

It is through describing our feelings that we understand them and control them. Describing feelings somehow captures them and removes the worry from them, rendering them incapable of hurting us.

C. Form the habit of asking "How do you feel?" and making it a specific rather than a general question. During this month, as you did in Month Six, stay aware of how often you can ask someone how they feel—but like the man described in the opening part of Month Five, add some words to make it the kind of specific question that solicits a serious and specific answer. Say, "How do you feel about the decision your boss made?" or "How do you feel when your math teacher calls on you in class?" or "How did you feel right after the cheerleader tryouts?" or "How do you feel at 5 o'clock on Friday night when the weekend begins?"

D. At the same time, form the parallel habit of telling others how you feel. As we have mentioned, the words "I feel" have a way of opening up a high trust level in a conversation. They also allow their user to say what is in his heart without judging or offending the person he is talking to. This month, refocus on saying how you feel, and be as clear and articulate as you possibly can about those feelings. For example, if you are upset with your thirteen-year-old daughter for not letting you know where she was after school, your impulse might be to say, "You are irresponsible when you don't ask and you'd better not let it happen again," when a more effective, less judgmental (and perhaps more accurate) thing to say would be, "I feel upset and worried when I have no idea where you are." The first response breeds defensiveness and resentment in the daughter and minimizes her inclination to apologize and try hard not to do it again. The second response breeds concern and maximizes her inclination to apologize and improve of her own initiative.

E. Telling others how you think they feel. Somewhere beyond the habit of asking how others feel and telling them how you feel lies the art of being able to "tell" others how they feel. As a person masters the skill of "face reading" (see Month Eight), he becomes capable of giving a very valuable gift to those he deals with. He can say, "You look as if you're feeling a lot of pressure," or "You sound as if you are even more excited about that than you're letting on!" or "I appreciate you saying that, but I sense that you still don't feel right about it."

As we make this kind of statement to people, we are talking to them about their feelings, and they will respond—to agree with our assessment, to disagree with it, or to expand or alter it. In every case, windows will be opened to us that allow us to see feelings and to notice opportunities to give encouragement or help that is tailor-made to the feelings and needs of the other person.

F. The incredible gift of a well-conceived compliment. Some of my most vivid (and valued) childhood memories are of simple compliments I received. I remember a hunting trip when my father told me how much fun it was to have me along and how sharp my eyes were at picking up distant movement. I remember my mother praising specific grades on a report card and asking me where I had obtained my aptitude for math since I couldn't have gotten it from her. And I remember a little sixth-grade girl who coyly told me what a good dancer I was, and with that one simple sentence drastically changed how I viewed several things, including dancing.

Just as the body needs physical nourishment, the human ego needs the nutrient of praise. And the "fast food" of "Good game," or "You look nice" will not mean as much as a carefully prepared "gourmet" compliment like, "You did an exceptional job on that model, son. You've always been really talented with your hands, and the way you painted it shows you have a real feel for color and design," or "I was noticing you with your friends after Sunday School and you really have a way of keeping everyone involved and including all the other kids in your conversation. I could tell by watching how much they like you and respect you."

When you give a compliment, be sure it is completely honest, make it as specific as possible, and get as much eye contact as possible with the person so you can "say it" with your eyes as well as with your voice.

Children, particularly adolescents, thrive on praise and use it as fuel for their flame of self-esteem. Parents who consciously strive to communicate as many of the positive feelings and as much of their pride as possible find their children to be happier and more manageable.

Criticism is simply not an effective teaching method. When it is used at all, it should be focused on an action, not on a person, and it should be sandwiched between layers of praise.

G. Orient personal conversations toward feelings. In addition to talking about how you feel, and how the person you are speaking with feels, it is possible, in everyday conversation, to turn discussion about third parties toward feelings. Doing so elevates a conversation and gets it above gossip.

For example, your friend says, "Did you hear that since Fred lost his job he and Mary are considering a separation or divorce?" You, rather than following the typical pattern of gossip, say, "I wonder what feelings Fred had to deal with in being laid off—probably felt some bitterness and maybe some insecurity. What do you think?"

By shifting the conversation to feelings, you end up empathizing rather than gossiping.

H. Absolute honesty. Nothing promotes meaningful communication more than candor and honesty. Honesty and openness are very disarming: They take down the other guy's defense and encourage him to talk and respond to you in a way that is equally honest and thus very revealing of his truest and innermost feelings.

Complete honesty means not exaggerating; it means saying what you really think rather than what is expected. And it means taking down facades and artificial images.

It is not easy, but it is rewarding. Commit yourself to total candor for this "month" and you will be amazed at the growing sense of power and inner strength that results.

I. Your own methods. List any other things that come to mind, ways you could improve yourself and concentrate more on the skill of communicating about your feelings and about the feelings of others.

III. Exercises for Children

A. Fast Sunday discussion and pretest (to help children understand this month's goal of communicating effectively about feelings).

Test

B. Example (to give children a communication model to follow). It goes without saying that your children will begin to communicate feelings as they see you doing so.

Talk openly about your moods and feelings and ask often about theirs. You will thus teach your children two profoundly important principles: (1) it is okay to have feelings—the whole gamut of feelings; and (2) it is healthy and beneficial to express those feelings (in the proper place and at the right time, but soon).

C. Adding feelings to active listening (to encourage and draw out children's feelings in conversation). The active listening discussed in previous chapters reaches its highest form when it centers on feelings.

Listen carefully to what a child is saying, then rephrase it back to him, and then add an assessment or supposition about how that thing must make him feel. For example: "I see what you mean, John. Your coach tells you to do it one way but then he praises Billy who is doing it a different way. That has got to be a little frustrating for you because you're the one trying to follow the directions, but not getting the praise. I think if I were you, I'd feel pretty confused about just what to do next."

D. Bedtime chats (to use a relaxed atmosphere for discussions involving feelings). We discussed in the last "month" what a good moment bedtime can be for communication, and we have mentioned various fun questions to ask children at bedtime. Try during this month to expand this idea a little so that it includes the expression of more specific feelings.

Start it off yourself by sitting on the edge of a child's bed and volunteering how you have felt about various things during the day. Let the child respond in kind. Prompt him along with questions, encouragement, compliments.

Don't expect feelings to flow as freely as you wish on the first few efforts. Be content to talk to your children about your feelings a few times and be patient about their own expressions.

E. Writing and reading about feelings (to repeat methods from earlier chapters that help children better define and articulate their feelings).

Take the list started in the "magazine picture game" or used in writing themes (see 2 and 3, above) and expand it in a family discussion. As the list grows, explain that as we grow and mature we experience a wider range of feelings and emotions. Use the metaphor of an explorer who discovers new continents, new rivers, and previously unknown mountain ranges. Just as bold and successful explorers were unafraid of new territory, so we should be unafraid and unashamed of acknowledging and expressing our feelings.

F. Feelings "clearing house" (to assist children in having a vocabulary to explain their feelings and in realizing the advantage of expressing feelings rather than holding them in). During the month, find some opportunities to clear away any unexpressed feelings that any family member has. Go through the adjective list together and say, "Has anyone been feeling frustrated? jealous? angry?" and so on right through the list.

Preface the "clearinghouse" by quoting the phrase, "Unspoken feelings don't ever die; they simply get buried and come forth later in uglier forms."

Be sure children understand that this is just an exercise to help them identify feelings and to show them how much better they feel after feelings are expressed. Remind them that there will usually not be this kind of game to provide a way to express how they feel—thus they should, on their own, think about how they feel and share those feelings with other family members.

G. One-on-one opportunities (to facilitate the most personal expressions of feelings—one-on-one, between parent and child).

Take a child on routine travel whenever possible. From a business trip to a simple visit to the grocery store, take a child along. One-on-one situations facilitate communication of feelings more effectively than any other setting.

A trip, whether it is across the country or just across town, is a particularly effective device for communication. Since you are on your way somewhere, you feel no pressure to be doing something. Therefore, you can talk, because there is essentially nothing else to do until you reach the destination. This relaxed atmosphere of time availability leads to easy and pleasant communication.

H. Your own methods. List any other ways you can think of to help children become better at explaining and communicating about feelings.

I. Post-test (to reinforce and recall what has been learned).

Retake the test from the beginning of this section. You will find that the questions are easy this time rather than perplexing. Praise the children's improvement and go on to the family focal point.

IV. Family Focal Point

The "Comp" award (to keep children aware of trying not only to know how others are feeling but to help them feel better by communicating their own positive feelings—and to reward their efforts at both).

You will remember the "What Would Jesus Do" award discussed in Month Three and the "Ice Breaker" award from Month Five. We have found that a brief award ceremony each Sunday at the dinner table is an exciting and effective way to extend praise and recognition to children. At first we were concerned that teenagers would think they were a little above this type of activity. But, on the contrary, we have found that they want (and need) recognition as much as or more than the smaller children and always want to be in the running for the awards we give.

This month, we suggest a third award, called the "Comp" award. In our family, it came about this way: Grandma was visiting us and was involved one evening as we discussed this "month's" goal of trying to know how others are feeling. She told us of a teacher she once had, long ago when she was just a little girl. This teacher, she said, had a gift for knowing how children felt and for offering words of encouragement or praise when they were needed most. Grandma said she remembered how this teacher would come up to her and say, "I have a comp for you. It's a good one and I'll give it to you after school." Grandma would then feel happy and excited all day, waiting to see what nice thing the teacher would say to her.

With Grandma's story in our minds, we discussed how powerful a good compliment can be. We talked about how a person has to observe and listen and try to know how the other person is feeling before he can give a good and thoughtful compliment. And we talked about a good compliment as the highest form of feelings communication.

We decided it was something important enough that we should remind ourselves of it each week. So we established this third award—called the "Comp" award. It consists of a piece of construction paper with a carefully lettered "COMP" mounted on cardboard.

Each Sunday at dinner we say, "Who is in the running?" and the children think back, trying to recall any instance during the past week when they noticed enough about another person and sensed his feelings well enough to communicate a good compliment.

The children listen to each other's experience in giving compliments and become regularly more motivated to give better compliments themselves. The "Comp" award is presented to the person who gave the best compliment. He keeps the award on his bedroom door throughout the week until next Sunday when it is reawarded.

V. Summary

The ability to accurately and honestly communicate feelings is an essential part of charity. We must know of the feelings of others in order to serve them—and we often serve them best simply by expressing our feelings to them and for them.

This "month's" exercises and approaches attempt to help children (and parents) to sort out and better define their feelings by talking about them, and to better grasp the feelings of others by listening to them.

It is important to remember that the efforts we make to communicate what we feel actually expand and extend the range of what we feel. The thought it takes to articulate our emotions serves to enhance those feelings and to complete them.
