Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Charity ( 1986)

Section VI

Doing

All of the observing, listening, feeling, and communicating skills we have tried to develop in ourselves and in our children over the past ten months come into their full beauty when they bring about the action of service.

James Russell Lowell said, "All the beautiful sentiments in the world weigh less than a single lonely action."

William R. Inge said, "Beautiful thoughts hardly bring us to God until they are acted upon. No one can have a true idea of right until he does it."

Ralph Waldo Emerson said, "Man's actions are the picture book of his creeds."

Francis Bacon perhaps said it best of all, "All our actions take their hue from the complexion of the heart, as landscapes their variety from light."

Month 11

Service

Understanding Observing Feeling Communicating + Doing____________ =Charity

"You will find as you look back upon your life, that the moments that stand out are the moments when you have done things for others." (Henry Drummond.)

"True generosity requires more of us than kindly impulse. Above all it requires imagination." (I. A. R. Wylie.)

I. Illustrations and Stories

One snowy December night in a poor part of London, we took our four small children on a mission of service. Our destination was an orphanage, populated mainly by retarded children. Each of our children had decided the previous Monday night in a family meeting to choose one of his or her "best toys" to give to one of the orphans. We had called the orphanage to make arrangements and to get the names of four children of corresponding ages.

The evening lives as a vivid memory in the now much older minds of our children. They remember the huge old Victorian house. They remember the looks of pleasure on the four orphans' faces. They remember a little girl named Rebecca who took little interest in the doll she was given but loved the tiny doll dish and spoon that went with it. Most of all they remember the warmth and light they felt in their hearts on that cold, dark night. They know it for what it was—the light of giving, the warmth of service.

I observed a young neighbor boy across the street. I watched him from my window, hearing nothing but seeing enough to tell a beautiful story. He skipped out of his front door into the bright, white winter Saturday, basketball under his arm, sneakers on his feet, smile on his face. He trotted down his walk, dribbling the ball and making a head fake or two wherever there was a dry patch of pavement on the carefully shoveled cement. The boy had done the snow shoveling earlier that morning. I had noticed him as I went out to pick up the morning paper.

Now he turned onto the main sidewalk and loped past his neighbor's house. Then he paused, looked back, hesitated, started running again, stopped again. He was looking at the old lady who lived next door in the house he had just passed. She was struggling with a heavy old snow shovel. Again the boy started down the street. Again he paused. I could see his thoughts as clearly as if I were inside his head. "The guys are waiting for me. I'd miss part of the game. I've already shoveled snow this morning. But she can't do it. She's too frail. She might hurt herself."

He tossed the ball into a fluffy snowdrift and ran back to get his shovel. The look on his face was an interesting combination of exasperation at the situation and satisfaction in having decided something he knew was right.

If there is one truly predictable occurrence in the Church, it is that missionaries, in their return address, will say, "It was the best two years (or eighteen months) of my life."

Why do they say that? We can tell you from watching over six hundred of them who were in our care in London that on the surface what they do doesn't look like the best two years of anything. They get up before dawn in freezing, bare apartments. They study difficult matter intently for two hours before eating a meager breakfast. They spend most of the day knocking on doors that get slammed on them. They give up their greatest loves (from girlfriends to basketball to deep pan pizza). They follow rules more rigid than most prisons (staying within a small area, no movies, no social contact with the opposite sex).

Why are these the happiest years? Because it is a time of concentrated service, of doing all they can for their fellowman—and, in the process, forgetting themselves.

"I believe that the rendering of service is the common duty of mankind and that only in the purifying of sacrifice is the dross of selfishness consumed and the greatness of the human soul set free." (John D. Rockefeller, Jr.)

Teddy Roosevelt said, "In the battle of life, it is not the critic who counts. Not the man who points out where the strong man stumbled or where the doer of deeds could have done better. The credit belongs to the man who is actually in the arena, who does actually strive to do the deeds, whose place will never be among those cold and timid souls who never knew either victory or defeat!"

What really puts us in the arena? What really lets us undertake the risk of actively loving? The answer is service.

Those who serve are involved. They are no longer mere spectators of life. And they will never be among the "timid souls" who rarely lose and rarely win!

II. Approaches for Parents

A. Attitude. Most service is an outgrowth of attitude. Let's explore some aspects of the kind of attitude that leads toward natural and heartfelt service.

The presence of this attitude in my mind actually (though it's hard for me to believe even as I write) made it pleasant to be awakened six times in one night and to be given six chances to serve a tiny brother.

B. Work by "mental effort." The most effective and useful types of service come in the form of response to need. When we think hard enough to clearly define a need, and then think again, hard enough to think of how we can really help fill that need—then we provide true service.

This approach can be particularly valuable with children. I remember one period when I felt some rather deep concern about problems that two of our children were having. One adolescent daughter, just starting a new school, felt that she had no close friends and was just too shy to go out and get some. And our preadolescent boy, totally secure socially and with his friends, was performing far below his potential academically at school.

Both problems seemed to drag on and on, and steadily worsened. I worried about them a fair amount but didn't know what to do, really, other than give a word of encouragement here and there.

One day it occurred to me that I had to analyze these problems to the same depth and with the degree or intensity of mental effort that I put into business and professional problem analysis at my office.

Hard thought led to specific ideas. As mentioned earlier in this book, we ended up throwing a surprise party for the daughter—a slumber party that tightened some relationships and got her over the hump. As for the son, I first spoke at length to his teachers, then went to school with him so we could sit together with his teachers and talk. My son, learning earlier that day about the meeting, had prepared a list of the grades he wanted to aim for during the next term. He also wrote out what he thought he would have to do to get each desired grade. The teachers added a bit, right to his list, making it a complete summary of the requirements and grade division points. We designed a system of follow-up: teachers checking in school, parents checking in the home.

Both ideas helped considerably with these two children's respective problems. The point, though, more importantly, is that parents can best serve their children when they take the time to think first, to use mental effort to decide what the needs are and how to meet them.

C. Keeping inventory. As simple as it sounds, rendering small acts of service is often as much a product of habit as anything else. We do what we condition ourselves to do, and even though routine, mechanical, or unfeeling service is inferior to what is done with the heart, there is nonetheless much benefit in becoming consistent and regular in our efforts to serve.

Try this (during the month): In your day-planner, calendar book, or diary (or on your partnership planning forms if you have adopted the planning system from Month Seven) draw a small box on each day or date. Then, as you watch for and perform some small act of service each day, write what it was in the box for that day. A few words will do: "Helped Lillian unload groceries," "Took over car pool for Margaret so she could prepare for guests," "Stopped to help elderly man change tire."

You will never pass a day without chances to give some kind of service. The uncertainty is whether you will see those chances. The "fill-in-the-box" method increases awareness.

D. Wise service. We must all strive to give others, particularly our children, what they need rather than what they want. Usually we can discern the difference between the two simply by asking ourselves objectively, by trying to project in our minds what the consequences will be.

All of the other skills, worked on in the other "months" of this book, essentially help us to observe and understand enough to serve needs rather than wants. Indeed, this is what separates true charity from mere nice gestures.

The question is not whether your nonmember car-pool friend wants the gospel, it's whether he needs it. It's not whether your neighbor wants to go to aerobics, it's whether it would help her to go. It's not whether your teenager wants his own car when he's sixteen, it's whether he needs much more responsibility and maturity first (he does!).

Big things like the examples above are pretty easy. But we need to work on the small, everyday ones—they are the toughest. And it is sometimes our wants that get in the way of others' needs. Are you buying the overpriced toy in the airport shop because your daughter needs it, will benefit by it, will be reassured of your love by receiving it—or is it because you want to ease the slight guilt you feel for not spending much time with her lately? What does she need?

Or what about something as routine as visiting teaching? The elderly lady just wants someone to talk to, so that's what you do once a month—you talk to her for a while, and listen, too. And she does need that. But what else does she need? Something she doesn't ask for and may not even consciously want? Does she need more fresh air? A way to get out of her home once in a while? Does she need any physical help? Any assistance with her own distant family? Does she need help with her journal? Does she need purposeful activity or projects to make her feel worthwhile? What does she need?

The point, once again, is that real service, real need—based service, takes thought, mental effort, even wisdom. We're only without these things when we don't want them badly enough to work for them.

E. The power of prayer. Perhaps the most pleasant and easy-to-answer prayers that God receives are those from people who ask for opportunities to serve. Service to others is service to him and fulfills his purposes.

Essentially, when we ask for chances to serve, we ask if we can help him. And he always says yes.

Because it is always answered, prayer to serve should never be asked without thought and commitments. Once those are in place and the request made, look out! Opportunities to give service will start dropping like rain.

Prayer is not only the prelude to service; it is the heart of it. Often the best service we can render to another is to pray for him. "Third-party prayers," in which one person prays to God for someone else, are usually effective in direct proportion to how specific they are and how much faith is involved. Alma the Elder, as we know, prayed with such faith and sincere intent that God intervened to bring Alma the Younger into repentance.

Again, the observation, recognition, and understanding of needs is the key. When we have found a genuine need, we can try to serve directly, and when the need is beyond our power or wisdom, we can appeal to God through our faith and our specific prayers in behalf of the specific need we have recognized.

F. Your own methods. Before reading on into the ideas for children, take a moment and list any other ways you can think of to give yourself additional ideas and motivation to give service.

III. Exercises to Teach Children

A. Fast Sunday discussion and pretest (to help children understand how the skills of the preceding ten months lead up to service and to establish concentration on service as the goal for the month ahead). Build an opening discussion around the following points:

Test

B. Comprehension of service—the "hows" and the "whys" (for building a "mind-set" for service within our children).

Then an older man of the village, a gentleman who had always taken special interest in the statue, proposed that they leave the statue as it was—without hands—and that a special sign be created for the base of the statue that would read, "On this earth, his only hands are yours."

Discuss the story with your children. See how much they can tell you about what it means. How is service to others service to Christ? How is service to others partial repayment for what Christ has given us (which is everything)? What kinds of things can we do for others as "Christ's hands"? What kinds of thoughts come to our minds when we ask, "What would Jesus do?"

The best illustration of service (and the most pertinent and relevant to children) are stories of service their grandparents or ancestors (or even their parents) have rendered. These needn't deal with large or magnificent or publicly recognized service. In fact, incidents relating to everyday good deeds or thoughtful acts have the most direct influence on children. What incidents can you remember from your own experience and from stories you have heard of your family?

a. The Jones family located a needy family and decided to help them to have the kind of Christmas they could not afford for themselves. They invited the family over for two family home evenings and got to know them. They took them all for pizza one night and got to know them better. Then they talked about the family and planned exactly what they could do for each child and for the parents to make it the best Christmas they had ever had.

b. Larry was walking home from school one day when he noticed an elderly man whose car had a flat tire. He helped the man get the jack working and put on the spare tire. Closer to home he passed a neighbor who was trying to hang her wash on a clothesline. The wind came up and scattered sheets and other articles across the lawn. Larry helped her gather it up and then stayed to help her hang it on the line.

Discuss the differences in the types of service involved in the two stories. One kind was planned and became better because the Jones family took the time to think carefully about needs. The second kind of service was spontaneous. Needs presented themselves to Larry and he responded to them.

Ask for some other examples of planned service. How do you find opportunities for planned service? What are the enjoyments of planned service? What are some other examples of spontaneous service? How do you find opportunities for it? What are the enjoyments of spontaneous service?

C. Look for needs—do the deeds (to help children see the connections between the listening and observation skills they have been learning and the actual rendering of service). Explain to children that whether service is planned or spontaneous, it has observation as a prerequisite. We cannot "do the deeds" until we "see the needs."

Look for opportunities (dinner time is usually best) to ask about what needs anyone in the family has observed and about what deeds were done or could have been done to assist those needs.

D. Create an atmosphere of awareness and service (to further encourage children to watch for chances to help).

Other "trademarks" of a true institution are its codes of conduct, its slogans, and its mottoes. Think of a good two- or three-word motto for your family that implies service (for example, "help others" or "watch for needs" or "service to others").

Repeat the family motto often: Start any family meeting with it, put it on a plaque in the family room, make a needlepoint sampler of it—anything that increases the family's awareness of and commitment to giving service.

E. "Service training" (to help children become proficient at thinking of the right kind of service to render in a particular situation).

Emily Dickinson wrote:

"They might not need me but they might, I'll let my head be just in sight. A smile as small as mine might be Precisely their necessity."

F. Service awards (to recognize and praise children for giving service). The Sunday "awards" discussed in previous "months" are especially effective for this month. Have the "What Would Jesus Do" award go to the person who (as Jesus would have) noticed a need and did something about it.

G. "The highest service" (to help children realize that the most lasting and beneficial kind of service is the kind that helps other people to help themselves).

Read the following quotations together:

"The highest service we can perform for others is to help them help themselves." (Horace Mann.)

"To lift up a fallen man is good. To help him lift himself up is better." (Author unknown.)

Then make a list of "better" forms of service:

—Instead of giving a poor man a fish, teach him how to fish.

—Instead of giving people food and clothes, help them get a job.

—Instead of tying a child's shoe, teach him how to tie.

H. Asking (to help children realize that there is another way besides observing to discover needs).

We heard a fireside speech by a blind woman once, and one of the most interesting things she said was how rare it was (and how pleasant) for someone to simply ask what they could do for her. Much more often, she said, people tried to give her a kind of help that she didn't really need and that embarrassed her. They would help her find something that she took pride in being able to find herself, or take hold of her and help her do something that she had long since learned to do on her own. What she appreciated much more, she told us, was people who didn't assume they knew her needs, but asked.

There is a great principle here. No matter how good we get at noticing or observing the needs of others, we will never know the specifics of their needs as they do. When it is asked sincerely, the question "What can I do to help you?" is the most effective beginning that service can have!

We have some friends whose teenage boys have made a habit of calling on four or five widows in their neighborhood on a regular basis to ask what they can do for them. The widows know they are sincere and have come to appreciate their visits immensely. They mention the things they really need—perhaps an errand or help with something heavy. And the boys derive great satisfaction from helping.

Families can also do this kind of asking together. Set aside a Saturday morning. Put on your grubbies, go to the homes of some elderly neighbors, ask what would help them right then, and spend a few hours doing whatever they need done.

I. Group service projects (to give children the experience of working with a large group in performing major service). Ward Mutual groups and Scouting groups often get involved in service projects of various kinds, but it is those who plan the projects who get the greatest fulfillment.

Try organizing a group service project as a family. Find a need that takes lots of manpower (such as cleaning up a property or painting a house) and let your children organize and plan it, ask other families to help, figure out when and how to do it, and so forth.

J. Your own methods. Sit down for a half hour and think about service. What ideas come to mind? How can you get your children involved in more opportunities for service? What things can you do together? How can you motivate and reward their efforts at serving? Write your ideas down.

K. Post-test. Take the test from the beginning of this section again. Many of the questions that were hard to answer (or answered with a "zero") a month ago will be easy (and plentiful) as you retake the test.

Praise the children lavishly for their improvement and their new sense of awareness. Then talk about the family focal point.

IV. Family Focal Point

The free daddy date. All of the family focal points in this book are ideas designed to "carry on" the principles of the chapter long after the monthly focus has shifted to other chapters. Therefore, the focal points have to be things with a built-in motivation.

We have found that what we call the "free" daddy date or "free" mommy date works in precisely this kind of self-perpetuating way.

For us, "daddy dates" and "mommy dates" start when children are young and are times when one individual child goes somewhere alone with mom or dad. Because our family is large, these one-on-one times are especially valued by our children. We try to have at least one daddy date or mommy date with each child each month. The children, of course, would like to have them more often than this.

And there is one way that they can. If they find a service opportunity, something they plan that they and one parent could do for someone, we have promised them that one of us will take them—alone—to go and perform that service. This is a "free" daddy or mommy date that they get in addition to their quota of one per month.

Don't assume that this is only an idea for young children. Teenagers crave time alone with parents, too (though they may not admit it).

The motivation of an opportunity to be alone with one parent adds to a child's interest in looking for and finding opportunities for service.

V. Summary

All of the previous "months" in this book were devoted to the development of skills and understanding that would lead to acts of service. This month, the objective is to focus on those acts themselves and to make them fun and rewarding enough that children want to continue to look for them and participate in them.

Take the time this month not only to think about and perform acts of service, but to reflect on service you have rendered, to recall how happy it made someone else, and to think back and remember how good it made you feel to do it.

Perhaps the most important thing to remember during this month is the principle discussed earlier, that "we love whom we serve." Do not make the mistake of thinking it works the other way. We do not necessarily love those who serve us. We need only to look around our society to dispel this notion. We see how many cynics, drop-outs, conceited people, and spoiled children there are who take advantage of, criticize, and even despise the parents, teachers, and society that have served them.

But we do love those whom we serve. That is a law. And it follows, simply and correctly, that those who love most are those who serve most.

We began this book talking about love as the best motivator for service. We have now gone all the way around the circle and found that service is the best motivator for love.

Service is training in loving.

As we teach our children to serve, we are teaching them to love. In fact, more than that, as we teach them to serve they are participating in love, actually gaining love and absorbing it as they perform the service. And it is a love that frees them from the unhappy prison of self-centeredness.
