Richard Eyre, Linda Eyre, Teaching Children Charity ( 1986)

Month 12

Anonymous Service

Understanding Observing Feeling Communicating + Doing____________ =Charity

"Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth." (Matthew 6:3.)

"Except men shall have charity they cannot inherit that place which thou hast prepared in the mansions of thy father." (Ether 12:34.)

I. Illustrations and Stories

In the Book of Mormon definition, "charity is the pure love of Christ." (Moroni 7:47.) One way to interpret the word pure is as the purity of one's nature. Too often, acts of service are performed with the thought of recognition from others or of the appreciation and gratitude that will come from the receiver. At other times we serve to strengthen our own self-image as a kind or generous person. It is only when none of these self-focused motivators are present that our motives are pure. We remove them when we serve anonymously.

We've heard of a family that for years had a family tradition of helping a needy family at Christmas. Then one year they decided to do it anonymously. They discovered the needs of the family they located by nameless calls to neighbors. They prepared gifts and looked for the things the family wanted without telling anyone they were doing it. They labeled the presents "from your secret friend" or "from Santa." They made a visit late Christmas Eve and quietly arranged the wrapped gifts on the porch. Then they all got in the car, parked up the street in dark shadows, and the fastest boy pushed the doorbell several times and ran for cover. In silence, from the shadows, the whole family watched as the surprised and delighted poor family came to the door and discovered the Christmas they didn't think they would have.

The anonymous giving family would be very upset if we or anyone else found out who they were. We don't know—we heard the story from the family who was helped.

The scriptures tell us that those who gain recognition or admiration for their acts of service already have their reward, whereas those who act anonymously will receive their reward in heaven. Even when someone gives service to others with motives that are pure and unselfish, he still, to some extent, eliminates part of his heavenly reward by receiving the reward of whatever plaudits he gets in recognition of his deed.

There is an inner feeling, a reward of the spirit, that swells secretly inside whenever we can do something for others that is not "connectable" to ourselves.

There are three levels of anonymous service. One keeps the deed secret from all people except the person for whom the deed is done. The second level keeps the deed secret from the person for whom it is done but not necessarily from others. On the third level, no one knows who did the deed except God and the doer himself.

Service on any of the three anonymous levels requires imagination, creativity, and sometimes even a little bent toward the intrigue of covert and clandestine activity!

Level one is illustrated by a man named Milt who knew of a friend's need for a second loan to get into the home that he and his family so badly needed. The bank's limits and loan criteria did not allow enough for the down payment. Milt arranged to loan the balance to his friend, on the strict condition that no one else knew of the transaction, and on the secondary condition that the friend, someday when he was able, would help someone else on a similar anonymous basis.

Level two is illustrated by Billy Parker, age twelve, and his dad, who decided it was about time they did something really nice for the Folkers, the elderly couple who had been such good neighbors to them for so long. Mr. Folker still shoveled his walk every time it snowed (which was often in Montana where they lived). Billy and his brother Jimmy and their dad knew that the Folkers usually slept late and that Mr. Folker never did any shoveling until late morning. They decided to get up early every morning there was snow and get his walk and driveway done before he looked outside.

Another illustration is Becky. She noticed that the new girl in school was shy and had no friends. She approached a half-dozen of her own friends and told them that she was trying to make the new girl feel comfortable. She asked if they would help by doing the same. She told her friends to keep their discussion secret, not to mention to the new girl that they had talked—just to go a little more out of their way to be friendly and make her feel accepted.

Level three is illustrated by Jane Wolff. She was one of many who had tried to help Lilly Parker, a young divorcÃ©e with three little children who was trying to keep her family together with no more support than a part-time job and occasional unfulfilled promises by her husband to catch up on the alimony. Lilly had always refused help, saying she had too much pride and she would make it just fine on her own.

Jane decided to "go underground." On her own, and always anonymously, she found ways to get extra food and clothing delivered to Lilly. Always it was accompanied by some form of note that made it seem like something other than a handout. For example, one note said, "Thank you for your patronage over the years. This is a token of our appreciation." Once, when she knew some unexpected bills had come up, Jane sent a cashier's check with an anonymous note that said, "You won't remember this but you once waited on me at Spencer's Cafe and took the time to talk with me for a minute. I was seriously depressed that day and your cheerfulness helped me more than you will ever know. Consider this check a tip with interest added on for four years."

Jane even managed to arrange for a better job to be offered to Lilly. She covered her tracks on everything she did.

Stories like this are rare. They are rare partly because they do not happen as often as they should. But they are also rare because, if they are truly anonymous on the third level, no one ever knows about them.

Another illustration of level three is provided by Sue, an adolescent girl who wanted to do something for a wonderful lady who had been her Sunday School teacher for two years. Sue thought about it for quite a while and decided, totally on her own, that what the sister would appreciate most would be a sincere, loving letter that could be interpreted as being from any member of the class. She wrote the letter carefully, even including an original poem of gratitude. She typed the letter on plain paper and was careful not to include any clues as to who might have written it. The letter thanked the teacher for changing her life and for giving her a foundation on which to make decisions for the rest of her life.

The story related here is pieced together from some small shreds of evidence and a certain amount of guesswork.

II. Approaches for Parents

A. Think about it. Opportunities for anonymous service rarely occur "off the cuff"—or, if they do occur, we seldom recognize them and grasp them unless we have been thinking about it. Start by coming up with someone who you know needs something. Then plan a way to deliver that need on one of the three levels of anonymity. During this "month," decide on one major act of service or on four (weekly) smaller ones. Think them through, plan how and when you will do them and how you will be sure to stay anonymous. Then do them.

B. Start a private "book of Anonymous Service." Sometimes having a private diary of some sort (in which you record "for your eyes only" notes on things you have done or on plans you have for future service) can serve as a motivation and a catalyst to keep you aware and conscious of the goal to provide secret service. In such a book you can keep track of names and facts you learn about anyone needing any kind of help. If you open the book once a week or so, recording anything you have done or thought about and reviewing earlier facts and plans, the process can become a regular reminder as well as a source of joy and inner satisfaction that you share with no one but yourself and the Lord.

C. "Partnership" service. As important as it is to try to do some acts of service that are known only to yourself, it is also exciting and fulfilling to do some things as a couple, working and planning together to secretly meet a need of someone else.

The best (and most enjoyable and consistent) way to do this is to have, each fast Sunday, a short partnership planning meeting in which you review your family goals, schedule the commitments you have for the month, and talk about at least one act of anonymous service that you could perform during the month. You will find that talking about it, planning it together, is as much fun as doing it—and you will find that it draws you closer together in a rather unique way.

D. Asking and fasting. It is well to remember that, even with our efforts at watching and observing, we are never as aware of the needs of others as is God. A prayer in which we ask to be made aware of needs that we can meet is a truly remarkable type of prayer. We mentioned this method in Month Eleven; add to it this month the dimension of asking for opportunities for anonymous service.

As a parent, imagine the pleasure and joy you would take in one of your children asking which of your other children he could help and just how he could help in a quiet, secret way.

Fast Sunday, particularly if you are involved in the kind of monthly planning mentioned in item C above, is an ideal time to ask for awareness and for opportunities for anonymous service.

Once you have asked, you must think and watch. Sometimes ideas will come to you immediately following or even during your prayer. Other times, you will notice an opportunity in the days that follow.

Answers to this type of prayer come in different ways and at different times, but they always come.

E. Remember that it is often the small things that count. We mentioned earlier the "small services" of a smile or a kind word of encouragement. At first glance it would not seem that these are examples of anonymous service, since they are performed in person. Thinking again, however, these are often the very most anonymous acts since they can be aimed at strangers—at people whom you have not seen before and are likely not to see again.

In some ways this is the ultimate in secret, non-self-serving deeds: to notice a lonely person, one who looks discouraged, someone who is withdrawn or shy—on a train, in a public place, while traveling, walking on a downtown street—and to catch his eye, to smile, to say hello, perhaps to ask a question, stay to talk for a minute, offer some cheer and some conversation.

F. Your own methods. List any other ideas that come to mind: ways of giving anonymous service, people needing help but too proud to ask, anonymous service you could provide as a couple or as a family.

III. Exercises for Children

Fast Sunday discussion and pretest (to focus family attention on this month's goal of giving anonymous service). Remind the children that this is Month Twelve in your family's year-long effort to understand and exercise charity. Explain to them that charity reaches its most pure (and often most exciting) level when it leads us to do things secretly for other people.

Then engage the family in a discussion along the following lines:

Test (left-hand side of paper)

B. "Secret buddies" (to apply and practice simple acts of anonymous service within the family). Children of all ages enjoy the "secret buddies" game. On Sunday, put the names of all family members (including parents) in a hat and let each person draw. If anyone gets his own name, he draws again.

The name that each person draws becomes his "secret buddy" for the week ahead. He tries to do as many things as possible for his buddy, guarding carefully to leave no clues to his identity. The secret services may range from making someone's bed or shining his shoes to finding and buying a tool someone has needed or leaving a note about the things a person is good at or about why that person is appreciated or loved by his secret buddy.

The next Sunday (after a week) have two brief, sequential discussions: the first about whose secret buddy did the most and the best things (without yet revealing who the buddies were), and the second to see who can guess who their secret buddies were. Then reveal the names.

C. The "Secret Service" award (to reward children for taking the initiative of thinking of and doing anonymous service and to make them increasingly aware of future opportunities). To the Sunday awards discussed in previous "months," add the "secret service" award. Ask, "Who is in the running?" and let children think back through the week past and recall any "level two" anonymous service (where the person receiving it did not know who gave it). Give the award to whomever can relate the best deed.

As with the other awards, make a simple logo of S.S. on a mounted piece of paper and let the child who wins it post it on his door for the month ahead.

With this award, you will have four that are given out in your brief awards ceremony at the Sunday dinner table. Each one reminds and motivates the children on one important aspect of charity.

To make the ceremony even more interesting, try the following twist, which combines the awards with the different pictures of Jesus that family members keep in their rooms (see Month One).

Bring the four awards and all of the framed pictures of Jesus to the dinner table. Turn the back of the four awards toward the children so they can't tell which is which, and have a child "pick a card." The one chosen becomes the first award given that week, and the person who receives it gets his first choice of which picture of Jesus he wants that week for his room. As the other awards are given, let their recipients choose the pictures they want.

As a further variation, ask children who receive an award to try to choose a picture on which Jesus' expression seems to match the award (for example, "He looks in this picture like he might be giving a compliment to someone," or, "In this one he looks like he might be saying, 'Do not let your left hand know what your right hand doeth'").

D. Sponsor a child in a Third World country (to give children the chance to serve others who are both very different and very far away from themselves). Another way to make service essentially anonymous is to give it to people who are too far away or too far removed from you to "pay you back" in any way.

Various organizations offer opportunities, for a few dollars per month, to sponsor a child—paying for his support and often for his education.

You can, of course, make your support anonymous, receiving information only from the organization and not corresponding directly with the child. But there is often so much enjoyment and so much benefit in having your children correspond with the child that you may want to settle for "semi-anonymous" service in this case.

E. "Right-attitude," tithing, fasting, and other Church offerings (to help children understand all Church service and giving as forms of anonymous service, and to enjoy this form of sacrifice). Take the time to explain to children that tithing goes to assist the Church in providing for people's physical and spiritual needs, and that fast offerings go specifically for welfare and assistance to the needy. We do not know personally the people who receive the help, nor do they know us, but there can be great joy in imagining them and knowing we are helping, at least in a small way, to ease their burdens.

Also talk about Church callings, and about the fact that gifts of time and personal effort are often worth more than money. And when one magnifies a calling, giving it his best, no one can say how many may be helped, both directly and indirectly.

Tell the following story: A young missionary, laboring in Scotland in the 1800s, was so discouraged that he wanted to return home early. He had converted no one to the Church. He prayed privately in a cave, telling the Lord of his plans to give in. An answer came. The answer was that he could not measure whom he was helping, that much good would come of his work—that he should stay. He finished out his mission, finding little outward success, baptizing only one small, ragged Scottish boy. But he returned home at peace with himself, confident and ready to approach the rest of his life because he had given his time, tried to serve, even when the fruits of his labor were not obvious. He often wondered what those fruits might be.

Long thereafter, near the end of the missionary's life, a wonderful leader of men and follower of God was called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ. The man became a sterling example of manhood, of fatherhood, and of an abundant life for millions. As he aged and his flowing hair became snowy white, he became the prophet of God on earth—the President of the Church.

The man was President David O. McKay, and he was the son of the ragged little Scottish boy who was the humble missionary's only convert.

F. The story of Butch O'Hare—two perspectives on anonymous service (to help children see the connection between integrity, conscience, and anonymous service). In World War II, a young pilot named Butch O'Hare was trying to get back to his carrier after his fighter plane had been damaged. His squadron commander had sent him back, fearing that his bullet-riddled craft was of little further fighting use and that O'Hare should get it back to the carrier while it would still fly.

Reluctant to leave the mission, O'Hare nonetheless followed orders and headed back toward the carrier. On the way, quite by chance, he intercepted a squadron of Japanese migs, flying from another angle toward the American fleet which, without its own planes, would have less defense against them. O'Hare, despite his crippled plane, engaged them in a dogfight and ended up shooting six of the migs out of the sky. By then he had run out of ammunition and was trying to fly into the other planes—to knock at least one more out even though it would cost his own life to do so. The Japanese flight leader, seeing that he was dealing with a "madman" who had no regard for his own life, decided to make a retreat and led his remaining planes off in the other direction. O'Hare had attacked them with the intent of sacrificing himself, in the hopes that he could bring down enough of them to save the thousands of men on his carrier.

As it turned out, O'Hare was miraculously able to nurse his battered aircraft back and land it safely on the carrier. He became one of the war's most decorated heroes, receiving the rewards and accolades and heroism that he had not sought. A few years later the airport in O'Hare's home town of Chicago was renamed O'Hare Field in his honor. It was to become the busiest airport in the world.

Now another story, also set in Chicago. Al Capone, the most infamous of the 1920s gangsters, was charged with crimes time after time by the law but never went to jail because of the skill and craftiness of his personal lawyer, a man called Easy Eddie.

But as time wore on, Eddie began to heed his conscience. He knew of Capone's evil and he knew the best service he could give his fellowmen was to turn Capone in. He eventually went to the FBI and said he had decided to turn state's evidence, to help put Capone into the jails he had kept him out of for so long. The government warned him of what he already knew better than they, namely that, though they would try to protect him, his life would be in grave danger.

He replied that he had a small son and had decided that what he wanted most to leave to that son was a good name. That name, he decided, was more important than the wealth he would have to part with by turning on Capone.

Now Eddie wanted his service to be anonymous, desperately wanted it, but it could not be so. Capone was put in jail, but not long thereafter Eddie met with an "accident" and was killed.

His son, however, did grow up with a good name, and with his father's courage and desire to serve others. His son's name was Butch—Butch O'Hare.

G. Letting others serve you (to teach children that service is a two-way street, and that is often just as important to let others serve you as it is to serve them). Ask your children what they think the phrase "we love whom we serve" means. They will likely give a pretty good answer. Then ask, "If we want others to love us, what must we do?" (Let them serve us.) Since others have a need to serve, sometimes the best way to serve them is to find a way whereby they can serve us. In a little different twist of the word, this is a form of anonymous service, since they do not realize we are serving them (our service is hidden, camouflaged, beneath the service we are inviting them to give us).

The way to do this is to ask. Ask for advice and for help in areas that those you are asking perceive themselves to be good at. Such a request is a flattering compliment to them and it draws them closer to you, makes them feel important, and gives them the blessing of service.

H. Your own ideas. As with each "month," it is likely that you can come up with your own methods that are even better suited for your own children. Take a few moments and think hard about opportunities for anonymous service. Think of ways your family could help others in secret. Be sure to write your ideas down.

I. Post-test (to reinforce and review what has bee learned, and to measure the month's progress).

Retake the test from the beginning of this section. Compare the results with those of a month ago. Praise the improvements. Discuss how your family can continue to enjoy the inner joys of anonymous service. Present the family focal point which follows as a way of doing so.

IV. Family Focal Point

One family "secret service" each month. Because children of all ages love being a part of surprises, it is not difficult to involve them in the process of designing some kind of secret good deed to do once a month.

When we first began doing this, the children responded almost too enthusiastically. Some of their ideas were so elaborately secretive that we decided they were either watching too much TV or reading too many mysteries.

One month they decided the family down the street really needed a particular book. They determined to bake a cake, with the book inside of it, and deliver it secretly to the family. They had a wonderful time doing it.

Another month they decided that since they had no living grandfathers, they wanted to find an old man whom they could help and get to know. Through the local Community Services Council we located an eighty-six-year-old man with no family and no one to watch out for him. We have since had many memorable moments of service, from helping him interpret a household bill to simply sitting and listening as he tells of his life. The children often notice something around his house or yard that needs improvement. They do this quietly and privately.

On months when we plan and carry out a family secret service, we inevitably have a great experience—one in which we learn more than we teach and gain more than we give.

V. Summary

If the entire process of this book is thought of as an equation, perhaps the product or the result is anonymous service. Children (or adults) can get to the point where they are able to think enough about others to look for and find private acts of service to perform for them. When they reach that point, we can be sure that they are worrying far less about the self-centered things that flood and short-circuit the minds of most adolescents and teenagers.

Take the opportunity when this twelfth month ends to have some kind of review with your children. Take any that are eight or older to a restaurant or some place that is special to your family and discuss the full year. See if they understand how the earlier chapters on seeing and listening tie into the feelings chapters. See if they can grasp how some of those skills help in their efforts to communicate better with others and to do more for them.

Discuss the "entry" and "exit" tests that they have taken at the starting and ending of each month and compliment them for their improvements. Remind them of the first three months spent on understanding charity as the pure love of Christ. Ask if they understand that definition any better after learning the skills of the last nine months.

Finally, discuss repeating each of the twelve "months" during the coming year. Ask which ones they look forward to most. Review the twelve family focal points and see which of them have taken root and become permanent parts of your family's life.

Thank them for being your children, for affording you the greatest of all opportunities for Christlike love: namely, the opportunity of being their parent.

Then go back and start on Month Twelve (which is actually Month One, repeated). You will find that your second year will be even more beneficial than the first, that your children will have an insight and an understanding this time through that will actually blend the various skills—and will form the true attitudes of charity.
