Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

Introduction

The Spirit of Christ Comes from Every Page

Eugene England, Provo, Utah

I had my "reconversion" to the Book of Mormon (to use the word I have chosen for the experiences of life-long Mormons) when I was a missionary in Hawaii in 1956. Yes, I had read the book and studied passages for talks, but I had not been brought to Christ by it.

Near the end of my mission (Charlotte and I had been called to Samoa together right after our marriage and transferred to Hawaii for our first child's birth, then she had gone home), I faced the most difficult spiritual challenge of my life to that point. A man we were teaching on the island of Maui had come to believe the gospel was true, but he couldn't find the strength to repent. He would make promises to change his ways, to get rid of habits very harmful to himself and his family, but he would break his promises and then suffer terribly from guilt. He felt ashamed, not good enough for Christ, and too weak to become good.

We tried all kinds of ways to help him be strong, from telling him about the hell he was making for himself and about the heaven with his family he was destroying, to hourly calls to check up on him, to going over and over the logical "steps" of repentance. Nothing worked, and his family, who had joined the Church, and we missionaries were all near despair. Then I remembered Joseph Smith's claim that the Book of Mormon was "the most correct book" in the world and that its principles provided the best way to get near to God. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938], p. 194.)

I studied the Book of Mormon, looking for ways to help our friend. As I did, I went back over my notes from Lowell Bennion's institute classes, which I remembered had stressed the new vision of salvation through Christ's atonement given by the Book of Mormon. Slowly I found again the key I had been taught but which had not meant enough until now when it was needed so badly. Then we read the main passages about Christ from the Book of Mormon with our friend, and he felt the spirit of complete love from his Savior. I remember when we came to the sermon of Amulek, in Alma 34, where he teaches that the suffering of Christ brings about the bowels of mercy, enough to break through the bands of justice and give us the means to have enough faith to repent. This was exactly what our friend needed—and as he read the Book of Mormon passages he finally understood and felt it and thus was able to accept Christ's love and repent. I believe his wife's love, never critical, always encouraging (and our own struggling efforts to be like her) played some role. But the turning point was when he felt love from Christ, conveyed by the promises and spirit of the Book of Mormon. He said, "If Christ can have this kind of love for me, who am I to refuse to accept it—and not accept myself." With this new strength, he became a new person, almost overnight.

My own life didn't change as much, but I saw clearly then that the Book of Mormon had the best answer to the chief human question, "What can we do about our sins?" and that it also contained the best direct help to actually bring people to repent. My sense of Christ's atoning love that began there on Maui has become central to my own efforts to change, to my way of seeing literature and politics and human violence and healing, and to my efforts to counsel people.

Once, when I was bishop of a married student ward at Brigham Young University, one of the ward members asked me to talk with a friend who had tried suicide and was often terribly depressed. As we met, I quickly found that, like many young Latter-day Saints I had counseled, she had a strong sense of justice and self-condemnation but a very weak sense of Christ's mercy and love. She spoke quickly and harshly about her failings and her despair. I felt I should not talk but simply read with her, from the Book of Mormon, those passages that teach the Atonement and convey its spirit. After a while peace visibly came over her and she began to weep, and when she left she had been helped.

The Book of Mormon is the unique tangible witness in the world of the most important intangible reality, the love of Christ and His power to heal and save us. I feel this power, after many readings and much study, whenever I turn to any part of the book. I immediately am brought close to tears by the Spirit of Christ that comes from every page. We who have felt that tangible power in various ways—like electricity, or with burning that is a fire in the bones or that fills the body, or through the way the book physically calls attention to itself or seems to be able to affect its environment—use quite similar language in our descriptions, whether we are from Barbados or Hungary or Utah, whether college professors or cowpunchers. That power serves a great variety of purposes—to prepare a boy like John Harrington to receive the gospel many years later, to give a teenager like Donna Chase the courage to turn directly to Christ despite the real costs, to provide rock-bottom conviction for otherwise quite skeptical scholars like William A. Wilson and David Whittaker. Yet not everyone seems to need such physical evidence. Like Dustin Heuston and Merrill Bradshaw, they come, through long study, to a solid conviction that is finally confirmed emotionally. The letters and narratives in this volume provide a great panorama of the many fascinating ways the Book of Mormon is leading new converts to Christ and reconverting life-long members all over the world.

What a remarkable book! More than 35 million in eighty languages have been printed, and the pace is accelerating: 1.2 million in 1984 and 3.4 million in 1988. At this rate at least another 35 million will be published in just the next ten years. The Book of Mormon is now, next to the Bible and the Koran, probably the book read most widely—by more people in more places—in the world. Each year hundreds of thousands of people, from Argentinians, Bostonians, and Californians to Zulus, from children and new converts and prospective elders to middle-aged cultural Mormons and older couples going on missions, have their lives dramatically changed by reading the book and responding to its power. As the witnesses in this collection demonstrate, that power is manifest in ways that fit the unique ways and circumstances and language of each person, but it always brings meekness and lowliness of heart, sorrow for sin but strength to repent, and courage to act and speak in entirely new ways. In other words, it always leads people to Christ—to accept Him as both judge and friend and to follow His command, in the book, to be like Him.

My father is a good example of a reconversion. He was raised in a Mormon village, Moreland, Idaho, by goodly Mormon parents, but it wasn't until he left home at seventeen for a job in a Union Pacific paintshop in Pocatello and read the Book of Mormon before work each morning that he came to know the Savior. During that time, he had a dream in which Christ came to him and told him He loved and accepted him. It is clear, as he tells me this again nearly seventy years later, that he can still feel that first presence of grace. It led him to change his life in many ways, large and small: to go on a mission instead of becoming an airline pilot, to marry my mother because the same Being brought her to him by the hand in a later dream, and especially to feel what I call the "Spirit of Lehi," a continuing determination to help fulfill the great Book of Mormon promises to the descendants of Lehi.

My father and mother, influenced by the "Spirit of Lehi," gradually came to the conviction that they must consecrate all their surplus to help take the gospel to Lehi's descendants, in North and South America and Polynesia. And through their consecration of time as well as means, and their sensitivity to the Spirit, they were in a position to help directly with the development of what is now the most dramatic way the Book of Mormon is going out to the world, the Family to Family Program. In 1969 my father was working with William Bradshaw as a host at the Temple Square Visitors' Center and with him occasionally giving out somewhat personalized copies of the Book of Mormon to people with special interest. Then Arlene Crawley, from Kaysville, told Brother Bradshaw and my father about her Primary class project, which led the three of them to create the family-to-family approach of sending copies of the Book of Mormon on missions all over the world and eventually to build the project into an approved, accelerating, Churchwide program.

Sister Crawley tells of the inspiration and struggles of those first efforts and how the Lord works, sometimes with an amazing variety of imperfect people, to achieve his purposes. Her story leaves off with Brother Bradshaw's successful trip in the fall of 1970 to teach the program to mission presidents in South America, a trip that he made more extensive at Sister Crawley's urging. I can confirm her conjecture that it was my father who helped donate the five hundred books that made that seeding effort possible, because he asked me and my sister Ann to provide some of them. I have letters from Brazil written in the spring of 1971 by people who received the books given by my own family and copies of the answers we wrote.

Those treasured letters show, even at that early stage, the effectiveness of Sister Crawley's inspired idea that a personal testimony and picture in a Book of Mormon, with an invitation to correspond, is a way every member can directly respond to President David O. McKay's challenge to be a missionary. Some wrote back while they were still investigating, in gratitude and efforts toward friendship: "It becomes more and more difficult these days to find people like you, concerning yourselves with your fellowman even at this great distance. For this reason I've a great admiration for you and this gesture of felicitation with your fellowman." (Zilmar de Moraes, Canoas, Brazil.) Some were genuinely interested in the book and clearly on their way to conversion: "I read part of the book after [the sisters] left and was very impressed. I found the concepts of the book very profound, also an idea I had never encountered before, Christ in America." (Romullo Ferro, Pelotas, Brazil.)

We wrote back long letters of explanation and testimony about the gospel and the Church and helped our children write the children in the families. The missionaries, who provided the translations, often wrote notes of thanks, commenting on how effective the new program was compared to their previous efforts. I recently received a letter from a former student who had gone to Brazil on a mission and found one of those nineteen-year-old copies of the Book of Mormon, with our picture and testimony in it, in the home of what is now a stalwart Mormon family.

After Dad and Brother Bradshaw, working eventually with President Spencer W. Kimball, got approval for implementing the program Churchwide, Brother Bradshaw oversaw it for about eight years from his office in the Visitors' Center, while gradually members throughout the Church became involved through yearly drives in the priesthood quorums. Then in 1982 the program was moved into its own building, the old Lafayette School north of the Church Office Building, and was directed by two Church service missionary couples, Helen and Ray Hunter Barton, Jr., and Virgil and Audrey Peterson. When I talked with them in 1984, the number of books they were sending out had increased from 3000 a month to about 15,000 copies a month, and they were receiving increasingly enthusiastic reports of success from all over the world. The expanding program was moved into the larger Church Exhibits Building on Fourth North in 1985. Robert and Enid Burton were put in charge, and Ferrell and Blanch McGhie were appointed in 1986. The numbers of books sent out continued to grow, dramatically spurred by the addresses of President Ezra Taft Benson and, I believe, the "Spirit of Lehi," which seemed gradually to invest the whole Church as a result: 447,000 in 1986; 917,000 in 1987; 1,413,000 in 1988; and 1,200,00 in just the first half of 1989. Especially has that spirit been felt since the October 1988 general conference, in which President Benson made a dramatic appeal to "move the Book of Mormon forward now in a marvelous manner" and prophesied that it would flood the earth with millions of copies. The response of people in buying copies to be sent has been so great that the Church has now placed the program under a full-time professional, Brother L. Jay Monk of the Missionary Department, who is assisted by an advisory committee composed of the Bartons, the Petersons, the McGhies, and LaVorn and Bea Sparks. The staff has grown from 4 Church Service missionaries in 1982 to 169, and the program is expanding beyond the huge Exhibits Building.

Besides the many of us who can do our part each month by contributing through our ward or branch family-to-family project, individuals throughout the Church are being touched by the "Spirit of Lehi" in ways that impel them to unusual efforts. My father interested his friends Vadna and G. Albin Matson in the program, and they have sent many copies each year since the mid seventies, receiving letters from grateful converts from many nations. Margaret and Stanley Kimball, of St. George, Utah, have sent out more than twenty thousand copies and, from letters from converts and missionaries, they know of more than thirteen hundred people converted through those books. In the first half of December 1988, they learned of twelve baptisms, from Spain, El Salvador, Bolivia, Argentina, Hawaii, and Mexico. And many others are feeling what President Benson in October 1988 general conference called "this burden" and also "this blessing which [God] has placed on the whole Church." (Ensign, Nov. 1988, p. 6.)

I felt the pull of the "Spirit of Lehi" when I heard President Benson in that conference challenge "our Church writers, teachers, and leaders to tell us more Book of Mormon conversion stories that will strengthen our faith and prepare great missionaries." My heart responded especially to his call to "let us know how it [the Book of Mormon] leads us to Christ." (P. 5.) This book is the result of that challenge. I am grateful to Deseret Book for accepting and acting on my proposal so quickly and for the fine cooperation of mission presidents, friends, and colleagues all over the world—and especially the many people who made the effort to write and tell their own stories. For some it was a first effort and very difficult. For all it was a challenge to share sacred personal experiences in print.

I have done everything I could to respect the personal nature and sacredness of these testimonies. I have chosen the stories printed from the many I received to show the great variety of people being brought to Christ by this other testament and also to capture the remarkable similarity of experiences the book has brought over time and place, from Parley P. Pratt to the latest convert, and from India to Idaho. I believe you can hear the varied but amazingly consistent voice of the contemporary kingdom of God in these stories. I trust that you will indeed be strengthened in your own faith by them and led to know the book better for yourself and to be a better missionary with it. I especially hope that you too will be converted to Christ in new ways.
