Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

He Heard the Zulu Children Singing All Over the Hills

David and Vela Hawkins, Durban, South Africa

In March 1988 we were transferred to Durban, the second largest city in South Africa. We were assigned to work in the Kwa Mashu Branch of the Durban stake.

Kwa Mashu is a Zulu branch right on the edge of the great Kwa Zulu nation. This nation, geographically a part of South Africa, has a population of seven and a half million people. The first time we attended sacrament meeting in Kwa Mashu there were seventy-five Zulus present. We found no word to describe our feelings as we made that comparison of one to one hundred thousand.

The branch president is a fine young convert about twenty-eight years old. His mother-in-law is a Zulu witch doctor. He and his wife had three children before they went to the temple in Johannesburg to be sealed. Their little son born since then is the first Zulu born under the covenant.

The branch met in a lovely Ican building with a beautiful yard. Sister Hawkins attended Relief Society that first Sunday, but as she heard the Primary children singing "I Am a Child of God," she knew she would be in Primary from then on. The next day the stake Primary president visited in our flat and asked Sister Hawkins to work with the Primary in Kwa Mashu.

We were asked by the branch president to teach his eight-

year-old daughter to prepare her for baptism. We began teaching on Tuesday and Thursday after school. Four little girls attended the first class. We played a tape of children singing "Jesus Came to John the Baptist" and taught that story. At the end of class we gave each girl one of our Articles of Faith cards and told them if they learned one by next class they would get a prize. One girl learned the first one and we gave her a little package of cookies (they call them biscuits, as the British do), and we were in business.

The class began to grow. We were teaching faith, repentance, etc. The children knew of Joseph Smith and the gold plates. One day we asked them to name a person in the Book of Mormon. They guessed Moses, Adam, and Abraham, but not a Book of Mormon character. What a great door was opened to us that day—what an exciting opportunity!

We began with First Nephi and moved on through the book. We not only told the stories but also taught the gospel principles. We borrowed filmstrips and pictures from wards in the Durban stake. We often stopped the filmstrips to point out and discuss the ship, Nephi, the Liahona, the gold plates, or angels not having wings, etc.

The children couldn't get enough of the Book of Mormon pictures. They liked to see them over and over and name the people therein. The all-time favorite was Abinadi before King Noah and the wicked priests. They wanted to know which priest was Alma. One of their favorite things was to role-play the stories. The Zulu children were little hams and loved to perform. They really made the characters come to life.

The heritage of the Zulu nation since the days of Shaka, their famous warrior king, has been fighting and killing. After we saw how enthusiastically the children role-played "Nephi Kills Laban" and "Ammon Cuts Off the Arms of His Enemies," we began really down-playing violence and stressing prayer and good works. Alma again came to our rescue. "The word" is mightier than the sword.

After each class we went home excited and happy about the special spirit that we felt among the children. One thing we loved was seeing how they would apply the teachings to their own lives. For example, when we were reviewing we asked what King Benjamin taught his people. Their answers were "Don't let your children quarrel and fight" and "When you help other people you are helping God." Then a little girl gave this answer: "If you have some cabbage, and your neighbor doesn't have any, give him some, even if he didn't work to raise some."

One day after we had taught the Ten Commandments from Mosiah 13 we asked the children to name some of the commandments. The first answer was always "Don't smoke." We just let that pass as a fine commandment. They named "Don't kill," "Don't steal," and so on. Then a little boy gave a version of "Thou shalt not covet": "Don't wish you had your neighbor's mule." When the Zulu children would tell the story or see the filmstrip of Joseph Smith going into the woods to pray, they would say, "So Joseph went out into the bush to pray."

When we got into Alma in the Book of Mormon we gave the greatest lesson of all on the Atonement. We taught of temporal and physical death. Those Zulu children loved hearing of the two great gifts our Savior gave to each of us—resurrection and forgiveness—if we will repent. From then on repent was a big word in their vocabularies. Whenever we asked what any prophet had taught, their first answer was "Repent." We showed Man's Search for Happiness, stopping often to point out how Grandpa lived and died, how his body was buried, and how his spirit went to Paradise. Then we had to tell of spirit prison, and eventually we presented the whole plan of salvation from pre-earth life to the three degrees of glory. It was a joy to see their eyes light up as they put the parts together and understood.

We could have baptized dozens of those children. In fact, many of them asked us to baptize them. Some asked Sister Hawkins if she would baptize them. (Another great teaching moment.) We had been instructed by our mission, stake, and branch presidents not to baptize children unless they had family members active in the Church. We would tell them to bring their parents for us to teach. This way we got some good converts. Elder Hawkins never did the baptizing or confirming but gave the Zulu priests and young elders the opportunity to perform those priesthood ordinances.

The best thing about our classes and Sunday Primary was the singing. The Zulus sang beautifully! The children heard a song a few times and then began to harmonize. We had heard children in many Primaries singing "Book of Mormon Stories" but never to compare with those children in Kwa Mashu singing and doing the actions. A song that so much touched our hearts was "Oh, How Lovely Was the Morning" sung by the children in Zulu. How blessed we were that the Primary's sacrament meeting program for 1988 included four new verses of "Book of Mormon Stories"! The children just loved to hear about Alma, Ammon, the two thousand sons of Helaman, and Samuel the Lamanite—to hear and then to sing. "The Golden Plates" was a new song to them and soon became a favorite. We taught "To Nephi, Seer of Olden Time." The children quickly learned that the iron rod is the word of God and that the word of God is found in the Book of Mormon and the Holy Bible. We also taught "We Are of the Army of Helaman," and when we asked who is our Captain Helaman, their quick reply was, President Ezra Taft Benson. We then asked them what we are fighting against. Their answer was, wicked and bad things.

When the class numbered in the sixties, we gave up the biscuits and Articles of Faith. After a long class we were just too tired to listen to Articles of Faith for an hour and a half—many children had learned all thirteen Articles of Faith and lots of scriptures. At our last class we had eighty-seven children present. Many of them were from the mean, rough sections of Kwa Mashu, but we had no problems with them. Elder Hawkins chose their leaders to play the tapes and projector. They became our leaders. We were not allowed to go to the Zulu homes, into their townships, or even to the chapel at night.

Our grand finale was the children presenting the remodeled version of the Primary sacrament meeting program. Twenty-three Zulu children gave their stories and parts in Zulu, and a multitude of other children joined them in singing their songs in English. No prompting was necessary. They were proudly presenting their Book of Mormon program and they were prepared. It was the largest congregation ever at Kwa Mashu branch. The parents and older Zulus were most proud. The children had never performed for them before, and here they were teaching them the truths of the Book of Mormon. They all thanked and complimented us, but we just said, "Your children."

One man told us we had done a wonderful work. He told us he heard children saying Articles of Faith and singing Book of Mormon songs all over the hills of Kwa Mashu.

In the beginning the children spoke very little English, so all classes were taught with interpreters. At the end of the eight months, they had learned a lot of English and we had learned a bit of Zulu.

It was hard to leave South Africa, and especially Kwa Mashu. The last Sunday, as we said our farewells, one dear Zulu sister thanked us, as she had done many times before, for teaching her children the Book of Mormon. She started to cry and said, "Water has been coming out of my face all day, because you are going away." Water came out of our faces, too.
