Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

He Felt He Had Cheated the Lord Out of Forty Years

Perris Jensen, Cardiff, Wales

Harold Say was an employee of The Echo, the most widely circulated newspaper published in Wales. He had been exposed to the gospel for years but had never cared enough about it to really investigate. My wife, Gwen, and I began calling upon him in 1966 at the request of the young missionaries, who had pretty well given up hope of interesting him. Because we were older he paid more attention to us, and we finally got him started reading the Book of Mormon. He got about halfway through when, one evening, he declared to us, "The book is divine. No mere mortal could have produced it. If it is divine, then the man who brought it forth must have been a prophet; and if he was a prophet, then the church which he established must have been God's church. It is all done up in one package." A few days later I baptized him, and at last report he was still a faithful member.

William Bailey was an associate of Harold Say. He also lived in Barry, a village not far from Cardiff, Wales, and he also worked for The Echo. Where Brother Say was passive, Brother Bailey was antagonistic, mean. His wife once remarked to us, out of his presence, "You'll never get anywhere with him. He is the most intolerant man in the world." Each night we called on him we battled. We really went round and round. But each night, as we left, he would remark, "You'll be back, won't you." We assured him we would be back just as long as he would tolerate us. During the week he spent his spare time in the Cardiff public library reading anti-Mormon books to try to find something that he could use to tie us up. He had tied the young missionaries up in knots by digging up old accounts of anti-

Mormon stuff that they had never heard about. I was a new challenge, and he was determined to beat me down as he had done with the younger missionaries. Week after week we battled. Then one night, in the middle of a question, he stopped with the remark, "No! That's wrong. I'm through asking questions. Now you teach me." Then we began to get somewhere.

After much effort we induced him to begin reading the Book of Mormon. A few weeks later, when we were discussing the Atonement, he remarked that the only reason for Christ's mission was to teach us by example how we should live. We had discussed the Atonement many times, but apparently our teaching had gone right over his head. By this time we were on a friendly basis, so that I could kid with him a bit. In fact we had talked about the Book of Mormon, and he had asked me if I had ever noticed the great difference in literary style between Nephi and his brother Jacob.

When he spoke of literary style I asked him what he had observed. He explained, "Nephi writes with great difficulty. He has a hard time explaining himself. It's like driving an automobile with the brakes on. But oh, when you come to Jacob, he's a writer after my own heart. He just sails through the waves in a yacht."

When Brother Bailey remarked that the Savior's sole mission was to teach us by example how we should live, I challenged him, "Who taught you how to read? I don't think you can read very well, can you?" It was a dangerous remark, but it got his attention. Imagine asking a newspaperman if he can read well. He bristled up with his old antagonism, "What do you mean?" I said, "Let's go back and read a couple of chapters and see what you have been reading about the Atonement."

We read aloud chapters 2 and 9 of Second Nephi. He was humbled and apologized for his antagonism, "I see what you mean. I was reading only for the literary aspect. I think I better start again at the beginning."

The second time around he read for the doctrine. He got over into Alma, where Alma was baptizing in the Waters of Mormon, and he was ready for baptism. Even more, he was concerned about his dead grandson, who had never been baptized. We had already explained about baptism for the dead, but again it appeared to have gone over his head. We reminded him that he himself had never been baptized. He responded that he had been thinking about that, too, and thought perhaps on his birthday he would be baptized. My wife spoke up, "Why wait until then? You might be dead by then, or we could be, or we might be transferred." Three days later I baptized him. Within six weeks he was branch president. His zeal against had now become zeal for the work.

I had no part in the conversion of Brother Bateman, of Woodsetten, near Birmingham, but I heard him bear his testimony in church. His wife was a member, which was fine with him, because whenever she went to church he could go to the pub. One evening she was going to MIA. He lay down to relax a bit until she was gone, so he could go to the pub, but he fell fast asleep. When he awoke it was too late to go to the pub, but right beside him was the Book of Mormon. With nothing else to do he began to read. It interested him and he continued to read, but he was not about to let his wife know that he was reading it, so he hid the book except when she was away. She was amazed when he announced, one day, that he was ready to be baptized, even without the missionaries having taught him. Or did she secretly know what he was doing, but felt it best to keep quiet about it?

The place the Book of Mormon played in the story of Captain Jones is somewhat different. Captain Jones, a former sea captain, was blind. He was sitting on a park bench one day when a young lady approached from one side, reading a book as she walked. At the same time a man, whose name the captain never learned, was approaching from the other side. When the two came together, right in front of where the captain was sitting, the man asked the young lady what she was reading. She replied that she was reading the Book of Mormon. Then he passed on and was gone. Now you don't accost people on the street and ask them what they are reading, but it did happen this time.

Captain Jones heard what the lady said and called to her. He told her he wanted to know more about that Book of Mormon. She turned out to be a local missionary, and she was most anxious to meet with him, with her companion, and tell him about the Book of Mormon. But she was curious to know where he had ever heard about the Book of Mormon. He explained that forty years earlier, when he was a young sailor, he had left his ship in San Pedro, California, and was making his way across the States to the east coast. He entered Utah at St. George and, being out of money, stopped to work for a time. He painted houses. He was in Utah for a whole year before he finally went on into Wyoming. He heard a great deal about the Church and the gospel. He said, "The Lord called me to become a member, but I didn't." From that point on he had not heard the word Mormon until the young lady responded to the question of the "amiable stranger," as the captain called the man who was passing.

The lady missionaries worked with the captain for several weeks, but could get nowhere with him, as far as baptism was concerned. Finally they asked my wife and me to call on him. He was friendly enough and willing to listen to us, but he kept insisting he was not ready for baptism because he was not worthy. It was quite awhile before we determined why he was reluctant. He finally admitted that the reason he felt unworthy was because he had been, as he called it, "called by the Lord forty years earlier," and he had thus "cheated the Lord out of forty years' service." This gave me the clue to his resistance, and I reminded him of the story of the prodigal son. I asked him point-blank if it was better for the son to return to his father or remain with the pigs. He responded, "I get the point. I guess I should be baptized." But he explained that he had emphysema and had to go to the hospital the very next day.

We visited him several times in the hospital, where he spent his time preaching to the nurses. They told us he pestered them to death with his urging them to read the Book of Mormon. Then one day we went to the hospital and he was gone. The nurses were very much upset. They said he just got up and left without saying anything to anybody. We scooted over to his apartment and found him there. We asked him why, when they had not yet finished their course of treatments. He said he didn't know why. I told him, "I know why you left. You left so you could be baptized." He said he was ready, if the doctor would permit it. We phoned the doctor, and he said it was okay if he were baptized in a heated pool. I arranged with the missionaries to have the pool ready a couple of days later.

When we arrived for the baptism, the chapel and the pool were stone cold. The heating plant had failed; but the captain said go ahead anyway, and I baptized him. The captain then returned to the hospital for the rest of the treatment. Just at that time we were transferred from Cardiff up into Birmingham. We didn't see the captain again until about a year later when we came back on a short visit. A new chapel was being constructed in Cardiff. The brick masons were doing a sloppy job, and the supervisor had required them to tear down and re-lay some of the brickwork. We found Captain Jones at the chapel site as a volunteer worker, cleaning off the old mortar from the torn down bricks, so that they could be re-laid. He was healthy, cheerful, and happy in spite of his blindness. Still staunch in the faith.
