Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

It Came with Her Testimony in It

John P. Daniel, Littleton, Colorado

Even though I did not receive a Book of Mormon until I was sixteen, the first time I became acquainted with any of the unique doctrines put forth by the Book of Mormon was when I was thirteen years old. My social studies class was studying the conquest of Mexico by Cortez. The teacher explained that a handful of conquistadors were able to conquer the mighty Aztec nation, not because of superior power but because the Aztecs mistook Cortez for a bearded white man who had visited them centuries before and who had promised to return one day. That day, as I walked home from my bus stop, I pondered this, and the conclusion was given to me that the bearded white man for whom the Aztecs waited was none other than Jesus Christ. When this thought settled upon my mind, I felt assured that it was true. It was, in fact, a conclusion that struck me with such force that it was easily recalled at later times.

I have always been proud of my American Indian descent, even though it is very slight. Therefore, stories, documentaries, and anything else dealing with the Indians have been very interesting to me. It was because of this interest that I read a book by Anna Lee Waldo called Sacajawea (Avon Books, 1978), a novel about the Indian woman who led Lewis and Clark on their expedition. The book spoke of a tribe of Indians that performed a ceremony in which boys became men. This ceremony was performed by placing skewers through the muscles of the chest or of the back, tieing ropes to the skewers, and raising the boy off the ground until his body weight caused the skewers to tear through the muscles. This was done in similitude of another man who had been lifted up a long time before. As I read this, I felt that it was another piece of evidence that my conclusion was true, that Jesus Christ did visit America.

I cannot remember whether I read Sacajawea before or after I received the Book of Mormon, and I don't really think it matters. I didn't read the Book of Mormon when I first received it. Perhaps that was because the contents weren't really explained to me. I received it from a very close friend named Mara, whom I had been dating for several months. I knew she was a Mormon, but we seldom discussed the Church. When we did discuss it, we spoke of its organizational structure or spoke of the gospel in general terms—things I already knew and believed. A peaceful feeling blanketed me when we talked. These discussions seem to have been the catalyst for her giving me a Book of Mormon. When I opened it, I was furious—and I didn't know why (a common reaction to the book). But I kept the book for two reasons: (1) it came from one of my best friends—one of the few people in the world who showed love for me and (2) it came with her testimony written in it.

When I first received the Book of Mormon, I read Mara's testimony and was moved that she gave it to me because she wanted me to have an opportunity for eternal life. Then I read the testimony of the Prophet Joseph Smith as it is published at the beginning of the Book of Mormon. I say, "I read it," but "watched it" would be more accurate, for the images in my mind were clear and precise. How I wish I had understood, then, that the book is the scripture from the ancient Indians. But I did not—and the images from my reading did not compel me to continue to read. Therefore, the Book of Mormon went on a shelf.

Later, Mara and I stopped seeing each other, completed high school, and went to college. She went to BYU while I went first to Colorado State and then to Texas Tech. The Book of Mormon tagged along in these travels but was never touched. While I was at Texas Tech, however, events did occur that eventually led me to read the Book of Mormon.

The first event was an experience that is so sacred to me that I will only mention that I learned that Jesus Christ is the King of Kings. I was also commanded to find the truth—the word of God—with a promise I would know it when I found it. From this experience I gained the incentive and desire to find out all I could about God and what He wanted me to do.

During my search, I again found myself perusing statements about ancient American beliefs. My English class required me to write a research paper, so I obtained permission from the teacher to write a comparison/contrast paper on mythologies of the world. While reading about those of South America, I found a myth that spoke of a virgin who had conceived miraculously and brought forth a mighty leader. I was impressed with how closely the myth resembled some aspects of the story of Mary, the mother of Jesus Christ. I treasured this up in my heart.

My time at Texas Tech was also a time of learning to listen to and to understand God. Dreams that taught me and inspired me became frequent. One of the more common elements in the dreams was spending time with Mara. In 1984 I began to feel an intense desire to see her again. Fortunately summer break soon arrived and I had my opportunity. While we dated, I felt my old feelings return, and I strongly desired to ask Mara to be my wife (a situation that would never be). She refused my proposal because I could not take her to the temple. She wanted me to join the Church but not because of her—and I couldn't join it for any other reason than that I believed joining it was the correct thing to do. This experience of a rejected marriage proposal gave me the desire to find out if the Mormon church was true.

When I went home that night I pondered the events of the day and suddenly remembered that Mara had given me a Book of Mormon. I determined to read it, but first I had to find it. I vaguely recalled seeing it when I had packed to come home, so it was most likely buried under a pile of books that were still in boxes. Much to my surprise, I found it in the first box I looked in, face up, and under only one other book. Shrugging off this coincidence, I commenced to read. As I progressed through the Book of Mormon, I learned of the origins of a group of ancient Americans. I grew to love them. I mourned when they suffered and exulted when they were righteous. I learned how God deals with His children. And as I read I hungered to learn more. I was compelled to read on.

I met friends. Alma taught me how to experiment with the word and be born again. Ammon showed me how to serve. I wept—rather, sobbed—with joy as Ammon praised his God while reflecting on the joy of his labors. Then, after I had watched a people waver between righteousness and wickedness, I received a confirmation of the truth I had learned as a thirteen-year-old. I heard my King, the Lord Jesus Christ, speak to my new friends, telling them that they were his other sheep and members of the house of Israel. Jesus Christ did visit America.

Through this whole experience, three emotions filled my heart. First, I felt a love I had been seeking since my childhood, a love I had lost from some time before I could remember but which I had felt briefly from time to time. Second, I felt a peace that filled me and caused all problems and difficulties to melt into insignificance. Third, I felt a joy beyond anything I ever dreamed possible, yet which did not compare to what would come later.

I began to get hints in my teens of truths I would later know. These hints came from temporal and spiritual sources. Now I have the knowledge that can come only from purely spiritual sources. I am grateful for faithful members of the Church and committed missionaries who helped me to understand the meaning of the beautiful feelings I had while reading the Book of Mormon.
