Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

We Felt an Intense and Indefinable Excitement

Noel Owen, Anglesey, Wales

It started in the fall of 1964 when we first met Lamond and Marta Tullis—the first Latter-day Saints we had ever met. Pat and I, together with our baby daughter Sian, had travelled from our home in Wales to the east coast of the USA, where I was to take up a research fellowship in the chemistry department at Harvard University. We had rented an apartment on the outskirts of Boston and, on our return from a six-week-long journey by car wherein we had travelled the country from the east coast to the west coast and back again, we were very interested to find that a new family had moved into a neighboring apartment. The car license plates of our new neighbors told us that they were from Utah, and we were anxious to meet them and hopeful that they might prove friendly.

It was not until the following day that I had an opportunity to meet the newcomers. Upon exchanging a few introductory words with Lamond, I learnt that they were "Mormons." I remember exclaiming that that was interesting and that they would have to tell us more about themselves, since the only thing that I knew about Mormons was that they were, or had been, polygamous—and this was largely gleaned from the Western tales of Zane Grey! On my return from work the following evening, I learnt that Pat had met and talked with Marta. The initial conversation had proceeded along those so-familiar lines: "Would you like to come over for a cup of tea?"

Marta replied with a smile, "I'm afraid that I don't drink tea."

"Oh, then come for a cup of coffee!"

"I'm afraid that I don't drink coffee either, but I'd love to come over and visit with you anyway."

We have laughed many times together as we recalled that first meeting. But it was the beginning of a great and lasting friendship with Lamond and Marta Tullis. We spent many hours together as two young families would, and we plied them with questions about what was to us this fascinating new religion. I well remember how we followed the logical development of Lamond's argument so far, only to find a gap that their faith could bridge but over which our skepticism could not venture. For example, we found it difficult to accept that Joseph Smith had seen our Heavenly Father and His Son Jesus Christ and had been taught by the angel Moroni. It is also probably true that at this time we did not feel the need of changing our religious beliefs. I cannot remember any pressure coming from them, only an occasional outburst of frustration from Marta, "If only you could see things as we see them!"

At the same time, however, we recognized that there was something very special about the Tullis family, something that we had not experienced before. We were particularly impressed with the way Lamond and Marta were bringing up their two boys—the strong family love and respect was obvious, but kindly discipline also played a part, and the whole family relationship was one that we realized was excellent. We were quite amazed that Michael (a three-year-old) could pray aloud quite unselfconsciously with his family.

During our year together, Lamond and Marta gave us two books. One was a copy of the Book of Mormon and the other was a pictorial book called Meet the Mormons. We enjoyed looking at the pictures, but sadly the Book of Mormon remained on our bookshelves largely unread for the next eight years. After returning to North Wales, we would see the missionaries from time to time, but though we always made them welcome in our home, we were convinced that they could not tell us anything about the Church and the Book of Mormon that we did not already know.

In 1972, while I was working for six months at the University of British Columbia, we travelled to Utah to see the Tullis family again, and we visited Temple Square, where we were impressed in a spiritual way by the Visitors' Center and all that we saw. On our return to Britain, we were once again contacted by the missionaries and once more found ourselves falling into the same pattern of extending hospitality and conversation without commitment on our part.

Then two things changed. The first was that the Lord sent to our area of Wales one of the best prepared and most tenacious missionaries that he could possibly have chosen, and the second was that Pat and I began to realize that our four children were growing up without the religious foundation of regular church attendance. Pat and I had been unable to agree on the question of which church we should frequent, although we were both agreed that church attendance should be a family affair. Consequently our contact with formal religious groups was somewhat sporadic. After being visited by Elder Mickelson and his companions for several months and after continuously frustrating their attempts to complete a single discussion by constantly asking innumerable questions, we eventually decided that we would start listening to the elders' discussions without interruption and that when the discussions were completed we would make our decision.

In hindsight, I now realize that this is how the Holy Ghost works. This young missionary humbled us sufficiently to have us kneel down in our living room as a family and pray together. At the same time, he pleaded with us to commit ourselves to read parts of the Book of Mormon. I remember very clearly that after reading from the Book of Mormon one day, I turned to Pat and said, "You know, the more I read this book, the more I'm beginning to think that it's true!" It was not long before we both felt this same remarkable feeling; at last we had grasped it! With this remarkable change in our attitude, it seemed no longer difficult to believe in Joseph Smith's first vision and in the translation of the gold plates. The social implications of accepting the restored gospel of Jesus Christ were still to be a slight problem, especially to Pat, who loved her "cup of tea," but even these soon lost their apparent importance in the light of this exciting new truth that we had "discovered."

I was baptized in an ancient-looking font at a house that had been converted into a meetingplace about forty miles from our home, and two weeks later, after receiving the Aaronic Priesthood, I baptized Pat and our two oldest children. At that time, the Church in our area of North Wales consisted of a very small and scattered congregation of members, most of whom, however, had very strong testimonies of the gospel. In the early days and weeks following our baptism, we felt an intense and indefinable excitement, and I clearly recall driving to work one morning, glancing at the people I passed and thinking that they must be able to tell that I was now LDS, merely from looking at me. As well as the joy that we felt, this period was not without its challenges, and it was our testimony of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon that often kept us going.
