Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

As I Lay There, Holding the Book in My Hands, I Knew

Mark P. Rasmussen, Bountiful, Utah

I had always considered myself as basically a good person, a strong believer in God and Jesus Christ and His teachings. I was a believer in the Holy Bible, and having grown up in Bountiful, Utah, and having a wife and children of the LDS faith, I had a high regard for the LDS Church and its members. I lived in the Bountiful 40th Ward, where I had developed many friendships with its members.

Anyway, I suddenly began to realize that I had done very little in my adult life to improve myself as a person (spiritually), and I felt that "okay" was no longer good enough. I wanted to, and did, begin to be more supportive and involved with my family's Church activities. Reflecting back now, I remember something that my father had said to me one evening during our deer hunt in the late fall of 1986. I don't recall how the subject came up, but Dad said that not only should I support my family in the Church but I should go and participate and be with them. He indicated that I was not being a good example. This message stayed with me and, I am sure now, had a great deal to do with my desire to improve myself, even though I didn't realize it at the time.

During the last few months of 1987, I gradually became more active in Church activities with my family. Then one day my wife, Lynne, asked me if I would attend our ward family night at the Visitors' Center at Temple Square with her and the children. I said yes and felt quite good about it at the time, seeing it as an opportunity to spend some time with my family doing something that I knew meant a lot to them. However, as the day drew near for this event, I became more and more tentative about it until by that evening, when time to go approached, I was totally irritated that I had ever agreed to go—so irritated, in fact, that I found something to argue with my wife about. I had such a bad attitude and disposition that she finally left without me. But then, she tells me now, she realized that it was very important that I should go with them, so important that she felt that it was Satan trying to keep me from going. She turned around and came home, hoping that I would still go with them. She was not about to allow Satan to have his way.

As soon as my wife left without me, I felt terrible, knowing that how I had been acting was wrong and not knowing why I had even acted that way. I wasn't sure what to do and was feeling pretty low, so I was really glad but very humble when she returned and asked me again if I would still go with them. I agreed, and we left together. When we arrived at the Visitors' Center, I felt better, but I was really still not very interested in what we were going to do. I think I was getting a little irritated again, wondering why I had agreed to do this. But as I began to see familiar faces, my attitude softened. Then we began to look around the center because we were a little early for the meeting to begin. I wandered up the spiral ramp and at the top suddenly I was standing before a huge statue of Jesus Christ, the Christus. Words alone cannot describe the feeling that overwhelmed me as I looked up at my Savior's image, but it was almost as if He was there, and His spirit truly was.

I felt shame and sorrow for the things that I had done wrong and for the wrongs that had been done to Him, and yet I felt enlightened, full of hope and joy for the future. Finally, with tear-filled eyes, I turned and walked back down the ramp, avoiding others as I collected my emotions.

I was very attentive for the remainder of the evening. Later, I found out by a sign or some literature that was passed out, that one could obtain a free copy of the Book of Mormon as he or she left the Center. I knew immediately that I wanted to do that and kept it in my mind until just before we were ready to leave. I told my wife, and I went to get my copy of the Book of Mormon. Even though I now had a desire to read the Book of Mormon, I don't know why I felt I needed my own copy. There are many copies in my home and had been for the almost seventeen years Lynne and I had been married. I had never had a desire to read the Book of Mormon before, but now I did, and I desired to have my own copy.

As we drove home, I reflected on the presentations and exhibits we had seen at the Visitors' Center. As we discussed them as a family, I am sure my family could sense my change of attitude. But I did not tell them how excited I really was or how anxious I was to get home and begin to read my Book of Mormon. I was afraid of building up their hopes and did not want to feel pressured, so I didn't say much about my feelings for a long time, even after I had been reading the Book of Mormon for a couple of months.

As I prepared for bed that evening, I lay down in my bed, propped my head up on my pillows and prepared to begin reading my Book of Mormon. As I lay there holding the book in my hands, I knew, even before I opened it, that it was true. I was about to discover the truth. I also had a very strange feeling, which affected me very deeply, that I had always known that the Book of Mormon was true. I had silently prayed to my Father in Heaven to let me know the truth of what I was about to read, and my prayer was answered before I began. I believe now that one reason I did resist reading the Book of Mormon, as others have and will, is that we all know that its teachings are true, and if we read them, we will be obligated to abide by them.

In the months that followed, I pursued my study of the Book of Mormon, reading as often and for as long as possible, always not wanting to put it down. I also had the opportunity to attend with my wife weekly study classes on some of the basic beliefs of the Church at the home of Bishop David Lewis.

After frequent visits by my home teacher, David Hansen, my interest began to grow. Then Brother Newell Bryson, one of the stake missionaries, asked if I would be interested in having the regular full-time missionaries come with him to teach me. After the third lesson, the missionaries asked me if I would be willing to be baptized and set a date for it. I knew that I had to make a final commitment to myself and to Jesus Christ in order to continue to improve in my life and progress spiritually. I made that commitment and was baptized on August 27, 1988.

I continue to study the Book of Mormon, reading it through now for the second time. As I become accustomed to being a member of the Church and as I struggle to progress as a spirit and a person, my enthusiasm for my responsibilities as a member may waver a bit, but my knowledge of the truth, of the Book of Mormon, the gospel of Jesus Christ, will always be immovable. And I know that if I will read and study and ponder its teachings and pray, I will continue to progress toward my goal of returning to my Father in heaven.
