Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

Cousin Elsie Put the Book into My Hands

Dorothy E. Watkins Watkins, Nottingham, England

I was born in Nottingham, England, of goodly parents: James Willie (Will) Watkins and Eva Charlotte Dexter Watkins, on January 18, 1911— their second child. I have truly loved the Lord since I was a little child, and I acknowledge His hand upon me throughout my life. I was brought up in the Church of Christ, going to Sherwood Street Chapel every Sunday with my parents and brothers, with Sunday School in the afternoon. I always loved to be there.

When I was fifteen, a Welsh evangelist preached at our chapel, which greatly moved me, inviting us to give our hearts to the Lord and come unto Him. At the end they played "Just as I am, without one plea—but that Thy blood was shed for me—O Lamb of God I come!" I was fighting to hold the tears back but could not, and I sprang out of my seat and ran down the aisle to the front, tears streaming down my face. Then I turned and saw that my cousin and dearest lifelong friend, Joyce Rest, and her brother Philip, two years younger, had followed me. I was so glad; and the congregation shouted, "Hallelujah! Praise the Lord!" Two days later, we were all baptized by my uncle Percy White, husband to Mother's sister, Grace Dexter.

The first persons in the Dexter family to join the Lord's church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, were my grandfather Dexter's sister Annie Dexter Noble and her daughter Julia Troward Noble, who were taught by two Amer

ican missionaries. Later, Annie's husband, Abraham Noble, was baptized and also their other daughters, Dora, Hilda and Betty (twins), and Elsie Marian, the youngest.

They all emigrated to Utah in 1912. Great-aunt Annie and Uncle Abe visited England when I was a child to try to convert their relatives. They came to our home, and their visit was the first time I heard of Mormonism. Because of polygamy, my mother was bitterly opposed to it. My dear father was a very religious and kind man and loved the Holy Bible, and they had long discussions, but there were no conversions except one, Annie's sister Elizabeth Dexter (Aunt Lizzie), who emigrated to Utah and married an American.

The years passed, and then came World War II. At the outbreak of war on October 9, 1939, I gave up my job to join the Civil Defense as an ambulance driver and in 1941 became a convoy driver in the Women's Military Services. I was demobilized in December, 1945, and tried to pick up the threads of the life I had left in 1939. One never-to-be-forgotten day, dear Cousin Elsie Marian Noble McCune, Great-aunt Annie's daughter and my mother's first cousin, came to visit us at the end of her mission in Wales. We had a nice meal and visit together, and I felt her loving spirit. Before she left, Cousin Elsie put a Book of Mormon into my hands and said, "Dorothy, if I leave you this Book of Mormon, will you read it?" And I replied, "Yes, I certainly will read it!"

I did read it—and loved it—and often said to Mother, who sat with me at the fireside, reading the deaths in the Nottingham Evening Post, "Oh! Do read this, Mother!" but she wouldn't and finally said she was not interested.

As I read the Book of Mormon, I knew that it was true, just as much as the Bible, and was another testament of the Lord Jesus Christ. Even so, I put to the test the promise found in Moroni 10:4-5. One night I knelt at my bedside and asked God, my Heavenly Father, in the name of Christ, to confirm to me that the Book of Mormon was true.

I fell asleep but later suddenly awakened and sat straight up in bed, wide awake. Immediately, I felt an outpouring of the Holy Ghost upon me, enveloping my whole being, and felt filled with Light and Truth. It was wonderful! With joy I cried out, "Yes, it is true! The Book of Mormon is true!"

Later on, I was given the gospel discussions by two young missionaries from Utah. I drank my last cup of tea and my last cup of coffee, having learned the Word of Wisdom from the Lord, accepted the law of tithing, and was baptized into the Lord's church on a terribly foggy Saturday night at Nottingham Branch Chapel on January 14, 1961. Elder Hill baptized me, and I came up from the water full of joy and feeling cleansed. The chapel was a double bay-windowed house named Trentmore, on Musters Road, West Bridgeford, Nottingham. Its center wall had been removed, and the baptismal font was underneath the floorboards.

Derek and Muriel Cuthbert and their children were members, and what terrific leadership was theirs. Muriel could "move mountains"! About three weeks after I was baptized, dear Bishop Albert Green, now deceased, called me to be first counselor in the Relief Society presidency.

What a debt of gratitude I owe to dear Cousin Elsie Noble McCune, who placed the Book of Mormon in my hands, leading me into the Lord's church! Eternal blessings are mine. Both Elsie and Clarence have been instruments in the hands of the Lord in bringing to pass these blessings.

When I left the grey shores of England that snowy day, January 20, 1969, I knew not what the future held. I little knew that on March 1, 1972, I would be married in the Salt Lake Temple for time and all eternity to none other than United States Senator Arthur Vivian Watkins.

But I was! And it was the Lord who brought us together. This I know without a shadow of a doubt. It is a very precious and treasured story. I praise the Lord for all His loving guidance and care of me throughout my life.
