Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

The Woman in Siberia Asked, "Are You a Believer?"

Barbara Allen Kovalenko, Novosibirsk, USSR

On a recent trip to the Soviet Union, my husband, Gene, and I spent a few days in the Siberian city of Novosibirsk. There we were warmly welcomed and entertained by a group of people who had organized as citizen diplomats interested in promoting friendship with our people.

As we walked down a frosty street one day, leaving a Russian Orthodox church service in a dazzling, recently restored church, one of the ladies of the group, who reminded me of many of my Relief Society sisters, began talking to me in English. As it turned out, she is a linguist specializing in northern Siberian languages and English at the technical institute there. She soon asked me, "Are you a believer?" When I got over my surprise and said yes, she replied, "It is natural to believe; yes, yes, it is natural."

We had brought an extra Book of Mormon to Siberia, and I thought at once that I might have found the person to give it to. As we became better acquainted over the next couple of days, that seemed more and more the right thing to do. So when we were in her home one evening I asked her if she would like to have a book we in our culture hold very dear.

She said at first, "But you must not give away something so precious!"

After I assured her that I could easily get another copy, she said she would very much like to have it. I inscribed it for her and asked her to begin by reading Moroni 10:4. She held it reverently and said, "This will be our family book; we will pass it from generation to generation."

The next day I saw her again. She told me, "I have been looking at the book you gave me, and I can tell it is a book to read many times." She asked if I would write to her regularly, so now I have a wonderful correspondent in that far-off, beautiful land, someone who, in addition to being a new friend, has promised to tell me what she thinks about this testament of Jesus Christ.

Dear Barbara: January 18, 1989

. . . I read your book regularly. Strange as it may seem, I understand everything. But I don't keep all the events in my mind, so I reread some pages and enjoy it. Thank you. For me it's quite a new experience.

Galina Kurkin

Novosibirsk, USSR
