Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

Strange Burning Thrills Went All Over Me

Margaret Schutt, Henvey's Inlet, Lake Huron, Canada

The following account is from Papers of Margaret Schutt Gordon, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah. See also Claudia L. Bushman, "Maggie Becomes a Mormon," Ensign, March 1975, pages 64-65.

The first ten years of my parents' married life were spent in England, where [my father] followed his profession as a teacher. My mother's health being poor, it was thought necessary for her to take a trip or make some real change. It came to [Father's] notice that the Church Missionary Society of London sent men out as missionaries to foreign lands and paid them well. So he sent in an application and in due time it was decided to send him and his family to . . . Northern British Columbia, on the northwest coast bordering on Alaska. . . . So in July of 1876 we left England for a journey which changed the whole trend of our lives.

In the fall of 1877 a noted visitor came to [our village of] Metla Kahtla, Bishop Bompas, known for many years as the "Apostle of the North." He was the Church Missionary Society Clergyman in Northern Canada . . . and for forty years was the guiding star of Indians and white people alike. Being the only ordained Bishop in all the North Country at that time, he made long trips visiting other Missions and baptized and ordained such candidates who were worthy of the privilege. On these trips he and his Indian attendant had to walk, . . . carrying food and bedding about a distance of some thousand miles. It took six months to make the journey. Its perils and difficulties were great but this indomitable and faithful servant of the Master, with no object other than to do His service, spent a lot of his time in such journeyings. . . .

The Bishop and Mission Staff felt some system of spelling should be evolved of the Indian language and translations made and written in that, for their study and learning. So my father was given that task and because I so thoroughly knew the language in all of its system he used me to assist. . . . I would carefully syllabicate each word and help choose the spelling most suitable, then my father would write both English and Indian words, and by degrees we had the whole working language usable for printing.

[In 1882 my father] decided he would go East and seek his fortune in political fields, so we took passage . . . for San Francisco, . . . from there taking the train to Salt Lake City, . . . [which we reached] in July 1882. We had been all anticipation of our visit with our unknown relatives. . . . We were guests of Uncle and Aunt Fewson for a little more than six very pleasant months. In the late summer I started school at Rowland Hall, an exclusive [Protestant] school for girls. At the same time [my cousins] were going to the Deseret University. . . . Joseph, going about the same time I did, would often walk with me to my school and I recall how afraid I was anyone there would find out I had Mormon relations. He didn't care, but would fix me a nice lunch to take, a nice little basket, with a jar of peaches and cream, sandwiches and cake, such a feast. I recall the wonderful garden they had, the full half of the city block.

In February we went East [to Montreal, and] Father tried to make the political connections which had been promised him. . . . This never materialized [and] he had to look for employment, and after much searching had to take a school teacher job on Henvey's Inlet, Georgian Bay, Lake Huron. . . . While in Montreal, when I was seventeen, I had been confirmed a full member of the Church of England by Archbishop Bond and so was eligible to take the sacrament. I had always been a religious girl. My nature is spiritual, so I was proud and happy to receive that ordinance, and I can remember I felt quite sorry for my Mormon cousins in Salt Lake and wrote something to that effect, expressing my pride in my church. Joseph wrote back, I couldn't be as proud as he was, for he was a deacon in his church and no one need be sorry for him.

I think it was in April 1885 that a strange desire came to me, to learn something of Mormonism. I didn't like the idea at all. Brigham Young, who I was taught to think of as a wicked, immoral man, and polygamy kept coming to my mind, but in spite of my objections the idea persisted stronger than ever: "Find out about Mormonism." There was no one I could talk to, no one with whom I could discuss this strange and insistent urge. So I wrote to my cousin Fewson [Smith] in Salt Lake, saying I would like to learn something of his beliefs. Would he send me something to read? Immediately came a letter from him and some tracts, "Spenser's Letters," discussions between Orson Spenser and a minister. Every word I read was truth to me. . . . Fewson had written, "If you read this to scorn as you did here, I'll send you no more. If you are interested and want more, I'll send it." I wrote him, "From what Orson Spenser says there is not a doubt in my mind. Your Joseph Smith was a true prophet and Mormonism is the truth. Send me more." So, quickly came back the Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants. My parents viewed with amusement my interest in the subject, thought it just a girlish whim. But deep in my soul was coming a knowledge nothing could take from me. I really wanted to know for sure what I firmly believed, that I had found the truth.

I decided to read the Book of Mormon first, so taking it in my hand I went into my little bedroom and, still holding it, knelt down and asked my Father, if Mormonism was really true and Joseph Smith a true prophet, to reveal it to me as I read the book. I sat down and started to read, and immediately strange burning thrills went all over my body. At first I was afraid and then a peace came over me, and all the while I read, those burning electric thrills stayed with me until I laid the book down. The next afternoon, when ready to start reading, I again took the book to my room and again prayed that if it was true I could be shown clearly. For three weeks I read each day, asking the same blessing, not realizing that I had [in my hands] the greatest converter of all to teach me. And every time I picked it up after praying would come those electric burning thrills, which I soon recognized must be part of my teaching. I never mentioned them to the folks. They never knew of the wonderful experiences I was having all to myself or how my Father was teaching me the true gospel. As I reached the end of the book, filled with the wonderful Spirit it possesses, I came to the 10th chapter of Moroni, 4 and 5:

"And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

"And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things."

As I read these words, my eyes were fully opened. I gave a shout. I knew, then, what had been thrilling and burning my whole body. It was the promised Spirit which was testifying to my soul. Without being told, I had done just what Moroni said. I had asked my father in the name of his Son to reveal unto me the truth and he did just that, and I fully knew it. I cannot describe the joy I felt. It was beyond expression. I knew then and have never doubted since, that the gospel is true and Joseph Smith a prophet of the Lord.

That spring I got my mother to read. Father would not do anything with it. She studied and we discussed it and she also received a testimony of its truth. She did not have any noticeable manifestation as I did, but she believed, and the truth came to her. My little sister also believed it. Then, of course, as there was no one we could talk to or learn from, the spirit of gathering came to us. We wanted to go to Salt Lake and be baptized. Father said that was not possible. He had nothing to do there and would not consider it at all. We thought and prayed hard. Early in the summer Mother became very ill with dysentery. . . . She was delirious and in her ravings would say, "If we only could go to Salt Lake and be baptized," and I can still see my father kneeling by her bed—crying—and saying if you will only get well you shall go to Salt Lake or where else you wish. She did, and then commenced plans. Some property father had inherited in England was sold and that means was used. . . . It was a beautiful early morning in June when we left Henvey's Inlet for the last time. Quite a lot of luggage and a little sad at losing our pets, but all anticipation of our future, in which we would go to Salt Lake and join the Church.
