Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

I Felt I Ought to Read Such a Book with a Bare Head

Karl Ivar Sandberg, Gettysburg, South Dakota

The following account is from Our Dad, a compilation by Sandberg family members. See also Gerald E. Jones, "A South Dakota Swede and the Book of Mormon," Ensign, September 1976, pages 19-20.

The first time I heard of the Mormons was in 1923. I was then studying with a friend of mine and was reading a book about western traveling. In this book was a short account, perhaps a page or two, telling about the Mormons. I asked this friend of mine what kind of people are they? He said that they believed like the Israelites of old in giving tithes, etc., and that they had a book that they had found buried on the Atlantic Coast, where some Israelites that had visited this country long ago had buried it.

I started farming in 1923 and was batching it alone most of the time. In the winter of 1931 I read some books that made me very much interested in religion; in fact, by the end of that year I was firmly convinced of the divinity of Christ and had experienced a true repentance. But it seemed the more I studied the Bible and the more I listened to the different ministers, the more confused I would get. I could not accept the teachings of any church, for they seemed not to teach according to the Bible.

One day I met a Lutheran minister at one of my neighbors'. We discussed religion for about twelve hours. This was the first time I had ever really talked to a minister. I especially tackled him upon the subject of baptism, as it seemed to me the Bible taught baptism by immersion, plain enough for any one to understand. He offered at length to take me out and dip me in the farmer's water tank, but by now, I had lost all confidence in him.

In the spring of 1932 the idea came to me that if I studied the heathen religions, perhaps I would find something that would be better than the teachings of some of the religions I had studied. So with this in mind I went to the free library in Gettysburg, South Dakota, sometime in March 1932 and asked for the Koran. The librarian told me they did not have the book but she would send to the state library and get it. As I was about to leave the librarian said, "We still have a religious book you have not read, the Book of Mormon. A man here in town tried to read it; he found it so dull he went to sleep but perhaps you would like it." I said, "I have heard about the Mormons but their religion is of little importance. I want to study the leading heathen religions first."

As I was leaving the building the thought came to me that if I was to study all the heathen religions (I considered the Mormon a heathen religion) I would have to study Mormonism sooner or later, so why not study it now while waiting for the Koran? So, with this in mind I returned and told the librarian I wanted the Book of Mormon. She told me I ought to read a book by the name of Brigham Young first, then it would be easier for me to understand the Book of Mormon. So I told her to give me both.

As I read Brigham Young, it seemed to me the writer had the intention of speaking as much evil of the person as he could. Many places I found where the writer contradicted previous statements in the book. This made me lose confidence in the truthfulness of his writings.

Having finished the book I started on the Book of Mormon, and naturally I felt I had started to read a book of fiction. I had not read many pages before I discovered I had found a most remarkable book and the tears started to run down my cheeks and the most sweet spirit seemed to be present. I may here mention that it was customary with me as I worked around the place that perhaps several times a day if the work was not rushing, I would run in the house and read for a while. If I read fiction, I did not bother to take my cap off, but if I read the Bible, I would remove my cap, as I considered it a sacred book. I had my cap on as I started to read the Book of Mormon, but before long I felt a man ought to read such a book with a bare head.

As I remember it I read the book in about three days and it seemed to have the sweetest spirit with it and as far as I could see the book could be true, but yet I had the feeling that by and by I would see where the book would contradict itself. I thought the book so remarkable I took it to a religious neighbor of mine and told him to read the book, but that I would have to return it to the library in three days. I felt my neighbor would be very enthusiastic about the book, but when I returned in three days, I found him scoffing at the book, saying it was all made up with a lot of names borrowed from the Bible. I returned the books to the library. All summer I often thought of the book, and yet I could see nowhere that the book contradicted itself or the Bible.

That year my brother was working for me and one Saturday evening in the fall as he was preparing to go to Gettysburg, I told him to go up to the library and tell the librarian I wanted the Book of Mormon. The next morning being Sunday morning, as I got up I saw the book lying on the kitchen table. I started to read as soon as I had my stock fed, and that night before I went to bed I had read the Book of Mormon through. I was more impressed with the book than ever. I read the book through once more before I returned it to the library in two weeks and by then I knew that it was true.

As I returned the book I told the librarian to write to the state library and tell them to send all the books they had on Mormonism. The answer came back that they had no such books, but they sent the address of the Deseret Book Store in Salt Lake City and told me I could get some books there.

In the following months I sent for many L.D.S. books and as I see it now I am sure I was inspired of the Lord to order the books I did. Naturally after I had read some books I had numberless questions I wanted answers to. I must say that the Spirit of the Lord revealed many things to me which I in later study found substantiated by the authorities of the church.

The year 1934 was a crop failure and in September I hired a man to take care of my cattle for the winter and started out in my car alone for Salt Lake City to be baptized and stay there for the winter. On the third day I arrived in Coleville, Utah, just inside the state line, and as it was getting dark, I decided to stay there for the night and drive into Salt Lake the next morning. Being I was in Utah, the thought naturally came to me that there ought to be some Mormons there, for up to this time I had knowingly never seen a Mormon. So I went into a restaurant and ordered my supper and watched the people closely to see if I could pick out one that was a Mormon. I may say I felt I wanted to see a Mormon rather badly for in my heart there was a great love for the Saints. . . .

The next morning I drove in to Salt Lake City and the first thing I knew I was driving north on the west side of the temple block so I parked my car there and walked in through the West Gate (I had seen pictures of Temple Block in the books I had read) and this being Saturday they were baptizing in the bap

tistry under the Tabernacle. The first man I met was the door watch and he told me I could not come in there as they were baptizing. (The man later became a dear friend of mine.) I told him I had come there to ask to join the Mormon Church. He told me to go up and see the guide that was talking to a group of tourists in front of the museum. I had a hard time to keep my emotions under control. I was so happy to be there and the most wonderful spirit rested over me.

I followed the group of tourists until they were dismissed inside of the Bureau of Information, then I stepped up to the guide and told him I wanted to join the Church. He looked at me rather surprised and after talking to me for about half a minute he told me to go with him to see Brother Perry, the Temple Block Mission President. . . . After a while Brother Perry said I could be baptized any time but being it was Saturday he asked if I would wait until Monday. Then he took the guide I had contacted and said, Brother Christensen, it will be your duty to find Brother Sandberg a good hotel and take him to one of the chapels in the morning. I spent a delightful day on Temple Block listening to the guides explaining the gospel to the tourists but under a great emotional stress, being so happy. My guide took me to the Twentieth Ward chapel Sunday morning, and being it was to be conference next week, they had put the Fast Sunday one week ahead. So it was fast meeting I first attended, and there I bore my testimony of the gospel in front of the whole congregation, after which my guide told of my conversion. How I rejoiced to hear the Saints bear their testimonies. I knew then why I had a great love for the Saints in my heart. I was at last among real brothers and sisters.

I was baptized the next Monday, being the first of October 1934.

I stayed in Salt Lake City until the 14th of February next spring, working a few days in a packing plant, but I spent by far most of my time on Temple Block visiting with the guides and tourists and attending church Sundays. I also attended night school. I was ordained an elder before I left Salt Lake City in the spring, and needless to say I had gained a better understanding of the gospel and the Mormon people.
