Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

The Fifth Time Through I Saw Christ's Mission

Paull Hobom Shin, Seoul, South Korea

I was born in Korea, and when the Korean Conflict began in 1950, I fled south to escape the communist invasion. There I met the American military and obtained a position to work as a houseboy, which I continued for the next three years. Because I was a displaced person, I spent most of my childhood fending for myself. During that time I thought a lot about the pain of life. I was keenly interested in and constantly searched for a meaning to my life that would transcend the suffering and make it all worthwhile.

When I first met the American soldiers who were sacrificing their lives to help Korea, I felt that surely I could learn from them how to find happiness and peace. Very soon I became discouraged because of their conduct. Their heavy drinking, smoking, profanity, and generally unloving attitude toward Koreans did not seem to bring them happiness, and it certainly did not uplift me. One soldier, however, stood out from among the rest. He was different. He did not smoke, drink, or profane. In addition, he was friendly toward everyone. He even displayed a warm and loving disposition toward Koreans, often calling them brothers and sisters. I was so impressed with his life and example that I decided I wanted to become like him.

One day, I asked him why he was so different from the other soldiers, and he told me that he was a Mormon. Naturally I did not know anything about Mormonism, so I asked him to teach me. He gave me some preliminary background on the Church and then offered me a Book of Mormon. Now I am sure he did not fully realize the limits of my language ability—

or education for that matter—when he asked me to read this book. Despite the fact that I could not read English, I admired Dr. Paull so much I determined to read the book at all costs. I took a quick ABC lesson from a fellow Korean, purchased an English-Korean dictionary, and started to read. I would read one word in the Book of Mormon, then I would refer to the dictionary for the meaning. I would write each word and its meaning down in a notebook. When I finished one sentence, I would try to translate the meaning with my own comprehension. At that time, we were not allowed light in the combat zone, so each night, even in the sweltering heat of the Korean summer, I would cover myself with a blanket to block out the light and read the Book of Mormon with a flashlight. It took me seven months to read the book once completely through.

When I finished that first time, I did not really understand what I had read. Mostly I had only connected with the continual war stories. I asked Dr. Paull how he had found the meaning of life in a book of unending war stories. He replied that perhaps I had missed the real point of the book and had better read it again! Because I could feel its importance to him, and I wanted to be like Dr. Paull, during the next three years I read the book five times, trying to penetrate its depth with my limited language and life experience. Each time I read I understood at a different, deeper level. Finally, the fifth time, I caught the vision of Christ's mission and His love for all people. I was so touched by my newfound understanding that I wanted to be baptized. In 1954 an American soldier baptized me and gave me the special gift of the Holy Ghost.

Dr. Paull, who had in the meantime returned home, adopted me and invited me to come live with him in the United States. I was eighteen when I joined my new family. Because I had had little formal education in Korea, I had to start with a GED test in order to receive a high school diploma. From a high school diploma to a Ph.D. was a long, hard road for me. During my educational struggles, I communicated constantly with the Lord, seeking His help and trying to discipline my life by practicing the principles I had learned from the lives of the prophets in the Book of Mormon. I was especially influenced by Nephi's strong faith and trust in the Lord and Alma's indefatigable courage in doing what is right. The Lord blessed my efforts so that I not only finished my education but also served a mission in Japan between 1957 and 1959. He has continued to bless my life with a wonderful family, material comforts, and many opportunities to serve both in His kingdom and in the world throughout the ensuing years.

Now, as a mission president in my native land of Korea, I continue to rely upon the verses in the Book of Mormon to inspire me and my missionaries to magnify our callings. I still find my greatest joy and the sustaining meaning of my life and its suffering in my testimony. Thirty-five years after my baptism, may I affirm to you with all my soul that the Book of Mormon is true, that God, our Eternal Father, loves all His children and that Jesus Christ is indeed our Savior and friend.
