Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

The Urge Grew Beyond My Ability to Resist

Johnnie Phillip Weatherley, Glasgow, Montana

I was born and raised as a Southern Baptist and even as a youth was very much aware of the Savior, who had a very special place in my heart. I was youth pastor in the Baptist church and spoke in several churches along the east coast. Friends and even pastors were encouraging me to go to school to be trained in the ministry. I felt inclined to follow this counsel, and when I started college I excelled in religion classes. My heart was behind the endeavor, but I felt something was wrong.

I was drafted while I was in college. The school had sent in my deferment papers, but the draft board never received them. So I joined the Air Force and received as my permanent duty station Glasgow Air Force Base, Montana. While stationed there in 1966, I was reintroduced to the Mormon church through a friend, Rick Rynearson, and his wife, Chris. I started receiving the missionary discussions. As I heard the discussions, many questions arose. These questions were answered by those young missionaries, even though these same questions had gone unanswered by ministers of several religions whom I had talked to. At the end of the discussions, I really wanted this new faith to be true, but I needed something more than just a desire for the Mormon church to be true.

At this time I was night supervisor in my duty section. At night, after completing my work, I started reading the pamphlets and literature that Rick's sister, Penny, had sent. At first the reading was in silence, but two other airmen under me requested that I read out loud, if for no other reason than to keep them awake until the shift was over. The more I read of the Book of Mormon, the more I wanted to read. People have told me it was hard for them to read the Book of Mormon because it was so dry and boring, but it held my interest. I could hardly put it down. Those two airmen who listened as I read were soon ready to join the Church, and they had not even had the missionary discussions.

I wanted the Church to be true because of the warmth that I felt when reading about it or when attending the Sunday meetings. But being stubborn, as I am, I had to have something specific to show me that it was the one I should follow and that the Baptist, Lutheran, Presbyterian, Jewish, or Catholic religions were not. I needed to know what made this church truer than the others that claimed to be the "true church." I felt that if the Book of Mormon was true, and Joseph Smith was really a prophet of the Lord, then I should put to the test the admonition of Moroni to ask God. If the Joseph Smith story was true and the Savior did visit Joseph as a young boy who followed his desires after reading the Bible, James 1:5—"If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him"—then why shouldn't I be given the assurance that the Mormon church was the one and only true Church?

As a little boy I had been taught to pray in the mornings, at meals, and at the end of the day as I knelt by the side of my bed. I had learned to pray for what I wanted and to thank Father for what I had received. I believed that if Father wanted me to have what I was praying for, then He would give it to me. If He did not want me to have it, then I would not get it. That was my relationship to the Savior: He was real but distant. I had never been taught to expect a direct answer to my prayers, and most assuredly I did not expect a visit from Him in person. Now, after having read and studied about Joseph Smith, I was ready to pray about it, and I expected an answer. After all, He promised to "give to all men liberally."

Glasgow Air Force Base is located in the northeast corner of Montana, just below the Canadian border, and is between two big Indian reservations, Wolf Point and Fort Peck. Since I was in the military, you can appreciate that I was not rich, so one of my two roommates and I pooled our money and purchased a used T.V., for which the total price was four dollars. The T.V. itself was all tubes, no transistors, and the case was made of metal. It usually took ten to fifteen minutes to warm up, and the first thing we got was sound. A few minutes later we got the picture.

My two roommates had planned to go to Wolf Point for the weekend, and I told them I was not feeling well. After trying to talk me into going anyway, they finally gave up and left me to myself. After I was alone, I knelt to offer supplication to my Father in heaven about the Church. I had decided to stay on my knees until I received an answer. I was not willing to accept a "burning in my bosom" for confirmation. I did not feel that I was requiring a sign from my Father, but I needed to know beyond a doubt for myself. I had been on my knees for approximately half an hour when I suddenly had the urge to get up and turn on the T.V. You can imagine that I tried to cast that thought aside. After all, here I was asking something that meant more to me than life itself, and I had the urge to turn on the T.V. Each time I forced it from my mind, it came back even stronger. Tears filled my eyes as I struggled with this urge. I wanted to get up and put my boot through the tube so I would no longer be tempted in that way. Finally the urge grew beyond my ability to resist, and with tears streaming down my face, I got off my knees and turned on the T.V. Instantly there was picture and sound. The picture on the screen was that of a temple built by an early civilization. That very picture was in the book I was reading, The Trial of the Stick of Joseph by Jack H. West. The tears rolling down my face were no longer tears of frustration but tears of joy. I listened to the program and saw more pictures, which were also in the books I had studied. After a few minutes I turned the T.V. off and lay on the bunk, exhausted.

When I awoke in the morning, everything was vivid in my mind, and I felt a newness that I had never experienced before. Yet Satan would not leave me alone or maybe I was just too stubborn, but the thought came to me that I had just dreamed it. I was sure that was not the case. Then I thought that maybe it was just a coincidence that that particular program just happened to be on while I was on my knees; and I just happened to get the urge to turn on the T.V., which urge I just happened to give in to; and it just happened that for some reason the T.V. worked instantly; and it just happened that the picture was one of the pictures in the book I was reading; and it just happened to fit in with my supplication to the Lord.

I really did not think it was just coincidence, but I also did not think that it would hurt to get a copy of the documentary so I could learn even more about this "early civilization." I went into town the next morning to the cable company and requested information about where I could write to obtain a copy of that documentary. I told the clerk the time, the channel, and what I had seen, because I did not know the name of the program or anything else about it. He checked the log and informed me that he had no listing showing any kind of a documentary during the weekend. He showed me the logbook that contained the programs. Nothing listed could be construed to have been what I had seen and heard. He then told me that sometimes the programs were preempted out of Billings, Montana. He gave me the address to write to so I could find out what program they might have put on instead of the one listed.

I left that office knowing that the Lord had answered my prayer. I received a letter approximately a week later from the main cable company in Billings, apologizing for not being able to help me but that they had no record of any documentary of the kind I described being on the air at the date and time I had stated.

Well, I don't need the Lord to hit me in the head with a bat or to be struck by lightning. I accepted His answer and was baptized December 28, 1966, in a little branch in Glasgow, Montana.
