Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

Lord, Please Let My People Believe This Book

Katherine Warren, Hartford, Connecticut

When I was living in Connecticut, I had an opportunity to meet the missionaries from the Church when they came by. That was in 1967. They gave me Joseph Smith's Testimony. I believed every word, and I wanted a copy of the Book of Mormon. I told a friend of mine about it. She had one from a garbage collector, who had taken it out of a lady's garbage because it looked like a Bible. The garbage man gave the book to a friend who belonged to my church. She didn't understand it because it looked like a Bible and it had scriptures in it, but it said, "The Book of Mormon." Several times she decided to throw it away, but she couldn't do it. I told her about Joseph Smith's Testimony. She was visiting me at the time. She said, "Katherine, I believe I have that Book of Mormon, and you can have it." After she went home that evening, she called and told me she had it. She brought it to me.

I started reading that book, and oh, it was some good! Before I got the book, there was something in my heart. The Lord was leading me to search. It was just something that was revealed to me. There was something else other than the Bible! When I got the Book of Mormon, that feeling left, and I knew that was what the Lord wanted me to have. I read it. One night I was reading the book of Third Nephi when Jesus visited the Nephites and told them how to baptize. I was then a member of the Church of Christ. They baptize in Jesus' name instead of "Father, Son, and Holy Ghost." I believed in that doctrine with all my heart at the time. I laid the book aside. I was in my bed, and everyone was sleep. It was quiet, and I used to read late. As I was lying on the bed pondering all of what I just read, I thought, "Jesus told them how to baptize, but these people took Acts 2:38 and baptized in the name of Jesus Christ." I laid the book aside and I said, "This is just something someone has written!"

As I lay upon the bed pondering on what I had read, I think I dozed off to sleep then. Something touched my hand, and it was powerful. I can't explain how it felt. It was just like electricity. It shocked me. I could hear a voice over my head speaking out. It was just like it was quoting the same scripture I had read. It said, "Believe all things." I felt like I was just nothing. I felt so little. I could feel the eyes of God just piercing my soul. It didn't say any more, but after it left off speaking to me, I could feel His eyes on me.

My aunt and I were living together. We had different rooms. She had her bedroom, and I had my bedroom. I heard her go into the bathroom. I was so glad to know that she was awake. When she went back into her room, I ran in there crying. I told her what happened. She told me, "Read it to me." I read it to her. She was all wrapped up in the church the same as I was. She said, "But his name is Jesus and you're supposed to be baptized in Jesus' name." I said, "No, Aunt Eva, Jesus told those Nephites to baptize in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost." She said, "But his name's Jesus." I said, "The Lord just told me to 'believe all things.' " We read that book until six o'clock that next morning. I didn't go back to sleep. It was time to go to work then. I told different ones at church about it, and they criticized it. But I still believed it. . . .

I brought my son home to New Orleans in 1967, and my daughter and I went home in 1968. We left our furniture with different friends. The Lord revealed to me to tell them, "Let's have a Bible class." This just came out, based on how large our family was. Some of my relatives came to my older sister Dorothy's house to welcome us back home. We were all talking about how large our family was. I said, "We should start a Bible class." Every last one of them agreed. "When are we going to start it?" "Next Sunday!" We started the Bible class.

I married my children's father, the man who broke my heart, and we moved. I used to go back every Sunday and teach in the Bible class. We used to go from house to house, teaching the Bible. I kind of introduced the Book of Mormon little by little. When the Lord revealed to me in Connecticut about this book, He revealed to me that everyone who rejects that book would be cast off at the last day. There is no way to be saved without the Book of Mormon. If you don't believe in the Book of Mormon, you just don't believe the Bible. I was careful about how I told them because I really prayed. My aunt and I prayed for them that morning. I said, "Aunt Eva, let's pray before we read." We prayed, and I told the Lord, "Please let my people believe this book when I introduce it to them." Some of them did; Heavenly Father was with me all the way.

After I moved, I started going to the Church of God in Christ. I wanted to find the Church of Jesus Christ, so I looked in the telephone directory. I found the ward, and I started going there. I investigated the Church for about three years. They were prejudiced in that ward. They didn't want any blacks. There weren't any blacks there. Yet I felt good when I went. I kept going, even though nobody ever said anything to me. I didn't even know they had missionaries there. I had met the missionaries when I was in Connecticut. I used to go there and sit and listen.

It was 1970 when I first started going there. I moved down here in 1969, and it was 1970, 1971, and 1972 that I went back and forth to the ward. I didn't know how to go about joining the Church until I wrote to Salt Lake City. I wrote to President Kimball. He sent my letter to the New Orleans ward. They sent the missionaries out to me with my letter. They told me they had my letter and asked me if there was anything they could do for me. I told them I wanted to become a member of the Church, and I wanted to know how to go about it. They said, "It's hard to become a member of this Church. Have you heard what Joseph Smith said, that it wasn't time for the blacks as yet?" They said something like, "If the blacks come to us, we will receive them. We can't cast them away."

They said, "But we would like to teach you." They used to come. They asked me all the questions. I knew all the answers to the questions they asked me. They said, "It's time for you to get baptized now." They gave me all the lessons in 1975. They said, "Ask your husband if you can be baptized." I asked my husband, and he told me no. They said, "Sister Warren, this is your church. You can continue to come here. It might be fifty years before you get baptized, but you continue to come to church."

I kept going to church, and they sent two more missionaries out. They taught me. They made my husband angry by asking so many questions. My husband told them not to come back anymore to teach. He told them to continue teaching me at the church. I had already been taught. I was teaching them. Those missionaries told me, "We came to teach you, but you're teaching us." The second crew of missionaries gave me all the lessons and told me I was ready for baptism. They told me to ask my husband. They wrote a petition for me to get him to sign. I asked him to sign it, and he signed it. He said, "If this is what you want, I will sign it. I ain't never heard of such a thing." I gave it to them.

The missionaries told me, "There's one thing, Sister Warren. Bishop Williams is going to have to come down from Baton Rouge to interview you for baptism." Bishop Williams came down from Baton Rouge to interview me one night at the church. My husband wouldn't let me go.

I went on a fast. One night an angel of the Lord visited me. I was about to give up on joining the Church. I wanted to join because the Spirit had led me to join, but I was having such a hard time. A man dressed in plain clothes came out of my back room. I was living on Touro Street, not far from here. He went to the front door. When he went to open it, I felt like the Spirit was leaving me. One of the missionaries was named Elder Nelson. The man in plain clothes was the same height as Elder Nelson, same size as Elder Nelson, and he had on a grey suit. I said, "Elder Nelson, you're welcome in my home." He turned and came back to the bed. It wasn't Elder Nelson. It was another person. His face was glittering, and he just looked down on me. He didn't say anything. He just took my hand and just strengthened me. He gave me strength and revealed to me to let the missionaries come in my home to interview me. My husband said they weren't welcome there. My husband didn't want them to come, but he was working next time.

The next morning I called the missionaries, and I told them to come to interview me, to get in touch with Bishop Williams. Bishop Williams and his wife came, and the two missionaries came to my house. He interviewed me for baptism. I was baptized Christmas Day in 1976. I had a time getting in the Church! (From a tape-recorded interview.)
