Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

The Light Was Shining on a Particular Book

Larry D. Garske, Cottage Grove, Oregon

The year 1968 seemed to be a critical point in my life—it was a time for some major decisions that could have long-lasting effects. I was a leader of a very successful country western band. We had been featured on local radio and television and had just been given the opportunity to audition for a major record company. Being well aware of the temptations that this kind of life would bring, I was concerned that I might be the victim of my success rather than the beneficiary, unless I could find someone or somewhere from which to draw the strength I needed. I didn't want to fall victim to the weaknesses that I had seen other musicians encounter.

I did a lot of reading on a lot of various subjects and knew that some people had a belief in a Supreme Being, but I had never really considered it seriously. But if there was a basis to these beliefs, I felt, maybe this would be a time to test them. These thoughts led me that day to kneel in prayer. It was the second day after Christmas. I went to my bedroom, and because I had never been taught about prayer, I prayed out loud. I asked the Lord to give me the guidance and strength that I needed and to know if He really existed.

As I began to pray, a feeling came over me, a feeling that I knew was from outside myself, a burning yet peaceful feeling. As this feeling rested upon me, I felt that I was being led from my bedroom into my living room.

In my living room was a large window that reached almost to the floor, and along the base of that window I had my collection of books stretched along the wall. The sky was overcast with heavy clouds, and there had been heavy snowfall all week. As I was standing there with this feeling burning within me, a ray of light broke through the clouds and a splinter of it shone on the books at my feet. The feeling grew stronger as I noticed the light was shining on a particular book. I looked at the book and felt the feeling within me. There was no doubt that there was a connection. I reached down and picked up the book. It was the Book of Mormon.

I had bought this book along with others at an auction two years previous. I had read all of the other books, but I had never opened this one or knew what it contained. I began reading it right then and there. I finished reading it forty-eight hours later—I knew it was true. The day after I had finished reading it, the full-time missionaries tracted me out. Needless to say, I was a golden contact. I had many questions, but the content of the book was burned in my soul, and I knew my prayer had been answered and that God was a reality.
