Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

A Voice Kept Repeating, "It's True, It's True"

Troy Johnathon Bodnar, Columbus, Ohio

I was born in Youngstown, Ohio, on April 16, 1966, and was baptized into the Catholic church a month later. In my senior year of high school, I decided to study for the Roman Catholic priesthood. I felt that I had a calling from God for this particular vocation. I have always enjoyed helping others and thought that I could do this as a priest while bringing people closer to Jesus Christ. This truly excited me.

In August 1984, I left for the Pontifical College Josephinum in Columbus, Ohio, a seminary. Here I was to spend the next four years of my life. I had known of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints because my mother used to be a member. She converted to Catholicism when she married my father; however, I had and still have many relatives who are members. For some reason, I have always had a keen interest in Mormonism. I can remember doing a history report in middle school on Joseph Smith and the history of the Church, complete with a model of the Hill Cumorah.

The summer after my freshman year at the Josephinum, my aunt and her friend were going to vacation in Maryland. They asked if I would drive them, and I accepted. On our way there, I remember my aunt's friend telling me to exit the beltway outside of Washington, D.C. She said that there was something she wanted me to see. Sure enough, we pulled into the parking lot of the Washington Temple Visitors' Center. I had always wanted to see it up close. I had seen the temple from the beltway every time we went to visit my grandmother in Maryland. I had stared at it with great awe and interest and was disappointed when it vanished from my sight.

While we were at the Visitors' Center, I remember a missionary, a retiree, whom I talked with. I told him I was a Catholic seminarian but had many relatives who were members of the Church. He then asked me if I'd ever read the Book of Mormon. I replied no. He gave me a copy of it and then guaranteed me that if I read it and accepted the challenge by Moroni, I would be baptized and confirmed a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Little did I know that Moroni 10:3-4 and the Book of Mormon were to haunt me for a while. I knew deep in my heart that if I did read it and accept the challenge to pray about it, I would be converted. Nevertheless, I did not want to convert. After all, I was studying for the Catholic priesthood. Besides that, I had also always been taught that the Catholic church was Christ's true church on earth. He certainly could not have two of them. Which was correct? I believed Rome was.

Every time I tried to read the Book of Mormon, I immediately closed it for fear of my conversion. During my sophomore year in the seminary, I was bombarded with anti-Mormon teachings in my classes. I did not believe most of it and even defended the Church; however, I was still a bit confused and wanted to know the truth. So, I called the mission aries in Columbus. They came over several times, and I and several of my friends had some very interesting and informative discussions. I found the missionaries to be most healthy—both mentally and spiritually. Many misconceptions my friends and I had were cleared up. Soon the end of the school year came, and we went our separate ways. The missionaries asked me if I would read the Book of Mormon over the summer, and again, I was haunted with that request and the thought of Moroni 10:3-4.

My junior and senior years at the Josephinum were horrible. I found myself being led farther and farther from Jesus Christ and the path of righteousness. I was drinking, smoking, swearing, and the like. I still wanted to be a priest, though. Something was wrong. After much thought and prayer, I decided to discontinue my studies for the priesthood after my graduation from college seminary. As a matter of fact, I was very turned off by religion. I still believed in God, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost but felt that I did not need religion to get to heaven. As long as I prayed and led a good life—which I was not doing a good job at—I would get my reward in heaven. Boy was I ever wrong!

In October of 1988, I went to Chicago to visit my best friend and then to Madison, Wisconsin, to see my cousin, who is a Mormon. My cousin asked me why I left the seminary, and I told him the many reasons why. He then asked me if I would read the Book of Mormon. (Here we go again!) Once again, I was filled with trepidation. When I returned to Ohio, however, I began to read it. I enjoyed it, loved what it had to say, and had a difficult time putting it down. A couple of days later, I called the missionaries in Youngstown, Ohio. They came over and we talked. We had a great discussion. They left me so fired up. They also asked me if I would agree to be baptized if I found it to be true. I agreed.

That Sunday, I went to church with them. I thoroughly enjoyed it. It left me so excited that as soon as I got home that evening, I stayed up the rest of the night and finished reading the book that had previously filled me with fear.

I sat amazed for awhile and then took Moroni's challenge and prayed about what I had read, hoping to come to know the truth. I did not know how I would receive an answer, and I did not receive one for a couple of days. Then, finally, I woke up one morning and began with a prayer. I was filled with the greatest joy I have ever known, next to my baptism and confirmation. That entire day, it was as if a voice inside of me kept repeating, "It's true! It's true!" I even went to a Catholic shrine to pray about it, but the feeling would not leave me. It only got stronger and the voice louder.

That same book and challenge that had haunted me for three years had opened the truth unto me, gave me a strong testimony, and allowed me to receive two of the greatest gifts of Heavenly Father: baptism into Christ's true church on earth and the gift of the Holy Ghost—my right always to have the companionship of the Holy Ghost, my closest friend.
