Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

I Would Carry with Me the Manner of the Jews

Avraham Gileadi, Jezreel, Israel

The following account is from the preface to The Book of Isaiah: A New Translation with Interpretive Keys from the Book of Mormon, by Avraham Gileadi (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1988), pages xiii-xv. Reprinted by permission.

I was born in the Netherlands during World War II. In the course of the war, my father, who served in the Dutch resistance, helped a New Zealand pilot escape to Britain. After the war, many emigrated from wartorn Europe to new lands of opportunity. Although my father prospered, idealism led him to emigrate to New Zealand. There I grew up, participating in my teens in a successful rock and jazz group. Haunted by my spiritual childhood in the Netherlands, however, I broke with that subculture, seeking again my roots as a Catholic.

I underwent a period of introspection, such as the literature of the Catholic church encourages, reevaluating my priorities and internalizing spiritual principles. Becoming religiously active and involved, I yet sensed a lack of spiritual fulfillment. Soon, Israel's history in the Old Testament became the focus of my attention. Recognizing what I believed to be a partial fulfillment of prophecy in the modern state of Israel, I felt a desire to participate in it. In 1968, in a second, radical break with the past, I left New Zealand to settle in Israel.

Life in Israel soon involved me deeply in the Old Testament and in its religious offspring, Judaism. Judaism attracted me because of the unique manner in which the Jews view the Law and the Prophets. Among the Jews, I felt a depth of understanding that, as a Gentile, I had not hitherto known. While the analytical manner of the Jews was to me highly unusual, I could not fault it. It penetrated the words of scripture in such a way as to bring out an entirely new context that lay behind the words. I began to understand the New Testament differently also. I saw in Jesus' parables of the two sons broad allusions to the two houses of Israel, Judah and Joseph. I recognized in Paul's early years as a Christian the Nazirite vow. I, too, took the vow.

While still in New Zealand, I had determined, simply by studying a map of Israel, to which place I would go to live in Israel. On reaching Israel, I took an intensive course in Hebrew and began to study Judaism. When opportunity arose, I located at Jezreel, the place I had determined. This place turned out to be an agricultural settlement, unique in Israel, for Jewish immigrants from South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand. I had worked there a year when, on visiting the library, the librarian handed me the Book of Mormon and suggested I read it. I declined. At her insistence (her words were, "This is for you; you must read this!"), I took the book to be polite. I read it out of curiosity.

The Book of Mormon at once filled many gaps in the picture I had formed in my mind from reading the Old and the New Testaments. Many times I experienced a sense of spiritual joy which, I soon realized, was the influence of the Holy Ghost. Although the Book of Mormon contained new ideas, things I had not imagined (such as Zion on the American continent), still I knew the book was true. The things with which I had difficulty I resolved by praying and fasting. I was determined, above all, to be baptized into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

To my dismay, although I pursued every possible avenue, I could find no sign of the Church in Israel. When all proved fruitless, I prayed about what course to follow. It then dawned on me that I must continue to study the manner of the Jews until the Lord would permit me to be baptized. Thereafter, I studied Hebrew even more earnestly. I took instruction in Judaism from several rabbis. Taking this new, though paradoxical course, I felt at peace, conscious of being wholly in accord with God's will. I saw the law of Moses as a necessary schoolmaster to the fullness of the gospel I would someday embrace. My studies took me to an orthodox religious kibbutz, at which time I was formally received into the Jewish faith. I became an Israeli citizen. I truly felt with Ruth: "Thy people shall be my people, and thy god my God" (Ruth 1:16). The climax of my life as an orthodox Jew came when I studied at a rabbinic school in Jerusalem. My closest friends were orthodox Jews who nonetheless believed, as I did, that Jesus is the Messiah.

When I had thus fully absorbed the principle behind the Jewish manner of studying the scriptures, I discovered the LDS church. I met brethren evidently imbued with the Spirit of God—they stood out from all other people I had met. There followed some weeks of intense questioning by me, rather than the regular missionary discussions. The day I was baptized I left rabbinic school—one of the most memorable experiences of my life—and entered an entirely new phase. Although I was now a member of the Church, fulfilled spiritually in a way I had not hitherto known, I would nonetheless carry with me the manner of the Jews.
