Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

It Became the Foundation of My Faith As a Christian

John Robert Harrington, Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts

My second-grade teacher, Miss Connolly, was a devout Catholic but also an educator who believed in encouraging her pupils to explore for themselves. After Thanksgiving, 1965, she asked her class to write an essay on how we had spent our holiday. In order to inspire us, she first recounted what she had done over the Thanksgiving break. She mentioned how while on a foliage-viewing trip in Vermont she had stopped to visit the birthplace at Sharon, Vermont, of the founder of the Mormon Church, Joseph Smith; she went on to relate what she had learned about the life of the Prophet, including his translation of the Book of Mormon. She suggested that if we wanted to know more, we should look at this work of scripture for ourselves.

With this as a cue, I borrowed a copy of the Book of Mormon as quickly as I could from the Boston Public Library (this copy had been donated years before by the First Presidency of the Church). After reading the introductory material and the testimonies of the Three and the Eight Witnesses, I knew that if the Book of Mormon was true, then Joseph Smith was a genuine prophet in modern times. If Joseph Smith was a prophet, then the church that followed his teachings could be the only authentic Christian church from the time he received revelations from the Lord. I then commenced reading the sacred text itself. I will not pretend that I absorbed much from a first reading of so panoramic a work at age eight; however, the book provided unequivocal answers to questions about venerable points of Catholic teaching I had never been able to accept: the sacrament was a memorial of the Savior's atoning sacrifice and not a literal recreation of that event (the dogma known as transubstantiation); unbaptized innocents did not go to a place called limbo at death but instead enjoyed the peace of God; and there was clearly no scriptural precedent for the practice of auricular confession.

Most importantly, I accepted the invitation of Moroni to pray for guidance as to the truth of the record he and his father had preserved for these times. I prayed as a Catholic would, reciting an Our Father, a Hail Mary, and a Glory Be before asking my heavenly father the critical question. I immediately felt a sensation of warmth and inner peace. By the power of the Holy Ghost, the status of the Book of Mormon as a work of scripture was unquestionably made known to me.

It required another twenty-one years before I sought baptism into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, because I had to wrestle with another question: Why had God caused that I should be born and soon afterward baptized in the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church? (By Catholic teaching even infant baptism is an irreversible act.) I felt a moral obligation to remain a faithful, if secretly doubting, member of the church of my ancestors as long as it was still possible for me to aspire to become a priest. I knew that I could fulfill my calling to priesthood within the LDS church because of its practice of ordaining every worthy male to some priestly office. And so I spent the next two decades of my life engaged in three separate undertakings: studying to become a lawyer and then settling into the practice of law; learning as much as I could about the teaching of my own church and investigating which Catholic religious order might be willing to accept me; and reading absolutely anything I could lay my hands on about the history and doctrines of the LDS church.

At age twenty-nine, I found myself at a crossroads: I had a job as a lawyer that I still loved, but I had been rejected by every Catholic religious order I had sought to enter because of the uncertain state of my health. In sum, there was no way that I could ever become a Catholic priest. Through all "life's billows," my one certain source of solace was the Book of Mormon and to a lesser extent the other standard works of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Book of Mormon always took first place in this regard because no other work of scripture proclaims more clearly page by page what has never ceased to be the foundation of my faith as a Christian. In Peter's words of profound simplicity: "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life. And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God." (John 6:68-69). The only escape from my conundrum was the step I had so long delayed, a formal request to the local mission that I might receive the missionary discussions.

Within three weeks of mailing the request, I was baptized and confirmed, on April 17, 1988, by President R. Clark Greenhalgh, recently released as president of the Nephi Utah Stake. He and his wife were then serving as full-time missionaries, and they were primarily responsible for my instruction in the gospel. Seven months later, two days after my thirtieth birthday, the same gentleman ordained me to the office of elder in the Melchizedek Priesthood. I know that my father, now in the world of spirits, cannot be displeased with the choice I have made. It is my hope that I shall be able in due time to perform vicarious ordinance work on his behalf.

As the hymn says, "God moves in a mysterious way." From aspirant to the Catholic priesthood to Mormon elder, I have never felt that my Father in Heaven was not offering me opportunities to follow His way of perfection. I am a witness to the reality of President Ezra Taft Benson's statement that the Book of Mormon is in and of itself the great converter.
