Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

It Burned Out of My Being Every Doubt, Every Fear

Gary J. Coleman, Pullman, Washington

I was twenty years old when I began to read Mormon literature and to become acquainted with Mormon people. I felt drawn to them through their friendship and sincerity; however, my Catholic training was deeply embedded. My greatest concern was over my status with God if I should leave my former church. You see, I had been taught all my life that if I should leave that church, I would be damned and go to hell, as I would commit a mortal sin.

These teachings weighed heavily on my mind all through the process of my investigating The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I had also been taught that since I was the oldest son of my parents, my example, or the error of my ways, could have a negative influence on my family. I was concerned about my parents and my brothers and sisters. I did not want to do anything that would harm their spiritual growth.

The more I studied, the more I could see that the truths of the restored gospel were not part of my former church. I struggled with the concept of a true and living prophet. All my life I had been taught that any prophet in the latter days had to be a false prophet. To gain a testimony of the Prophet Joseph Smith was a great undertaking. During my search for the truth, I was seriously considering the vocation of a Catholic priest, a goal I had contemplated for fifteen years. I had served mass regularly as an altar boy in the Catholic church for twelve years.

When I was a senior at Washington State University in Pullman, Washington, a returned missionary named John Madsen became my friend. He shared his time and literature and helped me resolve many concerns. During the summer of 1962, I read two books that opened the vistas of the restored gospel to me. In one of the books, A Marvelous Work and a Wonder, I was introduced to the Book of Mormon. Reading about the book but not having a copy of it was a frustrating experience for me. Inasmuch as I was working in a forest service assignment on the St. Joe National Forest for the summer, I had no contact with Latter-day Saint people for many weeks. How I longed for a copy of the Book of Mormon. I did not realize that this book would be the key to my conversion to the Church of Jesus Christ.

Upon returning to Washington State University in September 1962, I again renewed contact with Brother Madsen and my Mormon friends. John was teaching an early-morning seminary class in Pullman at the time, and he invited me to attend. I was skeptical, yet anxious to resolve my religious struggle. I began attending the seminary class with ninth- to twelfth-grade students. Some days I wouldn't attend, but the class would pray me back! The course of study was Church history, and of course, the major figure in early Church history was Joseph Smith, the Prophet. Carefully and lovingly, John and his class led me to the truth concerning prophets, the Book of Mormon, the Apostasy, the Restoration, and many other topics.

Still, for some reason yet unknown to me, I was not blessed to have a copy of the Book of Mormon. Weeks went by, and I continued to learn about the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. It was near the end of October when I received a paperback copy of that sacred record, marked in red pencil, referring me through the book from cover to cover. The doctrines were clear; my need to know answers about these things was profound. I must ask God if these things were true. I knew that if the Book of Mormon was true, all the other matters of the restoration of the gospel through the Prophet Joseph Smith would be resolved.

I remember a particular early November Friday morning at seminary when our class listened to the tape Profile of a Prophet, by Elder Hugh B. Brown. It was an experience I shall never forget. Everything began to come together for me. I felt Joseph Smith was a prophet, and that opened a whole panorama of possibilities about the gospel.

I knew that I must resolve the matter of joining the LDS church or leave it alone once and for all. My studies were suffering because I gave many waking hours to the pondering of religious matters. I had to be sure. My example to my family had to be based upon truth, not error. How could I be sure? I resolved to go to the Lord in earnest prayer about my struggle.

Immediately following seminary that morning, I returned to my little apartment. I reread the marked verses in Moroni 10:4-5 and then poured out my heart to the Lord, not in the rote prayer of my youth, but as a son of God, seeking expected answers to my questions. I did ask God, in the name of Christ, if the precepts I was studying were true. I asked with a sincere heart, with real intent. More than anything I had ever wanted, I wanted to know what to do about religion. I asked about Joseph Smith. I asked about the restoration of the true Church. I asked about the Book of Mormon. I asked about the reality of Jesus Christ and his work. I pleaded with the Lord to reveal to me what I should do.

I received the answer to every one of my questions. By the power of the Holy Ghost I received the answers. By the power of the Holy Ghost I knew the truth of all the things I pondered. I felt a burning in my whole being, sweeping through my body from the top of my head to the soles of my feet, that burned out of my being every doubt, every fear, every concern. Relief and peace swept over me. I knew what I must do. I immediately left my apartment and hurried back to the little building where John taught seminary. He was still there. "I want to be baptized, John. I know the Church is true," I said.
