Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

I Had Known Jesus Was the Christ, but It Told Me Why

Alberto Marrero, Jr., Los Angeles, California

In April 1986 two missionaries stopped by and left a tract titled Christ in America. It was left with my daughter Miriam, and I read it only as a curiosity. What first struck me was the Mormon sense of God's universality. I then pursued the concept with a close friend of mine at work who was a Latter-day Saint. My LDS friend told me about the First Vision. I remember how I chuckled at the golden plates and gave it not another thought.

At this time, the only thing I knew about Mormons was that they were a peculiar people. I was aware of polygamy, and I thought that members of minority groups could not be Mormon church members. I also was under the impression that Mormons were radical "born-again, fundamentalist Christians."

A week later my LDS partner at work gave me a copy of A Marvelous Work and a Wonder. I read it more as a study than as a spiritual message. As I read that book, some of the questions that had for so long bothered me started to be answered.

After having finished A Marvelous Work, I asked my LDS friend for a copy of the Book of Mormon. I remember coming home, sitting poolside with a kahluá and milk in hand and reading the Book of Mormon. As I read, a struggle began to develop. Being well versed in history, I had serious doubts about the Book of Mormon societies in ancient America. But as I read on, my heart and my spirit became more and more involved in the Book of Mormon. Spiritual questions that had cursed me for years were being answered.

Every day my heart and soul were satisfied, quenched by the reading of the Book of Mormon. And every day at the end of each reading, my mind would say, "Yeah, but what about this? What about that?" As if by magic, the previous day's questions were answered during the next day's reading. I found myself being unable to keep away from the Book of Mormon.

By the time I had finished Alma, my heart and soul were convinced that this indeed was the word of God, but intellectually I still rejected the historicity of the Book of Mormon. As I pressed onward, I came to realize that philosophically, spiritually, I had always been a Mormon. I described my struggle to my LDS friend. He suggested prayer. I conscientiously refused to pray. I was afraid that I might fool myself, because I wanted a positive answer. I wanted hard, cold reality to go along with my spiritual understanding.

I woke up one Sunday morning in June 1986, and reality, knowledge, and faith all came together. I remember saying to myself, "You know that this is the word of God. You know that the Book of Mormon has moved you like no other book ever has. You know that this Book of Mormon is more real than the ground you are standing on." By denying the reality of the Book of Mormon, I was denying the most concrete reality I had ever experienced in my life.

Faith had become knowledge. For the first time in my life my spirit and my mind were in complete harmony. I went on to take the mandatory missionary lessons, but the Book of Mormon had already decided the issue.

I was baptized in August 1986, and since then my family has followed. I had always known that Jesus was the Christ, but it took the Book of Mormon to tell me why.
