Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

The Feeling Left, but the Assurance Did Not

Donna Chase, Ogden, Utah

My first contact with the Mormon church came when my family moved to Utah. I was six. I remember our neighbors coming to our door with flannel board displays and Book of Mormon stories. Their constant assault on our home soon became a nuisance. One night when we saw them coming down the street, we turned off the lights and hid until they left. In our Catholic parish there were several former Mormons who were not quiet about their contempt for the Mormon church. My parents talked to them about the situation with our Mormon neighbors. Soon after that we were all supplied with proper methods for dissuading missionary conversion attempts, and thus my family soon became heavily involved in anti-Mormon literature.

When I graduated from high school in 1983 and encountered the struggles of college classes and athletics, I felt alone. I had lost my stability and especially my drive. I was living at home and attending church with my family, but everything felt empty and foreign. I knew there was a God and had a deep faith in Him but never felt close to Him. This was a difficult time for me. When I was younger I found great comfort in kneeling in front of statues of saints and reciting memorized prayers after lighting a candle, but now this form of worship began to feel silly to me.

I began to depend heavily upon my Mormon friends. I had always had great friends. I was impressed that they had never pushed their church on me. In fact, they all seemed proud to have a Catholic friend. My friends were always patient, even when I mocked their religion and threw crazy questions at them from the anti-Mormon literature I was reading. One friend's patience especially impressed me. After I questioned her about Joseph Smith one day, she told me she didn't know the answer and asked if I would like to talk to the missionaries about it. I felt this was a great opportunity to ruin somebody's faulty religious view, so I accepted the invitation.

I began taking the discussions in a member's home. At first the experience was a nightmare for both the elders and myself. I found that they wouldn't argue with me about silly questions concerning Joseph Smith's "men in black hats on the moon" or the exact location of Kolob. After a while I started enjoying the discussions. I maintained my hard outward attitude, but inside I was slowly being touched by the love of these elders, my friend, and the member lady who let us use her home. I even succumbed to reading the Book of Mormon without telling any of them I was.

I finished listening to the discussions and had exhausted three sets of missionaries and their entire supply of filmstrips six months after I started. I'm certain that my friend had given up hope on me entirely. About eight months after ending the discussions I started reading through the Book of Mormon for the second time. My first time through had not supplied me with an adequate assurance that it wasn't true. I was sitting down on my bed reading one afternoon. I remember being frustrated that 1 Nephi was filled with the phrase "and it came to pass." I set the book down and asked out loud, "Is this really true?" No sooner was the question out of my mouth than I got an answer. My body was filled with warmth and began to tingle. The thought leapt into my mind, and I repeated it many times to myself and then out loud: "It is true. . . . It's true." I sat very still on the edge of my bed and repeated those words over and over. I felt no fear, only warmth and assurance until the feeling started going away. I then began to cry, begging for the feeling not to leave. Slowly the feeling subsided, but the assurance of the Book of Mormon's truthfulness did not. I sat and cried as the fear of telling my parents entered me. As I stood up to walk across the room, I was so weak that I lay down and didn't feel I had the strength to walk. I slept there on the floor until morning.

When I woke up, I called my friend and told her. Then I drove up to the house of another friend of mine who was a bishop at the time. I told him the story, and he arranged an interview with a seventy in the ward. The bishop then asked me to go and tell my parents that I was going to be baptized. I will never forget this experience as long as I live. When I walked into the house, my family was watching Star Trek: The Wrath of Khan. I asked my mom if I could talk to her and led her into the back bedroom. Mom sat on the edge of the bed looking at me eagerly, as any mom would, being excited to talk to her daughter. I told her that I had been working on something for a long time and that I was going to be baptized LDS that Saturday. My mom looked as if I had stabbed her in the back. She screamed and ran to the living room crying. My dad had heard enough before I made it to the living room. He yelled, "Get out!" and pointed to the door. He told me if I went through with it, he would show up at my baptism with a shotgun and break it up, and as long as I was a Mormon, I was not welcome in his home.

I went back up to my friend the bishop and told him what had happened. We set up my baptism, and I then went to a hotel. I could have stayed with friends, but I had to make sure that I was doing this for the right reason and that it was worth it to me. Four days later I was baptized. My friend and I kept one eye on the door the whole time waiting for my dad to come in and break it up. He didn't show, and I was baptized September 9, 1984. I then moved to California to live with my aunt. After serving a mission in the Texas San Antonio mission, I am currently living with my last companion's family in Provo and am a junior at Brigham Young University.
