Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

They Gave Me a Copy with All of the Pages

Antonia Purina Honrado, New York City, New York

One Sunday morning, almost six years ago, I met a young man in my building on his way to church. He was neatly groomed and greeted me with a smile. I noticed a certain book in his hand. He wasn't reading it, just carrying it with a cluster of other books. Nevertheless, for some reason that book caught my attention, so I asked him what it was. He replied it was a Book of Mormon, showing me the blue cover. I proceeded by asking him if I could have it, and without hesitation, he gave it to me. Looking at his watch, he said he was going to be late for the meetings and scurried off, leaving me with no explanation of this book that caught my eye.

I began at once my investigation of this book, reading it and pondering over its contents. It offered me something more than I had previously felt by my studies of other books of religion. I had been looking for something all my life. You see, I was baptized and raised in the Catholic Church. My parents were faithful members and taught me the ways of God, but I felt there was something missing. Therefore, at the young age of sixteen, I began my search for that something.

Attending churches and listening to their different doctrines only left me more discouraged. Nothing seemed to satisfy me. I even began to doubt my own beliefs about God and His existence. However, this new book in my possession offered me insights to such things as the heavens, God the Father, our Savior Jesus Christ, and the Resurrection. I felt the power of this book, which later on helped me to understand more about life. My studies increased, and I began to read it every night, comparing its teachings with those in the Bible, reading parts here and there.

One night, after meditating over what I had previously read in the book, I decided to apply the scripture in Mormon 9:21, which reads, "Behold, I say unto you that whoso believeth in Christ, doubting nothing, whatsoever he shall ask the Father in the name of Christ it shall be granted him, and this promise is unto all, even unto the ends of the earth." I believed in Jesus Christ, so I asked the Father if this book was true and if He could tell me. Then, I crawled into bed feeling good, anxiously awaiting the answer to my supplication.

The following morning, I woke up after a dream in which I knew that God heard my simple prayer. He really does live, and this book that caught my eye contains His word. Never before had I felt something so strong. This, also, helped me understand the death of my son that would occur months later. I knew that God lived and cared about me.

After this experience, which I call a revelation, after my prayer over the Book of Mormon, I desired to learn more about this true book. Some time had passed since the boy had given me it, and I hadn't seen him since.

I began knocking on doors in the building, asking if they knew of this boy and the Mormon church. Most of the people replied negatively, while others had never even heard of the Mormon religion. My search went on for six years to find somebody who knew something about the Mormons. Now that I look back, if I had known the complete name, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, I could have looked it up in the phone book and saved me years of searching.

Not being able to find the boy or his religion, I continued on with my reading and enjoying all the wonderful truths within its pages. I never was able to read the entire book, though.

One afternoon when I arrived at home, I found out that my grandchildren had needed a coloring book. The Book of Mormon must have caught their eye, too, as they decided to mark their favorite passages. By the time they were finished, the book was colored up and ripped into pieces. The only part remaining intact was from the picture of Samuel the Lamanite to the end of the book.

For the next few years, I read and reread the books of 3 Nephi to Moroni, while continuing my search for the church of the book. In August 1988, six years from the time I first received the book, my prayers were answered again. I met a Mormon lady who wrote down my address and said she'd send missionaries to visit me. When those two young men knocked on my door, I knew they would help me come to the end of my search.

One of the first teachings Elder Claypool and Elder Jorgensen shared with me was about the importance of prophets, then Joseph Smith, then the wonderful Book of Mormon. I anxiously took out my battered copy, showing them I had a part. Then they gave me a copy with all the pages.

My joy was only beginning in the gospel of Jesus Christ. I felt so much closer to Him because of the book. Thanks to the Book of Mormon, and the clear teachings of the elders, the commandment and privilege of baptism was easy to accept. I knew it was what God wanted me to do. I knew it was what I wanted to do.
