Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

Hey, That Means I Am Becoming a Christian

Radmila Ranovic, Baden, Switzerland

While I was living in Switzerland, four young men appeared at the door. It was 1974, September probably, and in those days everybody had long hair. These young men had really short hair, white shirts, ties; they looked really weird, and they said they had been given my address. My pen pal in New Zealand had said she would be sending some friends to see me, so I said, "Oh yes, I was waiting for you. Come in."

They spoke pretty good German, so I didn't even try my English. It was really bad then. I figured out three of them were Americans and one was from Germany. They had been in our house for a while when finally I asked them, "Well, so how did you go to New Zealand?" They said, "We were never in New Zealand."

I said, "What's going on here? How did she give you my address?" And they said, "Oh, we represent the Mormon church."

I said, "What?" That was the first time I ever heard the name, and I was shocked. I realized that she'd sent me some missionaries, and I thought, "Oh no, how am I ever going to get rid of these guys?"

They were really polite and nice, smiling all the time, and they said, "Well, do you know anything about the Mormon church?"

I said, "No," and I really didn't want to know anything. It was something strange for me.

They said, "Well, we could tell you something if you are interested."

"No, not really."

They said, "Okay, well, we came just to tell you about the Church, but if you're not interested that's no problem." So they just got up, and I couldn't believe they were leaving.

When they were at the door, one of them said, "Oh, by the way, do you know who Kreimir osi is?" I mean, Everybody in Yugoslavia knows him. And he said, "Well, he's studying in our university. I've seen him play there many times." I started to think, "Wow, how come some Yugoslav would join some weird sect like this? What is it all about?" That's when I started to feel a little curious about it. They left a pamphlet and said they would have a little movie in the church that showed something about the Mormons, and if I were interested I could come.

I went with my boyfriend. He had been in the United States as an exchange student and heard about Mormons but just bad things. He stayed with a black family, and they didn't like the Mormons at all. They said Mormons were Ku Klux Klan. So that's how he felt about Mormons, but he didn't tell me. We went to the place where they showed the film. I felt that churches were just for stupid people, but this was a little meeting room in the basement of a normal apartment building. Suddenly, on the wall, I saw a sign that said, "The glory of God is intelligence." That really shocked me. "Intelligence. These people believe in intelligence—really amazing."

They showed A Voice from the Dust. It was about the pyramids in Central America, and that's something I had always been interested in. They talked about the Book of Mormon, and they said, "If you want to find out if it's true, you can ask God and you will get the answer." That really impressed me. I said, "Wow, these people actually believe you can find out for yourself directly from God. I can just take the book and read it and find out myself."

After the presentation, the missionaries asked us how we liked it. My boyfriend started to yell at them and said they were Ku Klux Klan. I was so embarrassed. One missionary had been stuttering and suddenly couldn't say a word. I felt so sorry for the guy that I turned my back and stood off to one side. He saw me and asked, "Well, do you feel the same?" I said, "No, I don't. I would like to see that book." He said, "Okay, do you want me to bring you one?" I said, "Yes, can you?" He whispered, "I'll bring you one."

They came by another day and brought me a Book of Mormon and said, "We have some discussions that talk about that book, and we could teach you." I said, "No, no, you said I could find out for myself alone. I don't need you." So they just left the book, and that was that.

All this was in September 1974. I had the book till Christmas and I was curious, but I didn't do anything about it. At Christmastime in Switzerland they used to show lots of movies on TV, religious ones that talked about Jesus Christ. I remember sitting there, watching, and I thought, "I always wanted to find out more about Jesus Christ, and I never did. Where is that book? I should start reading it."

I started to read, and I couldn't understand a word. I spoke good German, but there were words I'd never heard before, like repentance. What does it mean? What is repentance? I was so ignorant about anything religious. Even when I understood the words, the book didn't make much sense to me somehow. That's when I finally had the desire to see the missionaries. I was thinking maybe I should read and ask them questions and we could discuss it. I still had their phone number, and I knew where their meeting place was, but then I thought, "No, I can't go there. I don't want to."

The first week after the New Year, I was home alone in the afternoon when somebody knocked on the door. It was missionaries. They were totally different ones, but I realized who they were. They came in, and I told them, "Oh, I started to read this book, but I don't understand it. I'll suggest something: I'll read ten chapters every week and write down my questions, and you can come and answer my questions." And they said they would.

I remember the first time they asked me to kneel down and pray with them. It was like something was pulling me back, saying, "Don't, don't." I was really suffering. They were already on their knees and waiting for me, and I was just sitting there, saying, "I can't do that." I finally did, though, and I had to pray, and I don't know how I said it, but it was really a weird feeling. Then I began praying for a while alone in the evenings. I would lie down in my bed and just kind of talk, like, "Okay, God, if you are there, I would like to know about the Book of Mormon. Is it true or not?"

I felt like I was talking to an empty space and that feeling was always bothering me. Sometimes I'd feel so stupid. I'd hope nobody could see me, nobody would find out what I was doing. It was really like doing an experiment. And I decided I'd stick to it, I'd do it.

The missionaries told me to pray about the Book of Mormon and read 3 Nephi. I was reading chapter 17 in 3 Nephi where it tells about Jesus Christ and that he came to America and was preaching. He wanted to go away, and all the people begged him to stay. Then he asked the children to come, and he blessed them. It said that he cried, and in that moment I was touched and I was crying. I remember it was just afternoon or evening, my door was open and my parents were watching TV, and I was lying on my bed reading the Book of Mormon and crying.

I suddenly said to myself, "You're so stupid, why do you cry about it? You don't believe that there is any Jesus Christ. You don't believe in this. This is just a fairy tale, nothing else. Why do you cry about it?"

And in that moment I felt so strongly that it had all happened. I couldn't deny it. It was real. It wasn't a fairy tale. There was Jesus Christ, and all this had happened. It was kind of a scary moment to admit to myself, "Okay, I believe now in this." And so the next step was, "Okay, if I believe in the Book of Mormon, I believe in Jesus Christ." And then, the next step was, "Hey, that means that I am becoming a Christian." It was all very scary for me.

When the missionaries would come in, I would start shaking. It was like I was really cold, so I would go and put a sweater on, and I would still shake. When the missionaries would leave I would stop. I was not afraid, but it was a strange feeling that they were bringing in, and I could feel it very strong. One time Elder McMurtry asked me, "Well, did you pray about the Book of Mormon?"

I said, "Yes, I did."

"Did you get the answer?"

I said, "No."

He said, "Okay, let me explain how the answers are." He explained the feelings that you have when the Holy Ghost tells you the truth. And he said, "Did you ever feel like your bosom was so full and you felt so happy that you wanted to cry?"

I thought, Oh, that guy knows everything. I had to admit, "Yes, I did."

He said, "Was that when you were reading the Book of Mormon?"

"Yes."

He said, "So do you believe the Book of Mormon is the word of God?"

I said, "Yes, I do."

Right when they asked me, I knew the Book of Mormon was true, I knew everything they said was true, and there was no reason why I should pray about it to be baptized. I knew that was the thing I had to do. I wanted to become a Christian, and I knew they were the ones who brought that nice spirit there that I couldn't feel anywhere else. Actually I wanted to be baptized, but just admitting it—that was the hard part. (From a tape-recorded interview.)
