Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

This Was Bedrock, Something to Trust In, to Build On

Dustin H. Heuston, Aircraft carrier, Pacific Ocean

I was born on April 24, 1932, a child of the Depression, in a middle-class family in the West Bronx in New York City. I attended public schools in New York City until I was sent away in 1946 to Mount Hermon, a New England boys' boarding school that was part of the Northfield Schools, which included the Northfield School for Girls that my wife, Nancy, attended some nine years later. When Nancy and I were there, the schools still had a vigorous religious tradition that required courses in religions, daily chapel, a program of great visiting ministers delivering Sunday sermons, a series of summer religious conferences, and an inspiring sacred music tradition.

As a result of an exposure to these traditions, Nancy and I were left with a hunger for a satisfactory religious experience. I went on to Hamilton College in upstate New York from 1950 to 1954 where I received the traditional eastern liberal arts training from faculty members who worked hard to get us to think clearly, analyze well, and learn as much about the history and thoughts of man as possible in four short years. Much of their unconscious thrust was to rid us of our biases, prejudices, superstitions, and generally sloppy thinking. It was at Hamilton in a history course that I first heard about the Mormons. I remember being appalled to learn that not many miles away good people had been deluded by a poor farm boy who talked of golden plates and visiting angels. I remember marveling how gullible people could be.

I left college for a brief banking career in New York City at the tail end of the Korean War and put religious pursuits aside when I entered the navy in January 1955. After a year in various naval schools, I was assigned as naval air intelligence officer to a squadron training for a seven-month tour on an aircraft carrier in the Pacific. On the carrier I met Chuck Turner, one of the great men I have known. Chuck was Mormon and so intrigued me through his kindness, intelligence, and remarkable character that I was determined to learn about his church, which had so obviously influenced his life. For the next year and a half, I went to Mormon meetings all over the world and read as many books as I could about the Church, both pro and con. I was fascinated by the remarkable organization and the wonderful people that I met, but I was equally repelled by the stories of golden plates, angels, and Joseph Smith.

One day I realized that the Book of Mormon would be an excellent source to study, because with much of the original handwritten manuscript still available, the Mormons would not be able to change the materials to iron out any embarrassing inconsistencies. As part of my research on the book, I had the good fortune of reading Francis Kirkham's magnificent two-volume work, A New Witness for Christ in America. Kirkham was a humble, honest, and great writer who listed all the information he could collect on the background of the writing and publication of the Book of Mormon.

I began my studies by committing a frontal assault on the Book of Mormon. My first copy is loaded with highly charged asides analyzing every word and motive with extraordinary fervor. In rereading my comments, I am amused at my obvious attempts to unearth any shortcomings that might disillusion me in my hopeful quest. I started quarreling with the title page, was bored by the introduction, felt uncertain about the testimonies of the witnesses, shocked by the testimony of the Prophet in recounting his experiences, and totally confused by the page entitled "A Brief Explanation about the Book of Mormon."

When I started the actual prose, I was reminded of Mark Twain's comment that Joseph Smith kept himself awake by throwing in another "It came to pass" every time he found himself falling asleep. Being an older brother, I did not take readily to Nephi. Nevertheless, I settled in and read studiously and gradually began to respect the materials. After completing my first reading, I decided that there was no "smoking gun" that might discredit Joseph Smith's story. Once again, I began to visit the church and meet with the impressive people.

Knowing I was going to take another six-month cruise on a carrier, I was baptized in August 1957, just before sailing for the Pacific. I quickly found a small group of Mormons, and we used to meet every evening to study the scriptures together. Originally we had intended to study a book on the Church together, but the only volume we all had in common was the Book of Mormon. Every evening we met in the ship's chapel, which was a small curtained area amidst all of the steel.

Because we had no expert with us, no syllabus, and nothing else to do, we started together on the first sentence of the Book of Mormon and shared our thoughts, sentence by sentence. More than half a year later we had only read one hundred twenty pages, but our lives had been changed forever. For me the experience was exhilarating because I was able to bring my intellect to bear without reservation, and the book stood up to it. It is hard to express how exciting it was to be able to work with a religious document one could trust and be fed by. The previous model I had from the Bible was a group of embarrassed scholars and teachers trying to explain what was myth and what was symbolic truth in the Bible. I am and will remain eternally grateful to those people who wrote that record so that we might have the benefit of it. And as the Book of Mormon predicted, my confidence in it spread to a new confidence and trust in the Bible. Thus one book gave me two.

After leaving the navy, I went on to get a master's degree and a Ph.D. in English. I taught at the college and university level for eight years, half of them at Brigham Young University. While at BYU I had the pleasure of teaching a Book of Mormon class and was once again deeply moved by the experience of working with the extraordinary materials in the book. The next eight years were spent running an independent school of grades kindergarten through twelve in New York City. There, whenever I could, I continued to teach at church and at firesides about the Book of Mormon. The last twelve years I have been involved in working with technology and education, and although my travels and schedule have kept me from teaching as much, I have continued to study the Book of Mormon on its own terms. Like many scholars I have found that I prefer the original materials themselves or historical data concerning the materials rather than other people's interpretations.

As I studied the Book of Mormon, I began to notice that there was a consistency within the various characters that reflected not only great differences but also very realistic and true-to-life characterizations. For example, Nephi, "being exceedingly young," prayed to the Lord to see if his father's words were true, and the Lord softened his heart so that he "did believe all the words which had been spoken" by his father. (1 Nephi 2:16.) But at this time he was admonished that "inasmuch as ye shall keep my commandments, ye shall prosper." (V. 20.) Generally speaking, one can assume that this traumatic admonition to a very young boy by the Lord would be remembered and taken literally. His great test came later when he was sent back to pick up the plates and was confronted by a drunk Laban. Nephi was told to take his sword and kill him. He was reluctant to do this, but after being spoken to by the Spirit, Nephi said, "When I, Nephi, had heard these words, I remembered the words of the Lord which he spake unto me in the wilderness, saying that: Inasmuch as thy seed shall keep my commandments, they shall prosper in the land of promise." (1 Nephi 4:14.) So at this critical moment Nephi decided to keep the commandment, and he killed Laban. For the remainder of his life Nephi used the charge to keep the commandments as his bedrock. His tone and attitude were not those of a compromiser. He had had an experience, he had committed himself, and he never deviated from the commitment that he had made as a young man.

Nephi's younger brother Jacob was an entirely different person. He had an entirely different set of experiences and therefore turned out to be an entirely different person than Nephi turned out to be. I find the story of Jacob to be particularly significant not only because it illustrates my interest in the consistency of characterization in the Book of Mormon but also because it shows his circumstances. He was given a philosophical blessing that reveals some of the most extraordinary insights about eternal principles that man has ever been privileged to read.

The setting for Jacob's blessing is deeply moving because Lehi was giving final blessings to his children before dying. A man who had undertaken an extraordinary saga at such a high cost to his family, Lehi no doubt felt a need to leave behind something of great value to his sensitive child who was his "first-born in the days of my tribulation in the wilderness." (2 Nephi 2:1.) Recognizing that the child "suffered afflictions and much sorrow," Lehi wanted to assure Jacob that because of "the greatness of God," God would "consecrate thine afflictions for thy gain." (Vv. 1-2.) Drawing on his son's difficult childhood, Lehi then explained the doctrine of "opposition in all things." (V. 11.) The father was privileged to help his son to understand that all he had suffered would add to his joy, for "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy." (V. 25.)

At the time I remember having been so excited by Jacob's blessing that I looked forward to hearing what his younger brother Joseph would be told. I was disappointed to read that his blessing was that the Lord would preserve his seed forever. I felt poor Joseph had been cheated, but now, approaching the twilight of my life, I find Joseph's blessing extraordinarily comforting, for now I have seed.

I was interested in tracing Jacob's sensitivities in his own talks. His style is far more delicate than that of his older brother Nephi. In lecturing the men in front of their wives and children, he was very apologetic because he had to speak with "much boldness of speech . . . before your wives and your children, many of whose feelings are exceedingly tender and chaste and delicate before God." (Jacob 2:7.) The people thought they had come to the meeting "to hear the pleasing word of God, yea, the word which healeth the wounded soul," but because God insisted that Jacob talk openly to the men, he had to "admonish" them about their "crimes, to enlarge the wounds of those who are already wounded, instead of consoling and healing their wounds; and those who have not been wounded, instead of feasting upon the pleasing word of God have daggers placed to pierce their souls and wound their delicate minds." (Vv. 8-9.) I know of no other passage that reveals such a sensitivity on the speaker's part to the hurt he might be giving to the spouses and children of those being called to repentance.

As I tracked the progress of each character's life in the Book of Mormon and continued to find that each retained a consistency of character that often was derived from youthful experiences, I began to sense that it was impossible for a young man in his early twenties to write in such sophisticated patterns, each differing markedly from the others. In fact, were Joseph Smith the author and not the translator, his themes and characterizations would have a consistency reflecting his own experiences and characterizations rather than the extraordinary diversity represented by the different authors in the book.

Although we can find these extraordinary differences in the fully developed characters in the Book of Mormon, we cannot find the character or voice of Joseph Smith. Were he to have written the book in approximately seventy-five days, we would find his set of themes and interests derived from his youthful experience. They would have been alike, as well, because in seventy-five days you do not have much of an opportunity to change. Instead, Joseph Smith's voice is nowhere to be found.

This insight stunned me and convinced me that I was dealing with a book that was real and, more than anything else, was a book I could trust. This was bedrock! This was something to build on! For I, like all other people, had my own set of experiences and characterizations, and I could not transcend them. Although I was given a hunger for religion, I had been trained to analyze and distrust religious fervor and emotion that had caused such trauma throughout recorded history.

Suddenly finding something that I could trust changed the entire perspective of my life. At last I could let go of my doubts and suspicions about the validity of religious experiences, and I began to find my way in this new world.
