Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

I Felt Someone Had Filled Me with Light

Lisa Bolin Hawkins, Amarillo, Texas

When I think back to the time when I decided to join The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, I feel especially loved by our Heavenly Father. He knew exactly how to bring the restored gospel to my attention. He didn't send people; he sent books. It was the perfect way to teach a girl whose fondest childhood fantasy was that she would somehow be locked in the Amarillo, Texas, pubic library overnight, and thus be allowed to stay up all night, which she was sure would enable her to read every book in the place—a goal just short of heaven itself.

I was born and lived most of my youth in Texas. My father was raised in the Southern Baptist church, my mother in the Church of Christ. My older sister and I were taken to both churches with indifferent regularity, although we spent more time at the Church of Christ because we often visited my mother's parents on weekends. My parents separated when I was seven years old and were divorced two years later. Over the years, with the help of friends and relatives, I was exposed by varying degrees to the Christian (Disciples of Christ), Presbyterian, Episcopalian, and Roman Catholic churches. The thing I liked most about any church was the music, but I also felt that other needs were being met through church attendance. I had a Bible of my own, and I read it.

By the time I was a junior in high school, I had been exposed to several varieties of orthodox religion. I continued my spiritual odyssey by exploring what my mother considered the unorthodox. I read Leon Uris's Exodus, attended synagogue, and considered converting to Judaism and going to Israel (about twenty-five years late, or was it?) to fight for freedom on a kibbutz. For several weeks I attended yoga classes and studied Hinduism and Buddhism. I alarmed my mother by becoming a vegetarian. This was during the early seventies, when the "flower child" culture was transforming itself into a hard drug culture, and I think my mother worried that meatless meals and herbal tea today could lead to marijuana and amphetamines tomorrow. To her credit, she was unwilling to interfere so long as the strongest potion to pass my lips was Dr. Pepper. She was relieved when I left Swami Satchidananda and returned to Jesus, and hamburgers.

My next experiment was with a group of what were then termed "Jesus Freaks." A group of about ten people, mostly high school students like me, met each Friday and Saturday evening for Bible study at the home of a pleasant woman named Mrs. Paul. So far as I know, they were not affiliated with any church. My friend Renee, who had introduced me to the group, helped me to be "saved" by acknowledging Jesus Christ as my Savior—something that was easy for me to do. Renee and I occasionally witnessed to waitresses and patrons in donut shops and similar places. We talked about Christ and salvation and left tracts with the people, most of whom accepted the intrusions of these earnest high school girls with fairly good humor.

Renee told me that the group met on Friday and Saturday evenings so that we would not be tempted to date. This was not a big problem, as the boys I knew did not seem overwhelmed by the temptation to ask me out. Renee also advised that I stop wearing makeup or trying to control my long, frizzy hair. I should wear only baggy jeans and shapeless T-shirts, so I would not tempt men to lust after me. Again, the men I knew did not seem to be struggling with this problem, but it took a lot less time to get ready for school than it did before I "went grubby."

After several weeks of meeting with the Bible study group, I had learned a lot about the Pauline epistles and looked a bit like Janis Joplin on a bad day. My room at home looked like a monk's cell. I had taken down all my posters and mementos, fearing that they were vain. I prayed and I read the Bible even more than I had in the past. My older sister was disgusted, not because she was antireligious, but because this particular manifestation of my search for the truth was deadly dull. She pointed out a few facts, like it was probably okay with God to try to look nice, and, in return, I preached at her. But she got through to me. As I thought about my friends and pastimes, I realized that my life held little joy. The only things I had to look forward to were my own death—at which time I would go to heaven, I hoped—or the second coming of Christ. I could not count on either event occurring within the next week or two.

Furthermore, the Bible study group could not solve my chief spiritual problem: I had never been baptized, and Jesus said in the New Testament that baptism was required. A minister who visited the group said that I could not be baptized without becoming a member of a particular church, and I hadn't found one that I thought God wanted me to join. I had other questions the members of the study group couldn't answer, either, things that I did not want to "accept on faith," as they suggested. Finally, one Friday, I told them I wouldn't be back. They pointed out that I was sure to go to hell; they prayed loudly for my wayward soul; I cried. As I left, I told them that if they were going to be the only people in heaven, I didn't want to go, anyway.

I gave up. For a few months I called myself an agnostic. I stopped praying and reading the Bible and had a good time redecorating my room. But finally, in June 1972, between my junior and senior years of high school, I couldn't stand it any more. I wasn't agnostic, and I knew it. So I went back to my Bible and my knees. "God," I pleaded, "I am tired of looking. If you want me to join a church, then find one for me. I am sick and tired of all this confusion."

A week or so after my prayer, I was at work—I had a summer job as a cashier at a fast-food restaurant—when a friend from school, Ron Brough, came in to buy some hamburgers. I didn't know Ron very well, but I liked him. His family had moved to Dallas from New Jersey, and everyone at school knew he was a Mormon. When Ron came into the restaurant that day, I thought, "Mormons—I haven't checked out the Mormons yet." I didn't say anything to Ron, but next time I went to the library, I literally "checked out" the Mormons: a book by Senator Wallace Bennett, Why I Am a Mormon, and a copy of the Book of Mormon.

I read Senator Bennett's book first, and it provided an introduction to the Book of Mormon and a lot of information about Church doctrines and practices. It all sounded acceptable to me. Then I began reading the Book of Mormon. This was different. This book claimed to be scripture, like the Bible. To me, that involved a heavy burden of proof. I read carefully, looking up each footnote reference to the Bible to be sure it was all consistent. As I read, I copied into my journal passages that struck me as especially memorable. Finally, I reached the challenge and promise in Moroni 10:4-5.

I did not doubt that if I asked God, He would tell me, one way or the other, whether the Book of Mormon were true. And I knew that if God's answer were yes, it would cause trouble in my family and bewilderment among my friends, and it would probably change my whole life. But that was not my main concern, because I wanted the answer to be yes. I had found the answers to many questions, and I wanted them to be true. As Alma explained in Alma 32:37, I "desired to believe."

Having been reminded by Senator Bennett of Joseph Smith's experience in the Sacred Grove, I was terrified that God might personally deliver his answer. When I knelt, after much thought, to ask my question, I first requested that I receive an answer without heavenly messengers or visits from Deity. Then I asked God if this book I had read so carefully, the Book of Mormon, was indeed a book of scripture, like the Bible. To me, the whole thing turned on the book: if the Book of Mormon were a true book of scripture, then all the rest of it, from Joseph Smith to the current prophet in Salt Lake City, had to be true, and I had found a church where I could be baptized.

God's answer was yes. I felt as though someone had lifted off the top of my head and filled me with light. I spent a long time in praise and thanks, in response to the joyous answer I received. I then telephoned Sister Margaret Brough and asked how I could be baptized, explaining that I had read the Book of Mormon, prayed about it, and was ready to join the Church. The Broughs became a second family to me. After I obtained permission from my reluctant mother and had six missionary discussions in two days, Ron baptized me, and his father, Rulon R. Brough, confirmed me. At that time, there was one stake in Dallas. Now there are many stakes and a temple.

I still consider my decision to join the Church to be the best I ever made, although almost two decades have passed. And I am thankful that the Lord knew and loved a seventeen-year-old fanatic reader well enough to answer her prayers through the medium most suited to her: a book—the book.
