Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

This Was the Church Jesus Wanted Me to Attend

Pamela April Brown, London, England

Missionaries from America, who knocked at our door one cold November day in 1984, were the people who introduced me to the Book of Mormon. For eight months I had felt very elated and excited, experiencing a peculiar feeling as if someone were by my side helping me through the days, knowing something was going to happen. Would it be happy or sad? The sun seemed to shine each day, unusual for England, particularly in November.

I had always felt close to Jesus from the age of five years and talked to Him whenever I felt like it. I was christened in a Protestant church and attended a convent school for many years. The Catholic religion had a strong influence on me at the age of sixteen years. I intended to become a novice nun, but inner feelings held me back and continued to do this through life. I attended many different churches with my children, but had not heard of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—although, while I was in New Zealand visiting relatives, we spent many evenings watching the beautiful sunset with the temple standing high on a hill. My uncle thought the building belonged to the Maoris.

In the year 1984 things would alter for me. After nursing my parents for twelve years in their home—my mother a psychiatric patient and my father disabled from a stroke—life became difficult, affecting the whole family. Our strength was getting rather low. I would sit in the garden by our little pond and talk to Jesus, asking Him how long this would all go on and how we could take the strain. We needed His help. As I mentioned before, the sun seemed to give warmth each time I prayed. I would thank Jesus, as I knew He was there, but it was not until I met the missionaries that I felt so close to Him. The weeks went by and, wherever I went, on trains, buses, cars, walking in towns or parks, this strong feeling came over me. I wanted to kneel down and pray. It was quite frightening.

One afternoon at 4 p.m., it was getting cold and dark. I was waiting for furniture to arrive when a knock came at the door. Instead of the furniture men, two young men stood there. I knew immediately these were the people I had been waiting for. The feeling was so powerful I felt I would explode. They introduced themselves as Elder Ahmu from Illinois and Elder Hirschi from Utah and showed me their illustrated book. I recognised the New Zealand Temple. Elder Ahmu's parents had helped to build the temple in Hamilton. His mother was born in Tauranga, where my relatives live. We talked for some time. The missionaries asked to come in. We prayed. I felt so thankful—at last something was happening. It was good to feel at peace, although the following weeks did not run smoothly.

The missionaries came each week. They showed films and gave talks on the Book of Mormon. I found it all so interesting. They gave me a copy, which I treasured. I could hardly put it down, reading late into the early hours of the morning. I knew this book was something special. Although it was hard to understand, I knew it was right. On reading the book my whole body became so hot that my head felt as if it would burst. Some days I felt turmoil. The whole house seemed to be going round and round. I felt quite afraid. Was I doing the right thing? I prayed with all my might and strength. The tears flowed. Several times I phoned the missionaries for help. They came to the house and read scriptures or told me over the phone which ones to read. They were always a great help.

My daughter and I attended the Mormon church on Christmas Sunday. I found it all so powerful and cried nearly for the three hours. I realize now that the Holy Spirit was with me. I discussed the whole thing with my son. I was so nervous at the next visit from the missionaries that I could not attend church again. I had experienced unusual happenings that Sunday. My son cancelled the missionaries' visit, but they arrived late that evening. We discussed the whole thing with my husband and family. The missionaries left in a friendly manner. I asked if I could keep the Book of Mormon, which they agreed to.

During the few days of the Christmas period, I could only think about the missionaries, their teachings, and the Church. A few days later I left a letter for the missionaries in the church. I prayed to Jesus that they would come to our house again. I knew by reading the Book of Mormon this was the church Jesus wanted me to attend, but it was not easy. My family was worried for me, although my husband always entertained the missionaries and members of the Church. He also drove us to the London Temple, which we all enjoyed.

The missionaries did return after reading the letter. Elder Ahmu had moved on and Elder Gardener from Idaho took his place. I was pleased to see them. We continued the lessons. My daughter and I returned to church. I did not realise that the missionaries were leading me to baptism. I thought that came years later, when you understood everything about the Book of Mormon. Once again, for two weeks I experienced a very strong feeling. I very much felt the need to be baptized. I decided to ask the missionaries on their next visit. As it happened, they asked me first. I promptly said yes. My husband asked me to be careful, but I knew I was doing the right thing.

The baptism was on February 28, 1984, at 6 p.m. It was the most wonderful evening. I really felt I belonged. Elder Hirschi baptized me. Elder Gardener confirmed me. I shall be forever grateful to them for their love and patience.

How I thanked our Heavenly Father, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost.
