Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

It Was like Fire to Me

Mark Graham, Salt Lake City, Utah

I was born in Salt Lake City. My family spent Sundays at Wasatch Springs, not at church. The Winder Ward house was at the top of our street. My little sister and I visited there to sample the refreshments whenever they had an outdoor carnival. I was considered to be a bookworm by my classmates. By the time I was ten I was an intellectual and an avowed atheist. In Utah it is hard to be ambivalent about the Church. You are usually for it or against it. Our family was definitely against it.

By the time I graduated from high school, I was convinced that the Church was the cause of most of the social as well as the psychological problems in the state. I was not a good person. I smoked cigarettes. I had a girlfriend. I was ambitious and arrogant. I was vehement in my disdain for religion and enthusiastic in my embrace of everything forbidden by it.

I had one year of college left when my girlfriend decided to go to California and join the Scientologists. For reasons not entirely clear to me, I picked up an old Bible and began to read it. I started at page 1. I read about Moses. I went to a drive-in movie and saw The Ten Commandments, with the Oquirrh Mountains as a backdrop. I thought, if the Bible is of any value, it must be about me in some way. Moses must be an archetype of the struggle of men to renounce spiritual bondage. I memorized poems of Dylan Thomas and the sixth chapter of Isaiah. I did not pray; I painted pictures. I asked questions of Moses and Isaiah as I painted and walked the mountain paths of the Wasatch looking for the burning bush.

And I sent letters to my friend with the Scientologists—mad love letters, painted letters, colorful letters. She lived on the Scientology boat. They read her mail before she did. They decided I was a PTS—a Potential Trouble Source. They were right. They told her not to read my letters and to discourage me as much as possible.

It was summer, and I was working for the Salt Lake City Mosquito Abatement District. I worked with a deaf man I had worked with every summer for five years. It was punishment for being rebellious. We were the drainage crew and the amphibious spray crew. Soon I was the only one he could get along with. He did not mind if I read.

What had caused me to begin to read that Bible? What bridge crossed the chasm of my intellectual resolution and allowed me to decide to just suspend unbelief? I had decided to believe the whole thing.

Meanwhile, I had not heard from the boat in Los Angeles for a while. I decided I would be brave. I would go there myself. I drove across the desert with my Bible and the poems of Rimbaud. I procrastinated our meeting by going to the Los Angeles Museum of Art. "What if she does not want to see me? What if she is married to a Scientologist?" I looked at the saber-toothed tiger caught in the tarpit at LaBrea.

Finally I drove my turquoise Mustang to the Scientology center and walked in very casually. She was having some yogurt for lunch and was surprised to see me. "Let's go for a little ride. You can eat in the car." It did not take me long to get lost in L.A. But before she could go back to Utah, she had to get all of her belongings. She was terribly afraid because of the tight security and the pressure she had been put under to stay. We walked into the place together. Before she could leave, they had to interrogate her. They did not like me very much. They wanted to test their mental powers against me. I could tell by the way they were staring at me. I felt peaceful. I walked over to the courtyard where I could see the palm trees. And I thought about the Savior. I felt a little of His peace, as if He wanted to demonstrate for a moment that He was able to secure those who were His.

The Scientologists tried to follow us along the astral plane, but they were no match for my Mustang.

During the winter I finished college. I was happier than I had been since I was a child. I took a dancing class and read Henry Miller. I painted pictures about the Bible. I painted pictures about things I did not even know yet; there was more in the pictures than I put there! Premonitions. When I thought seriously I was full of ideas, wonderful ideas, like a painting called Baptism. Or a painting about Moses and his bride leaving the world of spiritual darkness, dancing down the aisle as the movie loomed behind them. We lived on Center Street, below the capitol.

After graduation in 1973, I worked for Mosquito Abatement one last summer. I had an idea that we should go to New York. It was not something I decided after many deliberations; I just knew it. I also stopped at Temple Square one afternoon after work and picked up a blue paperback Book of Mormon. I read it in the back of the drainage truck. The people at Mosquito Abatement were wondering what was happening.

I did not pray about the book. I knew it was true as soon as I read it. It was just like the Bible, except pure and clear, more explicit. It was like fire to me. I felt like God had a work for me to do. A strange thought. I was going on a journey someplace I had never been before. There were no boundaries, no road marked out for the artist. I could understand how Lehi felt. By the time the stake missionaries stopped by, I had read the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price.

I did not want to go to church. I did not think it was necessary. I argued with myself on the way to work about this. I lost the argument. That was how the stake missionaries found us. They were a married couple. He was a retired steelworker. He did not look like Nephi or Alma. I took a long walk up into the foothills. What was to be done about these people? They were coming over again, in the evening. I decided to receive them like, well, like angels. That made all the difference.

We went to church a few times before going to New York. Young couples asked us if we wanted to come over some time and play games. "Play games? And eat marshmallow popcorn and pink punch too, I bet. No, thanks, we don't play games. We're artists."

After the interview for baptism we decided to get married. We were married by the bishop in his office late one night. We went to Harmons for dinner on our wedding night. Two days later I was baptized at the Tabernacle. The next day we left for New York with all of our belongings. But that is another story.
