Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

As If Touched by a Magician's Hand, She Changed

Patricia Moran, Carlos Paz, Argentina

It was a hot afternoon in 1988 in the city of Carlos Paz. My companion and I decided to visit a reference given to us by a sister member. After looking for a long time, we did find this very special family, consisting of a couple and the husband's mother; their children didn't live at home anymore. The husband had larynx cancer and spent a lot of time in bed, depressed and with hate towards God for the "punishment" He had given him. All the resentment had been transmitted to his wife. His mother was also ill. She was in an orthopedic bed, unable to move. She was very Catholic and accepted her burden; she had faith in many saints.

What frightened us or, better said, what hurt us was to see Cora, the wife, transformed, grieved, afflicted, and so very angry with God. She couldn't understand the Lord's love as it was expressed in her husband and mother-in-law. She didn't accept us well. Further, she shouted at us and made us feel terrible. Even though we tried to uplift her with our testimonies, she wouldn't listen to us. Her ears were closed, as was her heart. I felt so frustrated and powerless that I could only take her hands into mine, listen, and cry with her. This calmed her down a little. I remembered in that moment what Alma teaches us in Mosiah 18:9: "Yea, and are willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort."

I spoke a few words and asked her to read from the old and damp Book of Mormon that she had had for a long time. Again, she didn't listen. She left us. We marked some scriptures and left the book on the table. Saddened, we left the house. That night, I asked my Father with all my strength that she could find peace in her soul and read the Book of Mormon. I did this for a week but then forgot the whole matter.

Close to a month later, we were walking along the downtown streets of Carlos Paz when a woman stopped me. My companion didn't see her and kept on walking. To my surprise, it was Cora, but so different. In her eyes there was a new brightness. With a gentle voice, she said, "I've been looking for you for a long time. I read the Book of Mormon and my life changed. Can you see it? There's peace in me. I need to talk to you."

My heart beat quickly, and my imperfect mind was confused. I couldn't understand such a change in a woman. We arranged a date for two days later. That day arrived and I went first up the stairs of a typical house in the area (all upstairs). There she was, crying desperately, but meek and submissive, willing to do what the Lord had asked her. She opened up and began to tell us that her husband, the one who taught her to hate God, had begun to take part in charismatic meetings and, in between prayers and rosaries, hit and insulted her. He even spit on her, the one who took care of him and comforted him in times of physical and spiritual pain. She couldn't understand the god her husband had accepted. The only way out was the Book of Mormon. It brought peace, comfort, and hope to her life. Her great wish was to know if God could forgive her and if He loved her.

I understood how God works, how He used the opposition in His favor. Satan used her husband to keep her away from the Lord, and He, the Lord, used the same means to bring her closer to Him. I hope her husband will understand these things in the future.

So, there she was, crying on my shoulder, waiting for me to say something. I didn't know what to say. I just prayed in silence that the Spirit would tell me. She then told us that there was something I said in our first visit that touched her heart: "Don't say that God doesn't exist because He doesn't listen to you. What happens is that you don't listen to Him."

In tears, she asked me to teach her how to listen to God. So, we did. We explained to her how to pray and how our Heavenly Father answers our prayers. We recommended that she continue reading the Book of Mormon and go to church. Later we would explain the "magic book" that changed her. What I didn't tell her was that I wouldn't see her again because I was finishing my mission in a couple of days.

Not only had something in her inner self changed, but something in me did also, and the responsible factor was, as we know, the Book of Mormon. I understood the special spirit, or the special power, that it possesses. I know it's not us, nor our great spirituality, that makes the people accept the gospel. If it were like that, their conversion wouldn't be stable or secure, although our spiritual power is essential. The Book of Mormon is what works, touches, and transforms. Cora is a great example. In my eighteen months in the work, I never saw anyone so irate, so hateful, and so pained against God. So, as if touched by a magician's hand, she changed. But, it wasn't us, the dedicated missionaries who were there, but the spirit of the Book of Mormon that reached Cora's heart and surely will reach millions of other Coras. (Translated by Toms F. Lindheimer.)
