Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

My Body Seemed Too Small for My Soul

Yvonne Williams, Loriente, France

I was born and raised mostly in France, but because my father was an officer in the French army, I spent four years of my youth in African countries. My parents were practicing Catholics and had seven children. I am the youngest. They lost their second child, an infant son, in the country of Mali, where he had been born. Our family life was, to say the least, difficult. Showing any sign of affection was taboo. We had to be strong "little soldiers." People didn't speak and communicate in my family; they yelled and insulted. My father's harshness, violent temper, and domineering ways seemed too much to bear at times. We truly feared him!

I spent many hours as a child trying to figure out eternity and God. Invariably, I became very frustrated at my inability to do so. Fear would overwhelm me, and the tears would start rolling down. I realized when I was six or seven how ignorant I was. While standing in the middle of the street one day, I looked around me and saw a world I knew nothing about. I didn't know how the street under my feet had been made. I didn't know how the houses had been built. I didn't know where the electricity I used every day came from, not to mention the trees and the grass! I didn't know why God was so angry at us that He hadn't talked to us in two thousand years. I didn't know why I existed. I stood there panicked, and I burst into tears.

The nuns of the private Catholic schools I attended tried to instill in me a good set of values. I didn't rebel against these values, but I found the doctrines of the Catholic church more and more difficult to accept. By the age of fourteen, I wondered if my rebellion was triggered by the doctrines themselves or by my parents. I decided to judge the faith on its own merits, and to accomplish this, I enrolled in a Catholic youth movement. The experience lasted a year and was a disaster. By the age of fifteen I didn't know if God existed or who was Jesus Christ, and I didn't care to know anymore!

About a week after I officially quit the youth organization, my older brother, who was twenty-three at the time, died in a car crash. I received the news of the accident around 10 p.m. My parents were spending the weekend in their summer house on an island off the coast of my hometown. They didn't have a phone and couldn't be reached. My other sister and brother had gone to a party but hadn't told me where. I felt overwhelmed with grief and so incredibly alone. I loved my brother but had never told him so. No one ever said the word love in my family.

At first, I started to clean the house to try to not think. It didn't work, so I gathered all the pictures I could find of him and sobbed hysterically. Then I started to fear for him. Where was he? Was he alone? Was he in Paradise? What was Paradise like, anyhow? Did he know anybody there? I couldn't answer any of my questions. In desperation, I knelt and begged God to accept him, to reassure him. I stopped praying when I became aware of presences around me. I couldn't see them, but I felt many people in the room with me. Voices in my head were telling me, "We were there when he came. We welcomed him. Please don't worry. He is fine." Among the presences I soon discerned my grandfathers, the brother who had died as an infant, and many other friendly people. I couldn't tell who the others were, but I somehow knew that they knew me and were close to me. When I realized that I was having a conversation with "dead people," I became frightened and left the room quickly. Later during the night the thought that there was something that I should do for my brother kept coming to me. I kept rejecting it, telling myself over and over again that he was dead, out of my reach, dead.

I broke the news of his death to my sister and brother around 6 in the morning when they returned. My parents were finally reached close to noon that day. I didn't speak to anybody about "the people." It was contrary to what I had been taught. I told myself that I had probably made it up in my grief. I felt, nevertheless, a peace in my heart during the next few days. I was confronted during that period with some more doctrines I found impossible to believe. I had decided that I believed in God after all, but for the first time I realized that I could believe in Him and not in the church I had been raised in. The two became very distinct to me. I informed my mother shortly after my brother's death that I didn't consider myself a Catholic anymore.

Summer was beginning, and I joined my parents on the island. The girls in the family received the message from my father that it would have been different if one of us girls had died instead. Boys carry the name. Boys are important. My father seeemed to be taking his grief out on us. . . . I became consumed with hate for him, thought of killing him, and then judged and condemned myself. I was a big nobody, and I didn't deserve to live. I started collecting pills, any pills that could harm me. My plan was to collect enough of them to do the job right the first time.

One day, as I was staring at my collection of pills to see if I had enough, I suddenly felt the "inside" of me. I could see that deep down, way deep down, I was made of love. Maybe in a different environment I could reach down to that love and bring it up. A small, small voice was telling me to hang on, to give myself a chance. I threw the pills away. For the next four to five months, I waited. I didn't know what I was waiting for, but I knew I had to wait; something was going to happen.

One day I was looking in the encyclopedia under "Mormon." There was so much in the press about the Osmond brothers being able to have twenty-four wives each, because they were Mormons. How sick! I didn't know what a Mormon was. My mother was in the room at the time, but she said nothing. A few days later, she was standing at the kitchen sink when I came home from school. On the table was a strange-looking book. Two missionaries had left a Book of Mormon with our parish priest that same week. She had mentioned to him that I had complained that our encyclopedia was too small and didn't say much about Mormons. The priest lent her the book for me. To this day, my mother doesn't remember this happening. She was so upset when I joined the Mormon church that she completely blocked these events out of her memory. I took the book, thinking, "No way am I going to read this boring-looking book!" Who would have thought that there actually were Mormon missionaries in my little French town? And what were they doing there anyway?

I had just turned sixteen. My heart was so heavy and full of anger and sadness. My father's behavior was not improving, and now my brother and sister were increasing their drinking also. A few years later, my sister would die from it. I could see my family going through a lot of pain and destruction and was powerless to help. All I could do was watch and wait.

That night I took the book to bed with me, thinking that if I read in it a little, it would bore me so much that I would fall asleep faster. First I read the Joseph Smith story, then the thirteen Articles of Faith. At the end of the book was a list of commonly asked questions about religion and where to find the answers. They were my most common questions! I started to read the references. It is difficult to describe what happened next. I couldn't believe what I was reading. These answers made so much sense!

As I read, the tears started rolling down. I couldn't stop reading and crying. I then felt my mind opening up. I received a very clear vision of what was expected of me, who I was supposed to become. I can't describe the pain I felt when I realized how far from my potential I was and how much work was needed. I cried out to God to forgive me. I didn't believe that I could ever become the person He wanted me to be. That feeling of total despair was soon followed by one of complete love and acceptance. My body seemed too small for my soul. I was loved and accepted by my God! It would take time and effort on my part to grow, but I could do it. He trusted me, and He would be there to help me become what He knew I could become, if I let Him. I couldn't cry anymore. I just lay there, immersed in that divine love and responding to it.

The morning came very fast. I hadn't slept at all during the night. I felt very weak and out of breath as I prepared myself for school. I placed the book on a shelf very carefully. I think I was almost afraid to touch it that morning. I knew something incredibly powerful and "out of this world" had happened to me, but I didn't understand it. God wasn't supposed to talk to people anymore. . . . How could this happen? Why me? If me, then why not everybody else? I hadn't done anything special to deserve this.

I passed my father in the hall. All the hate I had for him was gone. In my heart I had instead a very sweet, penetrating feeling. It was so sweet that it hurt. He yelled something at me, but I couldn't get angry. All I saw was a very sick, very hurt man. I felt for him. It didn't matter if he didn't love me. It didn't matter if no one on the earth loved me. I was loved beyond measure by God! I couldn't move fast or speak very much. It took a lot of effort on my part to respond to people. At school, tears came to my eyes when I saw the priest who taught us catechism enter the room. I had been so hostile to that poor man! I was angry at him for not having the answers to my questions. Now I realized that he was a good man trying to do the best he could to teach us about faith. He couldn't tell us what he didn't know. We became friends that day.

The sweet, painful feeling remained with me two to three weeks. I wanted to keep it forever and get rid of it at the same time. I didn't read in the Book of Mormon anymore: I was too scared to open it. I went back to mass for a few Sundays, but I honestly couldn't feel God there, so I stopped. I read everything I found about the Mormons in all the libraries of my hometown. Most of it was not flattering. I couldn't reconcile what I was reading with the spirituality of the Book of Mormon.

After four months or so, as I was walking downtown with my best friend, I saw two strange-looking men on the sidewalk selling books. Next to them was a big picture I had seen in the Book of Mormon. With my heart pounding, I approached them, bought a book, and left quickly. I related to my friend what had happened to me that night and asked her to take the book and read it. She didn't think too much of it at the time, but she too found her way into the Church eventually.

Almost a year had passed since I had read in the Book of Mormon. One day, I finally decided that I needed to know more about it. I had never spoken to a Mormon in my life, and the thought of doing so was terrifying. If I wanted to learn more, I had to ask them to teach me. I had read everything in town about that church, and I couldn't bear to stay in my ignorance any longer. On Sunday morning, December 1, 1974, I knocked at the door of the meeting house, accompanied by my friend. It was a small apartment above a bar. The missionaries lived in it, and the dozen or so members met in the living room. We asked if we could attend the meeting and sat next to the exit, just in case! We were shaking from head to toe.

I was baptized, a year later, the week of my eighteenth birthday. One of the missionaries who had welcomed us to the church meeting on that first day came back after his graduation from Brigham Young University and proposed to me. We were sealed in the Swiss temple and now have two children.

My parents' initial hostility toward the Church subsided with the years. Under the prompting of the Holy Ghost, I was able to know how to reach my father. He responded to me a year or so before his death. On his nightstand he kept a Book of Mormon and The Restored Church, by William E. Berrett. One of my sisters and two nieces joined the Church in France, and I have over the years become familiar with many of the unknown, friendly presences.
