Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

That's When My Life Started Changing

Myrtle Francis, Antigua, Barbados

In 1988 Elders Webb and Moore from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints first visited me at home with what they called the restored gospel. I had never heard about this church before, and neither had I ever heard about the Book of Mormon—which was said to be another testament of Jesus Christ. Though I could not invite them in the first time because I had a terrible toothache, my curiosity was aroused, so I asked them to come back at a later date.

As the elders taught me the restored gospel, I became more and more interested in what they had to say, though I did not believe their teaching. Their doctrine was so different from anything I'd heard before. I kept on saying to myself, "Don't be fooled by them, Myrtle. They're just another false religion." After a few visits the elders gave me the Book of Mormon and suggested that I read it and pray and ask God if what I read is true. Little did I realize then what a big difference this strange book was going to make in my life.

Let me point out here that I was raised in a Christian home. I went to a Christian school and was baptized in a Baptist church. I was taught the Bible at home, at church, and even at school. I thought that the doctrine of the Mormons was false; I thought so because their teachings were not consistent with what I had learned as a child.

The elders kept on teaching me, though I was not receptive to the teachings of their church. I admired their faithfulness and the enthusiasm with which they taught the Bible. There were times when they'd come home for weeks and could not find me there, but they kept coming. I gave them a very hard time, but in spite of everything they were not discouraged.

Thank God I was open-minded enough that although I was convinced that their doctrine was false, I still welcomed them at home and kept on reading the Book of Mormon. After reading the book for about three weeks and praying, beseeching God to tell me if the book was true, I became convinced that a book as precise and accurate as the Book of Mormon could not have been written by a mere man. That's when I came to the realization that it is the word of God and consequently the church that used it the true Church—because no other church had the Book of Mormon. I then decided that I wanted to be part of that church.

That's when my life started changing. My friends thought I was crazy, my family thought I was in need of prayer, my co-workers thought there was some man in the church that attracted me. It's amazing how fast someone's life can change. Instead of being one of the crowd, I became the odd one. There was not one day that I was not reminded of my decision to join the so-called Mormonites.

The elders told me that one of the steps to salvation is baptism and that though I'd accepted the truth, I still needed to be baptized. I wanted to be part of the true Church, but I was still very reluctant to get baptized, partly because I had already been baptized in a Christian church and partly because of my friends and family. I struggled within myself night and day. I asked God to give me the courage to be baptized, because I knew that it was the right thing to do. After much prayer and a lot of encouragement from the elders I decided to be baptized.

The two weeks that followed were a very trying time for me. I had to deal with all sorts of criticism about the Church and my motives for wanting to join the Church. The hurtful part about all this was that these remarks came from people I thought were my friends. I was seized by a feeling of uncertainty. Was that what I really wanted to do? Could I deal with the criticism? A part of me wanted to go forward and be baptized. The other part wanted to forget the whole thing. The elders kept on encouraging me—one of the things they said that kept ringing in my mind was that I am the only one answerable to God for my actions. I then resolved that I would be baptized, no matter what anyone had to say about it.

I'll never forget the day I was baptized. It is one of the most memorable days of my life and one of the happiest. In spite of everything I've gone through since I decided to join the Church, I don't regret my decision to follow in the pathway of God—not even for one moment have I regretted it. My only regret is that my friends and family have not come to know the truth as I did. I'll always be grateful to the elders who introduced me to the restored gospel. I hope that one day I'll have the pleasure of leading someone to the fold of God.
