Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

In Spite of My Past, God Cares about Me

Emma J. Carpenter, Wellsboro, Pennsylvania

When I was about eight years old, I began to wonder why we didn't have prophets on the earth like we read about in the Bible. My family attended the Baptist church, so I asked my Sunday School teacher about it, and each time she told me she didn't know. I asked her, "Doesn't Jesus love us as much as He loved those people?" She told me it didn't make any difference; we have the Bible and that's enough. It wasn't enough for me, but she told me to stop asking and not even to think about it anymore.

By the time I graduated from high school, I was having all sorts of doubts about myself and life in general. I wondered if there was a purpose to life. I wanted more specific direction. I began to wonder if maybe one of the other churches in town might better meet my needs.

In 1970 the missionaries came to our home. They were talking to my mother about the Articles of Faith on a card they had. I was working in the next room, and something they said caught my attention. I went in and asked if I could read their card. I read the thirteen Articles of Faith and told them that everything on that card was what I had always thought should be true. Of course, the missionaries began teaching me the discussions. They told me about the Prophet Joseph Smith and President Joseph Fielding Smith, who was the president of the Church at that time. They said these men were prophets. I asked them if they were prophets like Moses, and they said they were. They showed me pictures of Joseph Smith and President Smith, and I remember the warm, comfortable feeling that came over me. I thought, Yes, this could be true.

Eventually the missionaries asked me to read the Book of Mormon and to pray about it. By that time I knew I had to know for sure. I knew it was either right, and I would have to go with it 100 percent, or it was very wrong, and I would get as far away from it as possible. So I said that I would do as they asked.

Throughout my life I had said my prayers regularly and I believed in God. But I guess I had just said my prayers without expecting answers, especially not tangible answers, because I couldn't imagine how my prayer would be answered. I was afraid I wouldn't recognize it. One evening when I was home alone, I went to my room to read the Book of Mormon. I knelt down by my bed and asked our Father in Heaven to please let me know, in a way that I would understand, if the Book of Mormon is true, and if so, I would also know the Church is true, and I would be baptized. I promised Him that I would change my life and be obedient to the teachings of the gospel. And if it wasn't true, I also wanted to know, because the opposition was very obvious to me. I could see only black and white—there was no gray. I knew the answer would change my life.

I sat on my bed and began to read very intently. After I had read just a few pages, very clearly into my mind came the words, "It's true, it's true, it's true." Just as distinct as the words were in my mind was the feeling in my heart that the Book of Mormon is the word of God. I felt that excitement that we feel when the Holy Ghost bears witness to us. Suddenly it seemed as though the windows of my mind were open, and my world was full of hope and confidence.

For the first time in my life I had prayed with real intent, and God had heard my prayer. Also for the first time I knew that our Father in Heaven is real and that He knew who I was and, in spite of my past, He cared enough about me to answer my prayer.

My family had attended church regularly since I was a child. Although those churches don't have the answers to all that we need to know to return to our Heavenly Father, I was taught the basics. I believed in God, and I knew that his Son Jesus Christ came to earth to save us from our sins. I knew the Bible was the word of God. I knew that as Christians we should live good lives. Those teachings prepared me to receive the fulness of the gospel when I heard it. Now, after reading the Book of Mormon and receiving the answer to my prayer that the truth has been restored to the earth, I had the peace of mind that I had been hoping for all of my life.

Consequently, I was baptized, and I have continued to read and study the Book of Mormon. I find answers to my questions in the Book of Mormon, and reading it over and over strengthens my testimony. Its teachings provide guidance for my life. But most of all, I know that I am being obedient to the counsel the Lord has given to His people down through the ages to study the scriptures and make them part of their life.

Once, in search of a scripture to express my thoughts, I found this in Alma 39:17: "Behold, you marvel why these things should be known so long beforehand. Behold, I say unto you,

is not a soul at this time as precious unto God as a soul will be at the time of his coming?" Although Alma was referring to the people who lived before and at the time of Christ, that scripture is also the answer to my childhood question, "Doesn't God love us as much as He loved the people we read about in the Bible?"
