Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

I Read It All in Eleven Hours, the Holy Ghost Pushing Me On

Alexandre Mourra, Port-au-Prince, Haiti

My father came from Bethlehem in what is now Israel, but he moved to Haiti, where he made a modest fortune in the mercantile business. I was born in Santiago, Chile, but as a baby I was taken back to Haiti, where I grew up. My native language and culture are therefore French. When I was still a young man, my father returned to Bethlehem with our entire family, for reasons of health, and he died there shortly thereafter. So, at the outbreak of World War II, I enlisted in the British army and saw savage military action in Lebanon. Shortly thereafter I married and returned to Port-au-Prince, where I have remained in the mercantile business ever since.

I had never been able to settle on any particular religion, although I tried many of them. I am recorded as one of the founding fathers of the Rosicrucians here in Haiti, but soon abandoned them. I then drifted from sect to sect, including the "Science of Mind," Freemasonry, and spiritualism. As a spiritualist I succeeded in conversing with departed beings, one of whom appeared as an angel of light. But I found myself in conflict with this personage, and I now realize that it was from the evil one.

I spent many months and years fervently praying to the Lord to send me the truth. My prayers were always addressed to God the Eternal Father, in the name of His son Jesus Christ.

Then, one day while in my store, in the year 1976, I felt prompted to call on my cousin, who had a store not far away. His cousin's wife was there reading the Book of Mormon, about which I knew almost nothing. I asked to borrow it but was refused. She wanted to finish reading it herself, but she gave me a tract on the Prophet Joseph Smith's own story, which I read avidly. I felt immediately in my heart that this told a true story. I wrote to the headquarters of the Florida Mission for a copy of the Book of Mormon, but for three weeks I received no answer. I wrote again and sent a photograph of myself along with my letter. Soon I received both an English and a French copy of the Book of Mormon. I started immediately to read the French copy.

No sooner had I started than I became overpowered by a strong conviction that the book was the word of God. I couldn't put it down. I read the entire book without stopping—from 5 p.m. to 4 a.m. The Holy Ghost helped me read that book—it kept pushing me on. Tears were flowing down my cheeks. I read with understanding in eleven hours. I knew the book was true. I accepted without question the major thesis of the book, the sacred and divine mission of the Savior Jesus Christ and His Messiahship.

For the first time, I felt Jesus to be a reality, a living person, instead of an idea from theology. I felt the spiritual power of the book and its absolute truth. I had no question at all in my heart. After my long wanderings through the mysteries of the occult, I had at last found the truth. My prayers had been answered. I applied immediately for baptism. I had to go to Florida, because no one in Haiti had the right authority. When I walked into the office of President Millet of the Florida Fort Lauderdale Mission, I was still smoking four packs of cigarettes and drinking twenty-five cups of coffee a day. President Millet told me about the Mormon views on such subjects. So I threw my tobacco into the wastebasket, and from that day on to this I have not smoked a single cigarette nor drunk a single cup of coffee.

I am grateful that I have served in the Church in my country and was able to meet President Spencer W. Kimball, who twice thanked me for my faithfulness and other times sent me gifts as a token of his love. Since receiving the Holy Ghost I have been blessed with the gift of discernment and the gift of healing. I have been able to cast out evil spirits, to heal the sick and the weak, and to make prophecies about the work among my people. (From an oral interview translated by David S. King.)
