Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

It Restores Truths about Christ Not Found in the Bible

Tom Ross-Barnett, Leeds, England

I was born in Liberia, West Africa, some thirty-seven years ago. The first nine years of my life were lived in abject poverty, as is the unfortunate norm for most of my countrymen. My life took a dramatic turn when I was brought to the United Kingdom in 1961 by an English lady who had been travelling through Africa on holiday. I was terribly crippled by poliomyelitis and was able to undergo medical treatment which greatly improved my life. [This story is told in detail in The Grasshopper Boy, by June Johns (London: Epworth Press, 1967).] This marvelous lady later adopted me. Through her I got the chance of an education and vast opportunities in life which otherwise would have been dreams. I attended Iowa Wesleyan College between 1971 and 1975, graduating in biology. I have since qualified as a schoolteacher and am working at the moment with people with learning disabilities.

I was baptized into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in November 1980. I am grateful for my membership in Christ's only true church on the earth today. I am grateful for the opportunities I have had to grow in the scriptures and in the various callings I have held. I have been honored to serve as ward clerk, Sunday School president, Sunday School teacher, and institute teacher, as well as in the elders' quorum presidency, on the activities committee, and at the moment as first counselor in the bishopric of my ward, Gaerwen Ward, Chester England Stake.

I first came into contact with the Book of Mormon in the summer of 1973. While I was in the United States as a college student I visited Salt Lake City. In Temple Square I bought a copy of the Book of Mormon along with other souvenirs. I placed no significance on this because I knew nothing at all about the Church.

When the friends I was travelling with saw me with the Book of Mormon, they began to laugh and told me that I did not want to read "that book," as it represented a racist church. I found it strange that a church should be racist. Unfortunately, I did nothing to investigate for myself. But I kept the Book of Mormon, and it travelled around with me for the next seven years, though I never had the courage to read it—to France, to the U.K., back to the U.S., to West Africa and back to the U.K. again. Finally, in August 1980, when I was living in Leeds, England, I was stopped in the street by two missionaries. I took this opportunity to invite them home, with the intention of challenging them on all the negative stories I had heard about the Church.

Well, they did turn up and I did challenge them, and they did answer my questions. It was not their answers which impressed me the most, however. It was the challenge they left me with to read and find out for myself if what they had told me was true.

I am pleased to say that I have read, pondered, and prayed about these things. I have followed the entreaties of Moroni 10:3-5. I have put this to the test, and every question that bothered me about the Book of Mormon I have resolved through sincere desire, prayer, and studying. I have no hesitation in attesting to the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon. The Holy Ghost has shown me its authenticity. No other book makes Christ its central character as does the Book of Mormon. I testify that the Book of Mormon not only testifies of Jesus Christ but also restores some truths of Him not found in the Bible. Not only does it confirm the doctrines we learn about Christ in the Bible but it also adds to and amplifies them. I believe the Book of Mormon was written for us today. If only we would follow its precepts, our lives would be so much richer.
