Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

I Awakened My Wife and Told Her of My Dream

Mutombo K. Antoine, Kinshasa, Zaire

The first time I met the missionaries, in 1986, I immediately arranged for a meeting. After the first lesson, they offered me a copy of the Book of Mormon. It was strange to find another testament of Jesus Christ. I wondered what this meant, and my heart was troubled. The missionaries told me that by reading this book I could know whether or not it was true and that God, by the power of the Holy Ghost, would show me the truth of all things, as Moroni had said (Moroni 10:3-5) and as James has said (James 1:5). Following the example of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who asked wisdom of God, and putting into practice the recommendation of Moroni to know whether this book was true, I was shown a great truth—a most significant vision:

As I slept I dreamed that I was discussing with some other brethren the truths of this church. At the same time the Spirit of God led me to look to the sky, where I saw a golden globe. At one side, seated in a chair, was the Prophet Joseph Smith holding a copy of the Book of Mormon in his hands. Beyond that I saw the two thousand young soldiers of whom Helaman spoke. Behind all this stood the most beautiful building that I had ever seen—exactly like the picture of the temple in Salt Lake City. What a wonderful thing! I quickly got up and awakened my wife and told her of my dream. Together we praised God. And from that time I have known that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the only true church on the earth, and that the Book of Mormon is a sacred book, a true testimony of Jesus Christ. And I know with all my heart that I am on the straight and narrow way of the Lord.

Everyone can, in this way, discover this wonderful truth by the power of the Holy Ghost.

I know that God lives, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, and that Ezra Taft Benson is the living prophet on the earth who leads us in these latter days. He recommends that we read the Book of Mormon regularly. It is the keystone of our religion, and I love to follow this counsel. (Translated by Edwin Adamson.)
