Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

My Guilt was Burned and Washed Away

David Dollahite, Greensboro, North Carolina

I was raised in the Episcopal church in Fairfax, California. Though the traditional confirmation age in the Episcopal church is twelve, I was confirmed at age ten because I wanted to serve as an altar boy and because my parents were involved in lay positions in the church. I served as an altar boy for about two years.

When I was twelve I started playing Little League baseball, and because the games were on Sunday, I no longer wanted to attend church nor serve as an altar boy, and so stopped attending. My religion was sports from age twelve until about age nineteen,when I read the Book of Mormon. My life's goal was to play professional sports. I played baseball, basketball, and tennis, until I dropped other sports to concentrate on tennis at about age fifteen.

I played tennis about six hours a day, year round, from age fifteen almost to nineteen. I traveled throughout northern California playing tournaments, played on my high school team, and taught tennis in the summers. I attained a measure of success by winning several tournaments, playing number one singles, and being selected most valuable player on my high school's tennis team. I planned to play professional tennis and be a teaching pro at a large tennis club. I had no interest in school other than sports programs and friends, and no interest in books other than those that might help me play better tennis.

When I was seventeen and a junior in high school, I began to develop staph infections and bone bruises in both feet. Tests indicated that I would continue to have the foot problems if I continued playing tennis for many hours a day.

The injuries to my feet forced me to stay out of some important tournaments in my senior year of high school, and I lost some important matches that I needed to win to obtain tennis scholarships. So after high school graduation I stayed at home and attended a junior college, taking classes and not participating in tennis.

The Book of Mormon arrived in our house through the efforts of Ray and LoDonna Leininger, friends of my parents. LoDonna worked with my mom and had told her much about The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and invited her to some church activities. My parents discussed the beliefs and practices of the Mormons around the dinner table on occasion and attended a few activities. They appeared fairly interested and complimentary. I began to think that my parents were going to become Mormons and told them to keep the Mormon religion away from me—I didn't want anything to do with it.

One day when I came home, I saw on the dining room table a blue paperback book with a picture of someone playing a trumpet—The Book of Mormon. To me, having the "Mormon Bible" in the house was more evidence that my parents were interested in joining the Church, but they said they were only politely listening because the Leiningers were friends of theirs. This turned out to be true. My mom put the book on the shelf, I forgot about it, and they stopped talking about the Mormons.

A couple of months later, in November 1977, I was at the end of my first semester of junior college and still didn't know what I wanted to do with life. I was quite discouraged that it seemed that my prospects for playing tennis professionally were dashed. I was sitting at home alone absently watching television and a strange thought came into my mind—I should read a book! I reasoned that now that I was in college and wasn't going to be an athlete, I should probably do something academic. So I went over to the wall of bookshelves in our living room. I saw novels, histories, and autobiographies that looked interesting. (My mom was an avid reader, collecting hundreds of books, and it was usually my job to dust them.) But then my eye caught a little blue book in the extreme upper left-hand corner. Something told me to take that very book down and read it. I pulled it down and opened up the Book of Mormon. I didn't know why, but I sat down and started to read. I read about twenty pages and felt warm and cool at the same time. I felt a kind of warm tingling all over and thought that a window must be open, but I checked and they were all closed. I began feeling that there was something very important about this book, that there were things being taught in this book that would be important for me to learn and understand.

I had to go to work that evening at a movie theater, so I put the book down. I thought about religion during my drive to work, about the things that were talked about in the Book of Mormon, about this family of Lehi who believed so strongly in their God that they were willing to leave their home and go through many difficulties.

As the movie played, I took my turn behind the concession stand, still thinking about religion, thinking that perhaps I ought to find out more about religion, that maybe religion would be helpful to me. A strange, dissheveled man came out from the theater and walked up to me, pulled out a pack of cigarettes from his pocket, and said, "These are Camel cigarettes. I used to smoke Cool cigarettes, but God came to me in a vision and told me that I should smoke Camel cigarettes." He told me about how God had spoken to him and told him to do various strange things. I thought that if this is what religion was all about, I didn't want anything to do with it.

I also remembered that a couple of months before, my best friend and doubles partner had gone off to New York, had been mugged, and was rescued and converted by a born-again minister. My friend called me from New York and told me that I was a sinner and needed to repent and accept Jesus or I would go to hell. He sounded strange and seemed so rigid and judgmental. I began again to feel my normal reaction that religion was not for me and that I shouldn't waste my time reading the Book of Mormon.

But when I got home from work that night about 9:30, I again had a powerful feeling urging me to read the Book of Mormon. I went downstairs, got the book, and brought it up to my room, sat down, and began to read. Again I felt those strange warm chills I had never felt before. I admired Nephi. He seemed to be a strong and courageous person. I also admired the prophet Abinadi, who was willing to suffer torture and death because of his belief in God. These prophets were not the weak men I'd assumed religion would make them. I felt anticipation as I read about the coming visit of Jesus Christ to the people in the Book of Mormon. Although I had heard about Jesus Christ, I had never read the Bible nor really cared one way or another about who Christ was or why I should know His teachings.

I read through the night until about 6 a.m. Many times I wanted to stop. I couldn't understand why I was sitting up all night reading any book, much less a religious book. There wasn't reason in that. I thought that if my friends could see me staying up all night reading a book about Jesus they would really give me a hard time. I was tired and sore and wanted to sleep, but I couldn't put the book down. Though the strong feelings were strange, they felt wonderful.

I went to school that day and to work that night and thought deeply about the things I had read. Something was happening within me. I began to feel sorrow for my sins and began to desire to be different, to be more like the people I was reading about. I had a strong desire to read the Book of Mormon, more than to do anything else. I rushed home from work that night and sat down at the same desk in my room and began to read. Again I read though the night. Many times I wanted to stop because of fatigue and hunger, but I sensed that there was something waiting for me at the end of the book that I needed to read. So I read on.

When I came to where Jesus Christ visited the people of America and read what He did and taught, I was on the verge of tears. I read with great joy the words that Jesus spoke to the people, and I knew that what He was saying was true. His actions and words touched something deep within me. I loved Jesus and wanted to be with Him. I felt sorrow for my sins, and I knew that I needed forgiveness. Somehow I knew that He was the Son of God and that it was very important for me to learn about Him and to have Him become a part of my life.

When I got about ten pages from the end of the book, and could see that I was nearly finished, it was about 5 a.m. on the second night. I was weary and wanted very much to sleep. My eyes and back were tired and sore. I thought, I'll just read the rest of this tomorrow. But then another strong feeling compelled me to continue reading to the end.

I suddenly felt wide awake, as if I had awoken from a ten-hour sleep. I got to Moroni 10:3-5, which were marked with lines and the phrase "very important verses." I read these verses several times, finally understanding what these verses were asking me to do. I thought about how merciful the Lord had been to humanity and to me. I pondered the things that I had read, the teachings about Jesus, the purpose of life, the great sacrifices that people were willing to make for their belief in God, the teachings of Christ, and I thought about the feelings I had as I read. I didn't understand what they were. I didn't know where those feelings came from. I just knew that I had never felt that way before. And I thought about my sins. I also sensed deep within that there was something extremely important about this book.

Then I realized that the verses were also asking me to ask God in prayer if what I had read was true. I had never prayed before, though I had said the Lord's Prayer in church many times and had read other prayers in the Book of Common Prayer. But I had never prayed to God "with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ." I knew that this was what I needed to do.

I knelt in my room and prayed that God would forgive me of my sins and tell me if the things that I had read in the Book of Mormon were true. During that prayer, I had a profound spiritual experience. I felt an intense and overwhelming magnification of the feelings that I had felt all the way through the Book of Mormon. I felt as if my body were on fire and at the same time as if waves of water were pouring over and through me. My guilt was burned and washed away. I felt almost as if I were lifted off the ground or lifted out of my body. New knowledge flowed into my mind, and new feelings poured into my heart. The truthfulness of the Book of Mormon was burned into my soul. I felt completely at one with God and with all people. I no longer desired to follow my goals or my desires but only wanted to be close to God and all people.

Many small pictures flowed through my mind, small glimpses of what seemed to be my future: pictures and feelings of me living a righteous life and teaching others about Jesus Christ and the Book of Mormon, and many other scenes I didn't understand. I had glimpses of a profound connection with all people, and of relationships with the prophets I had read about, of spending time with great souls learning about the wonders of the universe. I know that this was God's answer to my prayer. I wept for a long time at the joy of knowing that God knew about me and loved me, that my life was not an accident, of knowing that I had been taken off a path that could have led to destruction and being placed on a path that would lead to joy and peace. My prayer and experience must have lasted close to thirty minutes. Everything changed in that prayer—my thoughts, feelings, desires, and longings. I felt like my mind and heart and spirit were completely cleansed and that I was like a container, waiting to be filled.

When I arose from my knees, went to my bed and lay down, I couldn't sleep. Thoughts were rushing through my mind that this was the most important day of my life, that everything from this day on would be different. I knew more than I had ever known anything in my life that there was a God, that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, that I had been forgiven of my sins because of what he did, and that the Book of Mormon was God's word. I asked my mom at breakfast to tell Sister Leininger that I had read the Book of Mormon and wanted to know more about the Church. She invited me to church that Sunday, and I had my first missionary lesson that Sunday night. I felt the same feelings in church and during the missionary lessons that I had had while reading the Book of Mormon. One of the elders in that first discussion identified the feeling as the Holy Ghost. I did not doubt thereafter and was baptized about a month later on January 28, 1978.

The Lord knew that I would probably not have listened to any person who tried to convert me to a religion and instead compelled me to read on my own and blessed me with an outpouring of his Spirit. I have never doubted since that morning that God answers sincere prayer and that the Book of Mormon is the word of God. Because of my experience, I wanted to tell everyone I knew and met about the Book of Mormon and Jesus Christ. I have had the blessing of teaching many about the Book of Mormon and seeing it lead them to Christ. Through the years that I have been a member of the Church, the Book of Mormon has been a constant source of faith and strength and truth to me. I have read it more than any other book. I have studied its pages, thought about its doctrines, tried to live its precepts, and received great blessings as a result.

I now keep a copy of the Book of Mormon in the upper left-hand corner of my bookshelf to remind me of what is important and where all my blessings come from.
