Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

I Gained New Light on Christ's Relationship to Our Sins

Lowell Bennion, Seattle, Washington

In the summer of 1936 I went to summer school at the Uni versity of Washington. My purpose in going there was to take courses in the archaeology of the western hemisphere. I had recently been appointed a teacher at the institute of religion near the University of Utah. One of the courses I offered was on the Book of Mormon. I went to the University of Washington in search of external evidence for the authenticity of the Book of Mormon.

I studied hard, took copious notes, and listened eagerly to my professors. I made a list of all the things in archaeology that I might be able to relate to the Book of Mormon.

When the course was over, I hid out and read the Book of Mormon with my archaeological notes before me. To my surprise, I found few things I could relate to archaeological data. I learned also that a person has to be an archaeologist to be able to use scientific data judiciously.

Reading the book and analyzing its content gave me another surprise. I discovered for the first time, and very forcefully, that the Book of Mormon is not a scientific work, not history, not a geographical treatise, not a theology text, but a profoundly religious record, relating religion to life. It so declares its purpose:

"And it mattereth not to me that I am particular to give a full account of all the things of my father, for they cannot be written upon these plates, for I desire the room that I may write of the things of God.

"For the fulness of mine intent is that I may persuade men to come unto the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and be saved." (1 Nephi 6:3-4.)

Ever since 1936, my interest in reading and teaching the Book of Mormon has been to look for its religious teaching and spirit, and I have found the search rewarding. Permit a few illustrations.

I performed the marriage ceremony for a young Mormon woman and a young Jewish man who was a convert to Christianity. In a casual conversation, he asked, "Since we have the New Testament, what does the Book of Mormon add to our Christian faith?" That's a good question. Part of my answer is that the Book of Mormon greatly enriches our understanding of the first principles and ordinances of the gospel by which we become disciples of Christ:

The Book of Mormon is Christ-centered, bearing repeated witness of His mission. It has made some original and inspiring contributions to my understanding of the Atonement and of Christ's relationship to us.

When Jesus went to John the Baptist to be baptized, John hesitated, saying, "I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?" (Matthew 3:14.) Jesus replied, "Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness." (V. 15.) What He meant by that statement is not explained in the New Testament. But Nephi gives an inspiring interpretation:

"Know ye not that he was holy? But notwithstanding he being holy, he showeth unto the children of men that, according to the flesh he humbleth himself before the Father, and witnesseth unto the Father that he would be obedient unto him in keeping his commandments." (2 Nephi 31:7.)

It is inspiring to me to know that Jesus wanted to be baptized for His own sake, to show the Father that He would fulfill all righteousness by doing the Father's will.

The Book of Mormon throws light on Christ's relationship to the sins of men. King Benjamin, in his fine farewell sermon, says:

"And lo, he [Jesus] shall suffer temptations, and pain of body, hunger, thirst, and fatigue, even more than man can suffer, except it be unto death; for behold, blood cometh from every pore, so great shall be his anguish for the wickedness and the abominations of his people." (Mosiah 3:7; italics added.)

Jesus loves His fellowmen so much that the fact that they are steeped in sin causes Him to suffer because they are ruining their lives in sin.

In his great sermon on the Atonement and repentance Amulek gives us a profound idea of Christ's relationship to our sins:

"And behold, this is the whole meaning of the law, every whit pointing to that great and last sacrifice; and that great and last sacrifice will be the Son of God, yea, infinite and eternal.

"And thus he shall bring salvation to all those who shall believe on his name; this being the intent of this last sacrifice, to bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice, and bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance.

"And thus mercy can satisfy the demands of justice, and encircles them in the arms of safety, while he that exercises no faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the demands of justice; therefore only unto him that has faith unto repentance is brought about the great and eternal plan of redemption." (Alma 34:14-16; italics added.)

The only way to overcome sin is by repentance. Believing in and loving the Savior and doing His will gives people the faith, the motivation, to repent and thus be whole and be forgiven. Repentance enables mercy to satisfy the demands of justice. The Book of Mormon brings Christ into our lives in very meaningful ways.

When I was a missionary, a brother came to me broken-hearted because of a serious sin he had committed. With the Psalmist, he cried, "Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me." (Psalm 51:10.) At the close of our conversation, I invited him to prepare the sacrament table each Sunday morning. This he did reverently and lovingly. After a few weeks, he came to me again and said, "I am a new man." He taught me that I too could find faith unto repentance in fellowship with the Savior.

I wish to mention one other idea that bears witness to me of the authenticity of the Book of Mormon. Many of its finest teachings grow out of natural settings. For example, Alma the Younger went on a preaching tour, going from settlement to settlement among his Nephite people. He found a group of people who had been cast out of their synagogue because of their exceeding poverty.

Alma said to them: "It is well that ye are cast out of your synagogues, that ye may be humble, and that ye may learn wisdom; for it is necessary that ye should learn wisdom; for it is because that ye are cast out, that ye are despised of your brethren because of your exceeding poverty, that ye are brought to a lowliness of heart; for ye are necessarily brought to be humble.

"And now, because ye are compelled to be humble blessed are ye; for a man sometimes, if he is compelled to be humble, seeketh repentance; and now surely, whosoever repenteth shall find mercy; and he that findeth mercy and endureth to the end the same shall be saved." (Alma 32:12-13; italics added.)

He wisely stated that external circumstances sometimes compelled a person to be humble. That is true to life, because externally compelled humbleness can cause people sometimes to be bitter and cynical, whereas a person who is humble because of the word of God enjoys true humility.

As a missionary in Germany I was reading one evening Alma 62:41, which states:

"But behold, because of the exceedingly great length of the war between the Nephites and the Lamanites many had become hardened, because of the exceedingly great length of the war; and many were softened because of their afflictions, insomuch that they did humble themselves before God, even in the depth of humility."

I thought, how true to life. As we tracted from door to door a few years after Germany's defeat in World War I and saw the people's suffering, we found many Germans bitter and asking how God could permit such suffering. And we met many who were humble and compassionate as a result of their suffering. Ever since, I have observed how suffering and privation affect people. I find it either hardens or refines them, just as the Book of Mormon observed in that day.

I find that the Book of Mormon is an honest, true-to-life reporting of human experience, and I am particularly grateful for its insights concerning our relationship to Jesus Christ.
