Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

The Loss of That Book Is Bearable: It Was Only a Catalyst

W. Bryan Stout, Linares, Chile

When I entered the Language Training Mission to prepare to serve a mission in Chile in 1975, my testimony was young and tender—the only thing I could say I knew with certainty was that God lived and answered prayers. I spent my first four months in the mission field as junior companion to Robert Duane Lyman, who suggested I mark the scriptures with thirteen colors of pencils, one for each Article of Faith, using whatever color would be most appropriate to the passage. That idea intrigued me, and in my second city I decided to use that approach with the Book of Mormon.

For the purpose of my study, I expanded the scope of each color I used: With the first article of faith I included all discussion of the nature of any member of the Godhead; with the second, any discussion of sin or free agency; with the fourth, the sacrament and enduring to the end with the first principles of the gospel; with the thirteenth, doctrines about righteousness and commandments; and so on.

At the beginning, my study was no different from most previous occasions when I had read the scriptures. But something special started happening at 1 Nephi 10:17-22. I found myself using about half my pencils for this passage and felt the quiet but strong witness of the Spirit to its truthfulness, all the more penetrating on this occasion when I was aware of all the doctrine being powerfully taught.

This experience became common. Again and again I was impressed with the conciseness, clarity, and boldness the Book of Mormon used in proclaiming its doctrine. Again and again the Spirit both bore witness to the truth and helped me see the depth and power lying behind the simple words. As the weeks went by, I benefited from this study in a variety of ways. Not only was I uplifted personally, but I was able to bear a strong, glad testimony to the restored gospel.

From this study I came to love Isaiah. For the first time I was able to understand his message and appreciate the beauty of his expression. The Book of Mormon narrative became more alive to me than ever before. When I read of Nephi frankly forgiving his brother for leaving him in the wilderness to die, I wept and thought of the anguish Nephi and Lehi must have felt as Laman and Lemuel vacillated between rebellion and repentance and finally rebelled for life. When the combined Nephite and Lamanite army decisively beat the Gadianton robbers, I wept again, sharing the people's joy in their deliverance.

I was liberal in my underlining, and my use of different colors helped me notice things I would probably have missed otherwise. I used a purple pencil for the twelfth article of faith and church-state relations; there was more purple in Mosiah than in the rest of the Book of Mormon combined. I saw that government was a central theme of Mosiah, starting with the good example of King Benjamin and the bad example of King Noah and finishing with the sermons of Alma the Elder and King Mosiah explaining principles of good government.

I used a sandy color for the tenth article of faith and the role of God in history, and from its use I noticed a sandwich structure to the Book of Mormon: most of the quotations from the Old Testament and nearly all the prophecies about the last days occur either at the beginning in the small plates of Nephi or at the end of the book, starting with the appearance of Jesus Christ. The large central portion is filled mainly with detailed narrative and gospel sermons. I also saw that Moroni, the book's last author, deliberately echoed themes stated by the first author, Nephi, such as speaking to us from the dust and testifying to us at the judgment bar of God.

The biggest benefit I received was a deeper communion with the Spirit than I ever had before. King Benjamin's discourse on the mission of Christ, service, and spiritual rebirth exulted me and gave me more joy in life than any other passage. With Ether 12:4 I had an experience similar to the one Joseph Smith had with James 1:5. The idea that hope is the anchor to our souls, which leads us to abound in good works entered "with great force into every feeling of my heart." Ever since then, when it has been my responsibility to motivate others, I have tried to do it with hope, not guilt.

And so a suggestion from my first companion led me to the solid core of my testimony and helped build the spiritual foundation for the rest of my life. This method of multiple colors isn't for everyone: Another missionary I told my experience to tried it but gave it up as too involved. But it worked for me and taught me things I might not have learned in any other way.

In the years since my mission, that rainbow-colored copy of the Book of Mormon became a treasured possession and personal reference work. Unfortunately, I no longer have it. While I was in graduate school and inside the institute building helping at a function, someone passing through the parking lot stole my backpack out of an automobile. There is a poignant irony in that a heavily marked Spanish Book of Mormon was probably the most useless item in the pack to the thief, but it was the only irreplaceable item to me. The loss of that book is bearable, though, for it was only a catalyst in obtaining the real treasure. I still have a strong testimony of Christ and his gospel, and I am still getting insight from the Book of Mormon and the other scriptures.
