Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

I Brought It to My Father, with a Burning in My Heart

Catherine Weir, Footscray, Victoria, Australia

I was baptized into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints when I was eight years of age, in Glasgow, Scotland. My father had been told by his friends about the missionaries from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, whom you could not prove wrong. "Send them around to my place, and I'll soon prove them wrong," boasted Dad. But Dad just could not prove them wrong, so he joined the Church when I was only five years old.

Not long after my baptism, when I was still eight years old, we left Scotland by ship to come to Australia to live, my parents and six children. Dad stayed active in the Church for about two years in Australia and so did the rest of my family, until we went to live in Benalla, a little country town in which there was no branch of the Church. The nearest branch was twenty-five miles away in Wangaratta. We attended that branch regularly, until, after he broke the Word of Wisdom, Dad's faith seemed to peter out. We all stopped attending church when Dad did, as he was our strength in the family as far as testimonies went.

I started attending different churches within the next five years or so. I went to the Presbyterian church and the Salvation Army, but finally when I was fifteen years old I decided to settle down in the Methodist church because they had a good youth club. One day while conversing with my Methodist minister, I asked him what church was true. "All churches are true," he tried to convince me. It just didn't make sense to me. How can the truth contradict itself? and I had been taught contradicting concepts in each church.

When I got home, I told my father about my conversation with my minister. Dad's response caught me by surprise: "Go and get me the Book of Mormon, and I'll show you what church it true." We had not had contact with the LDS church for about five years. Since we had changed addresses five times, we could have thrown the Book of Mormon away. Not knowing where to begin my search, I said a silent prayer: "Dear Heavenly Father, if this is the true church, please help me find the Book of Mormon. In the name of Jesus Christ. Amen."

The first place I looked I found it and took it to my father with a burning in my heart. I did not know what burnings in your heart meant at that stage. As I presented this book to my father, he acted strangely, refusing to let me have the book, saying, "No, it may be too hard for you to live up to. What you do not know you cannot be held responsible for." He held fast to the book, preventing me even from touching it anymore.

"Please, Dad," I begged, "you can't stop now. You have aroused my interest too much." So Dad opened the Book of Mormon at the promise where God tells you that if you read the book with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you by the power of the Holy Ghost. (See Moroni 10:4.)

Being a very inquisitive fifteen-year-old, I decided, "Right, so I am going to put this promise to the test." I started doing as the promise instructed, reading and praying to find out if the Book of Mormon was true.

Within two weeks, missionaries from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints came knocking on my door, though this was the first time in five years we had had any contact with the Church. They told me where and when they held their meetings, inviting me to come along. I accepted their invitation, and as I sat through their meeting (which was held in a small recreation hall because they did not have a chapel built in the Footscray area at that time, about 1961), I realized I had never felt the Holy Ghost's presence so strongly in any of the other churches I had attended. I felt that the Lord was close to me within this church. I knew this was where the Lord wanted me to be. I knew this was His true church. This knowledge just increased as years went by and so did the feeling of getting closer to our Lord, till, as years have gone by, this closeness has brought unspeakable joy, which makes me desire never to leave His side.

The missionary who found me when I was fifteen years old told me later that he and his companion were not supposed to be knocking on my street, but he had felt motivated by the Spirit to come and knock on my door. I believe they were sent by God as an answer to my prayers.
