Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

Without the Spectacular Witness, Still It Blesses Me

Merrill Bradshaw, Provo, Utah

I have never had any reason to question those who talk of miraculous manifestations about the Book of Mormon. Those things have just never happened to me. In my younger years I used to wonder if there were something wrong with me, because when I prayed about the book nothing happened. I suppose the real reason nothing ever happened is that I have always had faith in the Book of Mormon and simply felt that when I understood all there was to understand about it, all the questions that other people raise about it would be answered and the book would still stand.

As a result, I cannot say, as so many are able to do, that when I arose from praying about the book I had a burning feeling that said, "That book is true." I have to think there are a lot of us in the Church who are in a situation similar to mine. But what I would like to emphasize here is that even without the flashing lights or secret voices to tell me the Book of Mormon is true, I have spent a good deal of time through my life studying it and its coming forth and the various evidences that exist. I cannot claim to have thought through all the questions that disturb so many people, but I have a simple understanding that when we know everything there is to know about the book, it will still stand fast as the anchor to our faith that it has always been for me. Even without the spectacular witness, it still blesses me and my family greatly. Let me give some examples.

When I went on my mission to Switzerland in 1950, I had studied the German language in both high school and college for a total of three years. I thought I was well prepared to be a missionary, even though I had not read the Book of Mormon in its entirety. But in the encounter with the living language of the Swiss people and their dialects, I was overwhelmed. It became very difficult to apply what I had learned. My companion and I read aloud to each other for an hour each morning from the Max Zimmer German translation of the Book of Mormon, which was written in the old German script. It was tough going at first, but through that reading of the Book of Mormon in German, the rhythm and flow of the language became a reality for me, and I was soon able to use my training to good effect.

That early-morning reading also helped me get through the Isaiah chapters of 2 Nephi, which stymie so many, especially young readers. In the process I was introduced to the intriguing and beautiful poetry of Isaiah, to the vision he had of the whole history of man, to his strong concern for the poor and the widows. That began a life-long study of the whole book of Isaiah, which has been a blessing at many times of spiritual need or of spiritual high points.

That reading also opened up to me the way prophets have of placing things of our life here and now into a perspective that gives them their true meaning in eternity. These openings and beginnings have continued to enrich my understanding of the gospel, of the plan of salvation, of my values and goals, of the meaning of my own life. This all began with that hour we spent together reading the Book of Mormon to each other in the early mornings in an attic room in Bern, Switzerland. It was not just the language, but also the beginnings of an understanding of the beauty and importance of all scripture that came to me through that experience.

During a spring term at Brigham Young University a few years ago, I had the privilege of attending a seminar intended to train faculty to teach Book of Mormon classes for freshmen. During that six-week period I read the book through twice, outlining and pondering meanings as I went, savoring especially beautiful passages and doctrines. That marked a step up in my love for the book. I was able to get much closer to it and to pursue subjects and themes that attracted my interest.

Again, I cannot say that I received any special manifestation or witness. That was not a part of my relation to the book. Rather, I gained a heightened awareness of the beauty of its message and the importance of its warnings for people living in our time. This awareness has increased during the past year as I have been teaching the Book of Mormon in our Gospel Doctrine class. I have come to identify with the problems that men like Alma and Mormon had and to understand their deep concerns for people like me. I have learned that many of the details that are objected to by critics of the book pale by comparison with the magnificent and intense love that Christ shows in the preservation of the book so that we could have it to help us.

As a family we have read the book often in our scripture sessions. I would not claim to be as regular at this as we are encouraged to be, but probably more than half of the time we have spent together reading the scriptures has been spent reading the Book of Mormon. We have enjoyed those times together very much, the older children often speaking with great nostalgia about them. As our five missionaries have gone out, they have been prepared about the same as I was: they accepted the book as true, even though they had not read all of it many times nor had someone from the other world appeared to demand that they accept it. Yet even without those excellent and spectacular spiritual experiences, it is an anchor to our family, to our faith, to our whole way of life. It is the keystone of our religion in that intimate sense that it is one of the determinants of our existence. When I think of its significance to us, I wonder if any manifestation could be more important than that.

The Holy Ghost is not always obvious nor direct in His workings with us. But through small things happening over a lifetime, He forges a rock at the foundations of our beings that we can build good and happy lives on, lives that are productive and solid in the kingdom. The Book of Mormon is part of that rock for me, and its significance continues to increase for me. I am grateful to God for its blessing.
