Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

I Felt Nephi Was Talking to Me As One of His Seed

Sipuao Matuauto, Salt Lake City, Utah

When I reached the age of four, in our little village in Samoa my mother taught me how to read, using the Samoan version of the Book of Mormon. I was a fast learner, and as I carefully followed Mother's reading and pronunciation guidelines, soon I was able to read the Book of Mormon and other scriptures by myself.

At the age of six, I completed reading the Book of Mormon entirely. Mother was extremely proud of my accomplishment and helped me set and accomplish the goal of reading the Bible, both the Old and New Testaments, by the age of seven.

At the age of twelve, I began reading the English version of the Book of Mormon in elementary school. Our missionary teachers also held Book of Mormon study classes in the evenings, which I was privileged to attend. As a young teenager I became more interested in reading the English versions of the scriptures— somehow, they made more sense to me than the Samoan versions.

Throughout my life, I have studied and read all the scrip

tures daily. Ever since I was a child, I have known of their truthfulness and have constantly expressed a deep appreciation to the Lord for these priceless records and the efforts of the great men and women who preserved these records for my benefit. I never felt the need of receiving a personal witness from the Spirit. I just knew they were true.

On Saturday, August 12, 1972, I came down with laryngitis. I had moved to Salt Lake City, Utah, and was a member of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir at the time, so I called Richard P. Condie, the director, and asked to be excused from the choir broadcast the next morning. He strongly advised me to stay home and take care of myself. He also discouraged me from talking throughout the duration of the weekend. After hanging up the telephone, I locked the door of my bedroom and immediately tried to determine what I could do to have a wonderful, profitable weekend, despite my dilemma. I was not ill, I had just lost my voice, and I felt I could still accomplish something worthwhile.

Of all the scriptures and many other great Church books available, I simply picked up a worn-out copy of the Book of Mormon and started reading it. This was nothing new to me, and I most certainly had not expected that anything out of the ordinary would happen to me; but somehow as I started reading it this time, I felt a powerful force that overwhelmed and overcame me at the same time, one which I had never before experienced in my many years of reading and studying this sacred record.

As I kept on reading I strangely and strongly felt that I belonged to the Book of Mormon people. I did my best to subdue these feelings, but the more I did, the deeper and closer I felt to them. Finally I came to the words of Nephi, prophesying the coming forth of the Book of Mormon:

"Wherefore, for this cause hath the Lord God promised unto me that these things which I write shall be kept and preserved, and handed down unto my seed, from generation to generation, that the promise may be fulfilled unto Joseph, that his seed should never perish as long as the earth should stand. . . .

"After my seed and the seed of my brethren shall have dwindled in unbelief, and shall have been smitten by the Gentiles; . . . and after they shall have been brought down low in the dust, even that they are not, yet the words of the righteous shall be written, and the prayers of the faithful shall be heard, and all those who have dwindled in unbelief shall not be forgotten. For those who shall be destroyed shall speak unto them out of the ground, and their speech shall be low out of the dust, and their voice shall be as one that hath a familiar spirit; for the Lord God will give unto him power, that he may whisper concerning them, even as it were out of the ground; and their speech shall whisper out of the dust." (2 Nephi 25:21; 26:15-16.)

The emotions that were building up within me could no longer be controlled. I burst into tears and cried for an hour or two. I felt as if Nephi of old was sitting there with me in my room, talking directly to me as if I were his seed; and my bosom swelled with a great abundance of love for this noble man, Nephi. I began to feel so very close to him and felt as if I had personally known him and lived during his time. As I dried my tears away, my heart was deeply touched by the efforts of this great prophet and others who had recorded and preserved these writings and instructions for their descendants and all those who would faithfully follow the Lord of the Book of Mormon, Jesus Christ.

As powerful as this experience was, however, a little confusion was beginning to form in my mind. You see, as a youngster, growing up in Samoa, I had always been told that we were Lamanite descendants, which was contrary to the feelings I was experiencing as I read the words of Nephi. I could not understand how I could possibly be of Nephi's seed if I was a descendant of Laman. I admit the thought startled me, and yet, almost immediately, the Spirit impressed me to turn to Alma 63 and read about Hagoth, the ship builder. As I read this chapter, I discovered the following:

"And it came to pass that Hagoth, he being an exceedingly curious man, therefore he went forth and built him an exceedingly large ship, on the borders of the land Bountiful, by the land Desolation, and launched it forth into the west sea, by the narrow neck which led into the land northward. And behold, there were many of the Nephites who did enter therein and did sail forth with much provisions, and also many women and children; and they took their course northward. And thus ended the thirty and seventh year. . . . And it came to pass that they were never heard of more. And we suppose that they were drowned in the depths of the sea. And it came to pass that one other ship also did sail forth; and whither she did go we know not." (Alma 63:5-6, 8; italics added.)

This gave me the answer I needed. I came to realize that it was very possible that the blood of both Nephi and Laman flows in my veins. The scripture is clear that the people who were on the two lost ships were Nephites; but at the time when Hagoth built his ships, both the righteous Nephites and the righteous Lamanites, who were members of the Church, were collectively identified as Nephites.

Long before Hagoth started building his ships, King Lamoni and his people and also his father and his people were converted to the gospel by Ammon and his brethren. They were faithful and devoted. There is no doubt in my mind that some of them were on these lost ships with their white brethren. It was also probable that the people who were on these lost ships eventually intermarried. I remembered, too, that thoughout the Book of Mormon many Nephites mixed with the unconverted Lamanites and they were collectively identified as Lamanites.

As I read this chapter under the influence of the Holy Spirit, I received a personal witness that the strong, deep feelings I was experiencing, and had tried to subdue, were justified.

This also explains a strange dream I had six months earlier. The dream was very brief, but it startled me and woke me up right out of bed. In the dream, a tall, handsome gentleman dressed in a white robe was standing before me and introduced himself. He said, "I am Joseph who was sold into Egypt. I am your father." The effect of the dream woke me up, and I could not return to sleep for the rest of the night. In the days that followed I felt as if I were in another sphere. Also, a paragraph from my patriarchal blessing began to make more sense.

Now after I had read Alma 63, everything made sense to me. After I discovered this information, I knelt down on my knees and offered Heavenly Father a simple prayer of thanksgiving for helping me eliminate my confusion, the confusion that had been caused by something I was told as a youngster.

By Saturday midnight, I got to the chapters on the Savior's visit to the Americas. Here again, I had to stop for another hour. My emotions were too much to be subdued. I felt the sweet presence of the Savior in my room as if He, too, were sitting there with me, telling me to be faithful and keep His commandments. What a glorious experience! I felt with every fiber of my trembling body the power of every word proceeding from His mouth as He talked to the Nephites. Again, I got down on my knees and, at this time, made a commitment to the Savior that never, never in my life will I disappoint Him.

I never did sleep Saturday night—the power of this great sacred record was too overwhelming for me to stop, to say the least. I kept on reading, and by 8:00 Sunday night, my reading was ended and the book was quietly closed and was returned to the shelf; but the grandness and the sweetness of the overpowering Spirit I had experienced remained with me for some time.

Two weeks later I was in Mexico City, attending the Mexico and Central America Area Conference. The Mormon Tabernacle Choir was to provide the music for both conference sessions on Sunday. On Saturday afternoon we went to the building where the conference was held to rehearse. As the choir members walked on stage to be seated for the rehearsal, the Mexican sisters were leaving a women's meeting. As I approached the stairs to go up on stage to be seated, a group of those "Lamanite" sisters saw me and excitedly rushed over, speaking Spanish to me. I smiled at them and said hello. Although I could not communicate with them, somehow I felt one with them and understood what they were saying. They had mistakenly thought I was of Mexican descent and were excited to see that one of their own participated in the greatest choir on earth. I wished I could speak Spanish to return their excitement.

Fortunately, one of the sisters spoke English, and I explained to them through her that although I did not speak their language, I was still one of their own through our common ancestral father, Lehi. At this point the sisters huddled around and hugged me and kissed me.

During both sessions on Sunday, as I sat on stage I strongly felt the same feelings I had experienced two weekends earlier in my room in Salt Lake City as I was reading the Book of Mormon. Looking out to this vast audience of Lamanites, I felt at home with them. I felt as if I were looking at a Polynesian audience. The Spirit was powerful and I knew without a shadow of a doubt that Lehi, Nephi, and all the Book of Mormon prophets were in attendance. I sat there with tears streaming down my cheeks as the Spirit bore witness to my soul that these were truly my people. The blood of the same ancestral lineage runs through my veins and their veins. The local priesthood leaders who spoke at the conference were giants of men. I understood their feelings and what they were saying, even though I do not speak their language. In such a short time, I came to know and to love them just as much as I love the Polynesians. I felt as if I had finally met the relatives I had often heard about but had never met.

Through this experience, I came to realize the great love and mercy the Lord had for me. He had allowed me the opportunity to prepare myself for a glorious experience in Mexico City. I was impressed that Christ can be my personal friend and confidant as well as my Savior. Ever since then, as I continue to study the Book of Mormon daily, I have come to cherish and treasure it as the sacred record of my ancestors and my people. Their writings and their exemplary lives have greatly enriched mine. Through their efforts, I have come to know the Savior, Jesus Christ, as they knew Him.
