Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

It Seemed That Nephi Was There and Spoke to My Heart

George Pace, Burley, Idaho

The following account is from Our Search to Know the Lord, by George Pace (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1988), pages 8-10. Reprinted by permission.

I was raised as an active member of a small country ward in southern Idaho. I sensed early in my life that the testimonies I heard in the small frame chapel each fast and testimony meeting were sincere and indeed true. I felt very positive about the teachings I heard and the concepts I learned in the many auxiliary meetings I attended. I observed also that the more diligently I tried to keep the commandments and to stay in close contact with the Church, although I often fell far short, the more peace I felt in my heart. And even though much of the motivation behind my activity in the Church was probably social (there were some really attractive girls in the ward), my involvement in the Church was uplifting and beneficial.

Nevertheless, had I been asked in my late teens how I felt about the Church—that is, did I know the doctrines of the Church were true?—my response would have been something like, "I really think there is a strong possibility that the Church just might be true," or, "There is absolutely no question in my mind that a lot of people I know really know the Church is true," or, "Oh, I sure hope the Church is true!" In any event, even though I felt very good about the Church—indeed, there was absolutely no question in my mind that the effect of the Church in my life was very positive—I knew there had to be much, much more to my membership. I sensed that I hadn't yet found that pearl of great price that would give greater meaning to my membership in the Church and enable me to obtain a greater power to enjoy life more abundantly.

Somewhere along the line, I came to the conclusion that I desperately needed to learn more fully for myself by personal revelation that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God and that the true Church of Jesus Christ was indeed restored to the earth. I determined that the quickest, surest way to do that was to read the Book of Mormon and pray mightily about it. Consequently, in my nineteenth year [1950] and while farming my father's farm, I decided to tuck a copy of the Book of Mormon in my back pocket and take it with me everywhere I went. I carried out my plan with some determination. Whenever I got a chance between changes of water while irrigating, while waiting for the final preparation of my meals, and during every other spare moment I could find, I read the Book of Mormon with genuine intensity for the first time. I had, of course, read portions of it before, both in the auxiliaries and in seminary, but not really of my own volition and not with real intent. Along with diligently reading the Book of Mormon every time I got a chance, for the first time in my life, I also lifted up my voice many times each day in mighty vocal prayer and pleaded for the witness of the Spirit that I might know that the Book of Mormon is true.

My experience that summer of reading the Book of Mormon and fervently pouring out my heart in prayer changed my life. Before the summer was half over, it seemed I had walked into a whole new dimension of life. The unseen things of the Spirit started to become more real than the things of the world. There gradually deepened in my heart the unquestionable assurance that what I was reading was true, and with that revealed assurance, Joseph Smith's divine calling as a prophet of God emerged as my great anchor in the reality of the restoration of the gospel. With those assurances, there seemed to come to me a desire to be more personally involved in the great unfolding drama of the redemption of man, a feeling that there was a preparation to be made, a mission to be fulfilled, a reason for being. Incidentally, I've noticed over the years that when anyone obtains a sure testimony of the divine origins of the Church, invariably that person will get excited about doing all he or she can do to effectively build the kingdom.

As beautiful and as great as those feelings were, however, I still hadn't glimpsed what the real pearl was. One experience I had that summer made a particularly deep impression on me and seemed to bring me a step closer to finding the pearl of greatest price. I had been irrigating alfalfa, a task that gave me several hours for reading interspersed with vocal prayer. About midmorning, I was sitting on a small bridge made of railroad ties that crossed the irrigation ditch. I was dangling my rubber boots in the water to keep my feet cool. As I sat there reading and reflecting, there came to me a quiet but particularly powerful witness of the Spirit that what I was reading was true. The feeling was so intense that I instinctively glanced heavenward. Although I didn't see anyone or hear anything, I seemed to feel strongly the presence of Nephi— so strongly, in fact, that I wouldn't have been at all surprised to have seen him standing there. It seemed to me that he spoke to my heart and said: "I want you to know that what you're reading is true, for I wrote it. I want you to know that I have seen the Lord and talked with him. I have been carried by his Spirit to the tops of high mountains and have been shown marvelous things. [See 2 Nephi 4:24-25.] And I want you to know he has endowed me with great power to fulfill all the commandments he has given me."

What a great assurance it was for me to feel so deeply and powerfully the truth of Nephi's words, and especially to know of his relationship with the Lord and of the great power the Lord had given him. As the summer continued and I persisted in reading and lifting up my voice in prayer, there came into my heart, by the power of the Spirit, an even greater and more exciting idea, an idea that helped me learn more fully what the gospel was really all about. It seemed to come from the Spirit and reflected the testimony of Nephi. The message was: "It's wonderful that you now know that what I have written is true, and that you know I have seen and talked with Christ and have received of his marvelous power in my life. But it is even more important for you to know that you, too, can see him as I have seen him; that you, too, can talk with him as I have; and that you, too, can obtain his mighty power to help you accomplish all he would have you do." (See 1 Nephi 10:17, 19.)

What an electrifying, soul-transforming thought that was to me! It has continued to be the mainspring of my spiritual motivation and the greatest idea planted in my heart through the restored gospel.
