Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

The Terrible Ache in My Heart Left Me

Loa M. Richie, Provo, Utah

Perhaps it was because I was born in a Latter-day Saint home to parents who were staunch in serving the Lord and in keeping the Lord's commandments that I grew up with great faith in my Father in Heaven and in His great love for me. For this reason I found myself often in a secluded place praying and talking to the Lord and thanking him for his many blessings to me and praying for continued guidance through each day.

I fell in love with a fine man, and we were married in the Salt Lake Temple. We were blessed with wonderful children. Then our seven-year-old son died suddenly and without warning. His death being so unnecessary, my husband and I were in no way prepared for such physical and mental and spiritual suffering and trauma. I lost all interest in living. I actually prayed sincerely to the Lord to allow me to die.

One day while I was busy in the kitchen, sorrowing over the loss of our seven-year-old son and wanting to be with him, it was as if someone spoke to me very clearly and told me that the devil was seeking to destroy me. I was told clearly to read the Book of Mormon and in this way I would receive much peace and comfort and also understanding pertaining to life and death. I did get my Book of Mormon off the shelf and I did read it. I carried it with me day and night and read it continually. When I slept, I kept the book under my pillow, so when my eyes were open in the night the book was at my disposal.

I can testify that I did receive peace and comfort by reading the Book of Mormon. It was at this time that I found out the real truthfulness of the Book of Mormon. My soul did rejoice because of the understanding and peace I received and still do receive in reading the Book of Mormon.

At the time our son died, I wanted so much to know about the spirit world, and I seemed to find nourishment for my spirit all through the Book of Mormon. When I came to Alma 40:11, where it says, "The spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, . . . are taken home to that God who gave them life," I read the verse over and over, desiring to know more. My husband and I wanted to gain every assurance we could that we would be with our son again. He was an anchor in heaven to us.

My spirit was hungry, and my heart ached and pained more than can be described, and I kept reading the Book of Mormon. My spirit was greatly comforted as I read 3 Nephi, especially chapter 17, verse 20. Well, I read in verse 20 where Jesus spoke to the people and said, "Blessed are ye because of your faith. And now behold, my joy is full." When He had said these words, He wept—and I wept too. Then Jesus took the little children one by one and blessed them and prayed unto the Father for them.

I knew then as I know now that Christ's love for us is even greater than we can comprehend. I then knew Christ loved us and would guide us through. I had not read the Book of Mormon until that cold dreary day in February 1940 when I was instructed to do this. I have testified to my children that at the time I felt it was the Holy Ghost who instructed me to do this and it was loud and clear to me. I feasted on the Book of Mormon and it fed my spirit, and my testimony grew, and I felt a love in my heart for everyone. I missed our son—but the terrible ache in my heart left me.
