Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

I Tried to Break the Spell but Could Not Do It

Charles Randall Paul, Charleroi, Belgium

When I was fifteen, after reading the Book of Mormon, I kneeled, squeezed my eyes, my brain, and my spirit real hard, and nothing came out! The book had seemed "good," and "too complex for an unlearned kid to write," and even "as uplifting as the Bible," but there was no burning bush in the bedroom. The experience was, however, satisfying enough to allow me to go on faith: I wanted it to be true. That is, after all, the real test down here. Befogged in mortal amnesia, we search for what we want to be true while God observes. There is rarely overwhelming evidence for anything. I do mean anything.

Next step came at Brigham Young University in my freshman Book of Mormon class with Reid Bankhead. "It's what the book says that counts!" Those were his watch words. Bless him for making us answer questions with literal quotations from the book. The gospel is illuminated in the Book of Mormon better than in any other scripture. The doctrine on the Atonement came to me with the force of burning truth as I studied the book in my dorm at Helaman Halls. There were days when I would leave Bankhead's class "in love"—clicking my heels and dancing in the quad. What beauty and simplicity! What depth and reach! The gospel is true; that is, the doctrine of Christ, Immanuel, is true. I felt it deeply as the warmth of the Spirit covered me with confirmation. I didn't agree with Bankhead's politics (too black and white for me), but he's got to be up there with Parley P. Pratt when it comes to Book of Mormon heroes in this dispensation.

Then I went to France on my mission. I had been out just over two years. In a little apartment in an attic on a dirty street in Charleroi, Belgium, I sat reading in Helaman one Saturday night in 1965. As I pondered the passage, of a sudden, I was aware that I knew what I was reading actually occurred in ancient times. I felt as if my mind had left my body and was observing me holding the open book in my hands. An inner, quiet, joy surged as I knew, in an epistemological sense, knew that I was holding the Book of Books for our times. I knew that it was really of God and from God as well as I knew that I was holding it in my hands. I clutched it tighter to see if the physical pressure could outweigh the spiritual pressure. Like pinching myself to wake from a dream, I tried to break the spell but could not do it. To this day I feel compelled, almost like the Three Witnesses, to share with others these experiences with the book that has been a keystone to my religion for sure.
