Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

The Voice Said, "I Am Now Going to Answer Your Prayers"

Raj Kumar, Chandigarh, India

I was born in a very strong Hindu-Sikh family in Punjab, India, and in my adult life sought to know the truth about religion. I became a Christian but continued to feel unsatisfied and to pray for understanding. When I was pursuing a master's degree in Chandigarh in 1982, I went to a performance of the Young Ambassadors from Brigham Young University. Afterwards, while I was meeting some of the young people, the Spirit whispered to me to go back to my seat. I obeyed and then I heard a voice say clearly, "The time has come when I am going to answer your prayers. Go out and you will find a special young man. You will know him, and he will answer your questions." This touched me deeply and I again obeyed.

A young man named Thomas Nelson had just come out of the dressing room. As I met him I knew he was the special one, and I said to him, "You all seem to be strong Christians by nature. Why don't you announce that to your audiences and share the gospel directly?"

With great power and authority, he said to me, "We are Christians, but we are quite different from other Christians."

I said, "I am a Methodist. How are you different from me?"

Without hesitating, he asked me three questions, one after the other: "Have you ever heard about The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints?"

"Have you ever heard about a book called the Book of Mormon?"

"Have you ever heard about a prophet called Joseph Smith?"

After each of these three questions, I felt a great sensation in my body, and I could almost feel the Holy Ghost talking to me as if He was bringing something to my remembrance. I could feel without any doubt that I was always familiar with these things, but at that time I felt that I had lost my memory and I was unable to explain what these things were.

I requested Brother Nelson to tell me more about the Church of Jesus Christ, the Book of Mormon, and the Prophet Joseph Smith. This good brother was very kind to me. He told me the sweetest story of the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ. It took him about thirty minutes to tell me this great story. Thirty minutes before, I did not know a thing about the Church, the Book of Mormon, or the Prophet Joseph Smith, but thirty minutes after, I knew without a shadow of doubt, as much as I know today, that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the only true church upon the face of this earth and the Book of Mormon is true and is the word of God. I also knew without any doubt that the man Joseph Smith was truly a prophet of God, a man who was instrumental in the hands of God in bringing about the restoration of the blessed gospel of Christ.

I expressed a desire to have a copy of the Book of Mormon. Brother Nelson did not have the book but promised me that he would send one to me soon. A few days later, I received a copy of the Book of Mormon through the mail. It is perhaps the greatest possession and gift I have ever received. This holy book is a great treasure, and I have received many wonderful and glorious blessings as I have made its study a habit. The Book of Mormon is a blessing in my life. I love this holy book and I would exhort all the inhabitants of this earth to read, study, ponder, and pray about this holy book. As much as I live, I promise that this book will prove a boon in the lives of its readers. I've come closer to the Lord my God as a result of regular study of the Book of Mormon. The Lord has taught me many great things as I've studied this holy book.

I would like to relate a very special experience that I had while I was serving as a full-time missionary in December 1983. I had just been transferred to the Fresno California Second Ward. I had been out only three months. I was a little discouraged and homesick. I wanted to serve the Lord and do my very best, but I was not able to get over this discouragement. I decided to seek help from the Lord through a regular study of the Book of Mormon. One morning I was reading this holy book in Alma 36:3, which reads, "For I do know that whosoever shall put their trust in God shall be supported in their trials, and their troubles, and their afflictions, and shall be lifted up at the last day." It could be just another verse in the book for many, but for me it has proved a great blessing. I could almost feel the prophet Alma standing in front of me that morning and talking to me. I was strengthened, and I started putting more faith in the direction and purpose in my life as a result of this. I study this holy book as often as possible, and the Lord continues to be my strength. I love the Book of Mormon, and I'm very thankful to the holy prophets who so faithfully wrote in this book the revelations and inspirations they received from our Heavenly Father.
