Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

I Felt Discernible Peace Fill My Body

Kenneth W. Godfrey, Tampa, Florida

There were very few books in our four-room house east of the railroad tracks on the north end of a twelve-acre farm. One volume we did have was George Reynolds' The Story of the Book of Mormon, first published in 1888. In about 1940, while still a young boy, I picked it up one winter day. As the snow fell outside, I sat on a crimson-flowered couch next to a coal heater and encountered Nephi for the first time. A man of heroic proportions, Nephi lived a life, it seemed to me, that equaled that of Alexander the Great, Plato, Genghis Khan, or George Washington.

After finishing Reynolds I decided to read the Book of Mormon itself and began, like millions of others, with 1 Nephi. Though I was young, this book caused questions to rush into my mind. How could Laman and Lemuel continue to reject God after having been visited by an angel? Why did God require Nephi to cut off Laban's head? (At the time I could not decapitate a chicken at my father's request.) How could the untrained Nephi build a boat? (I was unable to construct a fence that looked decent, and the model airplane, a P-38, that I had tried to put together, looked like it had already been in too many battles with a German Messerschmitt or a Japanese Zero.)

Then I encountered 2 Nephi and Isaiah, and my questions were forgotten as I stopped reading and thought about the cows I had to milk, sports, and my homework. Over the next few years, I heard in both church meetings and Sunday School classes about other Book of Mormon heroes, such as Enos,

Alma, General Moroni, Mormon, and Moroni. I even started to read the book again a few times. But there was always the impenetrable wall of 2 Nephi and the long quotations from Isaiah, and my reading would cease. Still I knew there was something extraordinary about the Book of Mormon. I had heard President Heber J. Grant say that Nephi was one of his heroes. So even though I was not reading it very often, it was still becoming part of my life, thoughts, and vocabulary.

I knew, for example, that Nephi was "born of goodly parents" (1 Nephi 1:1), that "men are, that they might have joy" (2 Nephi 2:25), that there "must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things" (v. 11), and that Nephi once said, "I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them" (1 Nephi 3:7). I continued to be amazed each time I was told, which was often, that Enos had prayed all day and all night, because I did not see how that was possible, especially when it was all I could do to pray for two or three minutes. Moreover, I was also learning that if you skipped 2 Nephi there were other good parts to the Book of Mormon.

One Sabbath morning in 1953 (it seems now like it was in August) I was sitting at the sacrament table listening to the bishop give announcements, when suddenly he said, "We have just received word from the First Presidency that one boy in each ward, each year, will be allowed to go on a mission." I had been preparing to go into the service to fight in the Korean War, and even though I had always wanted to serve a mission and was worthy to do so, I had for some time believed my dream would not come true. But when the bishop made that announcement, I knew that I would be the young man selected to represent our ward that year. The following Thursday night, the bishop knocked on our front door, was invited in by my parents, and asked if I would be willing to accept a mission call. He could not have known in full the surge of joy that rushed through my body as I excitedly told him I would gladly accept. Unknown to me, my father spent much time on his knees in the barn that night pleading with the Lord to open up the way so that he could support me financially the two years I would be gone. I subsequently continued to work for the Union Pacific railroad, the pay from which enabled me to purchase two cows, which I gave to Dad. My wages also paid for my initial mission expenses, helping somewhat to answer his prayer.

Knowing that I would be required as a missionary to know what was in the Book of Mormon, I began seriously to study that volume of scripture, as well as the New Testament. This time I forced myself through the Isaiah passages and the al

legory of Zenos and was thrilled by the wars, the stratagems, the victories, and the defeats found in the books of Mosiah and Alma. Samuel the Lamanite was added to my list of heroes, and the visit of the resurrected Savior to the Nephites spurred me on to read the tragic ending of that once faithful people.

While sitting in the mission home in Salt Lake City, I was listening one afternoon to Brigham Young University Professor Lynn McKinley, in his deep voice and with great feeling, speak about the Book of Mormon. As he concluded his talk he began to tell us how terribly important it was for all of us, individually, to obtain a testimony of the book's truthfulness. I realized that while I had read the book and believed that it was true, I did not yet have a sure witness, and I began to pray even as he ended his discourse. There came that moment to my soul a powerful, peaceful feeling accompanied by a quiet, almost imperceptible voice declaring that the Book of Mormon was true. All uncertainty fled; only assurance remained. That night, pondering the events of the day, I was impressed with how quickly my prayer of belief had been answered. I did not know then why a testimony had come so soon.

Upon my arrival in the Southern States Mission, I was assigned to labor in Tampa, Florida. My first companion was a recently discharged Marine who had been on his mission for only six months. Growing up, he had not been active in the Church but had cared more about cars, girls, and "good times." While he was engaged in a terrible battle in Korea's capital city, his sergeant, who was like a father to him, died in his arms. There quickly followed a change in my new companion's feelings and his life-style. He became active in the Church, and following his discharge he immediately came on a mission. He knew little about the gospel, less about the scriptures, and almost nothing about the history of the Church. I was his first junior companion, and at one of the first doors we knocked on my first day of tracting, we were met by a friendly, warm man who excitedly invited us into his home. I was amazed at how easy missionary work was and how ready people were to listen to our message. It was then that the man began to tell us that he knew all about Mormonism, its history, and the Book of Mormon. He asked us if we knew that Joseph Smith had placed a stone in a black hat which he pulled over his eyes as he translated the golden plates. He also declared that the Prophet placed in the Book of Mormon verses he had copied from the King James Bible, that the Book of Mormon also had excerpts from Shakespeare on its pages, and that it tried to answer every major controversy in the Prophet's own nineteenth-century religious world. Concluding, he asked, "What do you think of your prophet and his divine book now?"

I looked at my senior companion, anticipating answers that would utterly destroy our eager opponent. While still waiting, I heard him say, "Elder Godfrey, you grew up in the Church, you have been active all your life, you listened to all the lessons you were taught"—all of which was mostly true—"you answer the man!" A frightening, stunned feeling burst through my being. Then I heard myself say, "I don't know the answers to all your questions, but I have read the Book of Mormon. I know that what it teaches brings people closer to Christ and inspires them to both do good and be good; and what is more important right now is that I was told by the Holy Ghost, just a little more than a week ago, that the Book of Mormon is true. Your last question was, 'What do you think of your book now?' And my answer is, I know it is the word of God, and that it was translated by the gift and power of God, and the translation is correct." I felt a discernible peace fill my whole body as I said those words, peace accompanied by an assurance that I had just spoken the truth.

That night before going to sleep I contemplated the day's events. I knew why I had been given a testimony of the Book of Mormon so quickly, but I vowed that in the future I would know more about what was in that second witness for Christ, as well as more about its translation and the Church's history. Since then I have learned that if one has to choose, knowing that it is true is perhaps better than knowing how many times it mentions Christ, or how many examples of chiasmus are contained within its covers, or just which scribe wrote which part, or exactly what has been said about its translation.

While serving on my two-year mission, I was able to read the Book of Mormon seven times. Upon my return I took a Book of Mormon course at the Logan Institute of Religion, in which we studied that volume verse by verse. It was the spring quarter, and we were covering the last third of the book, which included the visit of Christ to the Nephites following his death and resurrection. I was struck with the concern He had for each person as He invited them all to feel his wounds. It impressed me that He did not have Nephi examine the marks on His body and then testify to the group what he had felt, nor did He encourage only the twelve disciples to do so. Rather, He took the time for each person to come forward and learn for himself or herself, until over twenty-five hundred people had done so.

Upon moving to Southern California, I was asked to teach for the Brigham Young University Department of Continuing Education a course titled "How to Teach the Book of Mormon." First, I tried to motivate the adults to read it, believing that once a person seriously begins to study its pages, a new love will have been found. Second, systematically I called attention to some of its major teachings with respect to the Fall, the Atonement, justice, mercy, patience, love, opposition, joy, and the factors that figure in the fall of civilizations. I then read its promise that all can know, if they will ask in faith, that the book is true. One ninety-two-year-old student had never petitioned God before regarding the Book of Mormon. After class one night, she retired to her apartment and, kneeling alone, put Moroni's promise to the test. Choked with emotion, she told the class the next week that her prayers had immediately been answered! Lamenting, she cried, "Why did I not ask sooner, because the joy I feel I have not felt before." The Book of Mormon, I found, as thousands had found before me, causes people's lives to change. They become more like Christ in their thoughts, feelings, actions, and speech.

I have thought often of the experience described in Third Nephi when the resurrected Christ visited the Nephites, instructed them, blessed them, and was about to depart for the night when He saw that the people "were in tears, and did look steadfastly upon him as if they would ask him to tarry a little longer with them." (3 Nephi 17:5.) Sometimes Latter-day Saints are taught to fear the Judgment and to look to that event with fear and trepidation. Yet the Nephites did not fear the "keeper of the gate"; rather, they desired to remain with Him longer.

My experience with the Book of Mormon has been a steady, simple friendship, never accompanied by angels, visions, or sudden dramatic events. Rather, it has kindled the gentle warmth of the fire of peace, the still small voice conveying love, and the feeling within that truth is quietly nestled on its pages. It has given me the deep impression that prophets of God inscribed scripture on plates of gold for a latter-day prophet to bring forth, and this scripture helps all peoples more surely walk on the narrow path at whose end stands a gate guarded by a keeper whose face I one day hope to see with pleasure.
