Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

The Book Is Full of Richness, like Flowers in Crannied Walls

Claudia L. Bushman, Newark, Delaware

The truth is that I don't much like the Book of Mormon. Reading it is tantalizing and disturbing because so much has been left out. If I had stood beside Nephi or Mormon with a stylus and some sheets of gold, the book would have told a different story, full of anecdotes of real life in Zarahemla, with full descriptions of houses, fashion, and the educational system. I would have described cities, sports, and commerce. I would have talked about family life. I certainly would have said something about the invisible and silent majority. Where are the women's pages of the Book of Mormon? Were they abridged out, or did they just never exist?

Then I don't like the people. A superrighteous and superior younger brother is enough to drive anyone to sin, and controlling the record as he does, he will not present his siblings in a very good light. And I have never been sympathetic to the elevation of overnight repenters like Alma. The return of the prodigal son is certainly cause for rejoicing, but he should come in below those who have been continually faithful, certainly not raised to their head. If those who have experienced evil can really be better than those who have always been good, let's hear it in some official way and incorporate it into the system. Helaman's stripling warriors make me very sad because their innocent faith seems wrongly placed. All men will die, and many of the righteous will die battling those who are equally righteous. The Book of Mormon is full of firm-jawed, single-minded, unsympathetic people.

Then the structure is so very complex, a compilation of fragments and diverse texts, all run together in a strange way. The people traverse a bleak landscape, traveling and fighting, with little sense of progress. They sin and repent, sin and repent against an ever repeated chorus—be good, be good.

But when I read the Book of Mormon, the first verse always seems heavy with wisdom, direction, meaning. Why have I never noticed this before, I wonder. This verse should be memorized, used as the basis of a talk, worked into a sampler. And the book is full of richness, like the golden eyes of toads or flowers in crannied walls. Hundreds of pages of small verses full of hidden jewels.
