Eugene England, Converted to Christ through the Book of Mormon ( 1989)

It Has Opened My Heart Wider to Experience His Love

Robert A. Rees, Los Angeles, California

I love the Book of Mormon. I have since the first day I heard about it when I was ten years old. I learned about the Book of Mormon from my father, who had just returned from the second world war. Before going into the service he had been miraculously converted to the gospel through a priesthood blessing that brought him back from the brink of death. Perhaps it was a combination of youthful openness and a gift of faith, but when I heard the story of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, I was blessed at that moment to know that what I was hearing was true. Somehow I just knew it. That witness has never left me, even though as a scholar and thinker I have wrestled with numerous questions or "problems" relating to the book.

I love to read the Book of Mormon. It is an inviting book, one that rewards the frequent and careful reader. My experience with it over the years has been the same as with the other standard works: the more I read them, the more riches they yield. Thoughtful, sensitive reading of the Book of Mormon reveals the depth, complexity, and subtlety of this great second testament of Christ. Each time I read it, I see things I have never seen before. One of the reasons for this is that I come back to the book a different person from the one I was on the previous reading. Not only have I had more experiences with the Spirit since the last reading but I have struggled more with my own weaknesses and transgressions, have suffered the pain of trying to be a better husband and father, and have faced the challenge of being a better Christian and, in whatever church calling I have, a better steward.

I love to read the Book of Mormon because as I do, the Spirit bears witness to me that what I am reading is true, and this strengthens my bond to God. I have thought often about why the Lord has commanded us to read the scriptures. I am convinced that the chief reason is that as we read about the experiences of actual men and women and see how God acted in their lives, we are convinced that he can act is our lives as well. Further, as the Holy Ghost reveals to our hearts and minds the truth of what we are reading, we experience the love of God in a profound way. In fact, one might say that the whole purpose of the gospel and the Church is to provide us with opportunities to experience God's love personally and to share that love with others. In this way, we come to experience, as the angel testified to Nephi, "the love of God, which sheddeth itself abroad in the hearts of the children of men" and to know that "it is the most desirable above all things. . . . Yea, and the most joyous to the soul." (1 Nephi 11:22-23.) The revelation of that love is available through reading the Book of Mormon. I have felt it frequently, deeply, and richly.

I love to study the Book of Mormon. I make a distinction between reading and studying. Generally, we read the Book of Mormon for inspiration and comfort, but we study it to gain understanding. One of the reasons why I love to study the Book of Mormon is that through serious, thoughtful study I am able to test the book's true mettle.

I first learned how to study the Book of Mormon when I was a student at Brigham Young University. There, under the tutelage of such great teachers as Robert Thomas, Truman Madsen, Hugh Nibley, Reid Bankhead, Glen Pearson, and others, I began a serious study of the Book of Mormon and learned to respect its toughness.

From Robert Thomas, who awakened me both intellectually and spiritually, I first gained an appreciation for the literary qualities of the Book of Mormon. Bob had written his undergraduate thesis at Reed College on the parallels between biblical poetic style and that of the Book of Mormon, and as a budding literary scholar I was intrigued by his insights. Hugh Nibley taught me how to consider the ancient antecedents of the book and how to read carefully to discover the book's message for our dispensation. Truman Madsen taught me how to connect the book's great messages with the rich philosophical, spiritual, and historical truths in other religions and traditions. In Reid Bankhead's class on Jesus the Christ I understood for the first time what the atonement of Christ meant to me personally. That experience was enhanced by Brother Bankhead's showing me how the Book of Mormon enlightens our understanding of the Atonement. Brother Pearson taught me that the Book of Mormon was the key to conversion, a lesson I was to apply many times as a missionary.

In graduate school I studied literary theory and criticism, and what I learned gave me a new appreciation for the linguistic complexity and literary beauty of the record of Nephi. The more I learned about the integrity of a literary text, the more I was convinced that no one living in 1830 could have written the Book of Mormon. In fact, I am convinced that all the scholars and theologians in the world in 1830, working with all the known texts and reference materials, could not have written what was translated from the brass plates. The intricacies of the various literary styles, the complicated narrative, and especially the spiritual insights all suggest a time and a people that neither Joseph Smith nor any of his contemporaries could have invented. There are just too many places where the authenticity of the text rings true.

It is in the details that any text has its greatest test, and it is in the details of the Book of Mormon that I often find things that give intellectual and rational support to the spiritual witness I have received. For example, when Nephi tells his people to let their souls "delight in fatness" (2 Nephi 9:51), I am convinced that this is not a metaphorical expression that Joseph Smith or his contemporaries might have used. It is one expression among many in the Book of Mormon that to my mind could not have been invented or faked.

I love to teach the Book of Mormon. Over the years I have had many opportunities to teach it both formally and infor

mally. I have taught it as a Primary, Sunday School, and Young Men's teacher; I have taught it in various priesthood quorums; and I have taught it as a seminary and institute teacher. In such classes I have taken pleasure in opening the pages of the Book of Mormon to my students and in turn having them enlighten my understanding.

As a father it has been my privilege to teach the Book of Mormon to my children and to testify of its truth to them. One of my greatest joys has been to see my children grow up with their own testimonies of the Book of Mormon and to see them share those testimonies with others through missionary work, teaching in the Church, and testifying to friends and acquaintances. In this way the light of this great book is passed from generation to generation and to the wider world.

As the bishop of a singles ward for the past three years, I have had many occasions to teach the truths of the Book of Mormon to members of my congregation. I have found it a great resource for touching the lives of others and challenging them to greater faithfulness. For example, not long ago I was counseling a young man who had been involved in a series of sexual transgressions. He was not convinced that what he had done was particularly wrong or that it would have serious consequences in his life. As I was trying to convince him of the error of his ways and help him come to a place of repentance, I remembered Alma's words to his son Corianton. Turning to Alma 39 through 42, I read Alma's counsel to Corianton and concluded with the words of this faithful father to his errant son: "Behold, I say unto you, wickedness never was happiness." (Alma 41:10.)

I love to teach the Book of Mormon because it is a very teachable book. Since it deals with the fundamental problems of human relationships, the archetypal conflict between good and evil, and the eternal struggle between our wills and God's, it provides many great lessons that can inspire faithfulness. Like all great literature, it allows us to identify imaginatively with the characters who inhabit its pages. Further, since it was writ

ten expressly for our day, as teachers we are able to relate its principles to the real world around us. Like Nephi, we are able to "liken all scriptures unto us, that it might be for our profit and learning." (1 Nephi 19:23.)

I love to testify of the Book of Mormon. Knowing how much joy the book has brought me, I have sought for opportunities to tell others about its truths. When I was a young missionary, it gave me a thrill to testify to the people I met in cities and towns in the Midwest of the Lord's work among the ancient Americans. The very first person I taught on my first day of tracting on a cold January day in 1956 in Kankakee, Illinois, I testified to about the truth of the Restoration, including the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. She received a witness through my humble testimony that I spoke the truth and was converted to the Church that day. Since then I have testified to thousands of the truth of this second witness of Jesus Christ and have felt that exquisite joy that comes when one is an instrument in bringing another to Christ.

I have had many conversations with others about the Book of Mormon. Several of these stand out in my memory. I have had the privilege for the past eight years of working with Dr. Norman Cousins in organizing a series of exchanges between writers from China and the United States. This has given me a rare opportunity of knowing some of the outstanding writers from both countries. At one conference in Los Angeles, I was having a conversation with the American writer Kurt Vonnegut. When he found out I was a Mormon, he asked me if I really believed what the Church taught. I assured him that I did. He then asked me how I regarded the Book of Mormon. I told him I considered it an authentic record. He asked, "How can you believe something like that?" My response was the same as that which I have given to my students at the university over the years: "If I am intellectually and spiritually honest with myself, I have to say that the spiritual conviction I receive when reading the Book of Mormon is among the truest experiences I have ever had."

I had a similar discussion with the poet Allen Ginsberg in Souzhou, China. We were at a gathering of writers one evening, and the discussion somehow turned to religion. When Allen asked what I believed, I gave him a brief summary of our teachings, including the story of the Book of Mormon. He asked incredulously, "This is actually believed?" I assured him that indeed it was and that I was one of the believers. Allen is a practicing Buddhist and has respect and tolerance for the beliefs of others, but this particular set of beliefs seemed to stretch the limits of his ecumenical spirit.

I also told my Chinese friends about the Book of Mormon and included copies of it in collections of American books that our delegation gave to the Chinese Writers' Association libraries in Beijing and Shanghai. On a trip to the Soviet Union, I gave a copy to a friend in Leningrad, and in Moscow I had an interesting conversation with a Russian associate who had been reading a copy of the Book of Mormon given him in December 1987 by my friend Gene Kovalenko. I have sent copies of the Book of Mormon to friends and associates, and my family has sent copies with our photograph and testimony to anonymous readers through the family to family Book of Mormon program.

I love the Book of Mormon most of all because it has led me to a fuller understanding of the life and mission of Jesus Christ and has opened my heart wider to experience His love. The Book of Mormon testifies of Christ from the very first chapter, where Lehi sees "One descending out of the midst of heaven [whose] luster was above that of the sun at noon-day" (1 Nephi 1:9), to the very last chapter, where Moroni says, "If ye by the grace of God are perfect in Christ, and deny not his power, then are ye sanctified in Christ by the grace of God, through the shedding of the blood of Christ, which is in the covenant of the Father unto the remission of your sins, that ye become holy, without spot" (Moroni 10:33). Through the many testimonies of Book of Mormon prophets and through Christ's own words to the Nephites, I have come to exclaim, as does Nephi, "I glory in plainness; I glory in truth; I glory in my Jesus, for he hath redeemed my soul from hell." (2 Nephi 33:6; italics added.)

I love the Book of Mormon. And I love the Lord for sending it to bless our lives.
