James E. Faust, Finding Light in a Dark World ( 1995)

Preface

Since becoming a General Authority in 1972, I have had the opportunity to meet with Latter-day Saints in many nations. In doing so, I have seen the countless ways in which faithful members of the Church are working to find light in this ever-darkening world. Good people everywhere are reading the scriptures, studying the gospel, teaching others, and rearing families, often serving without attention or recognition as they brighten the lives of those around them.

In this book—a collection of some of my recent general conference addresses and other speeches edited for the benefit of the reader—I have tried to define the light of the gospel and to suggest some ways in which we might seek that light.

Ancient and modern revelations proclaim Jesus Christ to be the Light of the world. Accordingly, the first section of this book focuses on our need to build stronger testimonies of our Savior, Jesus Christ, "the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world" (John 1:9).

The second section of the book shows several ways in which we as Latter-day Saints may serve as examples to those around us, thus radiating the light of the gospel: by honoring the legacy of those who have gone before, by performing service and standing for truth in our communities and nations, and by following the example of our Savior in great and small ways.

The concluding section of this book discusses the responsibility of parents to "bring up your children in light and truth . . . , according to the commandments" (D&C 93:40, 42). It is my firm belief that there is no more important human effort. Because each family member has the opportunity to seek the light of the gospel through righteous living, I have devoted specific chapters to discussing the duties and challenges of young people, priesthood holders, mothers, and fathers. And because keeping the Sabbath day holy is a family duty, a chapter addresses that important and sacred topic.

It is hoped that in these pages the reader may find some messages that will strengthen resolve, build testimony, and encourage good works. May the Lord bless you in your efforts to live worthy of his promise: "If your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things" (D&C 88:67).
