James E. Faust, Finding Light in a Dark World ( 1995)

Part One

The Light of the World: Jesus Christ, Our Savior

Chapter One

"The Prints of the Nails in His Hands"

Imagine with me that we are going to meet the Savior of the world. Imagine further that we are among the Nephites round about the temple in the land Bountiful on the American continent just after the Savior's crucifixion in Jerusalem. Imagine further that we have received the sign concerning his death, and while we were thus conversing together we "heard a voice as if it came out of heaven" which we could not understand even though "it was not a harsh voice, neither was it a loud voice; nevertheless, . . . it did pierce [us] to the very soul," so much so that there was no part of our bodies that did not quake, causing our "hearts to burn" (3 Nephi 11:3). We heard the voice a second time and we "understood it not" (verse 4).

The third time, we look upward from whence the sound comes. This time we are able to "understand the voice" and it says, "Behold my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him" (verses 6-7). As we look up, we see "a Man descending out of heaven." He is "clothed in a white robe," and he comes down and stands among us (verse 8). We are frightened. Many of us think it is an angel who has appeared. But he stretches forth his hand and says: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world" (verse 10). He continues: "And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning" (verse 11).

When we hear this, we fall to the earth because we remember that it was prophesied that Christ would show himself unto us after his ascension into heaven. Now we must be sure. There have been many false Christs who have come. How can we know? We remember scriptures that tell the manner of his crucifixion, and he invites us to come forth "that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world" (verse 14).

At first we are reluctant to do this. It is too personal, too indelicate, to touch another person's body to satisfy our curiosity. Others are getting in line. In the end, our curiosity gets the best of us, because we feel we must know. Is this personage really the Christ, Jesus of Nazareth, who received these marks he offers to show us when he was crucified in Jerusalem?

We are excited. Our hearts pound within our breasts. Could this possibly be the Son of God, the sovereign of the world? The line we are in moves forward, and we walk up to him. As we have been invited to do, we are among those who thrust their hands into his side and feel the prints of the nails in his hands and in his feet. "One by one" we go by him, and then we "know of a surety" that it is he "of whom it was written by the prophets, that should come" (verse 15). All doubt has disappeared.

Having thus witnessed for ourselves, how should we express ourselves? We are so humbled we feel we must say, "Hosanna!" Hosanna in the Hebrew means "please save us." And then we say, "Blessed be the name of the Most High God!" and we "fall down at the feet of Jesus, and . . . worship him" (verse 17).

There is one of us in the multitude who is called up to meet the Savior. His name is Nephi. We wonder, how will he greet the Savior? Will he shake hands? Will he bow? What would be appropriate? We watch very intently. "And Nephi arose and went forth, and bowed himself before the Lord and did kiss his feet" (verse 19). The Lord commands Nephi to arise and gives to him the power to baptize, and he then instructs Nephi and the others to whom he has given the power to baptize how it shall be done. "And now behold, these are the words which ye shall say, calling them by name, saying: Having authority given me of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen" (verses 24-25).

And then we hear the Savior instruct Nephi and the others that following the baptismal prayer, those being baptized should be immersed in the water. We are so anxious to hear more of his message. What will he teach us? He assures us that this is his doctrine and that if we will build upon this, we will build upon a rock, and our lives and our homes will be so strong that "the gates of hell shall not prevail against them" (verse 39). What a great promise that is. We are eager to hear more.

He begins to teach us. We soon hear that the doctrine of Christ is not easy doctrine. We are told we will be judged in part by the intent of our hearts. In large measure, we will be judged not only by what we have done but by what we should have done in a given situation. This is very sobering. It is new to us. This new doctrine requires a reconciliation of differences before we come to the Lord asking his divine providence. "Go thy way unto thy brother, and first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come unto me with full purpose of heart, and I will receive you" (3 Nephi 12:24). Then follows more of the hard doctrine of this Jesus:

And behold, it is written, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth;

But I say unto you, that ye shall not resist evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also;

And if any man will sue thee at the law and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also;

And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. . . .

And behold it is written also, that thou shalt love thy neighbor and hate thine enemy;

But behold I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them who despitefully use you and persecute you. (Verses 38-41, 43-44)

At first we are not wise enough to see what the Savior is trying to teach us. Afterward we realize that he is challenging us, trying to raise us to a higher level of devotion.

Now comes the hardest doctrine of all.

"Old things are done away, and all things have become new.

"Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect" (verses 47-48).

This is indeed a difficult doctrine. Yet we will try to live it, for our hearts have been changed like those of the Nephites who see the risen Christ and whose descendants for the next two hundred years live in such a manner that there is "no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people" (4 Nephi 1:15; see also verse 22).

I close with my own personal testimony. I bear solemn witness that Jesus Christ was born in this life to Mary, having been divinely conceived, and was the very Son of God. I believe that he was indeed born in a manger and reared in the home of Joseph, learning the trade of a carpenter from his stepfather. I believe that he lived among our Heavenly Father's children and taught them the plan of truth and salvation, which, if they are obedient, will permit them to enjoy his eternal presence.

I believe that, having completed his earthly ministry, he worked out our atonement through exquisite personal sacrifice and suffering on his part. I believe that his resurrection was accomplished, that he arose from the tomb with the same form of body parts that he laid down. I believe that he was and is our intercessor and advocate with the Father, and that because of him all mankind will enjoy an eternal existence, but that only the obedient and faithful will be exalted in his kingdom.

I believe that in these latter days, through him, a restoration of the holy priesthood after the order of the Son of God, with its keys and authority, has taken place through Joseph Smith. I believe that these same keys and authority have been passed down through the presidents of the Church and are upon the earth, being held at this time by President Gordon B. Hinckley.

I bear solemn testimony that God's purpose for man was declared to Moses: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39).
