James E. Faust, Finding Light in a Dark World ( 1995)

Chapter Eight

A New Civil Religion

Nearly 150 years ago, the first company of Mormon pioneers was in the area known as Hennefer, Utah. On that day they climbed the ridge known as Hogs Back Summit, which was dangerous and difficult for the wagons. Wilford Woodruff called it "the worst road we have had on the journey." The wheels of George A. Smith's wagon collapsed inward, zigzagging down from the summit. In the evening Orson Pratt and his advance party were on Big Mountain looking through an opening in the canyons. It was the pioneers' first glimpse of the valley of the Great Salt Lake. [^1]

In the state of Utah, Latter-day Saints memorialize each year those valiant pioneers who settled Utah and the surrounding areas. They were a people persecuted and driven out of what was then the United States because of their religious beliefs. They came west seeking to worship Almighty God according to the dictates of their own conscience.

Almost three centuries before, in a like manner, God-fearing believers, most notable of which were the Pilgrims, left Europe with its state religions and came to this land to seek freedom of worship. As a consequence of this, the deepest taproots of the United States and the state of Utah in the past have lain in the very essence of our humanity; our faith in God. Some U.S. coins still contain the phrase "In God We Trust." Our pledge of allegiance states that we are "one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all."

The recent controversy in the United States of America regarding the constitutionality of certain public prayers casts a serious cloud over the reality and meaning of the sacred in our society.

There seems to be developing a new civil religion. The civil religion I refer to is a secular religion. It has no moral absolutes. It is nondenominational. It is nontheistic. It is politically focused. It is antagonistic to religion. It rejects the historic religious traditions of the nation. It feels strange. If this trend continues, nonbelief will be more honored than belief. While all beliefs must be protected, are atheism, agnosticism, cynicism, and moral relativism to be more safeguarded and valued than Christianity, Judaism, and the tenets of Islam, which hold that there is a Supreme Being and that mortals are accountable to him? If so, this would, in my opinion, place the United States of America in great moral jeopardy.

For those who believe in God, this new civil religion fosters some of the same concerns as the state religions that prompted our forefathers to escape to the New World. Nonbelief is becoming more sponsored in the body politic than belief. I believe there is great danger in this to the nation. History teaches the lesson well that there must be a unity in some moral absolutes in all societies for them to endure and progress. Indeed, without a national morality they disintegrate. Proverbs reminds us that "righteousness exalteth a nation: but sin is a reproach to any people" (Proverbs 14:34). The long history and tradition of this nation, which had its roots in petitions for divine guidance, is being challenged.

On this issue Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes commented that "a page of history is worth a volume of logic." [^2] Appeals for divine guidance, forgiveness, and approbation have been part of the fabric of this nation from the beginning. The first prayer in Congress was offered in September 1774. In his farewell address, George Washington acknowledged that "of all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity, religion and morality are indispensable supports. . . . Reason and experience both forbid us to expect that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle."

Similarly, Abraham Lincoln declared, "God rules this world—it is the duty of nations as well as men to own their dependence upon the overruling power of God, to confess their sins and transgressions in humble sorrow . . . and to recognize the sublime truth that those nations only are blessed whose God is their Lord."

Thomas Jefferson, in his first inaugural address, prayed, "May that infinite power which rules the destinies of the universe lead our councils to do what is best and give them a favorable issue for your peace and prosperity."

James Madison, in his first inaugural address, stated that his confidence was "in the guardianship and guidance of that Mighty Being whose power regulates the destiny of nations, whose blessings have been so conspicuously dispensed to this rising Republic, and to whom we are bound to address our devout gratitude for the past, as well as our fervent supplications and best hopes for the future."

Every session of the United States Supreme Court to this day opens with the plea, "God save the United States and this honorable court."

In the Book of Mormon, Moroni gives the inhabitants of this nation a stern warning: "For behold, this is a land which is choice above all other lands; wherefore he that doth possess it shall serve God or shall be swept off; for it is the everlasting decree of God" (Ether 2:10).

The new civil religion is different from that envisioned by Benjamin Franklin, who seems to have first discussed the concept of "civil religion." [^3] Franklin's civil religion, as I understand it, was envisioned to replace the state religions of Europe, with their forced taxation and oppression. Franklin no doubt envisioned that this vacuum would be filled with a patriotism reflected by national symbolism, pride, ethics, values, and purpose. His eloquent statement concerning divine intervention in the Constitutional Convention clearly indicated he was not opposed to religiosity.

The new civil religion isn't really a religion as you and I would use that term to describe a faith or a church or synagogue that worships Almighty God and espouses a code of moral conduct for its adherents. This new civil religion teaches a sectarian philosophy that is hostile to traditional religion. It has its own orthodoxy. It could even end up in an ironic violation of the Federal Constitution, which states that there shall be no religious basis for office. [^4] Will irreligion become a test for office? May I share with you several examples that illustrate this?

Every American has been taught that the "freedom of religion" is the "first freedom" guaranteed by the Bill of Rights. The First Amendment to the Constitution recognizes the "free exercise of religion" as the preeminent position among constitutional rights as intended by the Founding Fathers.

Most Americans are unaware, however, that several years ago this most fundamental right was substantially eroded. For decades, whenever government tried to pass laws that interfered with any right guaranteed under the Constitution, the law was given careful scrutiny by the courts. Government was required to show that first, it had a "compelling governmental interest" that justified the interference with a Constitutional right, and second, that this "compelling governmental interest" could not be achieved through some other, less intrusive means. This strict scrutiny rule of law was even applied to rights that have been created by the courts even though they are not specifically found in the Constitution—such as the right to privacy, which is the basis for the legalization of abortion.

In the case of Oregon Employment Division v. Smith, [^5] however, this strict scrutiny and the burden on government to demonstrate a "compelling interest" was abandoned in cases involving the free exercise of religion. According to the court, religious exclusions to public policy is "a luxury we can no longer afford."

As a result, any government (federal, state, or local) was able to pass any law that infringed upon individual religious liberty as long as the law applied generally to everyone. In California, for example, a Catholic couple was sued in federal court because they refused, on religious and moral grounds, to rent an apartment in their own home to an unmarried couple living together.

A Quaker employer whose religious beliefs demand that he welcome the sojourner and the poor was denied relief from the Immigration Reform and Control Act. [^6]

An autopsy was performed on a Hmong boy against the religious beliefs of his parents, who believed that mutilating his body would prevent his spirit from becoming free. [^7]

The Civil Rights Act of 1964 has been construed to require the Boy Scouts of America to admit into membership persons who are unwilling to profess a belief in God. [^8]

As a result of the case Oregon Employment Division v. Smith, Congress passed the Religious Freedom Restoration Act by an overwhelming margin, and the act was signed into law on November 16, 1993. This act restored the requirement of the government to prove that there is a compelling state interest before interfering with the free exercise of religion. Unfortunately, the constitutionality of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act is now being brought into question.

The civil secular religion also teaches that the establishment clause of the First Amendment—companion to the "free exercise" clause—should be applied to prevent religious organizations from working cooperatively with the government to bring about worthwhile public policy. There are many laudatory public purposes, such as education, literacy, public health, welfare, and assistance to the poor where charitable institutions, including churches, can and should work with government assistance programs for the public good.

There are numerous examples, however, of instances in which governments have tried, through tax incentives, grants of educational materials or other commodities, to provide accommodation to religious institutions that provide public service—only to be challenged in court for fostering religion in violation of the establishment clause.

Another governmental accommodation that could be honored is the religious feelings of the people for matters such as religious holidays and traditions. These involve little public financial assistance but are frequently challenged as a violation of establishment.

I have chosen to emphasize this subject because the twin religious clauses of the Bill of Rights—"Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof" [^9]—are golden threads that in the past have permitted those who believe in God to publicly affirm that there is a higher power that "rules in the affairs of men." These religious clauses have fostered the creative impulses and the vitality of religion in an open, heterogeneous society. These clauses have freed this country from the terrible religious violence that has existed in Europe over the centuries and from which our forefathers in this country sought to escape. One author described these religious clauses in the Constitution as "the Articles of Peace." [^10]

The establishment and free exercise clauses should be read together to harmonize the importance of religious liberty with freedom from government regulation. Rather, today, in my opinion, the establishment clause is being used in our nation to restrict religious institutions from playing a role in civic issues, and the free exercise clause denies to individuals their religious liberty. It does not accord the equivalent to what the Constitution accords to secularism—the new civil religion.

One basic difference between Franklin's concept of a civil religion and the new secular religion is that the new secular religion rejects in large measure the basic concept of Anglo-Saxon-American jurisprudence. Our traditional jurisprudence has held that God is the source of all of our basic rights and that the principal function of government is only to secure those rights for its citizenry. May I quote from the Declaration of Independence: "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights; . . . that to secure these rights, governments are instituted among men."

In contrast, the new civil religion I speak of finds its source of rights by invoking the power of the state. It seems to have little purpose and few common values for morality except self-interest. Recently that power was invoked by the Supreme Court in a case known in legal circles as Lee v. Weisman. This is the case that resulted in the Supreme Court's banning ceremonial prayer at public school exercises. Commenting on the case, Edwin Yoder, distinguished columnist for the Washington Post, observed that "this decision is more than a natural extension of the original school prayer decision of 1962. It more closely resembles a promotion of secularity in the public forum—a result which some framers of the First Amendment Establishment Clause probably did not so much as dream of."

Yoder further states: "Religion has a legitimate public, ceremonial and community function which may be stunted by such decisions. It is far from clear why children, even of tender years, need to be protected from religion even on special ceremonial occasions." [^11]

There are natural safeguards in a God-fearing people that promote respect for law and order, decency, and public civility. One such restraining influence is the belief that the citizenry will be accountable to their Creator for their conduct under a high moral law. This respect for and adherence to moral law transcends the constraints of the civil and criminal codes. In a people who are not God-fearing, however, these characteristics are notably absent.

Will public civility be lost under the guise of claiming under Constitutional safeguards the rights to freedom of speech? Will tolerance of other faiths and beliefs continue to be diminished by claiming rights under the establishment and free exercise clauses of the Constitution?

Several years ago during the Los Angeles riots, we viewed our countrymen in Los Angeles lawlessly looting business establishments and happily carrying out stolen goods. When viewing the daily television fare and when confronted with the overwhelming social ills of this country, we can hardly say that our citizenry have been overexposed to moral teachings. One of the responsibilities of government under their police powers is to protect the health, safety, and morals of the citizenry. Our governments have not succeeded well in this duty of protecting morals, especially in regard to the coming generation.

Several kinds of moral evils have crawled inside the Constitutional fortress. Pornography, for example, finds its most effective shield in the First Amendment freedom of expression rights. The Constitutional freedom of conscience has been given a reverse twist with public prayer decisions.

The new civil religion is, in my opinion, coming dangerously close to becoming a de facto state religion of secularism. Litigation—and the fear of litigation—have made school boards and local governments reluctant to publicly defend moral principles. As a consequence, fewer public institutions are willing to take the stand in defense of moral values.

Historically in this nation the public religion was sacred rather than sectarian or secular. Public statements from the judicial as well as the legislative and executive branches affirmed a higher destiny for this nation under the providence of the Almighty. This is evidenced by Justice Brewer's pronouncement in 1892, "This is a Christian nation." [^12] The sacred aspect of public religion of this country continued until 1946, when the secular was ushered in by a case called Everson v. the Board of Education. [^13]

With the public religion now turning increasingly toward the secular, I wonder how this nation will preserve its enduring values. In my view, there is a substantial governmental interest within the limits of the religious clauses of the Constitution in public prayer and expressions of all faiths that acknowledge the existence of deity. Such prayer and expressions accommodate the abiding values shared by a great majority of our citizenry. They give meaning to a transcendent spiritual reality and idealism which, in the past at least, was quite firmly held by the people of our society. The very essence of our concern for human welfare and alleviation of human suffering lies in our spiritual feelings and expressions.

So now we find ourselves in a situation where, unlike the Pilgrims, the Mormon pioneers, and others, we have nowhere to go in order to escape a new civil de facto secular state religion that continually limits public religious expression and fosters secular values and expressions. How do we preserve the essence of our humanity?

Surely we must begin in our homes. We must teach our children and grandchildren. The moral teachings of all our churches must have an honored place in our society. The general decline in the moral fabric of the citizenry places a greater responsibility on homes and churches to teach values—morality, decency, respect for others, patriotism, and honoring and sustaining the law.

We can also exercise our right, with all other citizens, to vote for men and women who reflect our own values. We can also express our views as all other citizens have a right to do in the legislative process of both the state and the nation. With all others we can claim our rights of free expression. We can petition for the redress of grievances.

We can help educate the coming generation about their rights and duties. We can educate ourselves about the important moral issues of our time. There is no desert to flee to in order to have full freedom. There is no place across the waters for pilgrims. Therefore we must hold to our beliefs and do what we can.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Aurora Leigh, book VII.
[^2] William Shakespeare, King Lear, III, vi., 20.
[^3] Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939), p. 373.
[^4] Discourses of Brigham Young, comp. John A. Widtsoe (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1941), pp. 256-57.
[^5] Marion G. Romney, "The Price of Peace," address given at Brigham Young University, 1 March 1955.
[^6] Marion G. Romney, in Conference Report, October 1962, p. 94.
[^7] "Mother Teresa Has Anti-Abortion Answer," The Salt Lake Tribune, 15 February 1994, p. A11.
[^8] Ibid.
[^9] Ibid.
[^10] Ibid.
[^11] Forbes Magazine, 12 September 1994, p. 25.
[^12] "Ten Billion for Dinner, Please," U.S. News and World Report, 12 September 1994, pp. 57-60.
[^13] The Screwtape Letters (New York: Macmillan, 1961), pp. 64-65.
