Each time I receive L’Étoile (French), I hurry to read it. It is a precious guide for me. I appreciate the messages from the First Presidency; they help me feel the Lord’s Spirit, and my testimony is strengthened.

David Elogeais
Salon de Provence Branch, Nice France Stake

I first saw the Liahona (Spanish) when my brother was baptized and ward members gave him back issues. I read all of them. As I did, I felt something I could not explain, which made me cry for joy and happiness.

While my brother served a full-time mission, we lost contact with his ward—but we had the magazines. I read them over and over and always found something of help to me.

When my brother returned from his mission, he taught me the gospel. I was baptized in June 1987.

Later, the magazine was an extra companion for me when I was called to the Mexico Guadalajara Mission. My full-time mission is now over, but I still use the Liahona as a missionary tool. I take copies for the customers to read at the laundry where I work.

The rest of my family has not yet joined the Church, but they read the Liahona, and they are touched by the same spirit that touched me eight years ago.

These past eight years have been the happiest of my life. I am grateful to my Heavenly Father for my spiritual progress and for the counsel we receive through the pages of the Liahona.

Magdalena Cervantes Reyna
Fresno Ward, San Luis Potosí Mexico Stake

I first read the Liahona (Spanish) when it came into my hands by mistake. Today, as a new convert to the Church, I feel the magazine makes a great contribution to my life through its articles, its examples of gospel living, and the messages from the Brethren. I especially like to read the First Presidency Message and the Visiting Teaching Message.

Flor Leal Hernandez
La Trinidad Ward, Caracas Venezuela Stake

I am a full-time missionary in Argentina. I am grateful for President Gordon B. Hinckley’s First Presidency Message in the August 1994 issue—“And Peter Went Out and Wept Bitterly.” It helped me bring some less-active members back into activity.

The magazine has also helped my family at home, who are not even members of the Church. Thank you.

Elder Sergio Adrian López
Argentina Buenas Aires South Mission
