B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

1CHAPTER XCIV

1MISCELLANEOUS EVENTS, 1851-7: EXTENSION OF COLONIES EAST AND WEST—CORNER STONES OF THE SALT LAKE TEMPLE LAID

1IN pointing out the underlying cause of the troubles between the Latter-day Saints in Utah and the government of the United States, and following the first clash between the United States "foreign" appointees for Utah and the saints to its conclusion, I passed by many events in the history both of the church and of the territory that were parallel with those events and that now claim our attention.

EARLY SETTLEMENTS EAST OF SALT LAKE CITY

Among these events was the extension of the Latter-day Saint colonies in the Great Basin. The first colony planted east of the line of counties extending north and south of Salt Lake county was a settlement in Parley's Park, a little southeast of Salt Lake City. The settlement was made by Samuel Snyder who built sawmills in the park, early in 1853. Later settlements were formed along the valley of the Weber river, and later, viz., 1861, Summit county was organized. [^1] It takes its name from the fact that it includes within its boundaries several of the summits of the Wasatch range. It borders Salt Lake and Morgan counties on the east, and is noted for its coal and mineral deposits.

Colonization EffortsHCIn the year 1853, two companies were organized in Salt Lake City to effect a settlement in the Green river valley. The first company, consisting of 39 men, was led by John Nebeker; the second, numbering 53 men, was under the leadership of Isaac Bullock. [^2] Both companies united and formed a settlement on a stream known as Smith's Fork, in the vicinity of Fort Bridger, calling their settlement Fort Supply. Some months previous to the founding of this settlement Brigham Young had purchased of James Bridger a tract of land comprising thirty square miles, for which he paid $8,000 in gold. He erected a stone fort and made corrals for the protection of animals, and made other improvements on the ranch, amounting to $8,000 more. A county was organized called Green River county, with Fort Supply as the county seat. "In 1857 the United States Army, under General Albert Sidney Johnston, took possession of Fort Bridger in the name of the United States, and declared it to be a military reservation. The reservation was also extended over the settlement and farming lands of Fort Supply, the county seat. Alfred Cumming, then (1857-1861) governor of Utah, made an attempt to restore the property to the citizens who had been dispossessed by military authority, but his efforts were unsuccessful, having been overruled by John B. Floyd, then secretary of war. The loss and damage sustained by these Pioneers amounted to about $300,000." [^3]

Colonization EffortsHC3Another attempt at settlement eastwardly was made in 1855, when, on the 21st of May, about forty settlers under the leadership of Brother Alfred N. Billings, went from Manti, San Pete county, to a valley near La Sal Mountains, then called Elk Mountains, east of Grand river. The settlement was formed in the vicinity of the present site of Moab in Grand county, near what is now the eastern line of Utah. In September, however, the settlers were treacherously attacked by Indians and three of their number killed and one other wounded. The Indians also burned the settlers' hay in the stack, and turned off the water that supplied the fort that had been erected during the summer. On the second day of the attack the Indians surrounded the fort in great numbers, and there being no prospect of a reconciliation, and acting upon the advice of a few friendly Indians, the settlers mounted their horses, and leaving all their cattle and other effects in the fort, they started for Manti where they arrived without further adventure on the 30th of September. [^4]

SETTLEMENTS WEST OF THE SALT LAKE CITY LINE

Colonization EffortsHCThe first extension west of the north and south line of counties founded under the provisional government of "Deseret," was the settlement at San Bernardino, California, already considered in chapter lxxxviii of this History. The next movement westward was in 1855, under the leadership of Elder Orson Hyde of the twelve apostles. Elder Hyde with a company of thirty-five men left Salt Lake City on the 16th of May, and arrived at their destination—Carson valley, on the west side of the Great Basin,—about the middle of June. [^5]

Colonization EffortsHC4The first settlers of Carson valley were from among the emigrants of 1849-50-51 (gold rush period), and made up of both "Mormons" and Gentiles, with the former predominating in numbers. The inducement to settlement in this valley, so far removed from the settlements on the east side of the Great Basin, aside from the attractiveness of the valley itself, was the prospect of great gain by trade with the overland emigration to California. Among the "Mormons" prominent in making these settlements was H. S. Beatie and John Reese. The former built a house on the present site of Genoa, the county seat of Douglas county, now in Nevada, and after two years of profitable emigrant trade sold out his "station" to John Reese, who in partnership with his brother Enoch continued to occupy it for several years. [^6]

THE CARSON VALLEY SETTLEMENTS

Colonization EffortsHCIt was a matter of duty on the part of the territory of Utah to extend government over these settlements in Carson valley, and accordingly, in 1854, the legislature passed an act creating Carson county, and Orson Hyde was appointed its probate judge. [^7] Carson county was within the third judicial district of the territory over which United States Judge George P. Stiles presided and who accompanied Elder Hyde to Carson valley for the purpose of holding court in that part of the judicial district. Joseph Heywood, United States territorial marshal went with the party to aid the court. These three gentlemen had been appointed by Governor Young to act with commissioners from California, to establish the proper boundary between Utah and California. A commission which Governor Young announced to the Utah legislature of 1855-6, and whose duties were satisfactorily executed. [^8]

Colonization EffortsHCThe year following another company of settlers went to Carson valley, in which were included a number of men who became prominent in both the civic and the ecclesiastical life of Utah; [^9] and doubtless the western side of the Great Basin, the beautiful Carson valley, would have been the scene of strong, thriving "Mormon" colonies but for the incident known as the "Utah War"—to be considered later— which led to the practical abandonment of this and other outlying settlements.

Colonization EffortsHCIn Carson valley the saints were again in contact with a non-"Mormon" population; for the people in the Sacramento and the American river valleys no less than the people of Utah, were aware of the advantages of trading stations in that locality, and some of them hastened to establish them. Until the arrival of Orson Hyde's company of settlers, in 1855, the inhabitants of Carson valley were nearly evenly divided as between "Mormon" and non-"Mormon;" though among the former a number were classed as "Mormons" who really had no standing in the church, as they had either been excommunicated, or of themselves had fallen away from conscious union with the church. [^10] Always restive under the dominion of Utah territory, and also suffering some inconveniences because of the distance they were removed from the seat of the territorial government, the Gentile and indifferent "Mormons" of Carson valley had made several attempts, even before the arrival of Elder Hyde's company of settlers, to obtain either a separate territorial government or to be incorporated within the state of California; and after the departure of the main body of the saints in 1857, to meet the emergency of the "Utah War," these efforts were renewed from time to time until finally, on the 2nd of March, 1861, the territory of Nevada [^11] was created by act of congress out of the western half of Utah, the eastern boundary being fixed, first at the thirty-ninth degree of longitude, west from Washington; but by act of congress in 1862 the eastern boundary was extended to the thirty-eighth degree, and by an act of the same body, in 1866. to the thirty-seventh meridian, the new territory thus being given more than one-half of the territory of Utah, as organized by congress in 1850.

Colonization EffortsHC7The boundaries of Utah were still further cut down on the organization of Colorado as a territory in 1861. The west boundary of said territory extended to the thirty-second meridian, west from Washington, thus cutting down Utah's area by two full degrees on the eastern borders. Utah was still further despoiled of dimensions when the territory of Nebraska was organized—1854, [^12] and again when Wyoming was organized in 1868. Taking advantage of the temporary abandonment of the Fort Bridger district by the Salt Lake colonies in 1857, on account of its seizure by the United States army under General A. S. Johnston, the friends of Wyoming prevailed upon congress so far as to have included this portion of Utah in the new territory, running north from the forty-first parallel of latitude and east of the 34th meridian, an area of about eight thousand square miles, leaving the territory of Utah—and now the state—an area only of about 85,000 square miles. [^13]

Colonization EffortsHCAbout the time the Carson valley settlers left Salt Lake City, another company, known as the "Salmon River Lamanite Mission," consisting of twenty-seven brethren, led by Thomas S. Smith, of Davis county, started for a point on Salmon river, now in Idaho,—then Oregon—a distance of three hundred and eighty miles north of Salt Lake City, where they arrived about the middle of June and erected a fort which they named "Fort Limhi." [^14]

THE SALMON RIVER OR "LIMHI" SETTLEMENT

Colonization EffortsHCIn the spring of 1857 President Young with a company of 115 men, 22 women, and five boys paid a visit to Fort Limhi, the purpose being to explore the country with a view to the establishment of settlements in the future. President Young remained four days and a half at Fort Limhi, during which time he held a friendly conference with the Indian chiefs in the vicinity, smoked the pipe of peace with them at the fort, and distributed gifts of blankets, tobacco, etc., with which the Indians were delighted. Among the interesting incidents of this journey is the fact that Arapeen, the brother of Walker, the Utah chief, and who succeeded Walker as war chief of the Utahs, with a number of his braves, accompanied President Young to Fort Limhi, and was present and participated in the friendly conferences with the Bannocks. [^15]

CHIEF ARAPEEN'S VISION

Early in the year 1857, Chief Arapeen reported having had a visitation from the spirit of his brother Walker, of which the following is the record in President Young's Ms. History:

"Vision of Arapeen: Arapeen, brother of Walker, Utah chief, reported to the brethren in San Pete that he had a vision, in which Walker appeared to him, and told him not to fight the 'Mormons,' but cultivate peace with them. The Lord had revealed to Arapeen that the land was his [i.e. the Lord's] and did not belong to the Indians nor the 'Mormons;' that Walker had taken sick and died a natural death; that the Indians who stole should be whipped and have a ball and chain put on them; but it was not good to kill them and spill their blood on the land; that Arapeen was to relate what was communicated to him to President Welcome Chapman, and Counselor Higgins and Bishop Lowry (of Manti), and they would write it.

9Arapeen was also informed that it was not good for the 'Mormons' to trade guns and ammunition to the Indians at present. The Lord said that by and by when all people were good, and at peace, he would live on the earth with them. Arapeen saw three personages whose garments were as white as snow and as brilliant as the sun, and he was informed that all good people would eventually appear as these personages did: the Lord often talked with Brigham and now would talk with Arapeen also." [^16] The frame of mind resulting from this "vision" led doubtless to the chief accompanying President Young on this expedition to the north.

"This expedition" is a fair sample of the manner in which President Young made such journeys. As stated the company consisted of 115 men, 22 women and 5 boys. There were 54 wagons and carriages, and two light boats with decking planks for ferrying. The old organization in transit of the plains was followed. There was a presidency over the camp—Young, Kimball and Wells; three chaplains, Elders Hyde, Richards and Snow (Lorenzo); a captain, R. F. Burton; a marshal, J. C. Little; sergeant of the guard, Warren S. Snow; three engineers, A. Carrington, Jesse W. Fox and T. D. Brown; two clerks, J. W. Cummings and T. D. Brown. The wagons were grouped into tens, and a captain appointed to each group. Compass courses and odometer readings marked the line of the journey, and the distances from point to point; all of which were kept in tabulated form. The best of discipline, resulting in perfect order, was maintained, and the journey made without loss or serious inconvenience. On disbanding the camp at the end of the return journey, "a united and most heartfelt vote of thanks was returned to our president," says the chronicler, "for his fatherly care and kindness, for his prudent mode of regulating the travel, noon halts, and camps; and for his most excellent example, counsels and instructions during the journey." [^17]

10The northern expedition occupied thirty-three days, and included a visit to all the settlements north of Salt Lake City.

10During this period—1851-57—colonial growth also included the settlement and organization of Morgan county, northeasterly of Salt Lake county, by Jedediah Morgan Grant, Thomas Thurston and others. The county took its name from the "Morgan" in Elder Grant's name.

Political and Legal AffairsHCTHE FIRST STATE CAPITAL

Political and Legal AffairsHCSouthward, Millard and Washington counties were organized; and Fillmore, about one hundred and fifty miles south of Salt Lake City, in Millard county, was made the capital of the territory. [^18] President Fillmore was doubly honored by having both the county and the territorial capital city named for him. The Utah colonists believed that President Fillmore deserved well at their hands, both because of inaugurating such government as had been accorded to Utah, as also by withstanding all pressure to support the "run-away officials," and by his manifest friendliness in the appointment of their successors. [^19]

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe reason for removing the capital from the Salt Lake to the Pauvan valley, as set forth in Governor Young's message to the legislature, 1852, are as follows: The location is far more central to the territory than Salt Lake City; the Pauvan valley will sustain a large and dense population; locating the seat of government there would encourage settlers to go there and very much facilitate the settlement of all other suitable places in that region. "Under all these circumstances," concludes Governor Young, "the location of the capital at the place selected appears judicious upon its own merits, and will unquestionably advance the already prosperous and vastly increasing resources of the territory." [^20] The city was surveyed into blocks of ten acres each, subdivided into eight lots of eight rods wide, running at right angles and with the four points of the compass. Sawmills and flouring mills were soon erected; also a city hall and a schoolhouse. Work on the state house was begun, and the south wing of it completed by December, 1855, at a cost of about $32,000 dollars. This wing of the state house was built of stone, the dimensions being 41 feet 4 inches wide, by 61 feet 8 inches long. There was a basement and two stories. The basement was 10 feet high, the first story 12, and the second 14 feet 6 inches to the spring of the arch. A cut of the building as far as it was completed accompanies this chapter, showing it as it stands today. [^21]

Political and Legal AffairsHCTHE ONE AND ONLY SESSION OF THE LEGISLATURE AT THE NEW CAPITAL

Political and Legal AffairsHCFillmore did not long enjoy the distinction of being the capital of the territory. One session only of the legislature was held there, that of 1855-56, [^22] which continued through forty days; and for that winter Fillmore was the center of the officialdom of Utah, since, in addition to Governor Young, Secretary Almon W. Babbitt—successor to Secretary Ferris—and members of the legislature, there were present that winter in the half-built frontier town, Judges J. F. Kinney, G. P. Stiles, and W. W. Drummond of the supreme court; marshal of the territory, J. L. Heywood, T. R. King, probate judge of Millard county, and Amasa M. Lyman and Erastus Snow of the council of the apostles, all of whom were accorded the freedom of the floor of the general assembly. [^23]

Political and Legal AffairsHC12Heber C. Kimball was president of the council and Jedediah M. Grant speaker of the house. [^24]

PUBLIC BUILDINGS OF THIS PERIOD WHICH BECAME FAMOUS

Within the period covered in this chapter a number of the public buildings which are regarded as historical in Utah were erected or begun. Among them the "Old Council House." This was the first permanent public building erected in Salt Lake City. It was of red sandstone, 45 feet square and two stories in height. A large hall and two office rooms occupied each floor. The structure was begun on the 26th of February, 1849, [^25] and completed by December, 1850. It was designed as a "general council house" for the church; but was also used by the provisional "State of Deseret" as a "state house." During the early days of Utah the territorial legislature met there, and for a number of years it housed the territorial public library. It was also used for sacred purposes. Under instructions from President Young, Heber C. Kimball on the 7th of July, 1852, resumed the administration of endowment ordinances to the saints in it, which privilege had been suspended since the expulsion from Nauvoo, [^26] It was also occupied by the "University of Deseret" for a number of years, beginning in March, 1869. It was destroyed by fire on the 21st of June, 1883. The "Council House" stood on the southwest corner of South Temple and Main streets, the site now occupied by the Deseret News Building.

Also the "Social Hall," on the east side of State street between South Temple and 1st South street, Salt Lake City. It was built in 1852, but not opened for use until the first of January, 1853. It was built of adobes and in dimensions was 73x33 feet, having two floors, a basement and a main floor. It was built for uses implied by its name, social and semi-social functions, balls, feasts, amateur theatricals, birthday anniversaries of prominent persons, and the like. [^27] It was also used for more serious purposes. Some sessions of the legislature were held there, [^28] and council meetings of the priesthood were frequent. The "Social Hall" gave place to the modern improvements of automobile "gas stations."

14On the opposite side of the street, and between First and Second South, was the "Seventies Hall of Science," later known by the less pretentious name of the "Seventies Hall." This was also an adobe building, 50x30 inside measurement, erected to accommodate as a meeting place and class room for the seventies who constitute, in the main, as already explained in a former chapter, the foreign missionary force of the church. [^29] The "Seventies Hall" has long since been displaced by more pretentious buildings; but the fact of its once having had an existence is mute testimony of the early ambition for learning on the part of the seventies, the foreign preaching ministry of the church.

In this same period also the "Old Tabernacle" [^30] was built on the southwest corner of temple block, on the site now occupied by the "Assembly Hall." This building was 126 feet long by 64 feet wide, the ceiling was arched without a pillar, and capable of seating 2,200 persons (some put the seating capacity at 3,000), an auditorium such as was not to be found in any other frontier town in western America. It was dedicated to the sacred purposes to which it was devoted—the public worship of God and religious instruction—on the 6th of April, 1852, amid great rejoicing of the people. [^31]

15The "Tabernacle," however, by the time it was completed, was still inadequate to accommodate the public, and a "bowery," 156 feet long, and 138 feet wide, capable of seating an audience of 8,000, was attached on the north; [^32] but as this was not roofed in, except by an annual supply of "brush" for shade, it could only be used in the summer season.

15In the northwest corner of the temple square stood the "Endowment House," erected in this period. It was an adobe, two story structure, flanked by two one story wings, and built for the purpose implied in its name—the solemnization of temple endowment ceremonies—pending the erection of the temple. It was dedicated to its sacred purposes on the 5th of May, 1855, and remained in use, with little interruption, for thirty-four years, when it was taken down by order of Wilford Woodruff, in the spring of 1889, because of rumors that plural marriages, contrary to the law of the land, were being solemnized in the building. [^33]

THE BEGINNING OF THE SALT LAKE TEMPLE

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHCWithin the period being considered the great Salt Lake temple was begun. From the time of leaving the temple at Nauvoo, the building of another and a grander temple was constantly held before the vision of the westward migrating saints. In the "Old Tabernacle," during the second conference that was held within its walls, namely, in October, 1852, the vote to build the temple was taken on the 9th of October, [^34] after discourses upon the subject by Elder Heber C. Kimball, Geo. A. Smith, and John Taylor; and on the 14th of February following, ground was broken in the presence of several thousand people, who formed a hollow square round the plat that had been surveyed. All the civil and military organizations of the city were present, and several bands of music. President Young and others addressed the multitude. [^35] Ground was broken at the southeast corner by President Young; [^36] who afterwards dismissed the people. "But the day being pleasant many remained to work on the excavation, and much earth was removed that afternoon," says the chronicle.

CORNER STONES OF THE SALT LAKE TEMPLE LAID

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHCOn the sixth of April, of the same year, the corner stones were laid with becoming ceremonies and amid great rejoicing. Many bands of music were present, together with civic, military, and religious orders in attendance. The southeast corner stone was laid by President Young and his counselors—the presidency of the high priesthood of the church; the southwest corner stone by Presiding Bishop Hunter and his counselors—the presidency of the Aaronic priesthood of the church; the northwest corner stone was laid by John Young, president of the high priests quorum of the Salt lake stake, assisted by the high council of the stake; the northeast corner stone was laid by the twelve apostles, the general presidency of the seventies and the presidency of the elders. [^37]

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHCThus the corner stones of the Salt Lake temple were laid—just twelve years from the time the corner stones of the Nauvoo temple were laid. But thirty-nine years must elapse before the saints shall bring the capstone to its place with rejoicing; and forty years before they shall see it brought to completion and dedicated to God in whose honor its foundations were laid, and to whose glory its noble, granite walls and splendid towers were upbuilded.

THE TEMPLE A TESTIMONY OF THE SAINTS IN STONE

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHCIt may be instructive, as giving an insight into the character of these men—the church leaders, and this small frontier community, who on the 14th day of February broke the ground for, and on the 6th day of April, 1853, laid the corner stones of this sacred structure—(which has since become world-famed)—if we are here informed that its foundations, which they then began, were 193 feet east and west through the center of the building, embracing the footings of the walls; 125 feet north and south through the center of the towers, including the footings of the walls; that these dimensions cover an area of 21,850 square feet; that the foundations begun that day were laid 16 feet deep, and 16 feet broad at the base, tapering on each side to 8 feet in width, from which rise the walls eight feet thick in the first story, but reduced by stages in the second story to 6 feet—to the height of 107 feet 6 inches; the east center tower rising to 210 feet high, the west center tower being 6 feet less in height. [^38]

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHCThe Latter-day Saint community then laying the foundation of this great structure in the western wilderness numbered in the territory of Utah less than twenty thousand souls—men, women and children; and less than six thousand Latter-day Saints in Salt Lake City, [^39] and they had not yet been six years upon the ground. An undertaking so immense and begun under such circumstances, shows the church leaders to be men of large vision, and presents both the leaders and the people to the view of history as possessed of splendid courage and sublime faith in their mission and destiny. Nor did their faith in their ability to achieve result in disappointment. Realization in this case even outran anticipation; for while this noble granite structure slowly rose through the years to its completion, three other temples were built in various parts of the territory, [^40] second only in solidity and grandeur, in the western country, at the time of their completion, to this temple in Salt Lake City. And meantime the saints were engaged in many other activities and enterprises of both a public and private character that enter into the building of a state, the enlargement of a church, and the world-wide promulgation of a religion.

NOTES

In the midst of the agitation which arose over the organization of Nebraska and Kansas territories, in 1854, when it was proposed to remove the east line of Utah from the summit of the Rocky Mountains to the eastern rim of the Great Basin, Governor Young wrote a very interesting letter to his friend, Senator Stephen A. Douglas, of which he gives the following account in his Ms. History:

"April 29th [1854]: I wrote to Honorable Stephen A. Douglas that it was rumored that James Bridger from Black's Fork of Green river, had become the oracle to congress in all matters pertaining to Utah. That he had informed congress (as well as the Missouri Democrat) that Utah had dared to assess and collect taxes—that the 'Mormons' must have killed Captain Gunnison because the Pahvantes had no guns—that the 'Mormons' are an outrageous set, with no redeeming qualities.

20I expressed my astonishment that Bridger should be sought after for information on any point when a gentleman like Delegate Bernhisel was accessible, and forwarded the depositions of two strangers who had voluntarily given the same relative to the uncivilized conversation and conduct of Mr. Bridger.

20As to the organization of the two territories, Kansas and Nebraska, and the removal of the eastern boundary line of Utah from the summit of the Rocky Mountains to the eastern rim of what is called the Great Basin it looked to me like two faces under one hood, or like a card faced on both sides; one side for all 'Mormon'-hating, legal voters, with this sentiment in relief. 'Can you not see that the Mormons are no pets of ours; we have curtailed them of nearly half their territory, without the least shadow of reason for so doing, and manifestly to the disadvantage of all settlers between the present and former eastern boundary.' On the other side. 'Oh you dearly beloved Mormons, please observe that you have still quite a scope of mountain, desert and arid plain, and how thankful you should be that you have any portion left you, when the wire workers are so powerful against you.'

20The following paragraphs concluded my letter:

20'No doubt many fancy that they have now succeeded in nearly swallowing us up, please say to all such that I am sanguine that the 'Mormons' are still here in their central position and are laboring diligently and earnestly as heretofore, for the peace, union, prosperity and welfare of ourselves, for our common country, and in fine of all mankind, at an altitude of over four thousand feet above the strata of tumult, turmoil and strife that are occupying the time and energies of the great majority of the human family. In all frankness, friend Douglas, I shall feel exceedingly obliged by the organization of the two proposed territories, and with their proposed boundaries, for in Nebraska our population is even now the majority and we had contemplated making several settlements therein in a short time, and thus you see that we stand every chance of having two territories in lieu of one.'

20I also called for an expression of Judge Douglas' views on the Pacific railroad question, and informed him that whatever route it should be constructed upon, it would be the very best one for the interest of Utah and precisely where we would rather have it."

20No territory was at that time taken from Utah, but subsequently, 1861, a triangular piece on the western slope of the Rocky Mountains was granted to Nebraska, which was finally included in the territory of Wyoming. [^41]

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHCWednesday, April 6, 1853, could not have dawned a more lovely day, or have been more satisfactory to saints or angels. The distant valleys sent forth their inhabitants, this valley swarmed forth its thousands, and a more glorious sight has not been seen for generations than at Great Salt Lake City this day.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC21The Deseret National flag was unfurled to the breeze. The Nauvoo Brass Band, Captain Balloo's Band, and the Military Band, enlivened the air with their sweetest strains. The Silver Greys made a venerable appearance, and the minute men, true to their duty, were at their posts at an early hour. The police, under the efficient management of Captain Hardy, were at their posts at the time appointed; and the countenances of the saints were as glad and cheerful as though each had been favored with the visitation of an angel. So opened the general conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Great Salt Lake City, which was called to order in the tabernacle, by President Young, at ten a. m.

21Present:—Of the first presidency: Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Willard Richards.

21Presiding patriarch: John Smith.

21Of the quorum of the twelve: O. Hyde, Parley P. Pratt, John Taylor, W. Woodruff, E. T. Benson, G. A. Smith, A. Lyman, C. C. Rich, L. Snow, E. Snow, and Franklin D. Richards.

21Of the presidents of the seventies: Joseph Young, L. Hancock, Z. Pulsipher, H. Herriman, B. L. Clapp, A. P. Rockwood, and J. M. Grant.

21Presidency of the high priests' quorum: John Young, R. Cahoon, and G. B. Wallace.

21President of the stake: David Fullmer.

21High council of Zion, presidency of the elders' quorum.

21Presiding bishop: Edward Hunter.

21Clerk of conference: Thomas Bullock.

21Reporter: G. D. Watt.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC21President Young made a few introductory remarks to the saints; said that in a few years, "we may have a place sufficiently large to accommodate the saints, although twenty-three years ago, the church was organized with only six members."

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC21Choir sung "On Mountain Tops in Latter-days," etc.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC21Prayer by John Taylor. Choir sung, "Come All Ye Sons of Zion," etc.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC21The "order of the day" was next read by the clerk.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC21President Young rejoiced on opening the conference under such favorable auspices.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC21The procession then formed at the vestry door in the following order—

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC221st. Martial music. Colors.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC222nd. Nauvoo Brass Band. "

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC223rd. Balloo's Band. "

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC224th. Captain Pettegrew with relief guards. "

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC225th. Singers.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC226th. First president and counselors, and aged patriarch.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC227th. The twelve apostles, first presidency of the seventies, and president and counselors of the elders' quorum.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC228th. President of the high priests' quorum, and counselors, in connection with the president of the stake, and the high council.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC229th. Presiding bishop, with his counselors; and the presidents of the lesser priesthood, and their counselors.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC2210th. Architects and workmen selected for the day, with banner, representing "Zion's Workmen."

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC2211th. Captain Merrill, with relief guard, in uniform.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC22The procession then marched through the line of guards to the southeast corner of the temple ground, the singers taking their position in the center, the Nauvoo brass band on the west bank, and the martial band on the mound southwest. Captains Pettegrew, Hardy, and Merrill, with their commands, occupying the front of the bank (which was sixteen feet deep), and moving from corner to corner with the laying of the several stones, prevented an undue rush of the people, which might, by an excavation, have endangered the lives of many, when President Young, Kimball, and Richards, with Patriarch John Smith, proceeded to lay the southeast corner stone, and ascended the top thereof, the choir sung the following song—

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC22Deep in this holy ground These corner stones are laid; Rejoicing thousands round, O God, implore thine aid, That Zion now may prospered be, And rear a temple unto Thee. How long before thy throne Shall holy martyrs bleed? How long shall spirits groan, And angels mercy plead? Full long we've toiled, full long have bled, To bring redemption to our dead. Here let thy name be known, Thy blessings manifest, That men thy truth may own, And in thy courts be blessed, All nations feel thy power divine, And come and worship at thy shrine.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHCThis was followed by an "oration" by President Brigham Young, near the close of which he said: "We dedicate the southeast corner stone of this temple, to the Most High God. May it remain in peace till it has done its work, and until he who has inspired our hearts to fulfill the prophecies of his holy prophets, that the House of the Lord should be reared in the 'Top of the Mountains,' shall be satisfied, and say, it is enough." [^42]

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC23Similar services were held at each of the other corner stones of the sacred structure.

Footnotes

'We arrived at John & Enoch Reese's Ranch in this [Carson] county on the 17th inst. We had an excellent trip, but a very fatiguing one for both man and beast. Messrs. John & Enoch Reese have a most splendid mill and ranch. The labor that has been done by them is immense. Their crops generally look well. Grass-hoppers are very destructive, however, on wheat and vegetables, especially on late wheat. The harvest will be only middling on account of the insects.

Great numbers of cattle are dying on the road. So great mortality among stock on the road was never before known. It is heart-sickening to see and smell the dead carcasses on the road. The fuel is generally good on the south side of the Humbolt; but the road, the hills and mountains on this side of Hawe's ranch on the south, are very difficult for wagons to traverse.

The Big Mountain, east of Salt Lake City is not a 'patching' [i.e. circumstance] to several that we came down, all four wheels locked, and men behind with lariats to hold back and keep the wagons from ending over upon the teams. Still we got along well, and without accident. It is a miracle how we ever got over with the mill stones. But thanks be to our heavenly Father, we are all here safe and sound, and in fine spirits. The Lord has been with us, and is still with us, and I trust ever will be.'" (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1855, p. 68).

"Ex-President Fillmore: May his retirement be as happy and prosperous as his administration was successful and glorious; and the American people learn to know and appreciate their good men before they lose them."—D. H. Wells.

"Franklin Pierce: May his conduct in the presidential chair towards the 'Bee Hive State' be as that of Millard Fillmore."—W. W. Phelps. (Deseret News, July 10th, 1853).

"Some might query whether a revelation had been given to build a house to the Lord, but he is a wicked and slothful servant who doeth nothing but what his Lord commandeth, when he knoweth his master's will. I know a temple is needed and so do you; and when we know a thing, why do we need a revelation to compel us to do that thing? If the Lord and all the people want a revelation, I can give one concerning this temple.

In a few days I shall be able to give a plan of the temple on paper, and then if all heaven, or any good man, will suggest any improvements, we will receive and adopt them. * * *

Brother Joseph often remarked that a revelation was no more necessary to build a temple than a dwelling house; if a man knew he needed a kitchen, a bedroom, a cook room, etc., he needed no revelation to inform him of the fact; and I, and my brethren around me, know what is wanting in a temple—having received all the ordinances belonging therein—just as well as we do what is wanting in a convenient dwelling house." (Millennial Star, vol. xv, pp. 391-2).

---
Notas:
[^1] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, p. 11.
[^2] "President Philips," president of the Cymback branch, says President Young, "counselled the disorganization of the church at that place previous to the explosion." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 21st May, 1852, p. 49). Implying that had such counsel been followed the saints might have escaped the calamity.
[^3] See extra of the Lexington Express, April 13, 1852, published at length in Millennial Star, vol. xiv, pp. 220-222, where a list of the killed and wounded will be found. Also editorials of the Star, Ibid, pp. 217 and 282-3, History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 21st May, 1852, p. 49.
[^4] Millennial Star, quoting St. Louis Luminary, vol. xvii, pp. 218-19. Even as early as the 2nd of August of 1854 this change was determined upon. Under the entry in his History of that date, Brigham Young writes: "I wrote Elder F. D. Richards to discontinue shipping the saints via New Orleans and ship them via Philadelphia, Boston or New York; or if he shipped any more to New Orleans to do so in time that they might get off the rivers before warm weather and the sickly season set in. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1854, p. 71).
[^5] See this History, ch. lxxxviii, note 9, also Millennial Star, vol. xiv, p. 24.
[^6] The account of the wreck and the rescue, and the arrival of the saints and elders at San Francisco will be found in the Western Standard—Geo. Q. Cannon, editor and publisher—of March 15th and 22nd; and May 3rd, 1856.
[^7] 7. "Under his direction an election was held, on the 20th of September, for county officers, which resulted in the election of James C. Fain for sheriff; Henry W. Niles, surveyor; Charles D. Daggett, prosecuting attorney; R. D. Sides, treasurer; H. M. Hodges and James A. Williams, constables; Nicholas Ambrosia and Henry Van Sickle, justices of the peace; Henry D. Sears, William P. Allen and James McMarlin, selectmen,—whose duties were to act as associates with the probate judge, and attend to the care of the county's poor, orphaned and insane" (Bancroft's History of Nevada, ch. iv). Enoch Reese was elected the representative from the county to the Utah legislature. (Whitney's History of Utah, vol. i, p. 551).
[^8] 8. See Governor Young's Message, Deseret News, weekly, vol. v, Dec. 19>, 1855.
[^9] 9. Among these were William Jennings, afterwards, and for many years a leading merchant of Salt Lake City and for one term (1882-4) mayor of that city; Christopher Layton, after whom Layton, in Davis county, was named; Peregrine Sessions, the first settler of Sessions Settlement or Bountiful, Anson Call, of Davis county, founder of Call's Fort in Box Elder county, and William Kay, the latter the founder of Kaysville in Davis county.
[^10] 10. In addition to the inducement of trading stations in the Carson valley, to the mining population of California was the added one of reputed mineral deposits in the adjacent hills and canons; so that miners as well as traders were attracted to the Carson settlements, and increased the number of non-"Mormons." During the year 1856 a conflict between "Mormons" and non-"Mormons" threatened. Orson Hyde wrote to President Young asking that an additional one hundred men be sent to strengthen the brethren already in the valley (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1856, entry for Dec. 7th p. 1152). President Young was not in favor of sending the reinforcements, but wished that all the brethren in Carson valley were home and Hyde with them. Meantime news of the threatened disturbance reached the mining camps on the west side of the Sierras, and a number prepared to go to the aid of the non-"Mormons." Both parties, it is said, established hostile camps, and for two weeks the opposing forces were camped almost within sight of each other, "but without coming to blows." A truce was finally agreed upon by which it was provided that all should be allowed to remain on their lands. (See Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 591, also letter under date of Jan. 17, 1859, by the delegate-elect from Nevada, James M. Crane, published in full in Waite's Mormon Prophet, p. 31, et seq).
[^11] 11. "The word Nevada—in Spanish signifying 'covered with snow,' 'white as snow,' 'snow fall'—is taken, of course, for the naming of this state, from the mountain range upon its western border." (Bancroft's History of Nevada, p. 23).
[^12] 12. See Note 1, end of chapter.
[^13] 13. Bancroft's History of Wyoming, p. 740. Also Bancroft's History of Utah, pp. 592, 623.
[^14] 14. History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for May and June, 1855, pp. 51 and 68. There were eleven wagons, forty-six oxen, twenty-one cows and seven horses in the expedition. Limhi is the Book of Mormon name of a somewhat noted Nephite chieftain or "king," who lived in the second century B. C. The name, though the "Mormon" settlement was abandoned in 1857, still survives in Idaho maps. Indeed it is the name now of the stream on which the fort was built—a tributary of Salmon river—and of the Indian reservation located in its valley. (See Century Atlas, map of Idaho).
[^15] 15. History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for May, 1857, pp. 306-7. The account of the expedition to Limhi occupies from p. 297 to 312.
[^16] 16. History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for Feb., 1855, p. 7, et seq.
[^17] 17. History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for April and May, 1857, pp. 298-308.
[^18] 18. The enactment of the legislature naming the capital was approved Oct. 4, 1851. Anson Call, a prominent settler in Davis county, was authorized to effect the county organization. (Acts of the Legislative Assembly of Utah, 1855, p. 224). The site of the capital city on Chalk Creek, in the noble and beautiful "Pauvan valley," was chosen by a commission appointed by Governor Young, viz., Orson Pratt, Albert Carrington, Jesse W. Fox, and William C. Staines. President Young, Heber C. Kimball, Geo. A. Smith, General D. H. Wells, Major Rose, sub-Indian agent, and others,—fifteen men and three boys in all—accompanied the commissioners. The site was selected on the 29th of October, 1851. "The few Indians who appeared at the city," says the chronicle, "professed great friendship, and promised good behavior to Bishop Call and company who were on the ground, ready to build a fort forthwith—a work preparatory to fencing fields and building up the city." (Deseret News of December 13th, 1851).
[^19] 19. The following toasts in honor of Mr. Fillmore were given at the 4th of July celebration in Salt Lake City, 1853:
[^20] 20. Governor Young's Message to the Legislature, Jan. 5th, 1852, Deseret News of Jan. 10th, 1852.
[^21] 21. The estimated cost was $40,000; but according to a statement in Governor Young's message of 1855, the expenditure on the building in excess of the government appropriation up to that time, ($20,000), had been $12,000. (See Governor Young's Message, Deseret News, December 19, 1855, p. 324). The $20,000 appropriation for public buildings on the organization of the territory, 1850, first expended by the governor on a purchase of the "Old Council House" for state purposes until the state house at Fillmore could be "completed for the sitting of the legislature," (Deseret News, Feb. 7th, 1852), was returned to the territory, and the "Old Council House" reverted to the possession of the church. "The design of the architect," (of the new capitol), says Colonel Albert G. Brown, Jun., in the Atlantic Monthly, (May, 1859 p. 573), "is for a very magnificent edifice in the shape of a Greek cross, with a rotunda sixty feet in diameter. Only one wing has been completed, but this is spacious enough to furnish all needful accommodations. The material is rough hammered sandstone of an intense red."
[^22] 22. It appears that for a number of years afterwards there was some formality kept up by which the legislature continued to meet at Fillmore, but only to adjourn to Salt Lake City. (Whitney's History of Utah, vol. i, p. 545; also Linn's Story of the Mormons, p. 458 and note).
[^23] 23. Deseret News of Dec. 19>, 1855.
[^24] 24. Ibid.
[^25] 25. History of Brigham Young, Ms., Feb., 1849, p. 23.
[^26] 26. Ibid, entry for July, 1852, p. 62.
[^27] 27. "The balls at the social hall," says Captain Burton, of the British army, (1860) "are highly select, and are conducted on an expensive scale; invitations are issued on embossed, bordered, and gilt-edge white paper, say to 75-80 of the elite, including a few of the chief Gentiles." He gives a facsimile of an invitation to a social function, "Tickets $10.00 per couple." "The $10 per ticket will admit only one lady with the gentleman; for all extra, $2 each must be paid. In less splendid fetes $2.50 would be the total price." (City of the Saints, pp. 230-231). See also Deseret News for January 11th, where a detailed account is given of a legislative party, "Given at the social hall by the governor and legislative assembly, on Monday, Jan. 1st, 1855, in compliment to Judge Kinney—his associates—other United States officers of the territory—and Lieutenant Colonel Steptoe of the United States Army—with the officers in command."
[^28] 28. "At one time," remarks O. F. Whitney, "the legislature and the district court occupied the hall simultaneously. The council sat upon the stage, the house in the auditorium, and the court in the dressing room under the stage." (Whitney's School History of Utah, p. 65 note).
[^29] 29. "The Seventies Hall of Science" was begun late in 1850, the resolution to build being passed on the 27th of November of that year. Joseph Young, brother to Brigham Young, and senior president of the seventies was appointed trustee and superintendent of the work. Shares in the building were placed at twenty-five dollars each, and the "seventies abroad" were invited to purchase. It was dedicated Dec. 25th, 1854, and cost $3,500. (See General Epistle of the Presidency, April 7th, 1851, Millennial Star, vol. xiii, p. 212).
[^30] 30. The descriptive term "Old" was not applied to this tabernacle erected in 1851-52, until the large tabernacle now occupying the west center of temple square was began; with which it should not be confounded. (Proceedings of the dedicatory services of the "Old Tabernacle" are to be found in the Deseret News of the 17th of April, 1852; also History of Brigham Young, Ms., April, 1852, pp. 38, 39).
[^31] 31. "When the doors of the tabernacle were thrown open at 9 a. m. the people rushed in, as if flood gates of a mighty reservoir had given way, and in a very few minutes all the seats were occupied, so great was the desire of the saints to hear the teachings of the servants of the Lord." (Deseret News, April 17th, 1852). The dedication inspired two hymns, one by W. W. Phelps, "In Deseret We're Free;" and one by Eliza R. Snow Smith, "The Son of God Will Come." The first was but short lived, the second has survived, and is still sung by the saints, and is worthy a permanent place in the hymnology of the church.
[^32] 32. Liverpool Route, p. 109. Burton says 3,000. "The place was a kind of a 'hangar,' about 100 feet long by the same breadth, with a roofing of brushes and boughs, supported by rough posts, and open for ventilation on the sides; it can contain about 3,000 souls." It will be observed that Burton is mistaken in his dimensions.
[^33] 33. Official Declaration of Wilford Woodruff, Conference Proceedings, October 6, 1890.
[^34] 34. "It was voted unanimously that the temple be built of the best material that can be obtained in the mountains of North America." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1852, p. 86).
[^35] 35. Among other interesting remarks in reviewing the past, and speaking of the future glory of the work, President Young delivered the following respecting revelation as pertaining to temple building:
[^36] 36. The ground was frozen to the depth of about six inches. "After the earth was loosed around, about six inches deep, President Young said it was his privilege to remove that, and took a lump about one foot square upon his spade, and lifted it high up, and said—'get out of my way, for I am going to throw this,' and there he held it, about one minute, before he could get room to lay it down from off the temple site, so dense was the multitude around." (Deseret News, Feb. 19, 1853).
[^37] 37. The same sequence of laying the corner stones was observed as at Nauvoo, under the direction of the Prophet Joseph; but there was a slight variation in the grade of officers who officiated at the respective corner stones, except as to the first, or southeast corner, at which the first presidency in each case officiated. In Nauvoo the presidency of the Nauvoo stake officiated at the southwest corner; at the northwest corner the high council of the Nauvoo stake officiated; and at the northeast corner the presiding bishop of the church officiated (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, ch. xvii). The variation was not important, as President Young noted and explained. The Prophet Joseph, after giving the proper sequence in which the corner stones of temples should be laid, said: "The first presidency should lay the southeast corner stone, and dictate who are the proper persons to lay the other corner stones. If a temple is built at a distance, and the first presidency are not present, then the quorum of the twelve apostles are the persons to dictate the order for that temple." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, p. 331). From the above it would appear that the personnel of those officiating at the respective corner stones, after the first is laid, may vary, since some discretion seems to be lodged with the authorities laying the southeast corner stones, as to those who shall be appointed to officiate at the other corners. The fact that the twelve were absent in England when the corner stones of the Nauvoo temple were laid, accounts for the fact that they took no part in the ceremonies of laying the corner stones of the temple at Nauvoo. (The proceedings and ceremonies on the occasion of laying the corner stones of the Salt Lake temple, together with the speeches, prayers and remarks on the above interesting occasion, will be found in the Deseret News of April 16th, 1853; also in Millennial Star, vol. xv, Nos. 29 and 30).
[^38] 38. Liverpool Route, p. 109. The dimensions are given from the architect's plans, 1854, by the Church Historian, Geo. A. Smith, (Millennial Star, vol. xvi, pp. 635-6), from which there were but slight variations as the building progressed towards its completion. The variations in descriptions in other works than in the text, arise from taking the ground level measurements instead of including the footing of the foundations. The height of the side walls usually given as 167 feet is an error; 107 is the right measurement.
[^39] 39. The exact figures are: In the territory, 18,206; in Salt Lake City, 5,979. The numbers here given are from the reports of the bishops at the October conference, 1853. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for October, 1853, p. 127). There is some discrepancy between the census tabulated at this conference, from the reports of the bishops, and the census dealing with the population of the territory at this time, given in this History, chapter xcii. The difference is accounted for, in part at least, by the fact that the figures above give the number of church members in the territory; the former, that of the entire population. The difference, however, would show the Gentile population too large; "in 1853," says the authority formerly quoted (Burton), "the saints were reckoned at 25,000 by the Gentiles, and from 30>,000 to 35,000 by Mr. Orson Pratt, in the Seer." Taking the smaller figure for the basis of comparison, and accepting the above named conference reports as representing the Latter-day Saint population at 18,206, it would represent the Gentile population at 6,794, or nearly seven thousand non-"Mormons" in Utah, which is altogether too large.
[^40] 40. For an account of the location, structure and appearance of these temples, see The House of the Lord. A Study in Holy Sanctuaries, Ancient and Modern, James E. Talmage, 1912.
[^41] 41. American Encyclopedia, vol. xii, p. 198; History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1854, pp. 33-36.
[^42] 42. Deseret News, April 16th, 1853.
