B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

77CHAPTER XCVII

77MISCELLANEOUS EVENTS, 1851-7 (CONT'D)—CALAMITOUS INCIDENTS—"THE SAINTS SHALL HARDLY ESCAPE"

77AT A public meeting in his own house, at a time when the refugee saints, sick and poverty stricken from the Missouri expulsion, were bivouacking on the Mississippi at the place which afterwards became Nauvoo, Joseph Smith spoke, and in the course of his remarks explained the uselessness of preaching to the world about "great judgments," and urged rather that the "simple gospel be preached to the world." He also explained "that it is a false idea that the saints will escape all judgments, whilst the wicked suffer; for all flesh is subject to suffering and 'the righteous shall hardly escape.'" "Still many of the saints shall escape," he continued, "for the just shall live by faith. Yet many of the righteous shall fall a prey to disease, to pestilence, etc., by reason of the weakness of the flesh, and yet be saved in the kingdom of God. So that it is an unhallowed principle to say that such and such have transgressed because they have been preyed upon by disease or death, for all flesh is subject to death; and the Savior has said, 'judge not that ye be not judged.'" [^1]

77The saints, then, the church of Christ itself, in the light of this doctrine laid down by the Prophet, may not hope to escape misfortune, sickness, accidents, death; what I here call calamitous events; and in this chapter I propose to group together a number of such events occurring in the period of the church history now being considered.

THE CYMBACK DAMP EXPLOSION

The first of these events is a disaster in a coal mine at Cymback, near Merthyr Tydfil, Wales, in May, 1852, occasioned by a fire damp explosion, in which sixty-nine men were killed, nineteen of whom were members of the Church of the Latter-day Saints. [^2]

THE SALUDA DISASTER

Another disaster of the same year was the blowing up of the steamboat, Saluda, on the Missouri river near the town of Lexington, in the state of Missouri. The Saluda had about one hundred and seventy-five passengers on board, ninety of whom were Latter-day Saints under the leadership of Elder Eli B. Kelsey, en route for Utah. The Saluda left St. Louis on the 30th of March, 1852; and as she drew near to Lexington she met a mass of floating ice, which detained her at the Lexington wharf for several days. After the ice floe was past and the steamer was getting up steam to round a point above Lexington, the engineers allowed the boilers to get dry and red-hot, and as the engines started the pumps forced the cold water into the boilers, and the explosion occurred which burst the boilers to atoms, and the boat sank within ten minutes. The exact number of the killed and wounded is not definitely known, but is given by the Lexington Express, extra, of April 13th, as "about one hundred." Only twenty-six bodies of the killed were recovered.

Elder Kelsey, in charge of the company, and ten other leading brethren had left the boat some distance below Lexington in order to purchase cattle for the journey across the plains, and hence escaped the disaster. The people of Lexington, notwithstanding that town was in the region of Missouri where the saints suffered the bitterest persecutions but a few years before—1838—exerted themselves most nobly for the relief of the wounded; and they also gathered up for interment as many of the dead as could be recovered. Within a few hours they subscribed $1,000 for the relief of the destitute; and many among the wealthiest of the citizens opened their houses to receive the wounded, and themselves became their nurses. The steamboat Isabel, also en route up the river, witnessed the explosion, and halted to render assistance. Captain Miller of the Isabel generously offered free passage with free provisions, etc., to Council Bluffs, to the survivors; and quite a number availed themselves of the generous offer, and in three hours after the explosion had resumed their journey. Captain F. T. Belt of the Saluda was among those who were killed. [^3]

CHOLERA OUTBREAK EN ROUTE TO ZION

The emigration of the saints from England and some parts of continental Europe in 1854, suffered greatly from cholera on the journey up the Mississippi river, and at their encampment on the Missouri preparatory to starting upon the overland journey across the plains. They were detained upon the frontiers longer than usual, and the banks and bayous and river bottoms of the Missouri, where encampment was made, generated deadly miasmata. The Scandinavian contingent of the emigration suffered most, losing one hundred and fifty out of a company of seven hundred. The sickness which was general with all companies, and all classes of emigrants along the Missouri that season, began to abate as the camps moved away from the river. The amount of sickness while traveling up the Mississippi in this season's emigration led to changing the port of entry for the Latter-day Saint emigration from New Orleans to Boston, and New York. [^4] It has already been noted in these pages that as far back as 1851 the presidency of the church was convinced of the necessity of obtaining a different route of travel for the saints than the one via New Orleans and the Mississippi river; and instructed the president of the British Mission to investigate the feasibility of a route via the Isthmus of Panama, or Tehauntepec, thence up the Pacific coast to San Diego; that if practical the emigration might by the new route avoid "three thousand miles of inland navigation through a most sickly climate and country." At that time a change of route was decided not to be feasible. [^5]

WRECK OF THE JULIA ANN IN THE PACIFIC

In 1855, October 4th, the sailing vessel Julia Ann, B. F. Pond, captain, was wrecked on a coral reef near the Sicily Isles in the Society Island group. She had on board fifty-six passengers, twenty-eight of whom were Latter-day Saints bound for Utah, including in the number two American missionary elders of the church returning to Utah, viz., John S. Eldredge and James Graham. Five of the saints perished in the wreck, a Sister Harris, a Sister Humphrey, and three children. The rest of the passengers and the crew succeeded in leaving the reef on a raft constructed from the wreckage and landing on Sicily Isles twelve miles distant where they lived nearly two months, from early in October to the 3rd of December, 1855, subsisting upon small shell fish and sea turtles, while Captain Pond and nine men set off in the ship's quarter boat to seek some inhabited island for help. They first reached Borabora, one of the Society Islands, about two hundred miles from the scene of the ship wreck. Here the relief seeking party divided; the first mate, one of the sailors, and a brother McCarthy-going to Mopiti in search of a relief vessel, while Captain Pond and the remainder of the company went to Huahine, also one of the Society Islands, for the same purpose. Here the captain succeeded in chartering the schooner Emma Packer, Captain Latham Master, to go to the rescue of the passengers of the ill-fated Julia Ann. The first mate and his associates were also successful in obtaining relief boats in the form of two small schooners at Mopiti, through the kindness of King Tapoa of that island. Captain Pond, however, arrived at Sicily Isles twelve hours earlier than the party from Mopiti. He took on board the wrecked passengers of the Julia Ann and sailed for Tahiti, where the rescued passengers were treated with great kindness by the inhabitants of that island. "The United Board, or Masonic Lodge," relieved their immediate wants by providing food and shelter for all the shipwrecked passengers, and the American consul provided for the crew. From Tahiti the wrecked company finally embarked chiefly in two groups and arrived safely at San Francisco.

81This company of saints was under the leadership of a brother Penfold. The two American elders, Graham and Eldredge returned to Huahine with the rescue schooner, Emma Packer, and thence sailed to San Francisco, where they arrived April 23rd, 1856. Brother John McCarthy, of the second rescue party, returned to Mopiti with the two small schooners secured for the rescue service. He remained some time at Mopiti where he baptized the king's interpreter and ordained him an elder and through him preached the New Dispensation to the natives who received his message with much favor. From Mopiti he went to the Island of Riatea, where he preached and converted a Spaniard by the name of Shaw, ordained him an elder, and thence went to Tahiti, whence he sailed for San Francisco, where he arrived on the 14th of April, 1856.

A CAPTAIN DEVOTED TO DUTY

Captain Pond of the wrecked Julia Ann was evidently a very efficient officer and a noble man. It was the intention of the captain to sail south of Sicily Isles and the reefs extending on the southwest of the island, but by subsequent observation, it was ascertained that the true position of the Sicily Isles was sixteen miles from the place indicated on the marine chart, and to this fact and the fierce storm raging at the time the wreck was due, and not to any lack of efficiency in the vessel's commanding officer. As evidence of his interest in his passengers and his regard for human life, as against the saving of material treasure, it is only necessary to say that while getting the passengers on shore from the wreck, Mr. Owens, second mate of the vessel, was observed to be carrying a bag containing eight thousand dollars belonging to the captain. Captain Pond ordered him to set down the money bag and instead carry a little girl ashore, which he did. The girl was saved and the money lost. This act with his subsequent work for the rescue of his wrecked passengers proclaim him a most worthy captain and an honorable gentleman. [^6]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for September, 1851, pp. 72-98. Same also is published, without date, in Millennial Star, vol. xiv, pp. 17-25.
[^2] Millennial Star, vol. xiv, p. 23. Those who were to come by teams were counseled to bring with them nails, glass, paints, oils, wire, osage orange, and other choice seeds, and such articles as are most needed in a new country, to exchange for bread; and start earlier than usual, "even as soon as teams can possibly be supported on the prairie so as to avoid the spring rains, and be here to assist in harvest."
[^3] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for April, 1852, pp. 33-34. Also Millennial Star, minutes of the conference, vol. xiv, p. 355.
[^4] General Epistle of the First Presidency, Deseret News, October 31st, 1855.
[^5] Millennial Star, vol. xviii, p. 377.
[^6] The letter bears date of Dec. 30>, 1855, Millennial Star, vol. xvii, pp. 814-5.
