B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

83CHAPTER XCVIII

83MISCELLANEOUS EVENTS, 1851-7 (CONT'D)—HANDCART IMMIGRATION DISASTER

83ANOTHER disaster to be recorded within the period here considered is one connected with the "handcart immigration."

ORIGIN OF THE "HANDCART IMMIGRATION" IDEA

This method of emigrating the saints was first suggested by the presidency of the church in their sixth general epistle, addressed "to the saints scattered throughout the earth," and bearing date of September 22nd, 1851. [^1] In that epistle great emphasis was laid upon the subject of the saints "gathering to Zion," as may be judged by the following excerpt:

"O ye saints in the United States, will you listen to the voice of 'the Good Shepherd'? Will you gather? Will you be obedient to the heavenly commandments? Many of you have been looking for, and expecting too much; you have been expecting the time would come when you could journey across the mountains in your fine carriages, your good wagons, and have all the comforts of life that heart could wish; but your expectations are vain, and if you wait for those things you will never come, * * * and your faith and hope will depart from you. How long shall it be said in truth 'the children of this world are wiser in their generation than the children of light.' Some of the children of the world have crossed the mountains and plains, from Missouri to California, with a pack on their back to worship their god—gold! Some have performed the same journey with a wheel-barrow, some have accomplished the same with a pack on a cow. Some of the saints, now in our midst saints, now in our midst, came hither with wagons or carts made of wood, without a particle of iron, hooping their wheels with hickory, or rawhide, or ropes, and had as good and safe a journey as any in the camps, with their well wrought iron wagons; and can you not do the same? Yes, if you have the same desire, the same faith. Families might start from the Missouri river, with cows, handcarts, wheel-barrows, with little flour, and no unnecessaries, and come to this place quicker, and with less fatigue, than by following the heavy trains, with their cumbrous herds, which they are often obliged to drive miles to feed. Do you not like this method of traveling? Do you think salvation costs too much? If so, it is not worth having. Sisters, fifty and sixty years old, have driven ox teams to this valley, and are alive and well yet; true they could have come easier by walking alone, than by driving a team, but by driving the oxen, they helped others here; and cannot you come the easier way? There is grain and provision enough in the valleys for you to come to; and you need not bring more than enough to sustain you one hundred days, to insure you a supply for the future." [^2]

84It must have been expected by the brethren at Salt Lake City that many would act upon this suggestion and start in the spring following the publication of the epistle with handcarts as suggested; for Heber C. Kimball in the April conference following pleaded in behalf of those who were coming by that means of migration over the plains, whereupon "ninety-three persons volunteered to go out with their teams to carry provisions and render those on the road assistance."

84"I followed upon the same subject," remarks President Young, "when those who had volunteered to go, voted to donate their services." [^3] As no such emigration started from the states that year, of course this volunteered help was not needed. Indeed the suggestion of making the overland journey across the plains by handcarts was not acted upon until the year 1856. The necessary definite instructions on this method of immigrating was given in the general epistle of the first presidency of October, 1855, and the following season it was heartily responded to by the saints in Europe.

84THE HANDCART COMPANIES OF 1856

"In regard to the foreign immigration another year," (1856), said the epistle, "let them pursue the northern route from Boston, New York, or Philadelphia, and land at Iowa City or the then terminus of the railroad; there let them be provided with handcarts on which to draw their provisions and clothing, then walk and draw them, thereby saving the immense expense every year for teams and outfit for crossing the plains.

85"We are sanguine that such a train will out-travel any ox train that can be started. They should have a few good cows to furnish milk, and a few beef cattle to drive and butcher as they may need. In this way the expense, risk, loss and perplexity of teams will be obviated, and the saints will more effectually escape the scenes of distress, anguish and death which have often laid so many of our brethren and sisters in the dust.

85We propose sending men of faith and experience, with suitable instructions, to some proper outfitting point to carry into effect the above suggestions; let the saints, therefore, who intend to immigrate the ensuing year, understand that they are expected to walk and draw their luggage across the plains, and that they will be assisted by the fund in no other way." [^4]

The immigration that year was unusually large, amounting in all to 4,326 souls; of whom 2>,012 were emigrated by the means provided by the Perpetual Emigration Fund Company. [^5] The names of the eight ships and the number of saints going with each are recorded. The unusual number emigrated by the perpetual emigration fund, that is to say, means for their emigration was advanced by the company, represented an effort on the part of the church leaders in Utah to bring "to Zion" the worthy though poor saints who had long desired to gather to the body of the church, but had not been able to lay up sufficient means. "I will here repeat my wish and counsel to you," wrote President Young to Franklin D. Richards, president of the European Mission at the time, "that in your election of the saints who shall be aided by the fund, those who have proven themselves by long continuance in the church shall be helped first, whether they can raise any means of their own or not; let those be brought, so long as you can act within the means of the company, if they have not a sixpence in the world, but be wary of assisting any of those who come into the church now, during these troublous times for Britain, whose chief aim and intention may be to get to America." [^6] This arrangement which was carried out would naturally and did bring into the emigration of that year many of the aged, the sickly, the feeble, and many with large families of children.

86The route of the immigration in the main was via Boston to Iowa City, in the state of Iowa, that being the most westerly railway terminus at the time along the proposed line of travel. Here the handcart companies were fitted out for the journey across the plains. The first two companies led by Edmund Ellsworth and the second by Daniel D. McArthur left on the 9th and 11th of June respectively. These companies as reported on their arrival in Salt Lake City numbered—Ellsworth's: souls, 266; handcarts, 52; McArthur's: souls, 220; handcarts, 44; eight teams were divided between these two companies. [^7] A third and smaller company, chiefly composed of Welsh converts, under the leadership of Edward Bunker, left Iowa City on the 23rd of June.

86The three companies made the journey to Salt Lake City without serious adventure, or loss, though of course their traveling was attended by the toil and fatigue incident to such a method of migration.

The first two companies entered Salt Lake valley together on the 26th of September. When Governor Young learned of their arrival in the mountains east of Salt Lake City, he took a military escort attended by bands of music and met them at the foot of Little Mountain in Emigration canon and escorted them into the city, where they were cheered and made welcome by the populace that turned out en masse to receive them. They encamped on Pioneer Square, but in a few days had found homes among their kindred and friends in the community. Bunker's company arrived six days later, 2nd of October, also without serious adventure or loss. They had traveled with Captain John Banks' wagon company of immigrating saints.

87Commenting on the successful journey of 1,300 miles made by the two first companies, the Deseret News said: "This journey has been performed with less than the average amount of mortality attending ox trains; and all, though somewhat fatigued, stepped out with alacrity to the last, and appeared buoyant and cheerful. They had often traveled 25 and 30 miles in a day, and would have come through in a much shorter time, had they not been obliged to wait upon the slow motion of the oxen attached to the few wagons containing the tents and groceries." Time and distance considered, they had not averaged more than eleven miles a day.

87If the curtain could be rung down upon this handcart emigration incident of the year 1856, with the arrival of these three companies in Salt Lake valley, and their dispersion among the people, that method of traveling over the plains might pass without very serious objections, beyond a protest against the hardship of excessive toil involved in it. The successful accomplishment of the journey by these companies demonstrated that such a method of migration was possible rather than feasible. And what remains to be set down involves the whole adventure in a tragedy, making one of the saddest pages in Latter-day Saint history.

THE WILLIE COMPANY THROUGH IOWA

There were two other handcart companies fitted out at Iowa City in that fateful year of 1856, led respectively by James G. Willie and Edward Martin, and numbering in all above nine hundred souls. [^8] Their respective journeys are here but rapidly sketched.

The emigrants who made up Willie's company arrived at Iowa City on the 26th of June, and here met their first disappointment—the tents and handcarts, the one to afford them shelter, the other the means of conveying their food and bedding on the journey across the plains, were not, as yet provided; and in waiting for the manufacture of these necessary things the company was detained until the 15th of July. The journey through Iowa to "Old Winter Quarters," by this time known under the name of Florence, Nebraska, was accomplished in twenty-six days, since they arrived at Florence on the 11th of August and remained there until the 16th. The chief hardship of this stage of the journey was the midsummer heat, the dust; and when heavy rains converted this to mud, the heavy roads. The part of Iowa through which their route passed was then fairly well settled, and from the people of that state they received varied treatment. Sometimes they were met with good-natured badinage, at other times with threats of personal violence. At one point they were overtaken by a sheriff's posse with a search warrant issued by a justice of the peace, authorizing the posse to search to the very bottom of the few wagons for young women, alleged to be tied down in them with ropes. [^9] Of course the search revealed no such conditions as were alleged. At Des Moines an act of kindness varied the treatment. A Mr. Charles Good presented Captain Willie with "fifteen pairs of children's boots." There were some few desertions from the company in this first stage of the journey, eight in all—who were persuaded to the step by inducements held out by the people of Iowa—"for the leeks and onions"—is Captain Willie's manner of phraising it. [^10]

WILLIE'S COMPANY AT FLORENCE—SHALL THE JOURNEY BE CONTINUED

At Florence the question of continuing the journey through to Utah, or going into winter quarters on the Elkhorn, at Wood river, or some other eligible location in Nebraska, was debated; but it was finally determined to continue the journey, the majority of the leaders in charge, among whom were George D. Grant, Wm. H. Kimball, advance agents of the emigration that season, and Elders Willie—captain of the company of handcart emigrants—Atwood, Savage, Woodward, and John Van Cott, all favored it, except Savage, and the views of the majority of these leaders were accepted by vote at a mass meeting of the emigrants, anxious to get to Zion, ignorant of the difficulties and dangers to be encountered, and willing to trust the judgment of these leaders. [^11]

Levi Savage was returning from a more than two years mission in Siam and Ceylon, where he had most earnestly sought under trying circumstances to present the message of the New Dispensation. His action in the above named discussion deserves special mention. To the overzeal, not to say fanaticism, of his brethren, Elder Savage opposed common sense, and his knowledge of the country, both of which persuaded him that a mixed company of aged people, women, and little children, even though it had some strong men in it, could not cross the mountains so late in the season without much suffering, sickness, and death. He advised going into winter quarters; but when overruled, according to Chislett's Narrative, he said: "What I have said I know to be true; but seeing you are to go forward, I will go with you; will help you, all I can; will work with you, will rest with you, will suffer with you, and if necessary, will die with you. May God in mercy bless and preserve us." He lived up to his promise—"no man," says the narrative, "worked harder than he to alleviate the suffering which he had foreseen, when he had to endure it." But it had been represented to these saints in the handcart companies, and, indeed, to all the saints in Europe, that a special providence would attend this method of migration, and hence they would be apt to discredit any warning that might be given concerning dangers that might overwhelm them. "Know ye not," wrote Elder John Jacques, assistant editor of the Millennial Star—"Know ye not that it is the holy ordinance of the Lord revealed through his prophet, Brigham Young, for the redemption of the humble, faithful poor, and that it will be blessed and sanctified of him to the salvation of thousands who are not too proud to be saved in his appointed way, while many who will despise that way will be left to perish in Babylon. The Lord has promised through his servant Brigham Young that the handcart companies shall be blessed with health and strength, and be met part way with teams and provisions from the valley. [^12] And I am not afraid to prophesy, that those who go by the handcarts, and continue faithful and obedient, will be blessed more than they have ever dreamed of." [^13] Religious enthusiasts imbued with these ideas of blessing and favor, would, of course, vote to continue the journey "to Zion."

WESTWARD HO! INCIDENTS BY THE WAY

The Willie company left Florence on the 19th of August, and began the journey across the plains in earnest. The Cheyenne Indians were bad that season, and the emigrants heard of occasional attacks upon emigrant team-trains, among them of the attack upon Almon W. Babbitt's train, and later of the killing of Mr. Babbitt himself. From the Omaha Indians the handcart company received some kindness, and were able to buy some buffalo meat of them. By the 5th of September the company had made 265 miles west of Florence, but at this point they had the misfortune to lose thirty head of cattle, which they spent two days in searching for, but they were not found; and the journey was resumed with their few teams very much weakened. On the 12th of September they were overtaken by a company of returning missionaries in three carriages and some wagons. The company included Elder F. D. Richards, Daniel Spencer, and C. H. Wheelock, late presidency of the European Mission.

On the 17th of September, while yet on the Platte they had their first frost, "a very severe one." On the 30th they arrived at Fort Laramie—still five hundred miles from Salt Lake City.

On the 1st of October the journey was resumed. Occasionally they met eastward bound parties, among these were Parley P. Pratt and a company of missionaries, bound for the eastern states. That was to be this eminent apostle's last mission, since he fell a victim to assassination in Arkansas about seven months later.

ON RATIONS

At the very start the handcart company had been put upon rations, one pound of flour per day per man, a little less for women, and still less, of course, for children was allowed; and these scant rations from time to time had to be reduced until they were barely sufficient for subsistence. The last reduction left them at 10 1/2 oz. for men; 9 oz. for women; 6 oz. for children, and 3 oz. for infants. [^14]

92On the Sweetwater river they encountered extremely cold weather and severe snow storms; but while disheartened by this circumstance they were cheered by the coming to them of two messengers from the west, driving a light wagon, and bringing the news that a supply train was on its way to meet them, and they could expect to meet it in a day or two; and then the young men drove on to take the same cheering word to Martin's company, and to the wagon trains still further eastward. [^15]

THE FIERCE STORMS OF THE SWEETWATER—DEATHS

After the departure of these welcome messengers, however, the snow storms, accompanied by fierce winds, were renewed, until from sheer exhaustion the company sought such shelter in hollows and willow thickets as could be found and awaited the coming of the relief trains. Dysentery broke out in the camp, aggravated by eating the fresh meat that was obtained from killing a few of the broken down oxen. Deaths had been frequent the past few days from exhaustion and cold. Fifteen died in one of the terrible days immediately preceding the encampment above referred to, which was made at Willow Creek on the Sweetwater, and many were frostbitten. The storm that was proving so fatal to the handcart company had also overtaken the relief train, and hindered its progress. Not knowing the absolute destitution of the emigrants, and that they were perishing only a few miles distant, the relief train had gone into encampment, awaiting the arrival of the handcart company or the passing of the storm. Meantime Captain Willie with a single companion, started westward in search of the relief train. He found it; whereupon all possible haste was made to reach the sufferers. It was the evening of the third day after his departure that Captain Willie returned at the head of fourteen well loaded wagons. Their arrival came none too soon, if the camp was to be saved from utter destruction: for the ravages of hunger, dysentery, and exhaustion were threatening the extinction of the helpless emgirants.

CHISLETT'S PICTURE OF REJOICING—RELIEF

Chislett's account of the meeting of the handcart company and the relief train deserves perpetuation:

"On the evening of the third day after Captain Willie's departure, just as the sun was sinking beautifully behind the distant hills, on an eminence, immediately west of our camp, several covered wagons, each drawn by four horses, were seen coming towards us. The news ran through the camp like wildfire, and all who were able to leave their beds turned out en masse to see them. A few minutes brought them sufficiently near to reveal our faithful captain slightly in advance of the train. Shouts of joy rent the air; strong men wept until tears ran freely down their furrowed and sunburnt cheeks, and little children partook of the joy which some of them hardly understood, and fairly danced around with gladness. Restraint was set aside in the general rejoicing, and as the brethren entered our camp the sisters fell upon them and deluged them with kisses. The brethren were so overcome that they could not for some time utter a word, but in choking silence repressed all demonstration of those emotions that evidently mastered them. Soon, however, feeling was somewhat abated, and such a shaking of hands, such words of welcome, and such invocation of God's blessing have seldom been witnessed! * * Among the brethren who came to our succor were Elders W. H. Kimball and Geo. D. Grant. They had remained but a few days in the valley before starting back to meet us. May God ever bless them for their generous, unselfish kindness, and their manly fortitude! They felt that they had, in a great measure, contributed to our sad position; but how nobly, how faithfully, how bravely they worked to bring us safely to the valley—to the Zion of our hopes!"

94Mr. Chislett had left the church when he wrote that passage!

94Eight of the relief wagons passed on to the camps still further eastward, and six remained with Captain Willie's company.

94Fortunately, after reaching the South Pass, and descending into the Green river valley, the weather moderated, more supply wagons were met, some passing on to take the needed relief to the companies still in the rear, and others turning back with Willie's company to give such increased aid and comfort as was still required; and so abundant was the help in the last stages of the journey that most of the toil-exhausted, hunger-weakened emigrants could be taken into the wagons.

This company arrived in Salt Lake City on the 9th of November, and soon received every evidence that they had come among warm-hearted friends. "On our arrival," says Willie's Narrative, "the bishops of the different wards took every person who was not provided with a home to comfortable quarters. Some had their hands and feet badly frozen but everything which could be done to alleviate their suffering was done, and no want was left unadministered to. Hundreds of the citizens flocked around the wagons on our way through the city, cordially welcoming their brethren and sisters to their mountain home. * * * The total number of deaths in this party from Liverpool, was seventy-seven, * * * we had also three births and three marriages on the trip." [^16] Nearly all the deaths in the camp occurred after leaving Fort Laramie.

JOURNEY AND SUFFERING OF EDWARD MARTIN'S HANDCART COMPANY

Edward Martin's handcart company, known as the fifth of the handcart companies, and the last of this fateful year, duplicated the experiences of Willie's company, but was attended with even more disastrous results since it was a larger company, and had a larger proportion of women and children and of the aged and feeble, and also had a later start and was detained longer by the mountain storms.

95The emigrants that made up Martin's company and the two independent wagon companies of that season, under John A. Hunt and Benjamin Hodgetts, respectively, arrived at Iowa City in the early part of July, but were detained—waiting for their tents and handcarts to be made—until nearly the last of the month. One of the chief contributing causes to the handcart disaster was the frailness of these carts, and the unfitness of the material put into them. They were hurriedly made of unseasoned timber, and so much was sacrificed to lightness that the necessary strength and durability was impossible. The result was that in Martin's company, as also in the companies that preceded it, the breaking down of handcarts—which began a few days after the start was made—and the necessary halting to repair them contributed much to the delay of the journey.

FAULTY STRUCTURE OF THE HANDCARTS

Both Chislett's and Jacques' account agree in this. John Jacques, author of the great Latter-day Saint hymn, "O, Say What is Truth," was a member of Martin's company, and wrote a series of letters to the Salt Lake Herald in 1878 and 1879, describing somewhat in detail the events of the journey. The letters are seven in number, beginning in the Sunday impression of December the 1st, 1878, and appearing in each Sunday impression until Jan. 19, 1879. Elder Jacques had been a very earnest advocate of this handcart method of traveling over the plains, and had sharply reproved some who doubted the feasibility of the plan. [^17] "Many of the carts had wooden axles and leather boxes," he writes in his description of them. "Some of the axles broke in a few days, and mechanics were busy in camp at night repairing the accidents of the day." Chislett's account of the carts is that they had to be made at Iowa City while the emigrants were waiting for them. "They were made in a hurry, some of them of very insufficiently seasoned timber, and strength was sacrificed to weight, until the production was a fragile structure, with nothing to recommend it but lightness. They were generally made of two parallel hickory or oak sticks, about five feet long, and two by one and a half inches thick. These were connected by one crosspiece at one end to serve as a handle, and three or four similar pieces nearly a foot apart, commencing at the other end, to serve as the bed of the cart, under the center of which was fastened a wooden axletree, without iron skeins." The wheels were devoid of iron, except that in some of them there was a very light iron tire. The whole weight of a cart was about sixty pounds.

It doubtless will aid in appreciation of the difficulties and even the dangers of the handcart expedition westward if the matter of roughness of mountain roads and altitudes be considered. These are discussed by Jacques as follows: "To give a better idea of the nature of the latter one-half of the journey, I may say that the altitude of Salt Lake is about 4,200; * * * and that of Fort Laramie 100 feet lower. It may also be recollected that the whole of the winter part of this journey was performed at a much greater altitude, beginning at about 5,000 feet at North Platte camp, where the relief express found the company [i. e., Martin's], and never sinking so low again until in Emigration canon near this (Salt Lake) city; but rising at Devil's Gate it was 6,000 feet; near the three crossing of Sweetwater to 7,000 feet; by the South Pass a little higher. From Green river to Bridger about 6,700 feet; on Bear river to about 6,800 feet; in Echo canon, about 6,000; on the Big Mountain, about 7,245, with different ridges and summits which were passed over varying from over 7,000 to nearly 8,000 feet." [^18]

97The start from Iowa City did not begin until the 28th of July. At first there were two companies organized; one under Martin, the other under the leadership of Jesse Haven, returning missionary elder from South Africa. The two companies numbered nearly six hundred souls. The arrangement to travel in two companies continued until the companies arrived at Florence, Nebraska, which was on the 22nd of August. Here, as in the case of Willie's company,—which was but four days departed—the question of venturing upon the journey so late in the season was debated. "Unfortunately," remarks Jacques, "It was determined to finish the journey the same season."

AT FLORENCE—ADJUSTMENTS

Matters were somewhat readjusted at Florence. The two companies were united into one; Edward Martin was continued as captain assisted by Daniel Tyler. Both of them had made the journey with the Mormon Battalion from the Missouri river to the Pacific coast; both of them at first corporals, and afterwards as 2nd and 3rd sergeants, respectively, in Company "C." [^19]

The start was made from Florence on the 25th of August. It was the 8th of October when they reached Fort Laramie. Here they remained one day and some were able to exchange and sell watches and other personal effects they could spare for food which they were allowed to purchase from the military stores, at reasonable prices. [^20] Soon after leaving Laramie, however, it was found necessary to reduce the daily ration. "The pound of flour was reduced to three-fourths of a pound, then to half, and subsequently yet lower. On the 19th at Red Buttes they met the first severe snowstorm, accompanied by a piercing north wind; that day they had forded the Platte. Two days before, in order to lighten the loads on the carts they had sacrificed much bedding, the need of which they now sorely felt.

98On the 28th Joseph A. Young and two companions, with the news of coming supply trains, met them, an event which brought forth "the cheers and tears and smiles and laughter of the emigrants." Two days later they met the promised supplies on the Sweetwater near Devil's Gate. This assured relief, but much of suffering had yet to be endured. From a foot to a foot and a half of snow was on the ground and the cold was intense. The question was discussed as to whether the company should go into such winter quarters as could be provided or push on to Salt Lake. The latter course was determined upon. The freight that could not be taken along was left at this point with three men from the valley, and seventeen from among the emigrants to guard it. Only a small allowance of food could be left them, and because of this the men suffered terribly, and nearly perished of hunger by the time spring opened and relief arrived from Salt Lake valley.

Shortly after leaving Devil's Gate enough wagons were met to carry most of the baggage of Martin's company and some of the people, but the crossing and recrossing of the Sweetwater was a trying ordeal. There were so many who were helpless, or nearly so, that it was difficult to decide who should be taken into the wagons and who should be compelled to walk. "There was considerable crying of women and children," remarks Elder Jacques, "and perhaps of a few of the men, whom the wagons could not accommodate with a ride." "One of the relief party remarked," continues our authority, "that in all the mobbings and drivings of the 'Mormons' he had seen nothing like it." C. H. Wheelock (who, it will be remembered, was one of the presidency of the British Mission when this enterprise was undertaken, and who was now returned with the relief party to assist these emigrants, also one of the last who was with the Prophet Joseph at Carthage Prison) could scarcely refrain from shedding tears, and he declared that he would willingly give his own life if that would save the lives of the emigrants.

EPHRAIM K. HANKS—HERO

The men with one group of relief wagons, not yet met by the emigrants, concluded from their long delay in appearing that the rear companies of the emigration had perished in the snow, and were for turning back to Salt Lake; [^21] but Ephraim K. Hanks, commonly known as "Eph Hanks," who was connected with the mail carrying service, was determined to ascertain the fate of the emigrants, and accordingly mounted one team horse, and leading another, rode on alone. He met the emigrants while yet on the Sweetwater. He had killed a buffalo—two of them, in fact—and cutting the meat into strips, packed it on the horse he was leading; and this with other buffalo he had killed after joining the company, materially added to the meat supply. [^22]

100By the time South Pass was reached enough relief teams had arrived to allow of some passing on to help the wagon trains still further back, and at the same time admit of all the emigrants riding in the wagons. The journey now was more rapid. By the 21st of November Green river was reached. On the 28th the company camped on the Weber. Meantime other parties had been at work keeping the road open over the mountain passes east of Salt Lake City. By this time the relief wagons numbered one hundred and four, and the emigrants were welcomed by throngs of people into Salt Lake City, where they arrived on Sunday, the 30th of November. [^23]

100Every relief that shelter, and food, and clothing, and kindness, and devoted attention could bring to these belated emigrants was accorded them. The usual Sunday morning services were in progress at the "Old Tabernacle" when President Young learned of the approach of Martin's company to the city. In dismissing the congregation that the people might meet the emigrants and care for them, he said:

"When those persons arrive I do not want to see them put into houses by themselves. I want to have them distributed in this city among the families that have good, comfortable houses; and I wish the sisters now before me, and all who know how and can, to nurse and wait upon the newcomers, and prudently administer medicine and food to them. * * * The afternoon meeting will be omitted, for I wish the sisters to go home and prepare to give those who have just arrived a mouthful of something to eat, and to wash them, and nurse them up. * * * Prayer is good, but when (as on this occasion) baked potatoes, and pudding, and milk are needed, prayer will not supply their place. Give every duty its proper time and place. * * * I want you to understand that I desire this people to nurse them up; we want you to receive them as your own children, and to have the same feelings for them. * * * Now that the most of them are here, we will continue our labors of love until they are able to take care of themselves, and we will receive the blessing. You need not be distrustful about that, for the Lord will bless this people."

101It was in this spirit that the emigrants were received and waited upon by the people, President Young and his family doing their full share. During his remarks above referred to President Young had said:

101"I have sent word to Bishop Hunter that I will take in all that others will not take. * * * I am willing to take my proportion." [^24]

The exact number of those who perished in this company is not of record in our official annals; and it is difficult to fix upon any approximate number with certainty. Joseph A. Young coming in from the farthermost companies reported at a meeting in Salt Lake City, on Sunday, the 16th of November, that on meeting Martin's company at Red Buttes on the Platte, 56 deaths were reported up to that time; [^25] that, however, was on the 28th of October, and there was yet before the company more than a month of exposure, and toil, and suffering, in the midst of fierce mountain storms. Chislett declares of this company that of the six hundred at starting they "lost over one-fourth of their number by death." "The storm which overtook us while making the sixteen mile drive on the Sweetwater," he writes, "reached them at North Platte. There they settled down to await help or die, being unable to go any farther. Their camp ground became a veritable graveyard before they left." One-fourth of 600, would be 150. Jacques says that exaggerated ideas have been entertained with reference to the number of deaths. His own estimate is that about one in six of the "entire number that left Liverpool in the ship Horizon" died. As that number is listed at 856, Jacques' estimate of those who perished would be 142, or about the same as given by Chislett. Jacques also says that others "who claim to know" put the number of deaths in Martin's company "at about 100; or about one-eighth of the entire number that left Liverpool in the ship Horizon." [^26] All things considered the estimate of Chislett and Jacques,—putting their estimate at 145—is perhaps not far from the facts. And these added to Willie's seventy-seven deaths, brings the total of deaths to 222. The number who were frost-bitten was also large, and some were crippled for life. [^27]

102The wagon companies were also helped in the last stages of the journey. The people of Fort Supply, near Bridger, led by Isaac Bullock, as well as relief teams sent from Salt Lake City rendering them valuable assistance by providing them with fresh teams and supplies of food. All belated emigrants were reported as safely arrived in Salt Lake valley shortly after the middle of December.

The one redeeming feature of this unfortunate incident in Latter-day Saint history was the heroic efforts of the people in Salt Lake valley to save these unfortunate companies of emigrants. Especially is this true of the people in Salt Lake City and county; of Davis county; and latterly of Tooele county. These, because of their accessibility, bore chiefly the burden of the relief work; and there are men whose names deserve a permanent place in history for the activity and heroism then displayed in seeking to save from misery and death large numbers of their fellow men. Among these are—

Joseph A. Young, Thomas Alexander,

103Wm. H. Kimball, Ben Hampton,

103George D. Grant, Robert T. Burton,

103Cyrus H. Wheelock, Charles Decker,

103Ephraim K. Hanks, G. G. Webb,

103Stephen Taylor, Hosea Stout,

103Able Garr, James Ferguson,

103Daniel W. Jones, Isaac Bullock

103 Joseph Simmons

103Others were, of course, equally worthy to be remembered; their risks and services were equally as great as these whose names are here set down; but it happens with nearly all expeditions and enterprises of men that the few only can be specifically remembered in the annals of events. It is reserved to the "Lamb's Book of Life" to perfectly record the names of all who render service to humanity, and these, here unnamed, rank and file of the relief parties, who in that trying and adventurous enterprise of rescuing the stormbound and starving handcart companies of 1856, can be confident of being registered, and on the page with their names, these words will be written:

103"Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world; for I was hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick and ye visited me. * * * Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one-of the least of these, my brethren, ye have done it unto me." [^28]

103Of this service, remembrance of which I would perpetuate, President Young said:

"This is what I can say truly, with the rest of your counselors and directors, that no man or woman, that we have any knowledge of in the church, has refused to do as requested with regard to this immigration; they have run by day and night. Our messengers have been traveling from here to the Platte, and back and forth between Bridger, Green river, and the Sweetwater; and scores of men have been riding by day and night, without having enjoyed an undisturbed night's rest, during the last two months, only occasionally snatching a little when sitting by the camp fire. They have been riding by day and night, hurrying to and fro and laboring with their might, and have not refused to do what we have required of them. This is to their praise. Works have been most noble when they were needed. We put works to our faith, and in this case we realize that our faith alone would have been perfectly dead and useless; would have been of no avail, in saving our brethren that were in the snow; but by putting works with faith we have been already blessed in rescuing many, and bringing them to where we can now do them more good." [^29]

104Nor is this appreciation to be confined to those who braved the storms to carry the relief to the place where it was needed; but it is to be extended also to those who supplied the teams and the food, who by prudent counsels and prompt action conceived the relief plans and prepared the outfits for starting, and who by the consecration and sacrifice of their means made possible the rescue of their brethren from what would otherwise have been inevitable and miserable destruction.

104Of course, among the foremost of these were Brigham Young and others of the general authorities of the church then in Utah. O. F. Whitney in his History of Utah writes:

"Many besides those who went to the rescue of these companies would gladly have gone had it been their privilege. None were more anxious in this respect, for none felt more keenly for the sufferings of the unfortunate emigrants, than President Franklin D. Richards, under whose administration in the British Isles the handcart project had been inaugurated. He had arrived home only three days before the relief parties set out. He desired to accompany them and made all preparations to that end, but was called to assist President Jedediah M. Grant and other elders who were just then arduously engaged in carrying on what is known in 'Mormon' history as 'The Reformation.' Had it not been for this, Apostle Richards would have returned to meet the handcarts, and it is not saying too much, to those who know the man and his great sorrow at the disaster which befell his brethren and sisters on the plains, that could his own life have averted the terrible calamity which overtook them, it would willingly have been given." [^30]

105Near the close of his circumstantial account of the suffering endured by Martin's handcart company, John Jacques very briefly and temperately discusses the question of "blame" for the disasters that overtook it; and the matter is put so fairly that I quote it here at length: "The question may be asked, whom do I blame for the misadventure herein related. I blame nobody. I am not anxious to blame anybody. I am not writing for the purpose of blaming anybody, but to fill up a blank page of history with matters of much interest. I may say that notwithstanding the serious misfortune of this company, I have no doubt but that those who had to do with the management meant well and tried to do the best they could under the circumstances." [^31]

105THE MISSIONARY EAST-BOUND HANDCART COMPANY

105Doubtless to show the saints in Europe that the brethren in Utah did not shrink from the toilsome method of travel that had been suggested to them, a company of missionary elders numbering 74 men, with 25 handcarts, left Salt Lake City on the 23rd of April, 1857, for the Missouri frontiers, en route for various parts of Europe and the states to preach the gospel.

105Following is the description of the departure of this handcart company of missionaries from temple square, published at the time:

105"All things being ready, at a quarter before 10 a. m., the company started off in regular order, with as much apparent cheerfulness and unconcern as though they were going to return in the evening, whereas many of them will be gone for years, and all will probably have to pass through trials, and endure hardships, of which the pulling of their carts across the plains will be among the least.

The company consisted of 74 men, with some twenty-five handcarts, and was made up of individuals of nearly every imaginable occupation and pursuit of life: farmers, mechanics, tradesmen, merchants, and clerks—some Americans, some English, Scotch, Irish, Welsh, Danes, Swedes, Norwegians, Germans, and of other nations, were to be seen in the company, which made it an unusually interesting sight. To see such a variety of men, some of them young, some in the prime, and some past the meridian of life, leave their vocations at a moment's notice, and go forth in that way to proclaim the gospel of salvation to the nations that have long been wandering in the darkness, bespeaks a devotion to the principles of eternal truth not often seen." [^32]

106Instead of increasing in difficulties of road and dangers of approaching winter, however, as in the case of the west-bound handcart companies, it grew daily easier, and less dangerous as they approached the Missouri river. The company was made up moreover by men alone, and the presence of aged people and children did not enter into their problems; and their journey was down hill from the base of the Rocky Mountains to the Missouri river, and attended by a constantly expanding summer, instead of threatening and actual fierce storms of winter. It was, however, the best expression, perhaps, that could be given that the elders who went among the people to preach the gospel were willing to endure the same toilsome method of travel as had been suggested to the saints in Europe, and such an expression, on the part of those who gave it, was worthy of all acceptation and praise.

Two small companies of handcart emigrants crossed the plains in 1857, led respectively by Israel Evans and Christian Christiansen. They arrived in Salt Lake City on the 12th and 13th of September. In 1858, Latter-day Saint emigration both from Europe and the states was nearly suspended, and there were no handcart companies that year. In 1859 there was one company, led by George Rowley, numbering 235 souls, with 60 handcarts, and six wagons. In 1860 there were two handcart companies. The first was led by Daniel Robinson, numbering 233 souls; 43 handcarts; 6 wagons. This company arrived in Salt Lake City on the 27th of August, and President Young took the precaution to send out teams to meet it with 2,500 lbs. of flour and 500 lbs. of bacon. The second company of handcart emigrants that year was led by Oscar O. Stoddard, and numbered 126 souls, 22 handcarts.

107This was the last company to come by that method of travel.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1855, p. 71.
[^2] Burton's City of the Saints, pp. 69-70.
[^3] The practice then begun has continued, and become a permanent institution in the church, only the fast day has been changed from the first Thursday in the month to the first Sunday of the month. For the excellence and possibilities of this charity, see Note end of chapter.
[^4] This was reinstating the system adopted in the earlier years of the colony's experience. For the first three years in Utah "every head of a family," says Geo. A. Smith, "issued his breadstuff in daily rations, varying from one-quarter to one pound per soul, according to the amount of provisions he had on hand; most of the time the rations were from one-half to three-fourths of a pound, sometimes accompanied with vegetables and milk; but if without these, the bread was not increased; for it was necessary that it should be made to last until harvest. This order of things continued until the population increased to 12,000, when, in 1850, an abundant harvest put an end to the necessity of rationing." (Answers to Questions, p. 18). The families of the church authorities as well as other families were rationed. "I have been under the necessity," wrote Heber C. Kimball to his son William, then on a mission in England, "of rationing my family, and also yours, to two-thirds of a pound of breadstuff per day each; as the last week is up today, we shall commence on half-a-pound each. This I am under the necessity of doing. Brother Brigham told me today that he had put his family on a half-a-pound each, for there is scarcely any grain in the country, and there are thousands that have none at all scarcely. We do this for the purpose of feeding hundreds that have none." (Letter to William Kimball, date of Feb. 29th, 1856, History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Feb., 1856, p. 154, et seq. The letter will also be found in Millennial Star, vol. xviii, p. 395).
[^5] Ibid.
[^6] Millennial Star, vol. xviii, p. 395.
[^7] Thirteenth General Epistle of the Presidency, dated at Salt Lake City Oct. 29, 1855, Millennial Star, vol. xviii, p. 49, et seq.
[^8] "If any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel." (I Tim. 5:8).
[^9] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, pp. 552-3.
[^10] Ibid, pp. 602-607.
[^11] Desert News of September 28th, 1850. "He has gone down to the grave," said the News in concluding its comment, "leaving a spotless name behind him, and thousands to mourn their loss of such a valuable man."
[^12] See the Conference Minutes, Deseret News, April 17, 1852. "On the 11th (i. e. of April) President Kimball preached and presented the case of Bishop Edward Hunter, who was then ordained presiding bishop under the hands of Presidents Kimball and Richards. Bishop Hunter then chose President Kimball and myself for his counselors, and we were unanimously sustained by the conference in that office." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for April, 1852, p. 35). These brethren had acted as counselors to his predecessor; but finally Leonard W. Hardy and Jesse C. Little became the counselors of Bishop Hunter, October, 1856. (See Minutes of that Conference in Deseret News of October 22nd, 1856).
[^13] Deseret News, March 16, 1854.
[^14] In addition to the offices above referred to as being held by him at the time of his demise, President Richards was "editor and proprietor of the Deseret News; also postmaster at Salt Lake City, and "enjoyed the full confidence of the postmaster-general (James Campbell) who respected his judgment touching postal arrangements throughout the mountain territories." He was chosen secretary of state in the provisional government of the "State of Deseret," and also exercised the functions of the office of secretary of the territory for some time after the departure of the "run-a-way officials" in 1851-2, under an appointment from Governor Young. He was a member of the legislature from the organization of the territory, and president of the council at the time of his death. In fact his last appearance in public was to attend the last day of the council's session for 1854. To friends while making his painful way to the council chamber he remarked: "I will go and perform this last duty, if like John Q. Adams, I die in the attempt." Returning to his home that day, 20th January, he never left it again alive. (Deseret News, March, 1854, passim). The number and nature of his pursuits will bear witness to the activity and uprightness of his life, since his occupations bespeak the community trust he was deemed worthy to receive. A brief biographical note, up to the time of his uniting with the church will be found in chapter xxxi of this History.
[^15] See Conference Minutes of April, 1854, Deseret News, April 13, 1854.
[^16] "'Uncle John Smith' was born in Derryfield (now Manchester) Rockingham county, New Hampshire, on the 14th of July, A. D., 1781, and was baptized into the faith, which has so long preserved his life in usefulness, on the 9th of January, 1833, and ordained an elder. * * * In 1833 he moved to Kirtland, Ohio, and in 1838 to Far West, Caldwell county, Missouri, and then to Adamondi-Ahman, in Daviess county, where he presided over that stake of Zion until expelled by the mob in 1839. He arrived in Illinois on the 28th of February of that year, and located at Green Plains, six miles from Warsaw, where he put in a crop of corn; during the summer he split rails, and performed much hard labor unsuited to his health and years. In June he moved to Commerce (since Nauvoo), and on the 4th of October was appointed to preside over the church in Iowa, and on the 12th moved to Lee county to fulfill that mission. October, 1843, he moved to Macedonia, Hancock county, Illinois, having been appointed to preside over the saints in that place. In January, 1844, he was ordained a patriarch, and in November of that year, was driven by mobbers from Macedonia to Nauvoo, where he continued to administer patriarchal blessings to the joy of thousands, until the 9th of February, 1846, when he was compelled by mob violence to again leave his home. After passing a dreary winter on the right bank of the Missouri, at Winter Quarters, he took up the weary ox train march on the 9th of June, 1847, and reached Salt Lake City Sept. 23rd, where he presided over the church in the mountains until Jan. 1st, 1849. He was ordained the presiding patriarch to the church under the hands of Presidents Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball. He moved out of the 'fort' on to his city lot in February, 1849, and this is the only spot on which he has been privileged to cultivate a garden two years in succession in twenty-three years. In addition to a vast amount of varied and efficient aid to thousands in the way of salvation, during his long and faithful ministry, he administered 5,560 patriarchal blessings,—which are recorded in seven large and closely written books, and closed the arduous duties of a well occupied life as stated in stated in the text." (See Deseret News of May 25th, 1854).
[^17] John Smith, appointed to succeed "Uncle John Smith" as presiding patriarch to the church was the son of Hyrum and Jerusha Barden Smith, and was born September 22nd, 1832, In Kirtland, Geuaga (now Lake) county, Ohio. His mother died October 13, 1837. In the spring of 1838, John accompanied his father's family to Far West where from that time he shared in all the persecutions and drivings endured by the church in Missouri, and subsequently in Illinois. He arrived in Salt Lake valley in September, 1848. He was ordained to the office of presiding patriarch on the 18th of February, 1855, being then in his 23rd year, by President Brigham Young, assisted by his two counselors, Heber C. Kimball and Jedediah M. Grant, and several of the apostles. "In consequence of the persecution of the church and the circumstances of his family," remarks President Young, in making entry of the fact of the ordination of the young patriarch, "his opportunities of attending school were very limited. He labored diligently to attend to the wants of his father's family. In manner he was very diffident, and he possessed no tact for public speaking. In the canons and on Indian expeditions he was always found on hand by his brethren." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Feb. 18, 1855, pp. 18, 19).
[^18] See chapter lxxxiv, this History, footnote 6.
[^19] See History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 1854, p. 99. The organization was effected on the 4th of November of the year named. Milo Andrus was chosen the first president, with Charles Edwards and George Gardiner counselors. The members of the high council were James H. Hart, Andrew Sproule, John Evans, William Morrison, James S. Cantwell, William Lowe, Samuel J. Lees, Edward Cook, James S. Brooks, William Gore, John Clegg and Charles Chard.
[^20] Orson Spencer was born in West Stockbridge, Berkshire county, Mass., March 14, 1802, and was the son of Daniel and Chloe Spencer, who "belonged to that virtuous, industrious class of New Englanders of the Puritan stock which has produced so many eminent men to figure on the stage of action in all the various departments of life." In addition to the items of his history in the text it should be said that he acceptably filled the office of alderman in the city council of Nauvoo; that he shared the hardships which attended upon the exodus of the saints from that city; that on the Missouri frontiers he lost his wife, Catherine Curtis, daughter of Deacon Samuel Curtis, an accomplished and refined lady, who succumbed to the hardships of the enforced exodus from Nauvoo; that he left his six bereaved children in the care of a friend in order to respond to an appointment to take charge of the British Mission, where he presided with becoming dignity and honor. In 1849 he arrived in Salt Lake valley; and when the "University of Deseret"—forerunner of "Utah University"—was founded in 1850, he was appointed its chancellor, which position he held at his death. In 1852 he was appointed to a mission in Prussia, but was rejected and expelled from the kingdom. He returned to Utah in 1853. In 1854 he was appointed to a mission in the United States. He made his headquarters at Cincinnati until called to preside in St. Louis and take editorial charge of the Luminary, an appointment the activities of which were suspended in order that he might make the missionary visit to the Cherokee Indians referred to in the text, from which he returned only to die. (See Millennial Star, vol. xvii, pp. 762-3). In addition to the editorial work in connection with several church periodicals, Elder Spencer was the author of Spencer's Letters, a New Dispensation classic, covering nearly all the doctrinal and controversial subjects involved in the message of the New Dispensation to the world. The work is a series of letters to the Rev. William Crowel, of Boston, Mass., extending over a number of years, and is still published by the church for the use of its ministry, and the instruction of inquirers into her doctrines.
[^21] Jedediah M. Grant was the son of Joshua and Thalia Grant. He was born in Windsor, Broome county, New York, on the 21st of February, 1816. He was baptized and became a member of the church on the 21st of March, 1833. In 1834 he went to Missouri with Zion's camp, and after returning from that journey was ordained an elder in the church, and began that active work in the ministry of the New Dispensation that never ceased until the close of his eventful life. He was identified practically with all the movements of the church; with the exodus from Missouri; with the founding of Nauvoo; with the exodus from that city; with the building of Winter Quarters. He was captain of one of "the hundreds"—the third—in the migration of the saints across the plains in 1847. After that he twice returned to the eastern states in the interests of the church. He was Salt Lake City's first mayor, being elected on the first Monday in April, 1851, and uninterruptedly held that office up to the time of his death. He was elected major general of the first division of the Nauvoo Legion in 1852, a position he held at his death. He was a member of the territorial legislature and unanimously elected speaker of the house in 1852, a position he continued to hold in the three subsequent sessions. In 1845 he was chosen a member of the first council of the seventy, presiding over the missionary forces of the church; and from 1854 to the time of his death he was a member in the first presidency of the church. "As a citizen," said the Deseret News in his obituary, "as a friend, a son, a husband, a father, and above all as a saint, and in every station and circumstance of life, whether military, civil, or religious, he everywhere and at all times shed forth the steady and brilliant light of lofty and correct example, and died, as he lived and counseled, with his armor on and burnished." Perhaps the best eulogy pronounced upon him, however, was the remark of Brigham Young at his obsequies, viz., "He has been in the church twenty-four years, and was a man that would live, comparatively speaking, a hundred years in that time." (Deseret News for Dec. 10th, 1856. Same issue contains an obituary and the funeral proceedings)
[^22] Matt., v:27, 28.
[^23] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xlii:23, 24.
[^24] Ibid, sec. lxiii:16.
[^25] Alma, ch. xxxix:5.
[^26] See this History, chapter xciii, footnote 11.
[^27] Burton's City of the Saints, 252, passim to p. 441.
[^28] Deseret News, September 24, 1856.
[^29] Minutes of the Farmington meetings are published in Deseret News of Sept. 24, 1856.
[^30] See Linn's Story of the Mormons, 1902, book v. ch. ix. Life in Utah, or the Mysteries and Crimes of Mormonism, Beadle, 1870, ch. xii. Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, ch. xxxv. Stenhouse's chapter on the "Reformation" and "Blood Atonement," and constituting the most circumstantial narrative on the excesses of the "Reformation." is largely the contribution of an annonymous writer, a fact that goes far towards destroying the trustworthiness of the statements made. (Waite's Mormon Prophet, 1866, ch. ix. Lights and Shadows of Mormonism, Gibbs, 1909, ch. xxiv).
[^31] Gen., ix:5, 6.
[^32] See Exodus, xx, xxi, xxxi; and Leviticus, xxiv. Also Leviticus, xx, cf. Matt., xv:1-9; St. John, viii:3-12.
