B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

108CHAPTER XCIX

108MISCELLANEOUS EVENTS, 1851-7 (CONCLUDED)—THE FAMINE OF 1855-6—ESTABLISHMENT OF "FAST DAY" FOR THE CHURCH—DEATH OF NOTABLE MEN—"REFORMATION"—"BLOOD ATONEMENT"

108AMONG other calamitous events of the period 1851-7, to which the two preceding chapters and part of this one will be devoted, was "the famine" of 1855-6. This was occasioned by a prolonged drought and a plague of grasshoppers during the summer of 1855, from which dual cause the crop that year was well-nigh a total failure.

DROUGHT AND GRASSHOPPERS—A DUAL PLAGUE

"All the farms south of this city," writes Brigham Young, in 1855, "are nearly a desert, the northern counties and Tooele have fared considerably better, but within the last few days the latter have had a visit from the enemy, and the result is that wheat stalks have lost their heads; and, moreover, as the farms have been located on small streams, a large quantity of wheat has been burnt up for want of water. This is rather a dark picture, but I regret to say it is not overdrawn. Myriads of grasshoppers, like snowflakes in a storm, occasionally fill the air over the city, as far as the eye can reach, and they are liable to alight wherever they can distinguish good feed. A great portion of them, however, alight in the Great Salt Lake, which appears green at a distance, and the shore is lined with their dead, from one inch to two feet thick, and which smell exactly like fish. Wherever there is a chance for water the brethren are still planting corn." [^1]

The grasshoppers were a recurring plague to the valleys of Utah for several, though, fortunately, not always, consecutive years; and not always in equally destructive numbers. Captain Burton quotes a description of the grasshoppers, and of their flights in swarms, by a Lieutenant Warren, as follows: "According to Lieutenant Warren, whose graphic description is here borrowed, these insects are 'nearly the same as the locusts of Egypt;' and no one who has not traveled on the prairie, and seen for himself, can appreciate the magnitude of the swarms. Often they fill the air for many miles of extent, so that an inexperienced eye can scarcely distinguish their appearance from that of a shower of rain or the smoke of prairie fire. The height of their flight may be somewhat appreciated, as Mr. E. James saw them above his head, as far as their size would render them visible, while standing on the top of a peak of the Rocky Mountains, 8,500 feet above the plain, and an elevation of 14,500 above that of the sea, in the region where the snow lies all the year. To a person standing in one of these swarms as they pass over and around him, the air becomes sensibly darkened, and the sound produced by their wings resembles that of the passage of a train of cars on a railroad when standing two or three hundred yards from the track. The Mormon settlements have suffered more from the ravages of these insects than probably all other causes combined." [^2]

109In addition to the loss of the other crops by drought and grasshoppers, great numbers of cattle died on the ranges from the severity of the winter of 1855-6, which also materially lessened the quantity of food. And while the quantity of food was lessened from these three causes combined, the immigration of the saints was unusually large, and during the same period "great numbers of gold hunters en route for California," says George A. Smith, church historian, "came into the valley destitute of food, who were fed and aided on their way from our scant supplies."

THE CHARITABLE DEVICE OF "THE FAST DAY"

"In all these times of scarcity," he continues, "measures were taken to supply those who were unable to furnish themselves. A fast day was proclaimed for the church on the first Thursday of each month, and the food saved in that way distributed among the poor; [^3] and thousands of persons, who had an abundance of bread put their families on rations, [^4] in order to save the same for those who could not otherwise obtain it. And so wise and liberal were the regulations during these periods of scarcity, incident upon settling the territory, that no one perished or even suffered materially for the want of food, and all were remarkably healthy." [^5]

110Those were days in Utah when money was of little value in buying flour. "Money will not buy flour or meal, only at a few places, and but very little at that," wrote Heber C. Kimball to his son William, in England. "I can assure you," he continues, "that I am harassed constantly; I sell none for money, but let it go where people are truly destitute. Dollars and cents do not count now, in these times, for they are the tightest that I have ever seen in the territory of Utah." [^6]

But notwithstanding these hard times the presidency could report on returning from a visit to the settlements that a general spirit of contentment and a desire to do right extensively prevailed; and although they found the people, continues the report, "with their crops almost entirely destroyed by the ravages of grasshoppers, rendering their hard exertions and the labors of their hands fruitless, still we heard not a murmur, nor repining, nor complaining, but rather a firm and determined reliance upon the Lord of hosts and their continued exertions for sustenance." [^7]

111I have been particular to mention this "famine" in detail, for by doing so it will throw light upon some incidents of importance in the history of the Latter-day Saints, in this period. For instance, the sacrifices and increased burdens by reason of the heavy immigration of 1856, and the work of rescuing the handcart emigration of that year will appear all the more heroic and praiseworthy on the part of the Latter-day Saint community in Utah, if it is remembered that these burdens and this rescue work was done by a people whose resources were reduced by a previous year of famine. It will also account for the necessarily careful and limited, though willing and efficient, help given to California emigrant companies.

This "famine" of '55-56, revealed the precariousness of these Great Basin settlements, which eight years after the advent of the Pioneers into Salt Lake valley could still be subject to such reverses as had now come to them in the matter of food supplies. Such possibilities together with their isolation and distance from other sources of supplies, taught them caution with reference to selling grain to passing emigrant companies; and that caution accounts for some complaints made against them in these and immediately succeeding years, by California-bound emigrant companies. No charge can truthfully be made that the Utah colonists refused needed help to emigrant companies passing through their settlements; but the instinct of self-preservation, and the Christian duty of providing for their own, [^8] both prompted caution in disposing of grain supplies beyond what was absolutely needed by the emigrant strangers passing through their settlements; and led them sometimes to refuse absolutely to sell grain to be fed to teams.

THE POLICY OF STORING GRAIN AGAINST A TIME OF NEED

It was during these years, when crops were so uncertain, and other sources of food supplies so distant and transportation so slow, to say nothing of the unsympathetic and even hostile attitude of their fellow citizens, both east and west, leading to an indifference to the suffering of the Latter-day Saints in Utah, and who could—as we have already seen—coldly speculate upon the famine of 1855-6, settling the Utah question by the probable extermination of the "Mormons"—it was during these years, I say, that the wise policy was inaugurated of storing up grain each year "against a day of famine"—a policy which though now sometime since abandoned by individuals, is still followed in many quarters by a woman's auxiliary organization of the church, known as the "Relief Society."

112The Female Relief Society was the first auxiliary organization in the church founded by Joseph Smith on the 17th of March, 1842. As implied by its name, and as declared by the Prophet soon after its organization was effected, the purpose of the society is "the relief of the poor, the destitute, the widow and the orphan, and for the exercise of all benevolent purposes. * * * They [members of the society] will fly to the relief of the stranger; they will pour in the wine and oil to the wounded heart of the distressed; they will dry up the tears of the orphan and make the widow's heart to rejoice." [^9]

But in addition to visiting the widows and fatherless, the sick and the poor, the society was also organized for the self-culture of its members, for their intellectual, moral, and spiritual development; and has the distinction of being the first organization of women in the world for the achievement of these two purposes: the office of charity ministrations, and the self-culture of its members. "I now turn the key in your [woman's] behalf in the name of the Lord," said the Prophet of the New Dispensation, Joseph Smith. This at a meeting of the society held on the 28th of April, 1842, "And this society shall rejoice, and knowledge and intelligence shall flow down [upon woman] from this time henceforth." [^10]

113Mrs. Emma Smith (the Prophet's wife) was made the first president of the society; with Mrs. Elizabeth Ann Whitney and Sarah M. Cleveland as counselors. Miss Elvira Cole was made treasurer, and Miss Eliza R. Snow, secretary. The work of this society in caring for the poor, in nursing the sick, in keeping a storage of grain in many of the communities of the Latter-day Saints to provide against famine or other food supply emergencies, is among the most commendable things achieved by the church.

113Every completely organized ward and branch of the church has its own Relief Society; each stake of Zion has its stake Relief Society, organization with a stake presidency and general board; while the general church presidency and board has a supervisory and directing control of the work in all the world.

113The society now is affiliated with all the principal woman's national societies of the world, and sends delegates and representatives to the great councils of women both in America and Europe—and is therefore a national and international organization.

DEATH'S EARLY HARVEST IN UTAH—NEWEL K. WHITNEY, SECOND PRESIDING BISHOP OF THE CHURCH

During the period being considered (1851-7) death's harvest was heavy among the men prominent in the work from and near the beginning of it. Among these was the presiding bishop of the church, Newel K. Whitney, who died on the 23rd of September, 1850, in the 56th year of his life. He had been a staunch, personal friend of Joseph Smith from the time of their first meeting at Kirtland in February, 1831, to the close of the Prophet's eventful career. He had continued steadfast and faithful through the succeeding years that witnessed the exodus from Nauvoo, the migration through the wilderness, and settlement of the saints in Utah's valleys. In losing him, as stated by the Deseret News when announcing his death, "the church suffered the loss of a wise and able counselor—of a thorough, straightforward business man. * * * He has long held the office of presiding bishop of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—to receive from the rich by consecration and to distribute to the poor, the goods of this world." [^11]

114He was succeeded in office by Edward Hunter who was sustained at the general conference of the church, April 7th, 1852; and ordained on the 11th of the same month. He chose as his counselors, temporarily, Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, of the first presidency; and he, himself, was made assistant trustee in trust of the church, Brigham Young being the chief. [^12]

WILLARD RICHARDS: COUNSELOR AND ANNALIST

In 1854, on the 11th of March, Willard Richards, of the first presidency, died of dropsy at his residence in Salt Lake City. It will be remembered that he was with the Prophet Joseph Smith in the martyrdom at Carthage, but himself escaped unhurt. As he had been the confidant, and the tried and true friend of the Prophet, so did he occupy these relations with Brigham Young, and became his second counselor when the first presidency of the church was organized near the close of 1847. He was also the historian and general church recorder of the church—which position he held from December, 1842, to the time of his death. In that capacity he rendered invaluable service to the New Dispensation. For this office "he was eminently gifted," wrote Elder Orson Spencer. "He chronicled events, dates, circumstances and incidents," Spencer continues, "with rare accuracy of judgment and great tenacity of memory." [^13] Much of the accuracy and fulness of the history of the church that can now be given to the world, covering the eventful period of his labors as historian and general church recorder is due to the accuracy and fulness of the annals then written by him. [^14]

He was succeeded as counselor in the first presidency by Jedediah M. Grant; and as church historian and general church recorder by Geo. A. Smith. [^15]

JOHN SMITH—UNCLE OF THE PROPHET AND PATRIARCH TO THE CHURCH

On May 23rd, 1854, John Smith, the presiding patriarch to the church, died at Salt Lake City. "Uncle John," as he was familiarly known to the church, was the uncle of the Prophet Joseph, being the brother of Joseph Smith, Sen., who was the first presiding patriarch of the church. As stated in a previous chapter he was a very worthy man, and greatly beloved of the people. [^16] He was succeeded in the patriarchal office in the church by John Smith, [^17] the son of Hyrum Smith, the martyr, who was the second presiding patriarch to the church.

ORSON SPENCER: SCHOLAR AND THEOLOGIAN

The next among the prominent elders of the church to pass away in death was Orson Spencer, M. A. The value of this man in the ministry of the New Dispensation has already been stated on the occasion of his being released from the presidency of the British Mission and the editorship of the Millennial Star. [^18] He was a graduate of Union College, Schenectady, New York, 1824; and of Hamilton Theological Seminary (Baptist), New York, 1829. He received the gospel in 1841, being baptized by his brother Daniel, and from that time became one of the most faithful, as he was one of the most refined, talented and highly educated disciples of the New Dispensation. He died at St. Louis, Missouri, on the 15th of October, 1855, to which point forty days before, he had returned from a brief mission among the Cherokee nation of the American Indians, in what is now the state of Kansas. While on this mission he was stricken with malaria, and much weakened by chills and fever he returned to St. Louis, where he was expected to take editorial charge of the Luminary, then being published by Erastus Snow, and also to resume his labors as the president of the St. Louis Stake of Zion, which had been organized in November, 1854. [^19] These expectations were disappointed by his death. [^20]

JEDEDIAH M. GRANT: MISSIONARY, REFORMER, AND FIRST MAYOR OF SALT LAKE

The last of the quintet of very worthy and prominent men who died within the period covered by this and the preceding two chapters, and whose prominence in the church makes it imperative that their demise be noted in this general History, was Jedediah M. Grant, [^21] second counselor to Brigham Young in the first presidency of the church, at the time of his demise; also Salt Lake City's first mayor, and the prime mover and master spirit in what is known in the New Dispensation annals as the "Reformation." Mayor Grant died quite unexpectedly on the 1st of December, 1856. "His demise has cast a deep gloom over the city," said the Deseret News in its announcement of his death; "stores are closed and the ordinary vocations of business suspended." Three days later he was buried with processional honors.

119In the civic life of Salt Lake City and the territory of Utah, Mayor Grant was a truly forceful factor, but it is in connection with the religious movement known as the "Reformation" that he will be best remembered in history.

119"THE REFORMATION:" GENERAL STATUS OF THE CHURCH

119The "Reformation" was doubtless a much needed moral and spiritual awakening. It must be remembered that for a number of years the Latter-day Saints had not lived under normal conditions.

From the exodus from Nauvoo, in 1846, up to the "Reformation" in 1856—ten years—there had been much of camp life, and of frontier life, in both of which there was much moving about, unrest, absence of settled conditions everywhere, all of which made it difficult to establish regularity of life and to enforce discipline. Again, also, I call attention to the fact that the men who were the leaders in the New Dispensation were largely of Puritan stock and training; and although they had become men of the mountains and the plains—men of the frontier wilderness—still at bottom they were men of very deep and very sincere religious convictions—religious convictions that demanded striving for absolute righteousness, and that did not look upon sin, in itself, with any degree of allowance. "Be ye perfect, even as your father in heaven is perfect," represented a principle and was an admonition of the Christ accepted by them, and emphasized into possibility of achievement, when rightly understood, by the philosophy and the ethics of the New Dispensation. When, therefore, these leaders saw moral disorders about them, and increasing lack of habitual reverence for sacred things—for the Sabbath day, for example, so often infringed in their forced marches, in their fighting crickets and grasshoppers, and meeting the exigencies of the irrigation system of farming; which, to raise and sometimes to preserve a crop, often forced the use of the water upon the Lord's day upon some of the community. Neglect of prayer by some "in the time and season thereof," was doubtless an outgrowth of the irregularity of their lives. So, too, a carelessness in respect of individual property rights. Often necessity forced the use of range cattle for food supplies, and the exigency of forced journeys, the use of work cattle, and other team stock, not always with the consent of the owners—and yet without intent of stealing; said uses of property springing from that sense of community feeling which had so often regarded all the means or resources of the community as available in order to carry to successful conclusion any individual enterprise of importance—so interwoven were individual and community interests in the period here under consideration.

120But while this community use of property was not evil intended in itself, it did make easy to those so inclined that habit of trespassing upon the property rights of others that, speaking plainly, can only be called theft.

SEX SINS AND THE "REFORMATION"

So also in regard to sex sins. The unsettled life of the ten years between the exodus from Nauvoo and the beginning of the "Reformation" was crowded with circumstances that lent themselves to continuous temptations in this kind of evil. There were the long weeks of ocean travel by mixed companies in slow sailing vessels; followed by long journeys of the same mixed companies up the American rivers, in crowded steamboats; or day and night travel in more crowded railway trains to the western terminals of the railroads. Then there was the longer overland journeying by handcart or ox train means of travel, all classes being thrown into constant and closest contact, which not all the care of the organized camp, nor the watchfulness of faithful pastors could rob of insidious and sometimes ruinous temptations. Then, too, as an explanation of the unusual force of emphasis placed upon sex sins, the Latter-day Saint community was open to the charge of licentiousness, and indeed were so charged, and that vehemently, for proclaiming as a principle and adopting as a practice the doctrine of a plurality of wives. To free themselves of this imputation in the practice of that doctrine, the church leaders laid an emphasis of denunciation upon sex sins which perhaps gives them an undue prominence in the things to be corrected by the "Reformation." Not that sex sins can be too severely denounced, or chastity too rigidly safeguarded by a community, but in consequence of what was perhaps the unconscious anxiety of the leaders to free the church from imputations of licentiousness in the matter of plurality of wives, the emphasis of denunciation placed upon violations of the law of chastity, and the severity of the retribution it was suggested be inflicted upon those guilty of such violations, have led to the belief that sexual sins were much more common in the Latter-day Saint communities than they really were.

"The law of chastity," as it stands in the doctrines of the church, is the law as given by the Christ when among men, involving not only the prohibition of physical acts against chastity, but even licentiousness of the mind. [^22] To which is supplemented: "He that looketh upon a woman to lust after her, shall deny the faith, and shall not have the spirit; and if he repents not he shall be cast out. Thou shalt not commit adultery; and he that committeth adultery, and repenteth not, shall be cast out." [^23] He that looketh on a woman to lust after her, or if any shall commit adultery in their hearts, they shall not have the Spirit, but shall deny the faith, and shall fear." [^24]

122Sex sins in the Book of Mormon are denounced as "most abominable above all sins, save it be the shedding of innocent blood, or denying the Holy Ghost." [^25] It should be noted, in passing, that these were instructions of scriptural force to the Latter-day Saints before the revelation respecting plural marriage was given. Such was the law of chastity in the church both before and after the doctrine of plural marriage was introduced. The teaching in the "Reformation" on this point brought forth no new law, but it laid tremendous emphasis upon the existing law.

122OUTSIDE TESTIMONY TO THE CHASTITY OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS

Both Captain Stansbury and Lieutenant Gunnison have been quoted as to the strictness of the early Utah community in the matter of insisting upon chastity, in sex relations, notwithstanding the existence of the plural marriage system. [^26] Captain Burton, whose City of the Saints was published in 1862, and whose sojourn among the saints was made in 1860, writes on this point: "The offenses against chastity, morality, and decency are exceptionally severe." "There is a prevailing idea * * * that wives are in public, and that woman can have as many husbands as the husband can have wives—in fact, to repeat colloquially, that they all 'pig together.' The contrary is notably the case. The man who, like Messrs. Hamilton and Howard Egan, murders in cold blood his wife's lover, is invariably acquitted, the jury declaring that civil damages mark the rottenness of other government. * * * The Mormons point triumphantly to the austere morals of their community, their superior freedom from maladive influences, and the absence of that uncleanness and licentiousness which distinguish the cities of the civilized world." "In point of mere morality," he said later, "the Mormon community is perhaps purer than any other of equal numbers." [^27] Our author also quotes the penalties of the laws of Utah defining "crimes and punishments," then (1860) in force, beginning with the Territorial Laws of Utah:

123"Sec. 32>>>>>>. Every person who commits the crime of adultery shall be punished by imprisonment not exceeding twenty years, and not less than three years; or by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, and not less than three hundred dollars; or by both fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court. And when the crime is committed between parties any one of whom is married, both are guilty of adultery, and shall be punished accordingly.

123Sec. 33. If any man or woman, not being married to each other, lewdly and lasciviously associate and cohabit together; or if any man or woman, married or unmarried, is guilty of open and gross lewdness, and designedly make any open and indecent, or obscene exposure of his or her person, or of the person of another, every such person so offending shall be punished by imprisonment not exceeding ten years, and not less than six months, and fine not more than one thousand dollars, and not less than one hundred dollars, or both, at the discretion of the court.

123Sec. 34. If any person keep a house of ill fame, resorted to for the purpose of prostitution or lewdness, he shall be punished by imprisonment not exceeding ten years, and not less than one year, or fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or both fine and imprisonment. And any person who, after being once convicted of the like offense, shall be punished not more than double the above specified penalties.

123Sec. 35. If any person inveigle or entice any female, before reputed virtuous, to a house of ill fame, or knowingly conceal, aid, or abet in concealing such female so deluded or enticed, for the purpose of prostitution or lewdness, he shall be punished by imprisonment not more than fifteen years, nor less than five years. * * *

123Sec. 38. If any person import, print, publish, sell or distribute any book, pamphlet, ballad, or any printed paper containing obscene language, or obscene prints, pictures, or descriptions manifestly tending to corrupt the morals of youth, or introduce into any family, school or place of education, or buy, procure, receive, or have in his possession any such book, pamphlet, ballad, printed paper, picture, or description, either for the purpose of loan, sale, exhibition, or circulation, or with intent to introduce the same into any family, school, or place of education, he shall be punished by fine not exceeding four hundred dollars."

124Nearly all anti-"Mormon" writers have made much of the fierce denunciations of sin by church leaders in this period of the "Reformation," and of the confessions to moral delinquencies on the part of some of the people, as indicating a very low state of morals and of spiritual degeneracy of the whole community. And this without taking note of the very high standard of moral and spiritual excellence required by the teaching of the church leaders; of the untoward circumstances above noted, so conducive to irregularity of life in the previous ten years; or of the excessive zeal of the leaders, inspired by the Puritan spirit in which the "Reformation" was conceived and conducted, and that often led to unconscious exaggeration in charging and denouncing both individual and community sins.

INCEPTION OF THE "REFORMATION"

ReformationHCThe "Reformation" began at a conference at Kaysville, in Davis county, held on the 13th of September, continuing through four days; President Jedediah M. Grant, Joseph Young, of the first council of the seventy, and William Willes, recently returned from his protracted mission in India, being the most prominent factors; Brother Willes contributing much to the awakening of religious fervor by singing soul-stirring songs, one in particular, through which ran the refrain—

ReformationHC124"The Saints will nobly do their duty."

ReformationHC124On the third day 500 people renewed all their religious obligations in the act of baptism, 80 of whom were baptized by Elder Grant himself.

ReformationHC125The "Reformation" proposed went chiefly to the practical affairs in life. According to the minutes of the meeting published at the time, the text of Elder Grant's first discourse and exhortation in the movement was supplied by Brigham Young:

ReformationHC125"Saints, live your religion."

ReformationHC125Such the text; the speaker urged that the saints hold sacred their baptismal covenants: "observing cleanliness in their persons, and dwellings, setting their families in order, carefully cultivating their farms and gardens, and not to feel so anxious to have more land that they could not attend to themselves; to gather into and build up the fort and settlement; and concluded by praying that all those who did not feel to do right might have their way opened to leave the people and territory of Utah, and that those who did not come forward and do their first works, [i. e. renew religious obligations by baptism], let them be unto you as heathen men and publicans, and not numbered among the saints." [^28]

ReformationHC125In this passage the keynote of the "Reformation" is struck; and save only for what some might regard as a hint of intolerance in the closing lines, its purposes were wholly commendable.

ReformationHC125This first "Reformation" meeting was followed by others during the same week at Farmington, in the same county, continuing three days, resulting in 406 persons renewing their religious obligations by baptism. The meetings were of the same general character as those held in Kaysville. [^29]

ReformationHCBy Sunday, the 21st of September, the "Reformation" had reached Salt Lake City; and in the two meetings held in the "Old Tabernacle" that day, President Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball as well as President Grant participated in the enthusiasm of the occasion, and from thence the work of reform and the renewal of religious obligations and covenants by the impressive sign of baptism, extended throughout all the settlements of Utah, and to all the branches and conferences and missions of the church. That much good was accomplished; that a spiritual awakening in the church was effected may not be doubted. Also it must be admitted, as in nearly all such movements, and times of special manifestations of religious zeal, there were many extreme things suggested, and some unwarranted interpretations of the scriptures, and many ill-advised things said which, when measured by the spirit of the gospel of Jesus Christ, are found wanting, especialy on the side of patience, and forbearance, and mercy. In some of its aspects this "Reform" movement resembled more in spirit the severe justice and retribution of the old Mosaic law than the spirit of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

126"BLOOD ATONEMENT"

ReformationHC126Among the things to be regretted in connection with the "Reformation," and from which the church has suffered much, through misapprehension of her real attitude in respect of the matters involved, are certain extreme and unqualified utterances of some of the leading elders of the church on what it has become custom to call "blood atonement;" by which is meant, as commonly represented by anti-"Mormon" writers, a claimed right on the part of the church to shed the blood of men guilty of heinous crimes, such as murder, adultery, and apostasy; and which, since such acts may not be done openly, and by legal authority vested in the church, then secretly, by assassination. [^30]

ReformationHCThat there are crimes for which the law of God prescribed capital punishment; and which, under the union of the spiritual and temporal power—under the blending of civil and religious authority in the old state-theocratic government of ancient Israel existed—may not be denied. As for example, in the case of murder, the law given to Noah and his posterity was: "At the hand of every man's brother will I require the life of men. Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed." [^31] This law was carried over into the Mosaic polity; and the list of crimes enlarged to include capital punishment for assault of children upon parents; for stealing men and selling them into slavery; for witchcraft; for beastiality; for idolatry; for violating the Sabbath day; for adultery. [^32] Capital punishment, however, in ancient Israel, was not left to be executed by irresponsible individuals, and at their caprice. It was sternly regulated by law and executed by legally designated agencies. There are sins enumerated also in the New Testament for which it is said there is no forgiveness. "No murderer hath eternal life abiding in him," saith St. John. [^33] "Who so speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come." [^34] "He that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath never forgiveness," is the more impressive declaration of St. Mark, "but is in danger of eternal damnation." [^35]

ReformationHC127"It is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame." [^36]

ReformationHCIt is very clear that other New Testament writers recognized a "sin unto death:" "If any man," said St. John, "see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death: I do not say that he shall pray for it." [^37] "For," as declares the writer to the Hebrews, "if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins; but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. He that despised Moses' law died without mercy under two or three witnesses: Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit of grace?" [^38]

ReformationHC128It follows as logical conclusion in such cases as are here enumerated that the matter stands with them as if no atonement of the Christ had been made, and they themselves must pay the penalty of their sins. "The life of the flesh," said Moses, is in the blood; "and I have given it to you upon the altar to make an atonement for your souls: for it is the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul." [^39]

ReformationHCIt may, of course, be urged that reference is here made to the blood of beasts and birds appointed to be slain in sacrifice; and that their blood, typifying the blood of the Christ, which would be shed for remission of sin, was given to ancient Israel to make atonement for their souls; and it is true, as Paul said of the law, "almost all things are by the law purged with blood; and without the shedding of blood is no remission." [^40] But if, as seems to be the case, from the foregoing considerations, there are certain limitations to vicarious atonement, even to the vicarious atonement of the Christ, then these ancient laws proclaiming that the life of the flesh is in the blood, and that "the blood maketh an atonement for the soul," make plain what is needful for the salvation of the soul where one's sins place him beyond the reach of vicarious means of salvation—then it is the shedding of the sinners own blood that must here be referred to. [^41] Paul evidently recognized such cases as these; for in referring to one who had been guilty of such sin as is not so much as named among the Gentiles, "that one should have his father's wife," he said:

ReformationHC129"For I verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged already, as though I were present, concerning him that hath so done this deed, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus." [^42]

ReformationHCHere then is the doctrine taught that by "destruction of the flesh," there is hope that "the spirit might be saved, in the day of the Lord Jesus." And no one can say that Brigham Young went beyond this when he said—and this is one of the offensive passages so frequently quoted against him by anti-"Mormon" writers:

ReformationHC130"There are sins that men commit for which they cannot receive forgiveness in this world, or in that which is to come, and if they had their eyes open to see their true condition, they would be perfectly willing to have their blood spilt upon the ground, that the smoke thereof might ascend to heaven as an offering for their sins; and the smoking incense would atone for their sins, whereas, if such is not the case, they will stick to them and remain upon them in the spirit world.

ReformationHC130I know, when you hear my brethren telling about cutting people off from the earth, that you consider it is strong doctrine; but it is to save them, not to destroy them. * * *

ReformationHC130I do know that there are sins committed of such a nature that if the people did understand the doctrine of salvation, they would tremble because of their situation. And furthermore, I know that there are transgressors, who, if they knew themselves and the only condition upon which they can obtain forgiveness, would beg of their brethren to shed their blood, that the smoke thereof might ascend to God as an offering to appease the wrath that is kindled against them, and that the law might have its course. I will say further; I have had men come to me and offer their lives to atone for their sins. It is true that the blood of the Son of God was shed for sins through the fall, and those committed by men, yet men can commit sins which it can never remit." [^43]

ReformationHC130The doctrine of "blood atonement," then, is based upon the scriptural laws considered in the foregoing paragraphs. The only point at which complaint may be justly laid in the teaching of the "Reformation" period is in the unfortunate implication that the Church of the Latter-day Saints, or individuals in that church, may execute this law of retribution. [^44] Fortunately, however, the suggestions seemingly made in the overzealous words of some of these leading elders were never acted upon. The church never incorporated them into her polity. Indeed, it would have been a violation of divine instruction given in the New Dispensation had the church attempted to establish such procedure. As early as 1831 the law of the Lord was given to the church as follows:

ReformationHC131"And now, behold, I speak unto the church: Thou shalt not kill; and he that kills shall not have forgiveness in this world, nor in the world to come.

ReformationHC131And again, I say, thou shalt not kill; but he that killeth shall die. * * * And it shall come to pass, that if any persons among you shall kill, they shall be delivered up and dealt with according to the laws of the land; for remember that he hath no forgiveness, and it shall be proven according to the laws of the land." [^45]

ReformationHC131The same disposition was directed to be made with reference to those who should rob, steal, or lie, that is, they should be delivered up to be dealt with "according to the laws of the land," [^46] Those who committed adultery, and repented not, were to be cast out.

ReformationHC131A few months later, August, 1831, the Lord said in connection with the purchase of lands in Jackson county:

ReformationHC131"Satan putteth it into their hearts [i. e., the hearts of the Missourians] to anger against you, and to the shedding of blood; wherefore the land of Zion, shall not be obtained but by purchase or by blood, otherwise there is none inheritance for you. And if by purchase, behold you are blessed; and if by blood, as you are forbidden to shed blood, lo, your enemies are upon you, and ye shall be scourged from city to city, and from synagogue to synagogue, and but few shall stand to receive an inheritance." [^47]

ReformationHCMoreover, in the very discourse, most frequently quoted by anti-"Mormon" writers against the church on this point—ante this chapter—Brigham Young very clearly indicates that neither the church nor individual members of it had any right to execute the law of retribution he had been discussing. He could refer to "plenty of instances where men have been righteously slain in order to atone for their sins," doubtless having in mind the many such instances named in the scriptures under the law and polity received through Moses; and the legal executions in those nations and states that give sanction to capital punishment for some of these offenses; he had "seen scores and hundreds of people for whom there would have been a chance [in the last resurrection there would be] if their lives had been taken and their blood spilled on the ground as a smoking incense to the Almighty;" he "had known a great many men who have left this church [i. e. of the Latter-day Saints] for whom there is no chance whatever for exaltation; but if their blood had been spilled, [for their crimes, not because they left the church] it would have been better for them;"—yet "the wickedness and ignorance of the nations forbid this principle's being in full force, but the time will come when the law of God will be in full force." [^48]

ReformationHC132All which is but recognition of the fact that said law of God is not now in force, and the "ignorance" of the nations now in power will not permit it to go into force. Under these circumstances, then, what is to be done? On the one hand is God's law of retribution that would destroy certain sinners in the flesh for their crimes, that "the spirit," to use the language of Paul, "might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus;" [^49] on the other hand are the "ignorant nations" who will not authorize the penalties affixed to some divine laws, nor prescribe the methods of execution that the law of God anciently ordained; and the church, as an organization, and the individuals comprising it, are forbidden to inflict the physical punishment of death, or any other physical punishment. Under these circumstances, I ask again, what is to be done? Just what Brigham Young did, issue the declaration he made in the very discourse here under consideration, the discourse of February 8th, 1857, but which declaration has never received consideration by anti-"Mormon" writers, nor allowed its place in modifying the spirit of the whole discourse quoted,—often misquoted, and always in some fashion garbled—namely:

ReformationHC"The time has been in Israel under the law of God * * * that if a man was found guilty of adultery, he must have his blood shed; * * * but now, I say, in the name of the Lord, that if this people will sin no more, but faithfully live their religion, their sins will be forgiven them without taking life." [^50]

ReformationHC133And that was and is the course and policy followed by the church. If there has been departure in any degree from that policy, and the positive, divine injunction to the church and its individual members—"Thou shalt not kill"—if this injunction has been violated, the responsibility for such departure rests wholly upon the guilty individuals and not upon the church.

ReformationHC133It should be noted in this connection that in the individual cases of "blood atonement" charged, the allegations rest upon the word of men who are themselves self-confessed murderers and outlaw desperadoes; or else the charge rests upon the word of anonymous writers; or the cases specified are not such as fall under the category of so-called "blood atonement."

ReformationHC133Of the first class the accounts of "blood atonement" are by such characters as John D. Lee, of the "Mountain Meadows" horror, [^51] and of William A. Hickman, commonly known as "Bill," Hickman—a typical western desperado; [^52] these, et al, loosely ascribe responsibility for their crimes to leading "Mormon" church officials, especially to alleged orders or to the veiled suggestions of President Brigham Young. It would violate all the canons of standard historical writing to consider seriously charges made by such characters. [^53]

134Of the second class, viz., anonymous persons, usually apostate "Mormons," who kept their identity concealed, it is alleged, through fear of assassination should they be identified with their disclosures, and whose tales of blood and cruelty and of oppression struggle out of obscurity to public attention through sensational writers. These are represented by such anonymous persons as those whose statements are admitted into the pages of Stenhouse, in his Rocky Mountain Saints; [^54] by Beadle, in his Mysteries and Crimes of Mormonism; [^55] by Reverend (!) C. P. Lyford, in his Mormon Problem; [^56] and by many others who from one pretense or another conceal the identity of their alleged informers. And yet, as remarked in an official document signed by the first presidency of the church and the twelve apostles, in 1889, there seems to have been no danger to such characters either from open or secret church agencies. "Notwithstanding all the stories told about the killing of apostates," says the document referred to, no case of this kind has ever occurred, and of course has never been established against the church we represent. Hundreds of seceders from the church have continuously resided and now live in this territory, many of whom have amassed considerable wealth, though bitterly opposed to the "Mormon" faith and people. Even those who made it their business to fabricate the vilest falsehoods, and to render them plausible by culling isolated passages from old sermons without the explanatory context, and have suffered no opportunity to escape them of vilifying and blackening the characters of the people, have remained among those whom they have thus persistently calumniated until the present day, without receiving the slightest personal injury. [^57]

ReformationHC135Of the third class of cases, viz., those that do not properly come within the category of alleged "blood atonement" cases, such as where a father or brother personally avenges the outraged chastity of a daughter or sister; or a wronged husband slays the despoiler of his domestic peace and home. Such cases are not peculiar to communities of Latter-day Saints in the United States, they are recognized as appeals to the "unwritten law of the land;" and trial juries quite generally in the United States refuse to convict, either for manslaughter or murder those who take the law into their own hands in such cases. Granting that the severity of the denunciations against violations of chastity and the purity of the home encouraged appeals to "the unwritten law," and hence that such appeals were made more frequently in Utah than elsewhere,—if they were more frequent than elswhere in western America—it still remains to be determined whether or not that is a reproach to the community, or a tribute to the high sense of honor, the virility, the strength, and the courage of the community's manhood. [^58]

ManifestoHC136But this whole question of "blood atonement," so much iterated and reiterated by anti-"Mormon" writers, is put at rest, so far as the church's relationship to it is concerned, by an official proclamation upon the subject, in addition to the divine instructions to the church already cited in this chapter. I give the title and formal introduction to the proclamation, and so much of the document as deals with the subject in hand, and the signatures:

ManifestoHCMANIFESTO OF THE PRESIDENCY AND APOSTLES

ManifestoHC"SALT LAKE CITY, Dec. 12th, 1889.

ManifestoHC136To Whom It May Concern:

ManifestoHC136In consequence of gross misrepresentations of the doctrines, aims and practices of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, commonly called the 'Mormon' church, which have been promulgated for years, and have recently been revived for political purposes and to prevent all aliens, otherwise qualified, who are members of the 'Mormon' church from acquiring citizenship, we deem it proper on behalf of said church to publicly deny these calumnies and enter our protest against them.

ManifestoHC136We solemnly make the following declarations, viz.:

ManifestoHC136That this church views the shedding of human blood with the utmost abhorrence. That we regard the killing of a human being, except in conformity with the civil law, as a capital crime, which should be punished by shedding the blood of the criminal after a public trial before a legally constituted court of the land. * * *

ManifestoHC136We denounce as entirely untrue the allegation which has been made, that our church favors or believes in the killing of persons who leave the church or apostatize from its doctrines. We would view a punishment of this character for such an act with the utmost horror; it is abhorrent to us and is in direct opposition to the fundamental principles of our creed.

ManifestoHC136The revelations of God to this church make death the penalty of capital crime, and require that offenders against life and property shall be delivered up and tried by the laws of the land.

ManifestoHCWe declare that no bishop's or other court in this church claims or exercises civil or judicial functions, or the right to supercede, annul or modify a judgment of any civil court. Such courts, while established to regulate Christian conduct, are purely ecclesiastical, and their punitive powers go no further than the suspension or excommunication of members from church fellowship. * * *

137[Signed]:

137"WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH,

137Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

137LORENZO SNOW, GEORGE TEASDALE,

137FRANKLIN D. RICHARDS, HEBER J. GRANT,

137BRIGHAM YOUNG, JOHN W. TAYLOR,

137MOSES THATCHER, W. W. MERRILL,

137FRANCIS M. LYMAN, A. H. LUND,

137JOHN HENRY SMITH, ABRAHAM H. CANNON,

137Members of the Council of the Apostles.

137JOHN W. YOUNG, DANIEL H. WELLS, Counselors." [^59]

NOTE

THE FAST DAY OF THE CHURCH

The fast day mentioned in the regular text of this History, usually extends from the evening of Saturday—the day of preparation for the Lord's day—to the afternoon of Sunday. Special services are held upon that day, the "fast day meeting, when right of speaking briefly,—usually in praise of God for his providences, or in testimony of the truth, or praying, or of singing, is granted to all present. And at this meeting the saints are admonished to remember the poor and contribute means, food or money, for their benefit; which in value should at least equal the amount saved by the person or family so fasting." * * * "All such funds," says the instructions to the church, "should be applied exclusively for the purpose of assisting the worthy poor as, in the judgment of the bishopric, may be necessary." The limitation of the charity to the "worthy poor," is made in order not to foster the vicious in preying upon the industrious, and to prevent the creation of a pauper class. It is no part of the church's polity to burden the industrious with the wilfully idle, the law is that "the idler shall not eat the bread, nor wear the garments of the laborer." [^60] Even in the cases of the "worthy poor," "who," says the instructions of the church in directing the uses of the fast charity, "should always have our sympathy and aid," it is suggested that "whereever a person drawing assistance is able to do something towards his or her support, however small, the bishopric should endeavor to provide such employment suited to their capacity and condition."

The possibilities of this fast provision is tremendous. It requires giving up two meals in a month and consecrating what would otherwise be consumed to the charity proposed. It is an act in which all may equally participate; and in their sacrifice be equal. And what is better yet, those who may have never felt the gnawing and the weakness from hunger before,—especially the children of the rich—by this means may be given the experience with each recurring month, and thus be put into sharper sympathetic relations with their less fortunate fellow Christians and fellow citizens than could otherwise exist. Suppose such a plan was faithfully carried out in the city of New York—all responding to it as a Christian duty—it would provide ample means to feed and clothe and lodge the worthy poor of the city; the cry of hunger need not ascend into the ears of God who has provided in his earth an abundance for all. The same would be true of our nation if it became a national institution in the land. It would constitute a permanent resource, an emergency fund, from which could be instantly met the requirements of such calamities as overtake our land at times by fire and flood, by tempest and earthquake, by famine and pestilence in which all would participate equally by an equal sacrifice. And what would result from a great city, or of a nation adopting such a noble means of charity, would equally result from all nations adopting it—it has in it the elements of a noble, world-wide charity, sufficient to the constantly recurring needs of the worthy poor, and the unavoidable calamities which intermittently visit every nation and people.

Footnotes

"I argue that in this territory it is a principle of mountain common law that no man can seduce the wife of another without endangering his own life. * * * What is natural justice with this people? Does a civil suit for damages answer the purpose, not with an isolated individual, but with this whole community? No! It does not! The principle, the only one that beats and throbs through the heart of the entire population of this territory, is simply this: The man who seduces his neighbor's wife must die, and her nearest relative must kill him! * * * If Howard Egan did kill James Monroe, it was in accordance with the established principles of justice known in these mountains. That the people of this territory would have regarded him [Egan] as an accessory to the crimes of that creature [Monroe], had he not done it, is also a plain case. Every man knew the style of old Israel, that the nearest relation would be at his heels to fulfill the requirements of justice." (Deseret News for Nov. 15, 1851). Judge Snow in his charge to the jury said: "We have no right to punish a person for a real or imaginary wrong, except with the authority of law. The safety of ourselves individually, and of society, depends on the correct and faithful administration of good and wholesome laws. No one ought to be punished unless that act has been declared to be penal by the law of the land, and the punishment directed; nor until he has had an opportunity of having a fair and impartial trial; for, peradventure, he may not be guilty as alleged against him." (Ibid). This instruction, however correct and formal, was vain, as such instructions have quite generally been in the United States, and especially in the western part of that country. The jury's verdict in the above case was "not guilty."

---
Notas:
[^1] This "gentleman friend," according to Mrs. Stenhouse, was Eli B. Kelsey, Tell it All: The Story of a Life's Experience in Mormonism, by Mrs. T. B. H. Stenhouse, 1878, p. 325. Mr. Kelsey was an apostate "Mormon;" as was also Mrs. Stenhouse and her book, an anti-"Mormon" book.
[^2] Mr. Jacob Forney, who succeeded Brigham Young as Indian agent for the territory of Utah, reports that they had 600 head of cattle, 30 head of horses and mules. In Waite's Mormon Prophet, though upon what authority is not stated, that author puts the number of cattle at 800 head, 60 horses and mules, 40 wagons and 150 emigrants (pp. 65, 66). Forney in a letter to the commissioner of Indian affairs at Washington dated from Provo, March, 1859, estimated that $30,000 worth of property was distributed, after the massacre, "among the leading church authorities;" an estimate in the one case, and an unwarranted assumption in the other. (Senate Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Sess., ii, No. 42). Cradlebaugh estimated the value of the company's property at from $60,000 to $70,000. Beadle, quoting Dr. Brewer of the United States army, who saw this train at O'Fallon's Bluff on the Platte, on the 11th of June confirms Stenhouse's account as to the ease and leisure with which the company traveled, referring to it as "probably the finest train that had ever crossed the plains," and that there seemed to be "about forty heads of families" (Life in Utah, p. 179). Major Carleton confirms the party being a wealthy one. "This train," he remarks, "was undoubtedly a very rich one. It is said the emigrants had nearly 900 head of fine cattle, many horses and mules, and one fine stallion valued at $2,000; that they had a great deal of ready money besides." (Carleton's Report to Major W. W. Mackall from Mountain Meadows, May 25th, 1859, Hand Book of Mormonism, pp. 67-69).
[^3] Tell It All, Mrs. Stenhouse, p. 325.
[^4] The Rocky Mountain Saints, Stenhouse. Stenhouse was an apostate "Mormon" and his book anti-"Mormon."
[^5] Vol. lv, p. 345. See Bancroft's History of Utah, pp. 544-5, note 3.
[^6] Brigham Young's Deposition, read and accepted in evidence at John D. Lee's second trial, September, 1876.
[^7] See Mountain Meadows Massacre, p. 7, by Elder (later in the apostles' quorum and counselor in the first presidency) Chas. W. Penrose, 1884, p. 7; also Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 547; also Tullidge in Millennial Star, vol. xxxix, p. 785; see also Interview with President Brigham Young, in New York Herald of May 6th, 1877, copied into Deseret News of May 12, 1877. The interview is a very long one, and important for the data it contains as to conditions in Utah at the time of the massacre.
[^8] This, however, may have been mere bravado, as there is no evidence beyond their reported boasts that they were connected with those events, though, in addition to the above statement, both Laban Morrill and Joel White testified that the emigrants were alleged to have boasted that they had "killed old Joe Smith." (See the testimony of Morrill and White at second trial of John D. Lee, September, 1876). Bancroft quotes Lee as saying that the Arkansas emigrants had publicly boasted that they "had the very pistol with which the Prophet Joseph Smith was murdered and had threatened to kill Brigham Young and all the apostles." Lee represents Isaac C. Haight as charging the emigrants with even more serious offenses such as "that they had insulted, outraged and ravished many of the Mormon women; that they had burned fences and destroyed growing crops; that at many points on the road they had poisoned the water springs; that it was their intention to return from California with soldiers as soon as possible and they would then desolate the land and kill every G—d—ed Mormon, man, woman and child, that they could find in Utah," etc., etc. (See Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 549, note. Mormonism Unveiled, Lee's Confession, pp. 218-219). It should be remembered, however, that John D. Lee in his confession was seeking excuses for his own atrocious deeds.
[^9] It must be remembered by the reader that at this time—summer of 1857—a force of United States troops were en route for Utah to suppress a supposed rebellion against federal authority in Utah; and it was the coming of these troops the emigrants referred to, and whom they threatened to reinforce by joining those troops that were expected from the southwest over Fremont's trail, to form a juncture with the eastern force in demonstration against the "Mormons."
[^10] Rocky Mountain Saints, pp. 432-3. Though Stenhouse here quotes an anonymous writer, "Argus," in the Corinne Reporter, a Gentile paper, published at the town of Corinne, about fifty miles north of Salt Lake City, yet Stenhouse vouches for him, knows who he is and holds that the "Open Letter" of "Argus" to Brigham Young was written by one of such standing as to make it worthy to be admitted into a serious history, (The Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 430, note. See also for alleged treatment of these emigrants by settlers, letter of Jas. H. Carleton, brevet major first dragoons, U. S. A., from Mountain Meadows encampment, May 25, 1859, Hand Book of Mormonism, pp. 67-69, anti-"Mormon," a compilation of miscellaneous documents).
[^11] See chapter xcix.
[^12] See Deposition of Brigham Young, received as evidence in the second trial of John D. Lee, at Beaver, Sept., 1876, Court Record of the trial; also affidavit of Geo. A. Smith. (Ibid). These documents are also to be found in Mormonism Unveiled, where the Court Record of the second trial of John D. Lee is given in large part, chapters xxi, xxii, and xxiii.
[^13] "What had they [the Arkansas emigrants] done * * * that a courier should be sent ahead of them bearing your [Governor Young's] written instructions to the Mormons, on said company's line of travel to have no dealing or intercourse with them; thus compelling [condemning (?)] them to almost certain starvation on the deserts." ("Argus," quoted by Stenhouse, Rocky Mountain Saints, pp. 431-2-3).
[^14] See Smith's affidavit, second trial of Lee. "Deponent further saith, that as an elder in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, he preached several times on his way south, and also on his return, and tried to impress upon the minds of the people the necessity of great care as to their grain crops, as all crops had been short for several years previous to 1857, and many of the people were reduced to actual want, and were suffering for the necessaries of life.
[^15] Affidavit, Brigham Young at Lee's first and also second trial, Court Record; also Deseret News, for 4th Aug., 1875, where the deposition is given at length. This deposition was presented at both the first and second trial of Lee, but was only admitted at the second trial.
[^16] Court Record, Lee's first trial, testimony of Jesse N. Smith, Salt Lake Tribune report of trial, pp. 33-34. Deseret News, August 4th, 1875.
[^17] Ibid. Silas Smith was equally prominent, with his brother, in both the civic life of the territory of Utah, and in the ecclesiastical life of the church. Elected to the territorial legislature in 1859, he served almost continuously in the house and council for twenty years, much of which time he was bishop of Paragoonah. In 1879 he led a party of Pioneer settlers into what is now called San Juan county, southeastern Utah, and founded the city of Bluff and other settlements. Subsequently he removed to San Luis valley, Conejos county, Colorado, where a number of Latter-day Saint settlements were being organized into a stake of Zion, of which he was made the president; and in which capacity and for the colonists he purchased some 20,000 acres of land at public sales, and secured titles for the people, and established them in prosperous settlements in the state of Colorado.
[^18] Elisha Hoops, who was a member of the Smith party when at Corn Creek, testified at the first Lee trial that he heard the inquiry respecting the likelihood of the Indians eating the dead ox; and also testified that just as the party he was with was starting out in the morning, he saw a German doctor traveling with the Arkansas train stick a knife into the carcass of the dead ox in question in three places and pour something in the cuts out of a vial. (See Court Record, testimony of Elisha Hoops; also Deseret News of Aug. 4, 1875; see also a statement of Historian George A. Smith under the title Account of the Mountain Meadows Massacre, History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 25th of Nov., 1864, pp. 879-883). On the other hand it is alleged that the poisoning of dead cattle resulted from their having eaten a poisonous weed that grows in southern Utah. Jacob Forney, who succeeded Brigham Young as Indian agent for the territory, makes this as an explanation in his report to the government and cites the case of the ox of Mr. Ray (referred to by Geo. A. Smith in this chapter as being killed by drinking from the springs poisoned by the emigrants) as being so killed while the Arkansas emigrants were in the neighborhood of Corn Creek (Senate Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, ii, No. 42, p. 76. Forney's Report was made in September, 1859). It is further asked what motive the Arkansas party could have for thus inviting the hostility of the Indians. The only answer, if any, would be the general contempt in which western emigrants held the Indians, the lightness in which they regarded the act of taking their lives, culminating in that most wretched of all aphorisms of the mountains and the plains—"The only good Indian is a dead one."
[^19] Deseret News, Aug. 4, 1875.
[^20] There is some conflict in dates as to the time of the arrival of the emigrants at the Meadows, and also as to the date on which the massacre occurred. For instance, "Argus," whom Stenhouse quotes, places the time of the massacre on the 15th of September, instead of the 11th. (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 431). And Josiah F. Gibbs, author of Lights and Shadows of Mormonism, places the first attack upon the emigrants on the 19th of September (p. 223), saying, however, that the dates "are somewhat mixed."
[^21] Court Record, second trial of John D. Lee, testimony of Laban Morrill.
[^22] The message he was to carry was read to Haslem by Isaac C. Haight, then sealed up. The messenger carefully concealed it upon his person and began his journey. (Haslem's affidavit, Mountain Meadows Massacre, Penrose, p. 86).
[^23] See also affidavit of Haslem given 12th of January, 1885, before Joseph Howell, notary public at Wellsville, Utah. Mr. Howell later was representative to congress from the state of Utah. The testimony of Haslem is not given at length in the court proceedings in the second trial of Lee, but a synopsis only. See the court proceedings as reported in Mormonism Unveiled, compiled and edited by Lee's counsel, William W. Bishop, containing Lee's alleged confession and a full account of his second trial. Haslem's testimony as recounted there stands as follows: "James Haslem testified that he went as a messenger from Haight to Brigham Young, and that Brigham Young sent back word that 'those men must be protected and allowed to go in peace.' He got back with the message Sunday after the massacre, and reported to Haight, who said, 'It is too late.'" (Mormonism Unveiled, pp. 322-3). In the Deseret News daily report of the trial while in progress, the synopsis of Haslem's testimony was more extended and contained the words to be used presently in the text. In consequence of the detailed testimony of Mr. Haslem not being given in full in the Court Record, an attorney, S. A. Kenner, Esq., took his testimony in the form of questions and answers on the aforesaid 12th day of January, 1885, as above cited. The testimony will be found in extenso as a Supplement to The Mountain Meadows Massacre, by Charles W. Penrose, 1884.
[^24] Report of Lee trial, while it was in progress, Deseret News of Sept. 20th, 1876. Also Haslem affidavit, Supplement to Penrose's Mountain Meadows Massacre, pp. 94, 95. Haslem also said he knew the contents of the written answer. (News report, Ibid).
[^25] Church Business Letter Book, No. 3, above copied from original impression.
[^26] Haslem's testimony, Mountain Meadows Massacre, Supplement, p. 95. Haslem's ride stands among the foremost of such achievements. He had ridden over six hundred miles in six days, and largely through a wilderness country.
[^27] See Haslem's affidavit, Ibid, p. 102. Joel White and Philip Klingensmith were entrusted with this message to Pinto. En route they met, near Cedar City, and going towards it, John D. Lee. They acquainted him with the nature of their mission and message, to which Lee answered: "I have something to say about that." (Testimony of Klingensmith, at Lee's first trial, July, 1875, Court Record; and testimony of Joel White at Lee's second trial, Court Record, September, 1876).
[^28] Lee says the first attack was made on Tuesday morning. (Confession, Mormonism Unveiled, p. 226). Others place it on Monday morning, Sept. 7th. See Linn's Story of the Mormons, p. 521; Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 550).
[^29] The following statement is from the report of Hon. George A. Smith, to Brigham Young, on Aug. 17, 1858: "When the attack was made on the emigrant party, the Indians sent out runners to the various bands in every direction, to gather additional help. The news reached the settlement at Cedar through that means. Ahwonup, the Piede chief at Parowan, received an invitation to join the foray against the emigrants. He went to Colonel Dame to tell him what he was going to do, upon which the colonel succeeded in inducing him and the most of his warriors to abandon the project." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 9th Sept., 1857, pp. 481-9).
[^30] Lee's Confession, Mormonism Unveiled, p. 229.
[^31] Lee's Confession, Mormonism Unveiled, p. 235; also Lee's second trial, Court Record, testimony of Jacob Hamblin. Lee states that two men left the camp, Hamblin reports that Lee told him that there were three, and that two escaped. (Ibid).
[^32] Nearly all anti-"Mormon" writers mentions as motive for "Mormon" bitterness, or "animus" against the Arkansas company, the murder of Elder Parley P. Pratt in Van Buren county, Arkansas, and name revenge for his death as a motive for the crime at Mountain Meadows, Stenhouse viciously and wickedly saying, in this connection, that "the Indian is not the only human being who fails to discriminate between the innocent and the guilty." (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 428). And even Bancroft attributes "Mormon" "disfavor" for the Arkansas company to "the murder of a well-beloved apostle of the Mormon church." (History of Utah, p. 545). Yet there is not a scintilla of evidence that justifies in the remotest manner any such suggestion, much less any such conclusion. Elder Pratt was killed on the 13th of May, near the line, between Indian territory and the state of Arkansas, and on which side of it is not quite certain, and while news of his death had reached Salt Lake City before the departure southward of the Arkansas company, no particulars of that sad event were known in Utah, as the eastern mail service between Independence and Salt Lake City had been suspended for several months; and there were no feelings of revenge existing in Utah against Arkansas citizens on account of the Pratt murder. Equally vain are the attempts to connect the Mountain Meadows tragedy with alleged threats made by Brigham Young in his conversation with Captain Van Vliet, and with which Bancroft's chapter on the massacre opens. In that conversation Brigham Young said: "If the government persists in sending an army to destroy us, in the name of the Lord, we shall conquer them. If they dare to force the issue, I shall not hold the Indians by the wrist any longer, for white men to shoot at them; they shall go ahead and do as they please. If the issue comes, you may tell the government to stop all emigration across this continent, for the Indians will kill all who attempt it." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 9th of September, 1857). This conversation is said by Bancroft to have occurred upon the 9th of September, two days later the massacre, over three hundred miles distant, took place. "In the absence of telegraph and railroads it would be impossible," Bancroft concedes, "to execute a deed three hundred miles away in two days." But as a matter of fact this Young-Van Vliet interview, in which the above statement occurs, took place on Sunday, the 13th of September, two days after the massacre at Mountain Meadows. (See Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry for 13th September, 1857). Brigham Young's words to Captain Van Vliet constituted a warning instead of a threat.
[^33] There is some conflict as to the number of men who escaped the first assault. Lee says three escaped, but Indians were put upon their trail and they overtook and killed them (Mormonism Unveiled, p. 244). Forney reports that three escaped, but they were overtaken and killed. (Senate Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, ii, No. 42, p. 89). Cradlebaugh says two escaped and fled to the desert, but were followed and finally overtaken and killed, one of them 150 miles from the Meadows. (Congressional Globe, Appendix, 37th Congress, 1862-3, p. 123). Burton condensing from official reports tells of three escaping from the first assault, but being taken and killed. (City of the Saints, p. 340, note).
[^34] See Bancroft's History of Utah, pp. 557-8, and Forney's Report in Senate Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, ii, No. 42, passim, Appendix, p. 123. Relative to the charge made by some anti-"Mormon" writers that the children were ill-cared for and poorly clad by the people who had charge of them in Utah, it is only necessary to quote Forney's report on this point: "It is proper to remark that when I obtained the children they were in a better condition than children generally in the settlements in which they lived." (Senate Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, ii, No. 42, pp. 87, 89). All the official reports deny the charge that the children were left in the custody of the Indians.
[^35] Letter of Major James H. Carleton to Major W. W. Mackall, assistant adjutant general, U. S. A., San Francisco, Cal., from Mountain Meadows, date of May 25, 1859, Hand Book of Mormonism, p. 67, et seq. "The property of the emigrants was taken to Cedar, where it was put up at public auction and sold." (Report of Captain R. P. Campbell to Major F. J. Porter, Senate Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, vol. ii, p. 208). Hon. George A. Smith's report to Brigham Young states concerning the conduct of the Indians in seizing upon the emigrant property that on the arrival of Colonel Haight at the Meadows he found "the Indians were pillaging and destroying the property, and driving off the cattle in every direction; each one endeavoring to secure to himself the most plunder, without respect to others. When they had secreted one back load in the hills, they returned and got another, thus continuing with the most unremitting energy till everything was cached." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1857, pp. 481-9).
[^36] Carleton's Report. Also Life in Utah, Beadle, p. 184, and Stenhouse in Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 452; and Cradlebaugh's speech, Congressional Globe, 37th Congress, 3rd Session, Appendix, p. 123.
[^37] Court Record, second Lee trial, Sept., 1876, Deposition of Brigham Young.
[^38] Heb. x:26-29.
[^39] Leviticus, xvii:11.
[^40] Heb., ix:22.
[^41] Not, however,—as I have already urged in preceding pages—by the church; certainly not by individuals taking it upon themselves to be the ministers of God's vengeance; for then they themselves would become murderers. "To me belongeth vengeance and recompense," saith the Lord (Deut., xxxii: 35). "Vengeance is mine; I will repay," saith the Lord (Rom., xii); and therefore must this matter of retribution for sin be left with God and those agencies that he shall ordain to encompass it. These, in part, are the secular governments in whose polities capital punishments are provided for some of the more heinous crimes against society and government, such as murder in the first degree, etc. Therefore the church is commanded to give up those who kill to be dealt with according to the law of the land. And Latter-day Saints believe that where secular government prescribes capital punishment it is better that such form of execution be adopted as will shed the blood of the criminal; hence in Utah, when the Latter-day Saints, in their capacity as citizens of the state have made the laws, condemned criminals, subject to capital punishment, are permitted to choose their mode of execution either by being hung or shot, the latter mode, of course, resulting in the shedding of their blood, thus meeting the requirements of the law of God as well as the law of the state. It is quite erroneously supposed that this idea had its origin among Latter-day Saints with Brigham Young. That, however, is not the case. In the minutes of the Nauvoo city council for March 4th, 1843, occurs the following statement by Joseph Smith: "In debate, George A. Smith said imprisonment was better than hanging. I replied I was opposed to hanging, even if a man kill another, I will shoot him, [this does not mean that he would do so personally; see context of speech], or cut off his head, spill his blood on the ground, and let the smoke thereof ascend up to God; and if ever I have the privilege of making a law on that subject, I will have it so." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, p. 296).
[^42] I Cor., v:1-5.
[^43] 43. Discourse Sept. 21st, 1856, Deseret News of Oct. 1st, 1856; also Journal of Discourses, vol. iv, p. 53.
[^44] 44. The passages that warrant the remarks of the text are to be found in a discourse of Jedediah M. Grant on March 12th, 1854, Deseret News, July 27th, 1854; also a discourse on the 21st of September, 1856, Journal of Discourses, vol. iv, p. 49, et seq. Also a discourse delivered by Brigham Young on Feb. 8th, 1857. Journal of Discourses, vol. pp. 219-220.
[^45] 45. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xlii:18, 19, 79.
[^46] 46. Ibid, verses 84-86.
[^47] 47. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxiii. For fuller exposition see this History, ch. xxi.
[^48] 48. Discourse of Feb. 8th, 1857, Journal of Discourses, vol. iv, p. 220.
[^49] 49. I Cor., v:3-5.
[^50] 50. Journal of Discourses, vol. iv, p. 219.
[^51] 51. See Mormonism Unveiled, Life and Confession of John D. Lee, especially ch. xix. This book—M. E. Mason, publisher, St. Louis, Mo., 1891—is edited by Wm. W. Bishop, Lee's attorney, at his second trial, 1876.
[^52] 52. Brigham's Destroying Angel, Life, Confession and Startling Disclosures of Bill Hickman, the 'Danite Chief' of Utah, edited by J. H. Beadle, 1870. Beadle is also the author of Life in Utah; Mysteries and Crimes of Mormonism, etc., etc., ad nauseam.
[^53] 53. Speaking of such charges the late President John Taylor, in a series of five letters to the Deseret News in which he was counseling the people of Utah to patience in the midst of a judicial crusade that gave entertainment of charges made by such characters as are referred to in the text, said: "But they are accusing some of our best and most honorable men of murder! What of that? Who have they suborned as their accusers? They themselves call them by the mild name of assassins—these are their fellow-pirates with whom they hob-nob and associate." (Life of John Taylor, Roberts, p. 316. The series of Taylor's Letters will be found in Deseret News, impressions of Oct. 16, 20, and 30; and Nov. 6 and 15, 1871).
[^54] 54. See the long communication of an anonymous writer to Stenhouse, Rocky Mountain Saints, detailing long list of crimes of the "Reformation" period, ch. xxxvi, et passim, and more especial in his chapter on the Mountain Meadows Massacre, ch. xliii.
[^55] 55. See Rocky Mountain Saints, chapters vi, viii, x, xii.
[^56] 56. The Mormon Problem, Rev. C. P. Lyford, 1886. More especially his four chapters constituting the Appendix of his book.
[^57] 57. The History of the Mormons: Their Persecutions and Travels, a brochure of 20 pages by the late George Q. Cannon, 1891, p. 17.
[^58] 58. All such cases as these, however, are charged up to "blood atonement" by anti-"Mormon" writers. (See all the authorities cited in notes 50 to 59 inclusive). In the case of the United States vs. Howard Egan for the murder of James Monroe, appeal to "the unwritten law" was first reviewed before a court in Utah, 1851. Briefly stated the facts in the case were that Monroe seduced the wife of Egan while the husband was absent in California; an illigitimate child was born; returning to his home Egan sought out its despoiler, and shot him to death. For this he was arraigned before Hon. Z. Snow, judge of the first judicial district court of the United States for the territory of Utah. Counsel for the defense pleaded:
[^59] 59. The History of the Mormons, by the late President Geo. Q. Cannon, a brochure, 1891, pp. 17, 18. The omitted parts between the first marks of elipsis above may be found in a previous quotation from the document in this chapter, see note 57.
[^60] 60. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xlii.
