B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

181CHAPTER CII

181THE "UTAH WAR" PERIOD: AGITATION AGAINST THE REAPPOINTMENT OF BRIGHAM YOUNG FOR GOVERNOR—COLONEL STEPTOE

181WE have now to treat of political matters, and their relationship to that event which is variously known in Latter-day Saint Church annals as "The Utah War;" or "The Echo Canon War," and by one pro-"Mormon" writer (Tullidge) as "Buchanan's Blunder." In the United States government official reports it is most frequently referred to as "The Utah Expedition;" though the military force is often referred to in official documents as "The Army for Utah." Anti-"Mormon" writers usually refer to the event as "The Mormon War." (Linn, Waite, et al), and one (Waite) quotes the saints as calling it—though I have found no confirmation of the alleged quotation—"Buchanan's Crusade."

ALLEGED PURPOSES OF THE "WAR"

The "war," if so it may be designated, was waged on the part of the general government for the maintenance of the supremacy of the federal authority in the territory of Utah, which Buchanan's administration had been led to believe, or feigned to believe, was questioned in Utah; and against which, it was also led to believe, albeit on insufficient grounds, a substantial rebellion existed. On the part of the Latter-day Saints, then constituting practically the whole population of the territory, the "war" was waged, in defense of the American principle of the right of local self-government, of community self-preservation, though the resistance to the federal manifestation of force may not have been described at the time by such political terms. The narrative as it develops, however, will plainly demonstrate the accuracy of the above statement.

GROUNDS OF OPPOSITION AGAINST GOVERNOR YOUNG

Brigham Young's first term as governor of Utah would expire in 1854. Naturally there was a strong desire in the territory for his reappointment, and Dr. Bernhisel at Washington was urging it to the extent of his ability, aided by such friends as he could bring to his support. Meantime, however, a very widespread and bitter prejudice had arisen against the saints in Utah owing to the report of the "run-a-way officials"—Brocchus, Brandebury, Harris and Day—followed, as it had been, by the official announcement of the church respecting the doctrine and practice of plural marriage. There was, therefore, a strong feeling throughout the country that a non-"Mormon" should be appointed governor of Utah, together with new judges, to be accompanied by a sufficient military force to enable them to "execute the laws of congress." [^1]

Political and Legal AffairsHC182"I deeply regret to inform you," wrote Delegate Bernhisel to Franklin D. Richards, "that the president finally declined to reappoint Governor Young to the office he now holds. Lieutenant Steptoe is the appointee." "The colonel," he adds, "sustains a high character here [i. e. in Washington], and numbers among his friends the honorable secretary of war [Jefferson Davis]. Since Governor Young's reappointment could not be secured, which is a source of profound regret to us all, I know of no one who, I suppose, would be more acceptable than Colonel Steptoe, but his friends here believe he will not accept." [^2]

Political and Legal AffairsHCColonel E. J. Steptoe and his command arrived in Salt Lake valley on the 31st of August, 1854. The command consisted of two companies of artillery and one of infantry, numbering about 175 soldiers, and about 150 employees or quartermaster's men, 100 wagons, and 1,000 head of horses and mules. Ostensibly the command was en route for California. Bancroft states that Colonel Steptoe had been given orders "to arrest and bring to trial the perpetrators of the Gunnison massacre," [^3] and we have already seen that he was present with part of his command at the trial and the conviction of some of the Indians engaged in that lamentable affair. It is also possible, however, that Steptoe's command came in response to the sentiment and the agitation in the east noted in Orson Spencer's communication to which reference has been made. At any rate the colonel of the command was the administration's appointee for the office of governor of the territory, and he was so soon followed by the other appointees of the Pierce administration, [^4] that the coming of the military force could easily have been made to serve the purpose of the eastern demand for such a thing. Fortunately, however, Colonel Steptoe seems to have judged that there was no occasion for such a turn to affairs; but on the contrary seemed very well pleased with conditions as he found them in Utah; so well, in fact, that he never presented his credentials if he brought them with him, and never claimed the office to which he had been appointed. On the contrary he joined with all the other officers of his command, with all the federal appointees, and all the leading non-"Mormon" merchants of Salt Lake City, in asking that Brigham Young be reappointed governor of the territory and superintendent of Indian affairs, and the following petition was addressed to President Franklin Pierce:

PETITION

Political and Legal AffairsHC"To His Excellency Franklin Pierce, President of the United States:

Political and Legal AffairsHCYour petitioners would respectfully represent, that whereas Governor Brigham Young possesses the entire confidence of the people of this territory, without distinction of party or sect; and from personal acquaintance, and social intercourse, we find him to be a firm supporter of the Constitution and laws of the United States, and a tried pillar of republican institutions; and having repeatedly listened to his remarks, in private as well as in public assemblies, do know he is the warm friend and able supporter of constitutional liberty, the rumors published in the states to the contrary notwithstanding; and having canvassed to our satisfaction, his doings as governor and superintendent of Indian affairs, and also the disposition of the appropriations for public buildings for the territory, we do most cordially and cheerfully represent that the same has [been] expended to the best interest of the nation; and, whereas, his reappointment would better subserve the territorial interest than the appointment of any other man, and would meet with the gratitude of the entire inhabitants of the territory, and his removal would cause the deepest feelings of sorrow and regret; and it being our unqualified opinion based upon the personal acquaintance which we have formed with Governor Young, and from our observation of the results of his influence and administration in this territory, that he possesses in an eminent degree every qualification necessary for the discharge of his official duties and unquestioned integrity and ability, that he is the most suitable person that can be selected for that office.

Political and Legal AffairsHC184We therefore take great pleasure in recommending him to your favorable consideration and do earnestly request his reappointment as governor and superintendent of Indian affairs for this territory." [^5]

Political and Legal AffairsHC185The foregoing petition was drawn up and signed on the 30th of December. Somewhat earlier in the month, the 21st, the territorial legislature unanimously memorialized the president and the United States senate to the same effect, representing that the petitioners and "their constituents unanimously wish and fervently desire the reappointment of his excellency, Brigham Young." [^6]

STRONG FOR THE RIGHTS OF LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT

Political and Legal AffairsHCWhile the reappointment of Governor Young was in suspense, and it was thought likely that some one else, and that some one else not to the people's liking, would be appointed, there were some rather vigorous things said by leading men of the territory by way of protest in relation to an administration in a republican government that would appoint officers in a territory without regard to the wishes of the people. Brigham Young was among those who assailed this injustice and this un-American principle, and as early as June, 1853, and again in February, 1855, he asserted his intention to reprove United States officers who imposed upon the people, as he had in the case of Judge Brocchus. [^7] In this connection nearly every non-"Mormon" writer has done Brigham Young a great injustice in representing that he expressed his determination to be governor of Utah in defiance of the federal appointing power. [^8] The first passage on which the garbling process is used and the injustice done is in respect of a statement made by Brigham Young in June, 1853:

Political and Legal AffairsHC"We have got a territorial government, and I am and will be the governor, and no power can hinder it until the Lord Almighty says, 'Brigham, you need not be governor any longer,' and then I am willing to yield to another." [^9]

Political and Legal AffairsHC186This, however, should be read in connection with a preceding paragraph in the discourse, to wit:

Political and Legal AffairsHC186"As for this people, and as for the disturbances and reports of the returned judges (Brandebury and Brocchus); as for the say so of one nation, or of all the nations upon the earth, I am entirely unconcerned. * * * but I hope one thing concerning this kingdom of God, which is established upon the earth [i. e, meaning here the Church of the Latter-day Saints] that they will turn neither to the right nor to the left, but maintain continually a steady, unslackened pace to build up the cause of truth: and let small men, or large men, officers of states, emperors, kings or beggars, say or do what they please, it is all the same to the Almighty. The king upon his throne, the president in his chair, the judges upon the bench, and the beggar in the street, are all overruled in their actions by the Almighty God of heaven and earth. Who can successfully fight against him?"

MISREPRESENTATION OF GOVERNOR YOUNG'S ATTITUDE

Political and Legal AffairsHCStrong in this conviction he also said in this same discourse—"I have no fears whatever of Franklin Pierce excusing me from office, and saying that another man shall be the governor of this territory." And then again—"I care not what may come, I will do the work the Lord has appointed unto me; you do the same and fear not, for the Lord manages the ship of Zion, and on any other ship I do not wish to be." [^10]

Political and Legal AffairsHC186The press of the United States having made much of the garbled reports of this discourse sent to the east by unconscionable scribblers, President Young in February, 1855, made the following comment both upon the fact of the misrepresentations and of his former remarks:

Political and Legal AffairsHC"The newspapers are teeming with statements that I said, 'President Pierce and all hell could not remove me from office.' I will tell you what I did say, and what I now say; the Lord reigns and rules in the armies of the heavens, and does his pleasure among the inhabitants of the earth. He sets up a kingdom here, and pulls down another there at his pleasure. He walks in the midst of the people, and they know it not. He makes kings, presidents, and governors at his pleasure; hence I conclude that I shall be governor of Utah territory, just as long as he wants me to be: and for that time, neither the president of the United States, nor any other power, can prevent it. Then, brethren and sisters, be not worried about my being dismissed from office; for when the president appoints another man to be governor of Utah territory, you may acknowledge that the Lord has done it, for we should acknowledge his hand in all things. All people are in the hands of the Almighty, and he governs and controls them, though they cannot perceive, neither do they acknowledge, his handy work. He exalts the president to be the head of the nation, and places kings upon their thrones. There is not a man that escapes his cognizance, and he brings forth his purposes in the latter days." [^11]

Political and Legal AffairsHC187With this light thrown upon the passage under question it is very clear that Brigham Young was not asserting any defiance of the federal appointing power at Washington, but merely acknowledging the hand of God in the affairs of men and of states; and was expressing his confidence that he would remain in his place as governor as long as the Lord sought proper to sustain him there; not, I believe, an attitude of mind that does great violence to common theistic notions or sentiments.

COLONEL STEPTOE'S STANDING IN UTAH

Political and Legal AffairsHCRelative to Colonel Steptoe and his reported appointment as governor of Utah, Brigham Young, while holding that "the people should have officers of their own choice," said of Colonel Steptoe:

Political and Legal AffairsHC"If the gallant gentleman who is now in our midst had received the commission of governor of this territory, as was reported, and had accepted it, I would have taken off my hat and honored the appointment; and this people would have been just as passive and submissive to him as they could be to me. That I will warrant and vouch for. If they wish to send a governor here, and he is a gentleman, like the one I referred to, every heart would say, 'Thank God, we have a man to stand at our head in a gubernatorial capacity; a man who has got a good heart, and is willing that we should enjoy the federal rights of the Constitution as well as himself.' I am with all such men, heart and hand. But for a man to come here and infringe upon my individual rights and privileges, and upon those of my brethren, will never meet my sanction, and I will scourge such an one until he leaves; I am after him. But I will, say, to the praise of the gallant gentleman referred to, if there was going to be a gentleman called upon to be our governor, there is not a man, out of the kingdom of God [i. e. the Latter-day Saints Church], that I would listen to sooner, and feel more confidence and cordiality towards, than to him. I wish this meed of praise could be awarded every officer in the government, but it cannot." [^12]

Political and Legal AffairsHC188It having been reported that Governor Young had been deposed and Colonel Steptoe appointed governor in his place, Elder Orson Hyde wrote the Deseret News:

Political and Legal AffairsHC188"So far as I am acquainted, there is no man in the territory, outside the church, who shares, more liberally, the respect and confidence of her citizens than the colonel. There are those, however, that are equally well respected.

Political and Legal AffairsHC188Colonel S. is not obliged to accept his appointment; and it remains to be seen whether he entertains a similar respect for popular sovereignty and the known wishes of the great mass of the citizens of the territory to that which they entertain for him." [^13]

Political and Legal AffairsHC188THE AMERICAN RIGHT OF "LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT"

Political and Legal AffairsHC188It was not to Colonel Steptoe, then, that objection was made by the people of Utah, but objection to the appointment of any person that was not the choice of the people. Previous to the publication of Hyde's comment the Deseret News editorially had said:

Political and Legal AffairsHC188"In a republican government so liberal, and professedly enlightened, as that of the United States, a person might reasonably expect to see the principle of 'popular sovereignty,' the basis upon which the whole political machinery is alleged to rest, carried out to the fullest extent; and not only each state, but also each territory be left to operate untrammeled so long as they kept within the bounds of the Constitution."

Political and Legal AffairsHC188In a later paragraph these reflections were indulged:

Political and Legal AffairsHC"It is not strange that our revolutionary fathers were more or less influenced by the precedents of the government whose yoke of 'taxation without representation' they had so recently thrown off; but it actually is strange that, in this boasted age of progression, the very principle against which our fathers so manfully struggled should be carried out towards the colonies. This is as entirely opposed to reason, justice, and the professed principles of freedom and 'popular sovereignty,' as it was in the days of the Revolution, and the perpetuity of so glaring an inconsistency can only be accounted for upon the traditionary influence, human weaknesses, delight in oppression, and love of power, even though unjustly obtained and exercised."

INCONGRUITIES OF TERRITORIAL GOVERNMENT

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe argument is then made that the territorial system in its practical effect amounts to taxation without representation, since the delegate from a territory to congress had no vote upon the raising or the distribution of the national revenue, which the people of a territory equally with the people of a state, pay; and the privilege of having a delegate in congress, but with no vote, amounts to little more than the privilege of petition and protest. Attention is called to the injustice of having their local legislation annulled by the national congress, [^14] in which matter the delegate had no vote. The un-Americanism of appointing officers to govern the people, rather than allowing the people to choose their own officers is pointed out. "This usuage," says the editorial, "is precisely such as Great Britain exercised towards the revolutionary colonies. All this is but cold shoulder treatment, and left handed kindness to those enterprising persons who go forth to redeem the unsettled wilds of our country; whereas a nation so wealthy, with such an extent of unoccupied domain, and withal so boastful of republicanism, should extend every possible encouragement to the permanent occupancy and improvement of new regions, and in lieu of fettering and discouraging by the arbitrary and tyrannical exercise of high-handed power, should break off every shackle, and guarantee the broadest exercise of the freedom that is consistent with the Constitution." [^15]

Political and Legal AffairsHC190Respecting the people of the territory and their fitness for self-government, and the improvements that might be made in the territorial system, the News writer said:

Political and Legal AffairsHC190"Who are the men who settle our territories, who make the first roads and bridges, open the first farms, build the first houses, and make the barren waste rejoice? They are the most energetic and enterprising of your citizens, and have been raised side by side with the residents of your states, to whom you vouchsafe the full and free rights of self-government, and a voice in your highest councils. And does the enterprise necessary to found a new settlement disqualify them for knowing their own wants, making their own laws and choosing their own officers? Shame on such an absurdity and a double shame on all who would put the weight of a feather upon the elastic step, and buoyant fortitude of those most loyal and intelligent Pioneers who go forth and amid hardships and privations to multiply upon American soil the happy firesides of American sons and daughters. What should be done by the parent government to foster the extending of the area of unalloyed freedom? Knock off the shackles which now bind the expansion of the full force of her territories, and to do this effectually and consistently, whenever they petition for it, and present a proper state Constitution, admit them into the Union as states, with privileges of sending at least one representative, and this, too, regardless of the number of their population.

Political and Legal AffairsHC190But if this too long a stride for the short steps of 'old usage,' and for 'the square rule of old say-so,' begin by allowing their delegates to vote as well as a voice, expunge the usurped authority to 'disapprove' their legislative inactments, and permit them to elect all of their own officers, except such as are also appointed in states, to carry out the policy and laws of the general government, and a person to look after the proper disbursement of such funds as congress should appropriate to assist the creeping child to speedily attain full stature.

Political and Legal AffairsHC190If this is still requiring too sudden and great expansion of the parchment skin of old 'tradition,' it does seem that the smallest amount of consistency would compel the appointing power to gratify the wishes of the people, by appointing officers of their own choice." [^16]

Political and Legal AffairsHC190One will look in vain for more cogent or stronger argument for the great American right of "local self-government" than is here set forth.

Political and Legal AffairsHCResponding to so unanimous a demand from all classes of people in the territory, including Colonel Steptoe and the officers of his command, President Pierce continued Brigham Young in office as governor of Utah. This may well be regarded as a victory for the people of Utah, a triumph for the principle of home rule, but the conflict between federal policy and the right of local self-government was by no means ended. It is next to appear in the judiciary department of the territorial government.

THE PEOPLES' RIGHT TO A LOCAL JUDICIARY

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe organic act of Utah passed by the national congress provided that the judiciary of the territory should be vested in a supreme court, district courts, probate courts, and justices of the peace. The supreme court was to consist of the chief justice and two associate justices, any two of whom constituted a quorum. The jurisdiction of the several courts provided for, both appellate and original, "and that of the probate courts, and of justices of the peace, shall be as limited by law;" with the proviso that justices of the peace should not have jurisdiction when the title to boundaries of land was in dispute, or where a debt or sum claimed in suit should exceed one hundred dollars; and provided also that the said supreme and district courts respectively should possess chancery as well as common law jurisdiction.

Political and Legal AffairsHCLeaving the jurisdiction of the several courts, except for the provisos named, to be "as limited by law," gave the general assembly of the territory its opportunity to secure for the probate courts which by the organic act the legislature was left to create and provide with officers, as wide a jurisdiction as possible. Circumstances lent themselves to such a movement. The retirement of Chief Justice Brandebury and Associate Justice Brocchus, left the territory, which had waited patiently for the machinery of government—and especially for the judiciary department—without a supreme court, and only one of the associate justices was left in the territory to transact the business belonging to the three district courts provided for in the organic act. The territory had been organized since Sept. 9th, 1850; nearly a year had elapsed before a sufficient number of the judges arrived to organize the courts; and then, before the system provided could be inaugurated, two of them left their posts, rendering that organization impossible, and leaving the territory without a judiciary except for such inadequate service as one associate justice could give. Under these circumstances, apart from any natural desire that the local legislators might have to enlarge the sphere of local self-government in the judiciary department, it is not remarkable that the general assembly did all it could to create a local judiciary that would meet the needs of the people and give something like stability to territorial judiciary affairs.

THE PROBATE COURT SYSTEM OF UTAH

Political and Legal AffairsHCAccordingly among the first measures enacted by the legislature of 1851-2—the first held under the organic act of the territory—was one in relation to the judiciary, the first section of which provided that "the district courts shall exercise original jurisdiction, both in civil and criminal cases, when not otherwise provided by law;" they were also to have a general supervision over all inferior courts to prevent and correct abuses, "where no other remedy is provided." Furthermore the act provided that "by the consent of the court and the parties, any person may be selected to act as judge for the trial of any particular cause or question; and while thus acting he shall possess all the powers of the district judge in the case." This to promote the local custom of settling difficulties by arbitration rather than by litigation; as also, doubtless, to enlarge the sphere of home rule by local officers as against government by federal appointees. In the same act, "with a view to the attainment of justice," the judiciary act proposed to dispense with all needless forms and to disregard all technical pleadings; "all technical forms of action and pleadings, are hereby abolished." This in the interest of direct and simple legal procedure—the cure for the oft insufferable "law's delay," and "the insolence of office."

Political and Legal AffairsHC193The judges of the probate courts—of which there was one in each county—were elected by the joint vote of the legislative assembly, but commissioned by the governor, to hold their office for the term of four years, and until their successors were elected and qualified. The probate courts, in addition to the usual jurisdiction of probating wills, the administration of the estates of deceased persons, the guardianship of minors, idiots, and insane persons, had power conferred upon them, to exercise in their respective counties, "original jurisdiction both civil and criminal, and as well in chancery as at common law, when not prohibited by legislative enactments;" and they were to be governed in all respects by the same general rules and regulations, as regards practice, as the district courts. Clerks and recorders were provided for these courts, with directions as to procedure and reports. Said courts were to be considered as always open, but provisions were made for four regular sessions each year. A prosecuting attorney was appointed in each organized county by the respective probate judges of said counties, whose term of office was for four years, unless sooner removed by the probate judge, and until his successor was appointed and qualified. It was made his duty "to attend to all legal business in the county, in which the territory is a party, and prosecute before the probate court of his county, all individuals accused of crimes."

Political and Legal AffairsHCA territorial marshal was also provided; to be elected by joint vote of both houses of the legislature; his term of office, four years—unless sooner removed by the legislature—and until his successor was elected and qualified. Power was granted to the marshal to appoint one or more deputies in each judicial district of the territory, whose term of office was to parallel that of the marshal, subject to removal at any time, however, by the marshal at his discretion. "It shall be the duty of the marshal, or any of his deputies, to execute all orders or processes of the supreme or district court, in all cases arising under the laws of the territory, and such other duties as the executive may direct, or may be required by law pertaining to the duties of his office." [^17] The office of attorney-general for the territory was created and elected in the same manner, for the same length of time and made amenable to the same authority, as the marshal—viz., the legislature. "It shall be the duty of the attorney-general," said the enactment, "to keep his office at the seat of government to attend to all legal business on the part of the territory, before the courts, where the territory is a party, and prosecute individuals accused of crime in the judicial district in which he kept his office, in cases arising under the laws of the territory, and such other duties as pertain to his office." Provision was made for the election of a "district attorney for each judicial district, (except for the one in which the attorney-general kept his office), elected in the same manner, for the same length of time, answerable to the same authority, and directed to discharge the same duties, in the same manner, under the same limitations, in their respective districts as the attorney-general in the district in which his office was located. [^18]

Political and Legal AffairsHC194These several enactments limited, as it was doubtless the intention of the legislators to limit, the United States supreme and district courts to the transaction of such legal business as related to, and that came solely under, the jurisdiction of the laws of the United States operative within the territory, and such appellate jurisdiction as the local legislators were bound to recognize.

LOCAL LEGISLATION CONFESSEDLY UNUSUAL, BUT—

Political and Legal AffairsHCUndoubtedly such legislation was unusual. But if the legislation was unusual, were not the conditions to be met unusual for Americans? And did not those conditions justify the legislation, both on account of the practical abdication of the federal judiciary, and the uncertainty of their remaining at their respective posts of duty in the future? But more than all was not this legislation justified upon the right of an American community to exercise the largest possible measure of home rule consistent with the several provisions of the Constitution bearing upon the distribution and reservation of political power as related to government?

Political and Legal AffairsHC195"Judge [Leonidas] Shaver, one of the best of the jurists," says Captain Burton, "tacitly acknowledged the jurisdiction of the probate courts;" that is, as established by the legislation here considered; and Judge Kinney the chief justice of the territory, under the appointment of President Pierce, asserted the legality of their jurisdiction in a judicial decision. [^19]

APPROVAL OF UTAH LEGISLATION ON THE JUDICIARY

Political and Legal AffairsHCIn addition to this decision of Chief Justice Kinney, the Utah legislation had the tacit approval of the national congress, which, notwithstanding it assumed the right to annul the laws passed by the territorial legislatures, allowed this legislation to stand undisturbed for nearly a quarter of a century, when most of it was annulled by what is known as "The Poland Bill," approved June 23, 1874, but which provided nevertheless, that "all judgments and decrees heretofore rendered by the probate courts which have been executed and the time to appeal from which has by existing law of said territory expired, are hereby validated and confirmed." [^20]

196TERRITORIAL MARSHAL AND ATTORNEY-GENERAL SUSTAINED

Political and Legal AffairsHC196That part of the legislation considered in the foregoing relating to the territorial marshal and the territorial attorney-general was also subject to the examination of both the territorial courts and the supreme court of the United States, with the result that the legislation respecting these two officers and their functions was sustained by the supreme court. In 1874, at the request of the Utah legislature, Judge Z. Snow, at one time associate justice of Utah, and at the time of which we speak Utah's attorney-general, reviewed this legislation; and in so far as it related to the two officers here referred to, and in relation to the history of the litigation and the conclusion of the matters involved, said:

Political and Legal AffairsHC196"How, then, stands this question? In 1852 the governor and legislative assembly passed a law providing for an attorney-general and a marshal, to be elected by the joint vote of both houses. Under this law these officers have been elected from that time till the present, and until about 1862 or 1863, no governor raised an objection. Then one raised the objection, but the legislative assembly stood firm. From that time till 1870 it was acquiesced in by the successive governors, each of whom had the same but no more legal authority than those who have since presided. In 1870 the courts here ruled against this law.

Political and Legal AffairsHC197In 1873 the Supreme Court of the United States having the law under consideration, held it valid, saying, 'The organic act is susceptible of a construction that will avoid such a conflict. And that construction is supported by long usage in this and other territories. Under these circumstances it is the duty of the court to adopt it and declare the territorial act valid.' If I am correct in saying the judgment of a court of last resort is conclusive, has not this act been declared valid?" [^21]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Ferguson's associates in this intimidation were Hosea Stout and J. C. Little.
[^2] See Waite's Mormon Prophet, pp. 37-8; also Bancroft's History of Utah, pp. 488-9.
[^3] Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 489, Waite's Mormon Prophet, pp. 36, 37. Linn's Story of the Mormons, pp. 470-1.
[^4] See History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 331 and 445.
[^5] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Dec. 22nd, 1856, pp. 1267-1278, where the case is given in detail; also Woodruff's Journal, entry for same date.
[^6] The conduct of Ferguson subsequently became the subject of investigation by a grand jury, which reported to Judge C. E. Sinclair's court, under date of Dec. 14>, 1858, as follows: "The grand jury find that James Ferguson, of Great Salt Lake City, U. T., did use language and threats calculated to intimidate Judge George P. Stiles, United States district judge, while in the execution of his official duties and presiding as judge of this district court at the February term, 1857. Said threats and language used to George P. Stiles." (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 283). [Signed] "Eleazer Miller, Foreman."
[^7] See Letters of Samuel W. Richards, member of the territorial legislature, to his brother, F. D. Richards, then, 1855, in England: "You have no doubt heard of the appointment and arrival of Judge Drummond in this territory. He has lately been holding court in this place [Fillmore] which has given him an opportunity to show himself. * * * He has brass to declare, in open court, that the Utah laws are founded in ignorance, and has attempted to set some of the most important ones aside. This being the highest compliment he has to pay to Utah legislators, we shall all endeavor to appreciate it, and he, no doubt, from his great ability to judge the merits of law, will be able to appreciate the merits of a return compliment some day. His course and policy so far seem to be to raise a row if possible, and make himself notorious." (Letter dated at Fillmore, Utah, Dec. 7th, 1855, Millennial Star, vol. xviii, pp. 204-5). In a second letter the same writer said: "He has virtually ruled our probate courts out of power in his decisions." (Ibid, p. 254; and Waite's Mormon Prophet, p. 39).
[^8] Linn's Story of the Mormons, p. 469.
[^9] Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 490.
[^10] Remy and Brenchley's Journey to Great Salt Lake City, 1861, vol. i, p. 208; also again, at p. 469, where the matter is repeated, and the presence of the chief justice noted.
[^11] Ibid, pp. 468-9.
[^12] Journey to Great Salt Lake City, vol. i, p. 469. The woman went by the name of Ada Caroll in Washington, but her real name was Mrs. Mary Fletcher, formerly of Baltimore, where her husband, Charles Fletcher, a school teacher and her mother, a Mrs. Ridgley, resided. (See Letters of Judge W. I. Appleby, in Millennial Star, vol. xix, p. 401, et seq; also letter from Mrs. Drummond, wife of the judge, in Deseret News of May 20th, 1857).
[^13] See impression of 20th of May, 1857; Mrs. D. addresses her letter to Mr. and Mrs. Richards—"Dear Brother and Sister:" for Drummond's character see Judge Appleby's communication in Millennial Star, vol. xix, p. 401, et seq, and Remy's Journey to Great Salt Lake City, vol. i, pp. 208-9.
[^14] Remy's Journey to Great Salt Lake City, vol. i. p. 469.
[^15] Richards' Letter, Millennial Star, vol. xviii, p. 355; also Ibid, vol. xix, p. 401 (Judge Appleby's version). The story is related by a number of writers, among them Waite and Remy. The letter refers the assault upon Abrahams to a gambling quarrel; Mrs. Waite says the Jew was "hired for $25 to quarrel with the judge;" that the "result of this emute was a compromise in which it was understood the judge would not interfere with the probate courts, and he was set at liberty," (p. 39). I have followed Judge Appleby's version in the text as being most likely to be accurate.
[^16] See the San Francisco Bulletin, Alta and the Sacramento Daily Union of the period, passim; and for a refutation of many of the judge's slanders see the Western Standard, edited by Geo. Q. Cannon; passim; and also Writings from the Western Standard, being a collection of editorials from the Weekly Western Standard, particularly articles under the captions, A Mormon's Estimation of Gentiles, p. 421; The Mormon Problem and the Bulletin, p. 454; Another Witness Against Judge Drummond, p. 478; Ex-Judge Drummond and His Slanders, p. 415, et passim; also current numbers of The Mormon during this period, passim.
[^17] Such excuse as existed for making this report arose from the fact that at the time of the disturbance in Judge Stiles' court, a number of books and papers were taken from the judge's office during his absence and burned. As the records, papers, etc., of the supreme court of the territory were supposed to be kept in his office it was suspected that they were also destroyed, whereas they were safe and in the custody of the deputy clerk of the supreme court, Curtis E. Bolton, in the absence of W. J. Appleby, the clerk.
[^18] The case of Captain Gunnison, and who was responsible for his death, is considered in ch. xcv of this History.
[^19] The case of Judge Shaver is treated in ch. xcii of this History.
[^20] This charge though admittedly not proven nor susceptible of proof, is nevertheless iterated and reiterated by anti-"Mormon" writers: Waite (Mormon Prophet, 1866, pp. 24, 25), Beadle (Life in Utah, pp. 172-3), Linn (Story of the Mormons, 1902, p. 467), and many others. Mr. Babbitt had sent out from Florence, Nebraska, in August, a small ox train, in advance of his own departure for the west, laden chiefly with government property, a large number of books, stationery and other necessaries for the approaching session of the legislature. This train was attacked by Cheyenne Indians on Prairie Creek, some fifteen miles from New Fort Kearney, on the 25th of August. All the party except two or three were killed on the spot, and one the next day—a Mrs. Wilson— after capture. The train was partly pillaged, when a party of Omaha hunters appeared on the scene in time to stop the pillage and save some of the wagons and other property which was turned over to the officers at New Fort Kearney. (Council Bluff Bugle, Sept. 9th, 1856, copied into Millennial Star, vol. xviii, p. 686). A few days later Mr. Babbitt, who had left Florence in an open carriage with only one attendant, expecting to overtake his train and accompany it to Utah, arrived at New Fort Kearney, where he learned of the disaster which had befallen his first train. He immediately purchased more cattle, fitted out his train again and resumed his journey. Several days later he was attacked and himself and his party killed. (Council Bluff Bugle, copied into Millennial Star, vol. xviii, p. 823). If the presidency of the church sent a party to perpetrate this crime and they went east for that purpose, and that purpose only, as charged by Judge Drummond, then the executioners traveled a distance of over seven hundred miles to do the deed, and seven hundred miles returning, making a distance of fourteen hundred miles. In addition to the unlikeliness of such an undertaking at so unnecessary a distance, there is an utter absence of motive; for while Mr. Babbitt was a bold, independent spirited man, and not given to yielding implicitly to the suggestions of Brigham Young, still there existed no motive for the crime charged against the "Mormon" presidency by Judge Drummond. Moreover, and once for all, the matter is set at rest by the investigation into the matter by the brother-in-law of Mr. Babbitt, editor of the Crescent City (Iowa) Oracle, who published the results of his investigations in the impression of his paper of May 22nd, 1857. (The article is given in Note end of this chapter).
[^21] The Resignation will be found in House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, x, No. 71, p. 212. It is also published in Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, pp. 131-134.
