B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

198CHAPTER CIII

198THE "UTAH WAR" PERIOD—DISAPPOINTED MAIL CONTRACTORS AND THEIR MISREPRESENTATIONS

198IT HAS already been said that the United States judges appointed by the Pierce administration were John F. Kinney, chief justice; with Geo, P. Stiles, of Utah, and William W. Drummond of Illinois as associated justices. The attitude of Judge Kinney with reference to local Utah questions has been sufficiently pointed out.

THE CLASH IN JURISDICTION OF COURTS

The first clash in respect of jurisdiction between the United States judiciary officers and the local territorial judiciary officers occurred in Judge Stiles' court in Salt Lake City, in February, 1857. The territorial marshal claimed the jurisdiction of serving writs and impaneling juries when the courts were sitting as territorial courts; the United States marshal claimed the right to exercise these functions both when the courts were sitting as federal courts and as territorial courts. Judge Stiles, inclining to the latter view, issued certain writs to the United States marshal, and when the question of jurisdiction came up in his court a number of local lawyers, led by James Ferguson, [^1] entered the court room and by boisterous conduct and threats intimidated the judge, who suddenly adjourned his court. In this imbroglio between Judge Stiles and the local lawyers, the judge's law office was raided, some of the United States court records taken possession of and certain books and papers of his office burned in an outhouse of the premises which gave color to the subequent charges made that the United States court records had been destroyed, which, however, was not the case. [^2]

199Waite, Bancroft, Linn, et al state that Stiles appealed to Brigham Young as governor of the territory to sustain him and protect him in the discharge of his duties; but he "was told that if he could not sustain and enforce the laws the sooner he adjourned his court the better." [^3] Stiles had been more or less prominent in "Mormon" affairs from Nauvoo times. In Nauvoo he held the office of city attorney and in the city council advocated the destruction of the Nauvoo Expositor. [^4] He had latterly, however, fallen into evil ways, and had been excommunicated from the church in the preceding December, by the conjoint action of a number of the apostles and a general meeting of the seventies—of which latter body the judge was a member—for immoral conduct—adultery. [^5] This loss of moral standing in the community, doubtless contributed to a lack of respect for his court, and was the cause of the indifference, on the part of Governor Young, in supporting him against the intimidation of Ferguson et al. [^6]

JUDGE DRUMMOND'S DECLARED ATTITUDE

Judge Drummond soon after his arrival in Utah, announced his intention to ignore the special powers given by legislative enactment to the probate courts of "original jurisdiction both civil and criminal, and as well in chancery as in common law;" denouncing such laws as having been "founded in ignorance;" and as having no binding effect. [^7]

200That the appointment of Drummond to the bench in Utah was as much a disgrace to the administration at Washington as it was an imposition upon the people of Utah is quite generally admitted, even by anti-"Mormon" writers. "Judge Drummond's course in Utah was in many respects scandalous," writes Linn. "A former member of the bench in Illinois," he continues, "writes to me: 'I remember that when Drummond's appointment was announced there was considerable comment as to his lack of fitness for the place; and, after the troubles between him and the Mormon leaders got aired through the press, members of the bar from his part of the state said they did not blame the Mormons—that it was an imposition upon them to have sent him out there as a judge.'" [^8]

IMMORAL CHARACTER OF JUDGE DRUMMOND

Bancroft refers to him as a "gambler and bully;" that "he openly avowed that he had come to Utah to make money, and in the presence of the chief justice declared: 'Money is my God.'" [^9] This is confirmed by M. Remy and Brenchley in their Journey to Great Salt Lake City, who claim to have been present when the remark was made; and further say—"he added without shame, that we might note this profession of his faith in our journal." [^10] These French travelers note also that the judge was "not a very estimable character, being notorious for the immorality of his private life." [^11]

The facts are that Judge Drummond brought with him from Washington a prostitute, whom he introduced as his wife, and quite frequently had her sit with him upon the bench during the sessions of the court,—"where he administered justice in the name of the republic," remarks Remy. [^12] He had deserted a wife and a family of several children at Oquawka, Henderson county, Illinois, whom he had left in want. It was some time before the immoral status of Judge Drummond was discovered in Utah, and then it was learned through relatives of Mrs. Drummond, who inquired of him if the wife he had in Illinois was still living, to which the judge answered in the affirmative, but claimed that he had been divorced from her. This led to a letter of inquiry being sent to Mrs. Drummond conjointly by Mr. and Mrs. Silas Richards, the aforesaid relatives of Mrs. Drummond. In answering Mrs. Drummond denied being divorced from the judge, and disclosed his relations with the Carroll woman, and his general perfidy. Mrs. Drummond's letter was published in full in the Deseret News. [^13] Such was the character and conduct of this United States judge appointed for Utah! "He was constantly saying," remarks M. Jules Remy, who met the judge both at Salt Lake and at Fillmore, "to whoever would listen to him, that these laws [i. e. the laws enacted by the territorial legislature] were founded in ignorance, and that he—an open adulterer, mark—would never let slip an opportunity of protesting against the polygamy practiced in Utah." [^14] A remark made by one Levi Abrahams, a Jew convert to "Mormonism," and a shopkeeper at Fillmore, led to Judge Drummond sending his negro body servant to horsewhip the Jew. This was done and both the judge and Cato, the negro servant, were arrested for "assault and battery with intent to murder." [^15] The case was never brought to trial, the matter being in some way, not very clearly set forth, "smothered" in court; and the judge soon after removed from Fillmore to Utah county, and in the spring of 1857 went to Carson valley, ostensibly to hold court for Judge Stiles, but really to leave Utah for the east via California and the Isthmus of Panama.

DRUMMOND'S RESIGNATION AND CHARGES

In California the judge for a time created quite a sensation through the press of that state, and much bitterness against the saints in Utah was manifested in editorial comment of the period. [^16] On arriving at New Orleans Judge Drummond mailed his resignation to Jeremiah S. Black, attorney-general in Buchanan's administration, bearing date of March 30th, 1857. He stated as his reasons for resigning:

203(1) That Brigham Young is the head of the "Mormon" church; and, as such head, the "Mormons" look to him, and to him alone, for the law by which they are to be governed; therefore no law of congress is by them considered binding in any matter;

203(2) That he [Drummond] knew that a secret, oathbound organization existed among all the male members of the church to resist the laws of the country, and to acknowledge no law save the law of the priesthood, which came to the people through Brigham Young.

203(3) That there were a number of men "set apart by special order of the church, to take both the lives and property of any person who may question the authority of the church."

203The judge also alleges—"That the records, papers, etc., of the supreme court have been destroyed by order of the church, with the direct knowledge and approbation of Governor B. Young, and the federal officers grossly insulted for presuming to raise a single question about the treasonable act. [^17]

203(4) That the federal officers of the territory are constantly insulted, harassed, and annoyed by the Mormons, and for these insults there is no redress.

203(5) That the federal officers are daily compelled to hear the form of the American government traduced, the chief executives of the nation, both living and dead, slandered and abused from the masses as well as from all the leading members of the church."

(6) The judge also charged discrimination in the administration of the laws as against "Mormon" and Gentile; that Captain John W. Gunnison and his party were murdered by Indians, but "under the orders, advice and direction of the Mormons;" [^18] that the "Mormons" poisoned Judge Leonidas Shaver, Drummond's predecessor; [^19] that Almon W. Babbitt, secretary of the territory had been killed on the plains by a band of "Mormon" marauders, who were "sent from Salt Lake City for that purpose; and that only," under direct orders of the presidency of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, and that Babbitt was not killed by Indians as reported from Utah. [^20]

Drummond further explains to the attorney-general that his reason for making his resignation public was "that the Democratic party"—the party with which he [Drummond] had always acted, was then the party in power, "and therefore, is the party that should now be held responsible for the treasonable and disgraceful state of affairs"—then existing in Utah territory. After telling how bravely he had endeavored to discharge his duty in Utah, though painfully admitting that he had "accomplished little good while there," he expressed it as his belief that "if there was a man put in office as governor of that territory, who is not a member of the church (i. e. 'Mormon'), and he be supported with a sufficient military aid, much good would result from such a course." "But," he continued, "as the territory is now governed * * * it is noonday madness and folly to attempt to administer the law in that territory. The officers are insulted, harassed, and murdered for doing their duty, and not recognizing Brigham Young as the only lawgiver and lawmaker on earth." [^21]

DENIAL OF DRUMMOND'S CHARGES

As prompt a denial was made of the main allegations of Judge Drummond, as was compatible with the means of communication of those days—there being no railroads nor telegraph lines between Missouri river points and Utah. Curtis E. Bolton, deputy clerk of the supreme court for Utah, in the absence of William J. Appleby, the clerk, made a sworn denial of the things charged in the resignation. The judge said in his resignation that the "records, papers, etc., of the supreme court have been destroyed by order of Governor B. Young." "I do solemnly declare this assertion is without the slightest foundation in truth," wrote the deputy clerk. "The records, papers, etc., of the supreme court in this territory, together with all decisions and documents of every kind belonging thereto, from Monday, September 22, 1851, at which time said court was first organized, up to the present moment, are all safe and complete in my custody, and not one of them missing, nor have they been disturbed by any person."

206Bolton also denies and disproves the discrimination in the administration of the law in cases against accused Gentiles; and concludes by saying:

206"I could, were it my province in this affidavit, go on and refute all that Judge W. W. Drummond has stated in his aforesaid letter of resignation, by records, dates, and facts; but believing the foregoing is sufficient to show you what reliance is to be placed upon the assertions or word of W. W. Drummond, I shall leave this subject." [^22]

206There should be added to Bolton's denial of the Drummond allegations at this point the vigorous denial of Mr. Feramorz Little, which was published in the east even before Bolton's letter was written. Mr. Little, connected with the western mail service, had arrived at Independence in the latter days of February; thence he went to Washington and New York, arriving at the latter place at the time Drummond's charges were given to the press and were creating a great sensation. Under date of April 15th he addressed a vigorous letter to the New York Herald, in the course of which he said:

206"The charges of Judge Drummond are as false as he is corrupt. Before I left for the states, I was five days every week in Great Salt Lake City, and I witness to all the world that I never heard one word of the burning of nine hundred volumes of law records, etc., nor anything of that character. * * * The treasonable acts alleged against the 'Mormons' in Utah are false from beginning to end. At Fort Kearney we learned all about the murder of Colonel Babbit, and do know that that charge against the 'Mormons' is but another of Drumond's creations. I have but a short time at my disposal for writing, but must say, that I am astonished to find in the states, rumors against Utah. We left our homes in peace, dreaming of no evil, and we come here and learn that we are the most corrupt of men, and are preparing for war." [^23]

OTHER CHARGES—DISAPPOINTED MAIL CONTRACTORS

There were also other communications sent to the east which greatly prejudiced the people of the United States against the people of Utah. These were the outgrowth of disappointed contractors engaged in the western mail service of the government. From the first letting of the contract for carrying the mails from Independence via Fort Laramie there had been great irregularity and much loss of mail, with corresponding disappointment and vexation on the part of the people of Utah and the west generally. In September, 1855, the Deseret News publishing an official list of the mail arrivals from the east, notes that only three out of its list of fourteen mails had arrived on time and thus comments on the mail service:

"The miserable manner in which 50,000 isolated citizens of the United States are supplied with mail facilities is a disgrace to the government, and a matter of inconvenience, disappointment and loss that none can fully appreciate except those who have experienced it as have the inhabitants of Utah. There is gross injustice, miserable mismanagement, and the dead weight of foul corruption and fogyism somewhere, or such long standing and well known evils would be removed.

208Utah is only allowed a monthly mail from the east, and that at the best is not required to arrive until the end of the month, and must leave early on the first of the next month, thus, when it even arrives by the allotted time, (which it has not done for nearly a year) compelling correspondents and business men to omit all, or nearly all, of their answers until another month. Hence, instead of a mail even once a month, it is virtually a mail once in two months in good weather, and twice within the past nine months, once in three months." [^24]

208Protests against the irregularity of the arrival of the eastern mail continued into the following summer. The June mail having been delayed for four days within forty miles of Salt Lake, on the plea of the contractors that the Weber river could not be forded, and which the citizens declared "a farm boy could have crossed with impunity," an indignation meeting was held at the Old Council House to protest against the inefficiency of the service. This on the 2nd of June: the meeting adjourned and convened again on the 14th of June when resolutions of protest were adopted and ordered printed in the New York Herald, The Mormon, New York, the Luminary, in St. Louis, and the Western Standard, in San Francisco. [^25]

THE "Y. X. COMPANY" ORGANIZATION

The irregularities of the eastern mail service led to the organization of what finally became known as the "B. Y. Express and Carrying Company," a little later abridged to the "Y. X. Company." The purpose of the movement was "to establish a daily express and passenger communication between the western states and California." The subject was agitated first at Fillmore in the winter of 1855-56, when the legislature and supreme court convened at that place. The meeting of leading men held at Fillmore adjourned to Salt Lake City, where a mass meeting was held on the 26th of January, 1856. The published roster of the officers of that meeting will disclose that it was not exclusively a "Mormon" affair. Governor Young was chosen president; Chief Justice (non-"Mormon") Kinney, Heber C. Kimball, J. M. Grant, Hon. Almon W. Babbitt, Associate Justice G. P. Stiles, (indifferent "Mormon") Surveyor General W. H. Burr (non-"Mormon") Messrs. W. Bell and W. Gerish, merchants, (non-"Mormon"), and Parley P. Pratt were chosen vice-presidents. Wilford Woodruff, Orson Pratt, and W. H. Hooper (the latter a merchant) were chosen secretaries, and Geo. D. Watt, reporter. [^26]

209There were speeches and resolutions upon the subject at this meeting; and on the 2nd of February another meeting was held still more enthusiastic. Balloo's band played patriotic airs, among them the Star Spangled Banner. Subscriptions for stock were opened. Governor Young took stock and individually offered to furnish 300 miles of the route. (i. e. with stations, stock, etc.). "One thousand miles was subscribed for, and the large number present unanimously voted to sustain the chartered company in carrying a daily express from the Missouri river to California, and in extending the line as fast and as far as circumstances may permit." [^27]

The formation of this company doubtless led to the very low bid of Hiram Kimball, a "Mormon," for the contract of carrying the mails between Independence and Salt Lake City, since it was designed that the mails should be carried by the "Y. X. Company," as part of its regular business. The contract was awarded to Kimball on his bid of $23,600.00 per annum, the previous contractors, a Gentile firm, Hockaday and Magraw, had received $50,000.00 per annum. It was known that the lower bid of Hiram Kimball would barely pay expenses but run in connection with the "Y. X. Company," and owing to the resources in stock, in the number and efficiency of mountain men and plainsmen, and possessing exceptional advantages for organization, it was beyond doubt that the mail contractor and his ally, the "Y. X. Company" would succeed. The contract was awarded to Kimball in October and was to go into effect on the 1st of December, of the same year, and run to the 30th of November, 1860. [^28]

210Meantime an enemy had been sowing tares in this fair field of enterprise. Mr. W. F. Magraw, the former mail contractor, being disappointed at his failure to secure a renewal of his contract, determined apparently to have his revenge upon the community of Latter-day Saints, whom he doubtless regarded as having united to be rid of him and his inefficient mail carrying service, of which, through their press, they had often, yet justly complained. Accordingly, Mr. Magraw wrote President Buchanan from Independence, Mo., under date of Oct. 3rd, 1856, in the capacity of "a personal and political friend." He felt it incumbent upon him to lay before the president "some information relative to the present political and social condition of the territory of Utah." "There is no disguising the fact," he continues, that there is left no vestige of law and order, no protection for life or property; the civil laws of the territory are overshadowed and neutralized by a so-styled ecclesiastical organization, as despotic, dangerous, and damnable, as has ever been known to exist in any country, and which is ruining, not only those who do not subscribe to their religious code, but is driving the moderate and more orderly of the Mormon community to desperation."

211"For want of time," he explains, he has to generalize; "but particular cases, with all the attendant circumstances, names of parties and localities are not wanting to swell the calendar of crime and outrage to limits that will, when published, startle the conservative people of the states, and create a clamor which will not be readily quelled; and I have no doubt that the time is near at hand, and the elements rapidly combining to bring about a state of affairs which will result in indiscriminate bloodshed, robbery and rapine, and which in a brief space of time will reduce that country to the condition of a howling wilderness." [^29]

211One other communication on the subject of alleged "Mormon aggressiveness" is a letter from the Indian agent of the upper Platte, Thomas S. Twiss, addressed to the commissioner of Indian affairs, Hon. J. W. Denver, under date of July 15th, 1857, but calling attention to a communication of earlier date, "April last," in which the agent had called the attention of the department to the settlement being made within the boundaries of the upper Platte agency "by the Mormon church, clearly in violation of law, although the pretext or pretense under which these settlements are made is under cover of a contract of the Mormon church to carry the mail from Independence, Mo., to Salt Lake City." So much evidently repeated from the April communication. In the July letter the agent proceeds to say:

211"On the 25th May, a large Mormon colony took possession of the valley of Deer Creek, one hundred miles west of Fort Laramie, and drove away a band of Sioux Indians whom I had settled there in April, and had induced them to plant corn. * * *

211I have information from a reliable source that these Mormons are about three hundred in number, have plowed and planted two hundred acres of prairie, and are building houses sufficient for the accommodation of five hundred persons, and have a large herd of cattle, horses and mules.

211I am persuaded that the Mormon church intends, by this plan thus partially developed, to monopolize all of the trade with the Indians and whites within, or passing through, the Indian country.

212I respectfully and earnestly call the attention of the department to this invasion, and enter my protest against this occupation of the Indian country, in force, and for forcible ejection of the Indians from the place where I had settled them.

212I am powerless to control this matter, for the Mormons obey no laws enacted by congress. I would respectfully request that the president will be pleased to issue such order as, in his wisdom and judgment, may seem best in order to correct the evil complained of." [^30]

212This is rank misrepresentation throughout and especially as to the number engaged in and the purpose of the settlement in Deer Creek valley. With reference to the settlements to be formed along the line of the mail route it was explained at the April conference of the church of that year, held at Salt Lake City, that the purpose was "more particularly to facilitate immigration by establishing temporary settlements;" [^31] and only twenty men were called at this same conference to engage in that service. [^32]

NOTE

EVIDENCE OF THE DEATH OF HON. ALMON W. BABBITT, AT THE HANDS OF CHEYENNE INDIANS, SEPTEMBER, 1856

"We notice in the letter of resignation, of Hon. W. W. Drummond to Attorney-General Black, that he there, among other very grave charges, asserts that the Hon. A. W. Babbitt was murdered by white men disguised as Indians, by order of the authorities of Utah. In justice to the parties thus maligned, we will state that we have taken much pains to gather all the information possible calculated to throw light upon the death of our relative Mr. Babbitt, and the particulars connected with the same; and we have not a shadow of doubt but that Indians of the Cheyenne nation murdered him for revenge and plunder; and for the satisfaction of his friends who have not heard the full particulars, we will recount them briefly.

As secretary of Utah, the late and lamented Colonel Babbitt purchased the stationery and other necessaries for legislative purposes, etc., and at a proper season started it from Florence across the plains with ox teams, under the charge of a Mr. Nickols. Late in August, with only one attendant and in an open carriage, Mr. B. left Florence for Utah. Upon arriving at Fort Kearney, he there found some of his stock, his wagons, and a portion of the goods, and one man wounded from his train, being all that remained, four of the number having been killed, three on the spot and one (Mrs. Wilson) the next day after capture.

213Mr. Babbitt hastened to purchase more cattle, and gathering up the remains of his freight, started the train again forward, and wrote us two several letters, stating that he would start forward himself with two attendants the day following. These, are probably, the last words he ever wrote.

213Mr. Babbitt left the fort as had been arranged, and was never again seen by white men. All the emigration were ahead. He intended to reach Fort Leavenworth [Laramie] in three days, and was making good his time. Some weeks later, an Indian came in to a French trader's station with a gold watch, which bore the initials of Mr. B.'s name, and soon another came with a massive ring, which was also marked as a seal ring.

213The Indians then being charged with the murder acknowledged they had done it. News was sent to the fort and Major Wharton immediately sent out a detachment in search, which found Mr. Babbitt's carriage, trunk and many valuable papers; but nothing of the unfortunate victim but a few bones.

213The Indians then confessed that, having been insulted and abused by the parties in charge of the mail, and then were killed by the soldiers, a company of twelve had fallen upon Mr. Babbitt's ox team as being the first they had met, to avenge the wrong. That they had seen Mr. Babbitt arrive at the fort and knew him, (he having crossed the plains nearly twenty times) and that he was a big man, and, by killing him, they might be likely to get plunder and revenge at the same time. They had gone on ahead and lay in wait; when he passed they followed him at a distance until he had stopped, the second day in the afternoon. Then they rode down upon him, yelling and screaming. Mr. B. shouted at them and motioned them to stop and pointed his pistol at them; but they passed on and he fired at them.

213Frank Rowland (a young man accompanying him) stood with his arms at his side until shot down; the other man ran away in the willows. The colonel fought like a tiger, fired all his arms, then clubbed his rifle and fought the whole twelve savages, disputing every inch, as he slowly backed up to his carriage for protection behind. He had seriously wounded several, when one, more cowardly than the others, jumped up into the wagon, and, with the tomahawk, killed a brave and noble man.

213Major Wharton still has possession of the ring which he obtained of the Indians, and some other valuables and relics, found on the spot of the murder.

213Mr. ——————-, a French trader, has a fine gold watch which belonged to Mr. B., which he purchased of the Indians, together with some articles of minor value.

213All that is now known of the murder of the late Mr. Babbitt, is obtained through the Indians themselves, who acknowledge they committed the murder.

It seems to be a very malicious charge the ex-judge is thus making against the people of Utah, without anything to justify him in doing so.

214The widow of the late Mr. Babbitt is now on her return from Utah to this place. Upon her arrival, we shall, at the earliest moment, announce the receipt of anything further connected with his murder." [^33]

214Mrs. Babbitt, according to the expectation expressed in the above narrative in the Oracle, arrived in Crescent City, and, under date of July 11th, 1857, addressed a letter to the New York Herald giving the results of her investigations at Fort Laramie and New Fort Kearney. Her letter appeared in the Herald under the caption:

COLONEL A. W. BABBITT'S MURDER

Interesting letter from his widow—Her melancholy investigation of the circumstances of His Death—The Cheyenne Indians His Assassins—all white men acquitted of the charge.

214The story of her letter was substantially the same as that published by her brother, J. E. Johnson, in the Oracle. In concluding her letter to the Herald, Mrs. Babbitt said:

214"I have not a shadow of suspicion that white men were in any way concerned in his death—the newspaper story that he was killed by the 'Mormons' to the contrary notwithstanding. As an act of public justice, I ask you to lay these facts before the people, that my friends and the many friends of my husband may know the facts relative to his melancholy death."

214[Signed] "JULIA ANN BABBITT." [^34]

Footnotes

On the foregoing our author remarks: "Mr. Ferguson was by instinct a gentleman: his actions on this occasion find interpretation in the general spirit of the times, Israel was determined not to be beaten." (Ibid). He should have said, that Mr. Ferguson was insisting, albeit in an irregular and unlawful manner, in this instance, for the right of local self-government. Stenhouse says that the true bill was found by "a Mormon jury." Geo. A. Smith, church historian at the time, in a letter to Colonel Kane, under date of Jan. 14, 1859, says, a grand jury, principally of camp followers investigated the subject, and found a bill against General Ferguson. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for January, 1859, p. 133). The jury was a mixed one composed between "Mormon" and Gentile with the latter predominating. The names of the panel will be found in Deseret News of Nov. 24, and of Dec. 15>, 1858; and the names of the twelve men who brought in the indictment are given in History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for Dec., 1855, p. 1165. The Ferguson case came to trial in January, 1859, before Associate Justice Charles E. Sinclair. The case occupied the court from the 5th to the 11th of the month, when, after an extended argument by United States attorney for the territory, Mr. Wilson, and for the defense by Mr. Ferguson himself, the jury brought in a verdict of "not guilty" and the case was dismissed. (Deseret News of Jan. 12, 1859).

---
Notas:
[^1] Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 156. Also the following from Bancroft: "The price to be paid for the transport of stores, provisions, and munitions of war was at the rate of twenty-two cents a pound; and thus it will be seen that if the 'Utah War' served no other purpose, it made the fortunes of those who secured the government contracts. Through a little dexterous manipulation at Washington, permission was given to the man who secured the flour contract to furnish Utah flour, and this he did at a cost of seven cents per pound, receiving, of course, meanwhile, the money allowed for freight, and netting in a single year the sum of $170,000 [on that item alone]. The troops remained in the territory for about four years, and no wonder that they often asked one another, 'Why were we sent here? Why are we kept here? What good can we do by remaining here?' No wonder also that the people asked, 'Were they retained in Utah in order to fill the purses of the contractors?'" (Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 498). Greeley in his Overland Journey, (pp. 252-3) says that this instance [i. e. the graft on the flour item] had become notorious at Washington. Stenhouse relates that the man who obtained the flour contract received an order for his money payable at Camp Floyd, but had the choice of receiving in lieu army mules at a certain calculation. He chose the latter, and sending them to California realized a profit of nearly 600 percent on his money. (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 416. For further specimens of sharp practice, see San Francisco Bulletin, June 8, Aug. 20, 22, 30, 1859, referred to by Bancroft, History of Utah, p. 498, note).
[^2] The quotations in the text above are from a letter of instructions to General Harney, signed by Geo. W. Lay, aid-de-camp to General Scott, commander in chief of the United States Army, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, x, No. 71, p. 7; also given in full in Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 122.
[^3] On the occasion of Captain Van Vliet's visit to Salt Lake City as the advance courier of the army, President Young in the interview that is now historic put to him directly the question: "I will now ask Captain Van Vliet if Drummond [i. e. Drummond's communication] was not the main cause of the United States sending their armies against us." "I think it is," was the captain's answer. (Journal of Wilford Woodruff. Ms., entry for Sept. 12th, 1857).
[^4] Deseret News of Aug. 5th, 1857.
[^5] Deseret News of March 25th, 1857; also of May 13th. "Our calculations concerning the arrival of the eastern mail," said the News of the 13th of May, "have failed, after all the care that was taken to arrive at correct conclusions; but we cannot think that the failure is any fault of ours. There is some mystery connected with the matter that we have not been able thus far to solve. It is now exactly six months since Mr. Gerrish left Independence, in company with [in charge of] the November mail which arrived here on the 24th of March." Early in February The Mormon, and a few lines from Delegate Bernhisel, reached Salt Lake City by the California mail, incidentally referring to the fact that the contract for route 8911—Independence, Salt Lake City—had been awarded to Mr. Kimball, but nothing could be done in the way of "signing acceptance" until the arrival of the contract. But, as we have already seen, the postmaster at Salt Lake made special contract for carrying a mail from Salt Lake eastward in midwinter; another was sent east February 7th, another in March, and another on the first of April, the 1st it was possible to send after the signing of the acceptance of contract; but acting on the informal information received via California mail, for two months establishing and stocking of mail stations on the route had been in progress. (See Deseret News of Aug. 5th, 1857, for extended comment on annulment of contract, etc).
[^6] The speech was published in full in the Missouri Republican of the 18th of June, 1857.
[^7] See Democratic Platform, Cincinnati, June 6th, 1856; see Cooper's American Politics, bk. ii, Platforms, pp. 36-39.
[^8] Republican Platform, Philadelphia, June 17th, 1856; Cooper's American Politics, bk. ii, Platforms, p. 39.
[^9] Elder John Taylor, successor to Brigham Young in the presidency of the church, and editor of The Mormon, during the formative period and starting of the "Utah Expedition," living in New York, and therefore informed as to the moving cause of that action, emphasized this particular cause of the "Utah War" in both his speeches and writings. In an address to the saints in Salt Lake City August 23, 1857, in explaining the cause of the army being sent to Utah, and, as he alleges, with "sealed orders," he said: "The Republicans were determined to make the 'Mormon' question tell in their favor. At the time they were trying to elect Fremont they put two questions into their platform, viz: opposition to the domestic institutions of the south and to polygamy. The Democrats have professed to be our friends, and they go to work to sustain the domestic institutions of the south and the rights of the people; but when they do that the Republicans throw polygamy at them and are determined to make them swallow that with the other [i. e. slavery]. This makes the Democrats gag and they have felt a strong desire to get rid of the 'Mormon' question. Some of them, I know, for some time past, have been concocting plans to divide up Utah among the several territories around, and I believe a bill having this object in view was prepared once or twice and came pretty nearly being presented to congress, but that was not done. * * * They wish now to steal the Republicans' thunder, to take the wind out of their sails, and to out-Herod Herod. Say they: 'We, who profess to be the friends of the Mormons and support free institutions, squatter sovereignty and equal rights, will do more to the Mormons than you dare do; and we will procure officers by that means and save our party,' and, as Pilate and Herod could be made friends over the death of Jesus, so they go to work and plan our sacrifice and destruction and make up friends on the back of it." (Deseret News of 2nd Sept., 1857).
[^10] Taylor and Colfax Debate, The Mormon Question, p. 22. This was a matter of sincere conviction of the late Mr. Isaac K. Russell of Utah, journalist.
[^11] Deseret News of Dec. 24>, 1856, p. 333. In his message a year previous Governor Young had said upon the subject of statehood:
[^12] It is quite generally believed that the annual celebration of the 24th of July by the people of Utah, commemorating the advent of the Latter-day Saint Pioneers into Salt Lake valley, supplanted in their affections as in their observance the nation's birthday anniversary. In proof that this was not the case previous to the "Utah Expedition" (and it is not true of the years subsequent to that event) I cite the account of the recurring celebrations, each of which was an elaborate affair:
[^13] Deseret News of July 9th, 1856, where the speech is given in extenso.
[^14] Deseret News of July 9th, 1856. An editorial note of the same impression says: "The Fourth of July was enthusiastically celebrated in this city, as may be readily inferred by reading the reported proceedings printed in this number. So far as we can learn, such has been the case throughout the numerous cities and settlements in Utah." The statement in the last sentence above was also quite generally what happened throughout all the years, mentioned in note 12.
[^15] Deseret News of July 8th, 1857.
[^16] See Minutes of Convention, 15th of March, 1849, and Constitution adopted, Acts, Resolutions and Memorials, published by order of the Legislative Assembly of Utah, p. 222.
[^17] Acts, Resolutions and Memorials of the Legislative Assembly of Utah, 1852, p. 222.
[^18] Acts, Resolutions, etc., of the Legislative Assembly of Utah, 1853-4, pp. 76-7.
[^19] The act for the reorganization of the militia was approved Jan. 14, 1857: The lieutenant general commanding, issued his orders installing the new system of regulations, on March the 27th, in "General Orders No. 2." (Deseret News of April 1st, 1857.
[^20] Ibid.
[^21] See House Executive Document, 35th Congress, No. 71, pp. 4, 5. The circular from the commander-in-chief, U. S. A., will also be found complete in Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 121, et seq.
[^22] Condensed from the personal narrative of Mr. Smoot, published in Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, pp. 156-7.
[^23] Deseret News of July 29th, 1857.
[^24] Deseret News, July 29th, 1857. The report was written and is signed by Geo. D. Watt, a noted English convert and one of the territory's earliest stenographers—the reporter of many early discourses of church authorities.
[^25] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for June 2nd, 3rd and 14th, 1856, pp. 327-8 and 33-4.
[^26] Deseret News of January 30th, 1856.
[^27] Deseret News of February 6th, 1856.
[^28] See Letter of Delegate John M. Bernhisel to John Taylor, Oct. 23rd, 1856, Deseret News of January 14, 1857.
[^29] Magraw's Letter to the President, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, x, No. 71, pp. 2-3.
[^30] House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, x, No. 33, from the Indian department.
[^31] Remarks of D. H. Wells, see Minutes of Conference in Deseret News of April 15th, 1857.
[^32] The list of names will be found in History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for April 21st, 1857, pp. 167-8.
[^33] Crescent City Oracle of 22nd May, 1857, copied into Millennial Star, vol. xix, p. 443. The essential facts of this narrative were also published in the Council Bluffs Bugle several months before they appeared in the Oracle. The Bugle statement is copied into the Millennial Star of Dec. 27>, 1855.
[^34] The letter is copied from the New York Herald into The Mormon of August 1st, 1857.
