B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

CHAPTER CIV

THE "UTAH WAR" PERIOD: THE CASUS BELLI—THE "MORMON QUESTION" A NATIONAL PARTY ISSUE

THE reader now has before him the substance of all the documents giving the "information" upon which the Buchanan administration believed itself justified in sending an army of two thousand five hundred soldiers to Utah with the necessary equipment, baggage, and supply trains; with great herds of cattle for meat supplies; with the necessary large number of servants, and teamsters; and the inevitable camp followers and adventurers that accompany such enterprises, with the attendant enormous expense of sending such an expedition through a thousand miles of wilderness, to a wilderness, there to be maintained for no one knew how long, and then to be returned through the thousand miles of wilderness at as great an expense as was incurred in getting them to their destination—surely this "Expedition" presented opportunity for "fat picking" by government contractors and justified those who named the "Utah Expedition" the "Contractors War." [^1] All this was occasioned by what the administration at Washington was pleased to regard as "the community and, in part, the civil government of Utah territory," being in "substantial rebellion against the laws and authority of the United States." For which reason the administration announced through the war department that "a new civil governor" was "about to be designated, and to be charged with the establishment and maintenance of law and order." And "your able and energetic aid," wrote the war department to General Harney,—who was first designated to command the "Expedition"—"with that of the troops to be placed under your command, is relied upon to insure the success of the mission." [^2]

THE GROUND PLAN OF THE "UTAH EXPEDITION"

This attitude of the administration was assumed, and this "Expedition" undertaken on the "information" supplied by the communication (1) of the "run-a-way judge," W. W. Drummond; this man who had outraged every principle of decency by deserting his wife and family in Illinois and placing a prostitute beside him upon the judgment seat in Utah, and whom even non-"Mormons" denounce—as we have seen—as a blackleg and a gambler; a profligate and a liar: and (2) on the communication of the disappointed and disgruntled mail contractor, Magraw; accompanied, it should be admitted, by some reports of "run-a-way United States officials," disgruntled sub-Indian agents, whose actions have been considered in a previous chapter, and by common report and the misrepresentations that have usually attached to all things connected with the Latter-day Saints. But I insist that the only foundation or excuse the Buchanan administration had for sending this armed "Expedition" to Utah was supplied by the above named two documents.

Upon these two documents, then, the Buchanan administration, without previous investigation, acted in the matter of this "Utah Expedition;" [^3] and, moreover, that administration confined itself in the main to the suggestions made in the communication of Judge Drummond, viz, the appointment of a non-"Mormon" for governor, to be supported by "sufficient military aid."

Utah WarHCQUESTION ON THE JUSTIFICATION OF THE WASHINGTON ADMINISTRATION

Utah WarHCAnd now let the situation in Utah be considered, and see if that situation was such as to justify the secret formation of such an "Expedition," much less justification for sending such an "Expedition" without first making official investigation of the charges against the Latter-day Saint community in Utah.

Utah WarHC217Respecting the phrase "secret formation of the Expedition'," it may be asked if such a thing as "a secret 'Expedition'" was possible to which the answer is, yes, under all the circumstances of distance and isolation of the community to be moved against, and the absence of other means of communication between Missouri river points and Salt Lake valley than a monthly mail; and even this was cut off for months previous to the order to form the "Expedition," and entirely suspended by formal government action in June—the mail that would doubtless have brought the news of the outfitting of the "Expedition." The postmaster at Independence, acting under instructions from the department at Washington, refused to deliver the June mail to the agents of the new contractor, because of delay in executing acceptance of the government award of contract beyond the date fixed for execution, and "the unsettled state of things at Salt Lake, rendering the mails unsafe under present circumstances." [^4]

Utah WarHC218The annulment of the mail contract, is of such importance as showing the unfair treatment of the Latter-day Saint community in Utah, that it is worthy of further consideration.

Utah WarHC218The letter from the postal department at Washington making the announcement of the disannulment is here given at length:

Utah WarHCPOSTAL DEPARTMENT'S LETTER TO HIRAM KIMBALL

Utah WarHC"Post Office Department,

Utah WarHC218Contract Office,

Utah WarHC218June 10th, 1857.

Utah WarHC218SIR: The Indentures of Contract for the conveyance of the mails on route No. 8911—Independence, Mo., to Salt Lake City, Utah, sent for execution to the care of P. M. Salt Lake City on the 16th October, last, do not appear to have been executed by you until the 24th March following. The delay in executing and the unsettled state of things at Salt Lake rendering the mails unsafe, under present circumstances, the postmaster-general declines extending the time for execution beyond the period mentioned in the advertisement; and, therefore, declines to accept the contract executed by you. Hence your service on the route will cease.

Utah WarHC218Very respectfully,

Utah WarHC218Yr. Obt. St.

Utah WarHC218WM. H. DUNDAS

Utah WarHC2182d Asst. P. M. General.

Utah WarHC218MR. HIRAM KIMBALL,

Utah WarHC218Salt Lake City,

Utah WarHC218Utah Territory."

Utah WarHCIt will be observed that Oct. 16th is the date on which the contract was sent from Washington for execution. December the 1st was the time limit fixed in the advertisement for the execution of the acceptance. The contract mailed at Washington in the middle of October would not leave Independence until the 1st of November, and if regular schedule time was made—a thing most unlikely at that season of the year—the mail would not reach Salt Lake City until the 1st of December, the day that the time for executing the acceptance would expire. But the November mail left Independence on the 8th of November, instead of the 1st. No duplicate was mailed via Isthmus of Panama and California, and the eastern mail for November, with the postal contract, did not reach Salt Lake City until the 24th of March, 1857, the mail for that month as also for October, having been held through the winter by the old contractors at Platte Bridge. It was utterly impossible, therefore, for the new contractors to sign the acceptance of contract within the time limit. [^5] As for the second reason assigned for refusing to deliver the mail to the new contractor, viz, "the unsettled state of things at Salt Lake rendering the mails unsafe," in this the postal department was accepting without verification and acting upon the malicious suggestion of the disappointed mail contractor, Magraw, and the disreputable Judge Drummond; gratuitously, however, extending the application of "the unsettled state of things in Utah" to postal affairs, since neither Magraw nor Drummond even hinted that the postal service was menaced by the alleged "unsettled state of things." The Latter-day Saint community in Utah of that period can well demand the judgment of "history" against the administration at Washington as to whether or not they were then accorded fair treatment, nor doubt the verdict.

A DEEPER LOOK INTO THE CAUSES OF "THE WAR"

Utah WarHCBut now to look deeper into the causes, on the side of the general government, that led to this "war." It seems incredible that such an "Expedition," involving the movements of so large a body of troops and at the expenditure of millions of the nation's treasure, should have been undertaken upon the representations of a dissolute judge, and the spite of a disgruntled mail contractor; and this, too, without one step being taken to verify the truth or untruth of the representations made; and notwithstanding also the willingness and indeed the desire expressed in Utah for such an investigation, as will appear from the following editorial in the Deseret News, of the 1st of July, 1857,—twenty-three days before the first word reached Utah of the military movement the administration had set on foot. It makes for its strength, too, that the editorial is addressed to "President Buchanan and Cabinet."

ADVICE TO PRESIDENT BUCHANAN AND CABINET: DEMAND FOR A COMMISSION OF INVESTIGATION

Utah WarHC"What, from Utah? [advice?] Ay, from Utah. And it can come from no better source, save one, and that one other the world do not seem to be very ready to hearken unto. [Source of Division wisdom.]

Utah WarHC220Editors and office-hunters are constantly dinning the ears of the president with the cry that 'the Mormon problem is a knotty one;' the matter becomes exceedingly complicated; 'the Mormon question is assuming a shape that will not permit its solution to be much longer delayed;' something, 'hit or miss, right or wrong, must be done with Mormons;' and so forth and so on.

Utah WarHC220Now it is notorious to all who read and fairly think, that this noise and smoke are raised without the first shadow of occasion given by the people of Utah, who are quietly pursuing their peaceful and legitimate occupations, breaking no applicable law human or divine. But the universal yell is, 'President Buchanan must do something with the Mormons!' Not yet knowing how long and how well he will be able to withstand the terribly clamorous and unjust outside pressure, and we being known to be on the side of economy as well as justice, we most respectfully suggest, in case he cannot withstand the pressure, that he select one or more civilians unbound by any 'ism' or 'isms,' if such can be found, also intelligent, strictly honorable, upright and gentlemanly, in the true sense of those terms, and send them to Utah on a short visit to look around and see what they can see, and return and report.

Utah WarHCThis is certainly fair, is very economical, and should be perfectly satisfactory to the most rabid 'Mormon' eaters. But in case that should not suit the fire-eating, blood and thunder, * * * and fury, spoils-seeking, office-hunting and black-mail-levying portion of the community, we suggest to them that they send a committee from their own clans, and so long as they behave at all as white men should, we will guarantee that Governor Young and the people of Utah will treat them with more true courtesy and kindness than they have ever met with."

SENATOR STEPHEN A. DOUGLAS ON "RUMORED" CONDITIONS IN UTAH

Utah WarHCReferring again to the documents supplied by the communications of Messrs. Drummond and Magraw, there exists good evidence that these were not regarded by the administration during the formation of the "Expedition" as rising in dignity beyond other "rumors" and "reports" that were current at the time. This remark is based upon the fact that Senator Stephen A. Douglas, the most potent factor of the political party in power, at the time, addressed a meeting in the statehouse at Springfield, Illinois, on the 12th of June, 1857, in which he characterized what had so far been heard concerning Utah as "rumor" and "report." Mr. Douglas had been requested to speak at this meeting on three subjects: Conditions in Kansas; the Dred Scott Case; "the Condition of Things in Utah, and the Appropriate Remedies for Existing Evils." [^6]

Utah WarHC221When Mr. Douglas came to the part of his speech dealing with Utah, he said:

Utah WarHC221"If we are permitted to place credence in the rumors and reports from that country, (and it must be admitted that they have increased and strengthened and assumed consistency and plausibility by each succeeding mail), seven years' experience has disclosd a state of facts entirely different from that which was supposed to exist when Utah was organized. These rumors and reports would seem to justify the belief that the following tracts are susceptible of proof.

Utah WarHC2211st. That nine-tenths of the inhabitants are aliens by birth, who have refused to become naturalized, or to take the oath of allegiance, or to do any other act recognizing the government of the United States as the paramount authority in that territory.

Utah WarHC2nd. That all the inhabitants, whether native or alien born, known as Mormons, (and they constitute the whole people of the territory), are bound by horrid oaths and terrible penalties, to recognize and maintain the authority of Brigham Young, and the government of which he is the head, as paramount to that of the United States, in civil as well as in religious affairs; and they will, in due time, and under the direction of their leaders, use all the means in their power to subvert the government of the United States, and resist its authority.

Utah WarHC2223rd. That the Mormon Government, with Brigham Young at its head, is now forming alliance with Indian tribes in Utah and adjoining territories—stimulating the Indians to acts of hostility—and organizing bands of his own followers under the name of 'Danites or Destroying Angels,' to prosecute a system of robbery and murders upon American citizens, who support the authority of the United States, and denounce the infamous and disgusting practices and institutions of the Mormon government."

Utah WarHC222Dealing with these conditions, professedly based on "rumors" and "reports," he said:

Utah WarHC222"Let us have these facts in an official shape before the president and congress, and the country will soon learn that, in the performance of the high and solemn duty devolving upon the executive and congress, there will be no vacillating or hesitating policy. It will be as prompt as the peal that follows the flash—as stern and unyielding as death. Should such a state of things actually exist as we are led to infer from the reports—and such information comes in an official shape—the knife must be applied to this pestiferous, disgusting cancer, which is gnawing into the very vitals of the body politic. It must be cut out by the roots, and seared over by the red hot iron of stern and unflinching law. * * * Should all efforts fail to bring them [the Mormons] to a sense of their duty, there is but one remedy left. Repeal the organic law of the territory, on the ground that they are alien enemies and outlaws, unfit to be citizens of a territory, much less ever become citizens of one of the free and independent states of this confederacy."

Utah WarHC222It was on the 12th of June that this speech of Mr. Douglas' was delivered, be it remembered. The "Utah Expedition" had been projected some months before, and a number of its supply trains were now well on their way to Utah; and yet this foremost man of the political party in power, and spokesman for the administration, was confessing that no official evidence had yet arrived that justified any action on the part of the government against Utah, unless it was to be justified by the "rumors" and "reports" on which Senator Douglas, when they were proven true, would be willing to proceed with the drastic measure proposed in his speech!

223DEMOCRATS vs. REPUBLICANS ON TERRITORIAL POLICY—THE "TWIN RELICS"

Utah WarHC223But why had the administration proceeded with the "Utah Expedition" in the absence of official, and well established evidence of the "rebellion" it feigned to believe existed, and proposed to repress? The question admits of but one answer: The Latter-day Saints in Utah were in disfavor with the populace; the Republican party, springing into existence in 1856, put forth its first candidate, John C. Fremont, a strong anti-"Mormon;" this fact, and its first platform, placed the Democratic party at great disadvantage before the country on the "Mormon" question. The Democrats had adopted the "squatter sovereignty" doctrine of Douglas relative to the settlement of the slavery question in the territories, namely, that when a territory was to be admitted as a state, it should enter the Union "with or without domestic slavery" as the people might elect. [^7] Issue was taken with this position by the Republican platform adopted eleven days later at Philadelphia, in which it—

Utah WarHC223"Resolved, That the Constitution confers upon congress sovereign power over the territories of the United States for their government, and that in the exercise of this power it is both the right and the imperative duty of congress to prohibit in the territories those twin relics of barbarism—polygamy and slavery." [^8]

Utah WarHCThe Republican argument then ran:—If the people of a territory have the right to determine for themselves the question of slavery, why have they not equally the right to determine for themselves the domestic institution of marriage? The Democrats did not dare to follow their principle this far in the face of popular displeasure against the "Mormons," and their plural marriage doctrine; and as the people of Utah had no votes to effect the membership of either house of the national congress, or the result of a presidential election, the national administration by its "Expedition" and Mr. Douglas by his speech, took the first opportunity to show that the Democrats, no less than the Republican party, were thoroughly anti-"Mormon;" and hence this effort of the administration, and the Democratic leaders to square their party action with the demands of the popular clamor against the Latter-day Saints in Utah, must be regarded as the underlying ministration in sending its armed "Expedition" to Utah. [^9]

224WAS THE "UTAH EXPEDITION" PART OF THE CONFEDERATE DIS-UNION AND PRO-SLAVERY PLANS

Utah WarHCIt has also been suggested that another cause of the "Utah War" originated in the desire of the then secretary of war, Mr. John B. Floyd of Virginia, "to scatter the United States forces and arms preparatory to the confederate rebellion." [^10] This "Utah Expedition," however, was planned so long before the opening of the war between the states, that the likelihood of it is of remote probability; though it may have been an after thought connected with the incident of the "Expedition," which resulted in the prolonged stay of the army in Utah—until the summer of 1861, by which time the war between the states had begun.

Utah WarHC225Reference has already been made to the part which the repacity of government contractors would likely play in giving encouragement to the "Utah Expedition," because of the opportunity it would afford for fortune making.

Utah WarHC225And now to take up the situation in Utah preceding the projection of the "Expedition," as suggested a few pages back, in order to ascertain if there was in those conditions any justification for such an action.

225PRE-"EXPEDITION" CONDITIONS IN UTAH

Utah WarHC225First: there is the effort on the part of the Latter-day Saint community to establish the express and carrying company described in the preceding chapter, which by uniting with its express and carrying business, daily transportation of the mails, would give more frequent communication between the people of Utah and the eastern states, resulting inevitably in a closer union and a larger sympathy on the part of the people of Utah and their fellow citizens of the eastern states. This enterprise—as we have already seen—carrying with it such results, the people of Utah had undertaken with enthusiasm.

Utah WarHCSecond: we have already seen how the legislature of 1851-2, and legislatures at subsequent sessions, had petitioned the congress of the United States to establish a weekly mail between Missouri points and Salt Lake City; to build a territorial road from some northern settlement in Utah via Fill-more to southern California; that they petitioned for a geodetic survey within the territory, in continuation of Captain Stansbury's scientific work; they asked the general government to locate, grade and macadamize a national turnpike from the mouth of the Nebraska river to Sacramento, via South Pass and Salt Lake City, and this in the interest of transcontinental immigration; they petitioned for a transcontinental telegraph line and railway, via Salt Lake City. All this was practically petitioning for closer union and freer intercourse with their fellow citizens of the eastern states. If the ulterior aim of the "Mormon" leaders was isolation of their people into a distinct and separated community, then their course involving the above mentioned efforts for more frequent intercourse and closer union with their fellow citizens of the eastern states, was destructive of such a purpose.

STATEHOOD APPLICATION

Utah WarHCThird: the year preceding the coming of the "Expedition" the people of Utah had met with a great disappointment in the matter of an application for statehood that had been planned for by the legislative assembly of 1855. Yet, in referring to that matter in an explanatory way, Governor Young alluded to it more in sorrow than in anger, or bitterness, in the following passage—from his message to the legislature—and this is his only reference to the federal government in his message of 1856:

Utah WarHC226"In accordance with acts of the legislative assembly, a Constitution was formed and adopted, the census taken, and delegates chosen to present our application to congress for admission into the Union as a sovereign and independent state. Recent advices from our delegates show that our application has not been presented, owing to the intolerance evinced by the predominant party in the house of representatives.

Utah WarHC226The enumeration of the inhabitants showed a population of near 77,000 in this territory, and it is presumed that the addition to our numbers, since that was taken; would amount to about twenty thousand. This gives an aggregate equal to or exceeding the ratio of representation for congressmen, removing every objection, if any were made, to our admission, on the score of insufficient population." [^11]

MANIFESTATION OF UTAH PATRIOTISM

Utah WarHCFourth: as a further means of ascertaining the spirit of conditions existing in Utah prior to this armed "Expedition" to the territory take into account the sentiments expressed at the recurring anniversary of the nation's birth—the Fourth of July. To go no further back than the year preceding the projection of the "Utah Expedition," 1856,—(the day was celebrated annually and without omission from the year of the organization of the territory, misrepresentations to the contrary notwithstanding) [^12]—the following took place:

Utah WarHC227"At sunrise the stillness of the morning was broken by firing a national salute of 13 guns from the arsenal, which was the signal for ringing of bells and hoisting of flags.

Utah WarHC227The mammoth United States flag was hoisted upon the temple block, under the direction of A. N. Hill, esq., and flags were displayed from the cupola of Governor Young's residence, at Livingston Kincaid & Co's, Hooper & Williams', Gilbert & Gerrish's and the Church Stores, Townsend's and Wilkin's Hotels, and Whitehouse's Shop, together with a great variety of banners and mottos at the different stores and private residence. * * *

Utah WarHC227The bands under the direction of Major William Pitt, played at the residences of Governor Young, Hon. H. C. Kimball and Lieutenant General D. H. Wells; after which all the Nauvoo brass band, mounted, and Balloo's and martial bands, in omnibuses, passed through the principal streets discoursing beautiful and harmonious strains of music, indicating to the citizens that the anniversary of American Independence was to be celebrated with joy and thanksgiving."

Utah WarHCThere was a great procession through the streets of the city, in which Hon. George P. Stiles, associate justice of the United States supreme court, and General D. H. Burr, United States surveyor general for Utah, were given a prominent place—among the immediate guests of the governor—and saluted with the firing of cannon. At the place of speech-making the Constitution of the United States was presented and read by Thomas Bullock "followed by three cheers from the troops and assembled multitude, a roll of drums and music by Captain Balloo's band." The oration of Governor Young was a written speech, read by Thomas Bullock. Excerpts follow:

PATRIOTIC SPEECH OF GOVERNOR YOUNG—EXCERPTS

Utah WarHC"Brethren and Friends:

Utah WarHC228Eighty years ago, on the day we now celebrate, our forefathers, few in number but strong in their united love of right, declared to the mother country and the world that they were, 'and of right ought to be, free and independent.' The oppression which hastened this declaration, the long struggle, the sacrifices and hardships which followed, and the glorious results are so generally known that I need not task your patience by rehearsing them on this occasion. * * * Glancing at the past, perhaps we, as a people, have more reason to respect, honor, love and cherish the government of the United States, her Constitution and free institutions, than any other people upon the face of the earth; but it is lamentable that professed statesmen should so far deviate from wise and correct principles of republican government, as to fail of being entitled to that respect and confidence which ought to be deserved by those entrusted with its administration. In this connection, permit the reflection as to what favorable action we are indebted for our existence as a people."

Utah WarHC228He then proceeds to acknowledge God's providence in the preservation of the Latter-day Saints, and their establishment in Utah's valleys, then continues:

Utah WarHC228"We live through the blessings of the Almighty, and by his providence we have nourished and sustained ourselves; we are willing to continue so to do. We came here to be free from oppression and mobocracy, and we do not wish such characters to follow us, or to tarry in our midst. But we say to all lovers of freedom, virtue and good order, in every land, you are welcome, for you will respect our rights, our laws, and the legitimate obligations of our republican government."

Utah WarHC228The difficulties encountered in the settlement of the Great Basin valleys are then discussed:

Utah WarHC"But amid all these disadvantages, unendurable by any other people, we are still striving to extend the area of freedom, and to gladden the most uninviting domain of a great nation with the blessings and privileges of her free institutions."

Utah WarHC229After this the speaker holds that if the Latter-day Saints "should leave these sequestered vales, they would soon revert to their former waste condition—silence would again assert her supremacy." And then:

Utah WarHC229"The country suits us merely because no other well informed people can covet its possession. If they do, it is because they grudge us an existence upon any part of God's footstool. There is nothing here, except what is produced by the most arduous toil, and that often unrequited, to tempt the avarice or cupidity of any reasonable creature. It is useless, therefore, for official cliques, who never have identified their interests with the welfare of this territory, and who never intend to, to seek to dictate, govern and control us.

Utah WarHC229In view of these facts, we fondly anticipate soon seeing the day when, in accordance with the spirit and intent of our republican government, we shall be blest with the full enjoyment of our rights and have the privilege of electing officers of our own choice, and be free from the imposition of those known to be unsolicited and unsought upon our part, and who feel no interest in our prosperity, but would much rather see us languish and come to naught."

Utah WarHC229After discussing the evil effects of lawlessness in various places manifest throughout the United States, he strikes a truly noble and patriotic vein, in a discussion of what should be the national policy:

Utah WarHC"Here let us pause and consider the true principles of a republican government. It is and can be based only in a high tone and sense of honor, liberal, enlightened, intelligent and extended views of human existence and progress, and a faithful adherence to the Constitution and laws of the country. The least departure from these principles, the least disregard to law, manifested and exercised by the people in their sovereign capacity, and we have the worst of all despotisms, a hundred, a thousand tyrants instead of one. Public security fails and there remains no safety for life, liberty, or the pursuit of happiness; anarchy, confusion, infuriated and maddened excitement rule supreme. * * * Neither partisan nor private feeling nor sectional strife and contentions, should be permitted to thwart the enlightened and conservative policy of the government. At the same time that policy should be just and liberal, and commensurate with the laudable desires and requirements of a great and mighty people. * * * Let her steadily progress in the march of improvement and patriotism and in the arts and sciences; and corresponding with a great and pacific policy, open and extend channels of trade and commerce, and provide with a liberal hand for the development of her vast internal resources by affording to her most distant states and territories railroad facilities, magnetic telegraphs, and such other useful and important helps as shall be conducive to the public interests." [^13]

Utah WarHC230Such the patriotic sentiments and the political principles of Governor Brigham Young, and if he had the influence with his people that is usually accorded to him, then the sentiments and the principles also of his people. And this was the governor of a territory against whom the fulminations of a Drummond and a Magraw were to prevail! Among the many toasts given on the occasion here described were the following:

Utah WarHC230"Brigham Young: The Champion of Constitutional Liberty.

Utah WarHC230Deseret—May she soon have her place in the Union as a state, and though last as a star in the galaxy of American glory, may her progress be like that of Venus, to usher in the light of freedom, commerce and intelligence, to the western world: based on the rights of universal justice, righteousness and loyalty to the federal government." [^14]

230THE FOURTH OF JULY—CELEBRATIONS OF 1857

Utah WarHC230In the year 1857, even when the advanced companies of the "Utah Expedition" were upon the march-albeit unknown to the people of Utah—the nation's natal day was fittingly observed. In the account of the celebration in the Deseret News of that year the boast is made that the Fourth of July was more fittingly observed in Utah than elsewhere in the land; with less of drunkenness, fighting and confusion than in the eastern states perhaps—

Utah WarHC230"But if a true love of the Constitution and the wholesome laws of the Union, and the deep gratitude for the noble action of our forefathers on the Fouth of '76 are to be the criterion, then most assuredly and indisputably does Utah shine peerless among her sisters.

Utah WarHCFor a goodly portion of the day all business was suspended, and all offices and stores closed, that every class might participate in the parade and festivities commemorative of the eighty-first anniversary of our Independence. The stars and stripes and other flags gracefully floated over the governor's mansion, the Council House, the Deseret Store, and the Stores of Messrs. Livingston, Kincaid & Co. and Gilbert and Gerrish [non-'Mormons'].

Utah WarHC231The sky was clear, the atmosphere tempered by a delightfully coolish breeze, and the index of a deep, calm enjoyment rested upon every countenance within our view.

Utah WarHC231The military procession was imposing, and the evolution of the troops were unusually indicative of decided improvement." [^15]

Utah WarHC231The celebrations of the day in settlements outside of Salt Lake City seem to have been particularly numerous that year. The Deseret News of the 15th of July publishes the account of the celebration and gives the program of the day's proceedings in the following places: Farmington and Kaysville, Davis county; Ogden, Weber county; Grantsville, Tooele county; Pleasant Grove and Payson, Utah county. The News of the 22nd of July, gave the program and an account of the celebration in Provo, Utah county; and Manti, San Pete county. Among the toasts in these outlying settlements were the following:

Utah WarHC231"Uncle Sam: May he remember that all domestic questions must be settled by the people.

Utah WarHC231President Buchanan: May the spirit that dictated his inaugural address guide him in his administration.

Utah WarHC231President Buchanan: The people's choice:—may he be governed by principle, and not by party cliques.

Utah WarHC231The Valleys of Deseret: Cradles of liberty.

Utah WarHC231James Buchanan, President of the United States: May he ever continue the friend of the 'hardy Pioneer.'

Utah WarHC231The Constitution of the United States: Be all the pain to her enemies, but champagne to her friends.

Utah WarHC231The Constitution: May its broad wings shelter Utah."

Utah WarHC231A little homerule spice also found its way into the toasts, as witness the following:

Utah WarHC231"Here's to our friends who seek for office in Utah—may they continue to seek and die without finding it."

231RENEWED EFFORT AT STATEHOOD—1857

Utah WarHCFifth: It has already been noted that an effort to secure statehood was made in 1856, a Constitution formed and adopted, the census taken, disclosing a population in the territory adequate to statehood; delegates were chosen to present the application to congress (Messrs. Geo. A. Smith and John Taylor); but they withheld it because of the manifest prejudice existing against the territory in the lower house of congress. This was but one of several efforts to gain admission into the union since the organization of the territory. The first application was made in 1849-50; [^16] in 1852 the territorial legislature memorialized congress to pass an enabling act, authorizing the inhabitants to form a Constitution and state government preparatory to Utah "taking her place beside her elder sisters in the great federal union." [^17] This request was repeated in 1853. [^18] No heed was paid to these several Memorials, but these repeated efforts to secure statehood carry with them their own comment, and argue the faith of the Latter-day Saints in the government of the United States, else they would never have sought so persistently for the admission of Utah into the American Union—their efforts to secure statehood is an evidence of their loyalty as Americans.

PURPOSE OF MILITIA REORGANIZATION AND ACTIVITY

Utah WarHCThe Utah militia had been reorganized early in the year 1857, but with no intent to offer resistance to the federal government, as is sometimes alleged, since the people of Utah knew of no impending occasion for such resistance. The reorganization was purely in the interest of affording to the many exposed settlements security from Indian depredations. [^19] On this head—and there is no other purpose urged for the efficiency of the militia—the general commanding, Daniel H. Wells, said:

Utah WarHC233"Owing to the pacific policy of Governor Young, calls for active service have been few and on a small scale, yet our past experience with the aborigines of the soil has taught us the necessity of being always ready. Pompous displays in frequent musters are no evidence of strength and efficiency. Arms and ammunition ever at hand are the stronger arguments. We should aim, as much as possible, to substitute the useful for the artificial, where but one can be had. As the negligence of one man may endanger the safety of all, so let us approach our new organization that negligence may not escape its due censure and punishment."

Utah WarHC233General Wells thanks the militia for their past service, "especially those," he continues, "who have been ready at all times, unhesitatingly to answer my calls by engaging in the defense of our frontier settlements against a brave and subtle enemy. Under the blessings of the Almighty their energetic responses have resulted in a present general peace, and terms of friendship with our uncivilized neighbors. As the good never wish for war, and the wise are always ready for it, let us continually seek that our weapons may be made bright and ready by our industry, and preserved so by a continued peace." [^20]

Utah WarHC233Nobler sentiments from a military leader, I venture to remark, will be difficult, not only to find, but to conceive.

THE BUCHANAN ADMINISTRATION AT BAR

Utah WarHCSuch then were the conditions in Utah in respect of the several things considered, and these are the things that represent the mental attitude of mind, the status of the people relative to their loyalty to the American government. And I argue from all these conditions existing in Utah, previous to the setting out of the "Utah Expedition" to suppress a rebellion that had no existence, and that, too, without even so much as a pretense of investigation, and on the questionable testimony of a discredited and dishonored judge, and a disgruntled and disappointed mail contractor, moved by malice to make their misrepresentations of conditions in Utah, was a high crime and misdemeanor on the part of the Buchanan administration of the United States government, against the Latter-day Saints community of Utah.

Utah WarHC234The matter of severely criticising an existing, or a past, administration is no evidence of disloyalty on the part of those who engage in it. The denunciation of scoundrelly United States officials, whose appointments was a disgrace to the administration who made them, and an insult to the people among whom they were sent—these criticisms and denunciations, here admitted as having been freely indulged by "Mormon" leaders, and which is quite generally relied upon by anti-"Mormon" writers to prove "Mormon disloyalty"—this right of criticism, of complaint, of protest, and of denunciation, is part of the reserved rights of the sovereign people in the United States. It belongs to the freedom of speech and of the press. It is as much the right of the people of the territories—still citizens and people of the United States though living in a territory—as of the states. It is as much the right of the "Mormon" as of the Gentile or the Methodist, or the Atheist. And I refuse to admit that the exercise of these rights by "Mormon" leaders is evidence of disloyalty to the government, or to that broader, deeper thing we call Americanism. If the test sought by anti-"Mormon" writers to be applied to Latter-day Saints, was applied to their contemporaries in New England, and in Kansas, and, for matter of that, to the east generally, some names now held in honor for the purity and strength of their patriotism would be relegated to the ranks of the disturbers of the land's peace, and numbered with the disloyal.

FIRST STEPS IN ORGANIZATION AND MARCH OF THE "EXPEDITION"

Utah WarHCThe first known steps in forming the "Expedition" were taken by the federal government on the 28th of May, 1857, when orders were issued from the war department for the gathering of "a body of troops at Fort Leavenworth, to march thence to Utah as soon as assembled," and giving directions for their equipment and general movements. [^21] As already stated the formation of the expedition was carried on with great privacy by the government. Feramorz Little while assisting in western mail matters at Independence obtained some inkling of the movements of the government through numerous men who were figuring upon securing the contracts of the government for handling the supply trains of the "Expedition." He left Independence on the first of June, with mail that had accumulated through May, scarcely convinced, however, that such a movement against Utah was afoot. At Fort Laramie Mr. Little met Abraham O. Smoot, Esq., then the mayor of Salt Lake City, going east with the Utah June mail. Between Fort Laramie and New Fort Kearney, Mayor Smoot met two or three hundred United States troops. The commander offered Mr. Smoot an escort to Fort Kearney, which was declined. A hundred miles west of Independence the Smoot party began to meet the heavy laden government supply trains. Captains and teamsters alike were reticent about their destination; they had government freight and were bound for some western post, the trains belonged to one William R. Russell, was the sum of the information that could be obtained. Arriving at Independence Mr. Russell was visited and from him it was learned that the destination of the freight trains was Salt Lake City, that they carried supplies for government troops who would soon follow. At Independence, too, while the postmaster there received the Utah mails, Mr. Smoot learned of the annulment of the Kimball mail contract. This was sad news. It meant that the "Y. X. Company" must go out of business, and accordingly its agents, under the direction of Mr. Smoot and others, proceeded to break up its stations and move its stock westward. About a hundred and twenty miles east of Fort Laramie the western-moving Smoot party met O. P. Rockwell with the Utah July mail. The information he received from the Smoot party led Rockwell to decide to proceed no further eastward, but return with the west-bound company.

Utah WarHC236At Fort Laramie, 513 miles from Salt Lake City, Messrs. Smoot, Rockwell and Judson Stoddard concluded to make a forced drive to Salt Lake City with their news of the approaching army, and accordingly they hitched up two span of their best animals to a small spring wagon, and left Fort Laramie on the evening of July 18th. In five days they reached Salt Lake City, arriving on the evening of the 23rd of July, only to find Governor Young absent from the city. [^22] He, with a large party of citizens, had gone to the head of Big Cottonwood canon, there to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the entrance of the Pioneers into Salt Lake valley, on the 24th of July. The main encampment of the celebrants was formed at Silver Lake, where three spacious, "lumber-floored boweries" had been provided by a local lumbering company, whose sawmills were adjacent, and a large number of the encampment passed the evening of the 23rd "in the joyous dance." "There were 2,587 persons in the company; with 464 carriages and wagons, 1,028 horses and mules, and 332 oxen and cows. * * * Captain Balloo's band, the Nauvoo brass band, the Springville brass band, the Ogden City brass band, and the Great Salt Lake City and Ogden City marshal bands, were in attendance; also the 1st company of light artillery, under the command of Adjutant General James Ferguson, a detachment of four platoons of life guards and one platoon of the lancers, under the command of Colonel R. T. Burton, and one company of light infantry under the command of Captain John W. Young." [^23]

ANNOUNCEMENT IN UTAH OF THE MARCH OF THE "EXPEDITION"

Utah WarHC"The stars and stripes," says the current Deseret News account of the celebration, "were unfurled on two of the highest peaks in sight of the camp, and on the tops of two of the tallest trees." "The different bands played at intervals throughout the day, and greatly added to the zest of the varied sources of enjoyment."

Utah WarHC237"About noon" Messrs. Smoot, Stoddard and Rockwell, these men with the "war news," accompanied by Judge Elias Smith from Salt Lake City, rode in upon this scene of peace and joy and patriotism. Their advent, however, did not disturb the peace and joyousness of the occasion. Their message was delivered quietly to President Young and his immediate counselors and associates. For the rest, the afternoon's merriment and enjoyment went on as if no messengers from the east had arrived. "At about sunset the camp assembled for prayers," says the account followed here, and doubtless the most reliable, since it was published five days later in the one periodical of the state—Deseret News—"when President Wells made a few remarks in relation to the latest tidings from the states, upon the order of leaving the ground in the morning, and concluded with prayer."

Utah WarHC237But not even the announcement of the "latest tidings from the states," though it reported the approach of an army, and practically announced "war," could kill the joy of that occasion, or interrupt the merriment. Songs by Messrs. Poulter, Dunbar, McAllister and Maiben—local celebrities, in the vocal art—opened the evening's exercises; "after which," says our chronicle, "dancing and general hilarity continued to a late hour. On the morning of the 25th the company began to vacate the ground by daybreak, every one apparently highly gratified with the privileges they had been so blessed in enjoying." [^24]

Utah WarHCThus the news of the "Utah Expedition" reached Utah, and straightway activities began among the Latter-day Saints to resist the manifest injustice of this procedure on the part of the general government, against a loyal, American community.

Footnotes

"We trust that the present congress will have wisdom to so far recognize the principle of self-government, and the genius of our free institutions, as to abolish in her territories that odious, tyrannical, and absurd system of colonial government which emanated from the British throne and place them upon that equality of constitutional rights enjoyed by the states in their internal regulations, election of officers and representation."

July 4th, 1850—Deseret News of July 6th, 1850.

July 4th, 1851—Deseret News of July 12th, 1851.

July 4th, 1852—Deseret News of July 10th, 1852.

July 4th, 1853—Deseret News of July 9th, 1853.

July 4th, 1854—Deseret News of July 13th, 1854.

July 4th, 1855—Deseret News of July 18th, 1855.

---
Notas:
[^1] The names of these commanders and their respective districts were as follows: Colonel W. H. Dame, Parowan; Major L. W. McCullough, Fillmore; Major C. W. Bradley, Nephi; Major Warren S. Snow, San Pete; General Aaron Johnson, Peteetneet; Colonel William B. Pace, Provo; Major Samuel Smith, Box Elder; Colonel C. W. West, Weber; Colonel P. C. Merrill, Davis; Major David Evans, Lehi; Major Allen Weeks, Cedar; Major John Rowberry, Tooele. (History of Salt Lake City, p. 168, Tullidge).
[^2] The "order," in extenso will be found in the Contributor, vol. iii, p. 177. The Contributor was edited by Junius F. Wells, son of General Wells, and the article "The Echo Canon War"—in which the "order" appeared—was prepared by the younger Wells over the nom de plume, "Vaux."
[^3] See ante, chapter c this History, note 14; for George A. Smith's mission to the settlements in southern Utah, and instructions not to sell grain to passing immigrant companies to feed to stock; also justification of this policy, Ibid, passim.
[^4] Deseret News of Aug. 12th, 1857.
[^5] The "European Mission" was founded by the union of all the missionary districts, conferences, and branches of the church in European countries, as also all such subdivisions in Africa, Australia and India, under one presiding authority in June, 1854, when Elder Franklin D. Richards, of the council of the twelve arrived in England, authorized by his letter of appointment "to preside over all the conferences and all the affairs of the church in the British Islands and adjacent countries." "This," says Jenson, (Church Chronology, p. 51), was the beginning of what is called the European Mission." (See also Whitney's Biography of F. D. Richards, History of Utah, vol. iv, pp. 316-17).
[^6] Deseret News of August 12th, 1857.
[^7] See New York Times of 12th September, 1857, copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Sept. 12, 1857, pp. 502-7. For character of Richards' mission see Ibid, pp. 418-9, and Biography of Samuel Richards, by Whitney, History of Utah, vol. iv, p. 324. The latter affirms that the "bold message" carried by Richards and given into the keeping of Colonel Kane, "was delivered to the president" by that gentleman.
[^8] See New York Herald of March 12th. One of the number through this issue of the Herald gave an intelligent exposition of the attitude of the saints in respect of the issues recently and then existing between them and the federal administration. Stenhouse in his Rocky Mountain Saints, paints a livid picture of the "terror" of these returning elders, which is all out of character; and contrary to the quality of courage which generally, and even by Stenhouse himself, is accorded to the elders of those days. The description given by Stenhouse smacks of apostate malice. (See Rocky Mountain Saints, pp. 354-6).
[^9] History of Brigham Young, Ms., August, 1857, p. 435.
[^10] They reported that they left but two boxes of caps and 1 lb. of powder in all Carson valley. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., p. 744).
[^11] The article is copied into the History of Brigham Young, Ms., Nov., 1857, pp. 795-6. The Los Angeles Star, the nearest newspaper to the home of the saints, in referring to the abandonment of San Bernardino, gives them this indorsement of good character:—
[^12] Colonel Burton received his orders on the 13th of August. His command was to consist of 160 men from the first regiment of the legion; but as the character of the service upon which he was ordered demanded haste, he took seventy-five men from the life guards of the legion and departed two days later, accompanied by Colonel James Cummings, of the general staff; Major J. M. Barlow, quartermaster and commissary; Major H. W. Lawrence, Lieutenants J. Q. Knowlton, and C. F. Decker. They were afterwards joined by a company from Provo, commanded by Joshua Clark. (See Echo Canon War, J. F. Wells, Contributor, vol. iii, pp. 177-8).
[^13] One thousand nine hundred and ninety-four souls had left various European countries for Utah; but of this number only one thousand two hundred and fourteen started on the overland journey. Their camp equipment was as follows; 157 wagons; 646 oxen, 20 horses, 18 mules, 75 cows,, 19 loose cattle and 97 handcarts. In addition to the above numbers there were a few other emigrants accompanying groups of returning missionary elders. (Report of A. M. Musser, secretary of emigration agent, 1857, quoted by Jenson in Church Emigration, Contributor, vol. xiv, p. 344).
[^14] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Sept., 1857, p. 513).
[^15] Colonel Robert Taylor Burton was a most efficient officer for this service. He was possessed of great powers of endurance, tireless energy, cool, brave, cautious; sound of judgment, and courteous in conduct, he had also that indescribable something which holds and attracts men to their leaders. He was an ideal officer, both in appearance and temperament, and doubtless in a wider field would have won military distinction. His service previous to the "Utah War" was in the several campaigns against the Indian tribes in Utah, both under the authority of the provisional state government of "Deseret" and the territory of Utah; and he was also active in the relief corps that went to the aid of the belated handcart immigrants of the year previous. He was the son of Samuel and Hannah Shipley Burton, the tenth child in a family of fourteen, half of whom were born in England and the others in America. Robert himself was born in Amersburg, West Canada, October 25th, 1821. His grandparents, Samuel and Mary Johnson Burton, were of Yorkshire, England. Robert T. Burton, both as a military officer and counselor in the presiding bishopric of the church will be a leading figure in the church history.
[^16] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 23rd August, 1857, p. 438. John R. Murdock, plains captain, arriving twenty days later, reported that the number of beef cattle lost by the "Expedition" was 850 head; and that the rest of the 2,000 head of beef cattle, with which the "Expedition" started, had been returned to the states. (Ibid, pp. 471-2).
[^17] Ibid, pp. 438-9.
[^18] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 5th Sept., 1857, p. 472. Captain John R. Murdock was a most reliable and truthful gentleman; as also one of the greatest plains captains of the church's pioneering and overland journeying days. He had carried the United States July mail from Utah to Independence that year, making the eastward journey of twelve hundred miles in fifteen days. The government having suspended the mails to Utah he had no return mail. He went as far east as St. Louis, thence returned to Atchison, Kansas, where he took charge of a train of merchandise for Bell and Kincaid, Salt Lake merchants, which he captained over the plains. En route he came in contact several times with detachments of the "Utah Expedition," and from soldiery and trainmasters learned what they expected to do upon reaching Utah (Biographical sketch of John R. Murdock by J. M. Tanner, 1909, Desert News print, pp. 122-129). An incident exhibiting the high spirit of Captain Murdock—and, in a way, of the "Mormon" spirit in general—occurred on the plains in connection with the loss of the "Expedition's" beef cattle not included in the text above. "A party of men came into Murdock's company and said 'We have lost 850 head of cattle, and don't know who got them; Indians we believe stole them; we believe half of the Indians that stole those cattle were Mormons.' Murdock replied: 'This company are all Mormons, you had better mind what you say.' After this the party were very respectful." (Murdock's Report, History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 5th Sept., 1857, p. 472). Murdock met Colonel Burton's command at Devil's Gate, and consented to leave his train and carry that officer's express to Governor Young.. He rode day and night, and with a change of horses made the journey of three hundred and forty miles in four days. (Biographical Sketch, p. 289).
[^19] Murdock's Report, Ibid, p. 472. The numerous desertions from the "Expedition" are confirmed by S. W. Richards, as are also the reports of the ribaldry of the camp in relation to what would be done with the "Mormons," once the army was in Salt Lake valley: Mr. Richards in a letter to Orson Pratt, published in Millennial Star, vol xix, p. 670, says: "At Fort Kearney we learned that many were deserting from the 'Expedition, both troops and teamsters, and the officers had been obliged to hold out inducements, and adopt rigid regulations, withholding pay for one year, etc., to suppress, as far as possible, the spirit of desertion. It was thought this spirit would greatly increase as they advanced towards the mountains, and encountered the severity of the mountain storms, which must necessarily overtake them. Even at Kearney the soldiers were in very high glee at the idea of wintering sumptuously in Utah, where, as the Paddy said, 'the women are as thick as blackberries,' and it was a great wonder to them what Brigham Young would say to see them with his wives parading the streets of Great Salt Lake City. Every dirty, foul-mouthed Dutchman and Irishman, of which many of the troops were composed, fully expected some 'Mormon' woman would jump into his arms upon his arrival in Utah, and hail him as a heavenly messenger sent to bring deliverance from 'Mormon' degradation, wretchedness, and despair."
[^20] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1857, p. 532.
[^21] These instructions issued from the Headquarters of the Army, New York, June 29, 1857, signed by George W. Lay, lieutenant colonel, aid de camp, to General Winfield Scott. They were addressed to General W. S. Harney, at Fort Leavenworth, but were afterwards turned over to Colonel Johnston to be considered as instructions addressed to himself. (See letter of Assistant Adjutant General Irvin McDowell, date of Aug. 28th, 1857, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, x, No. 71, pp. 7, 8. The letter containing Harney's instructions was afterwards turned over to Johnston and quoted in the text is to be found in the same volume of House Executive Documents, No. 71, pp. 7-9).
[^22] Senate Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, vol. iii, pp. 27-8.
[^23] General Fitz John Porter, years after the "Expedition," stated that Harney knew and dreaded the rigors of a winter in the Rocky Mountains; and so late was the "Expedition" in starting that Harney both feared, and predicted disasters, and induced Governor Walker of Kansas, his friend, to ask his own detention in Kansas, on the plea of his presence being necessary to quell the border disturbances. (Porter is quoted by Linn, Story of the Mormons, p. 482).
[^24] General Johnston had seen service in the "Black Hawk War," as adjutant general in the Illinois militia forces. At the close of that war he resigned his commission in the United States army to join that of Texas, when that country was struggling for independence. Recognized as a good disciplinarian he was appointed adjutant general and perfected the organization of the Texan army rising rapidly through all the grades until, in 1837, he was made commander-in-chief, and later acted, under President Lamar, as secretary of war in the independent republic of Texas. At the outbreak of the war with Mexico, on the solicitation of General Zachary Taylor, Johnston joined the United States army, and was chosen colonel of the first Texas regiment, and served with distinction. At the close of the war he returned to private life as a planter in Brasoria county, Texas, where he remained until 1849, when he was appointed paymaster in the United States army.
