B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

239CHAPTER CV

239THE "UTAH WAR": PRELIMINARIES OF THE CAMPAIGN—COMMANDING OFFICERS

Utah WarHC239QUITE contrary to what might have been expected the announcement of the coming of the United States army to Utah created but little excitement in Salt Lake City and other principal settlements. The colonists of Utah were too inured to opposition—even to organize opposition—to be easily excited by its appearance, though it approached in a new form and seemed more formidable than hitherto. There was to be resistance to manifest injustice, of course, yet there would be no hysterical nervousness in that opposition. Confidence in the righteousness of their cause, and confidence in their leaders was too great to admit of undue excitement.

APPROACH OF THE UNITED STATES ARMY ANNOUNCED

The first step in preparation was to send word to the district commanders of the Utah militia of the reported approach, "tolerably well authenticated," of an army from the eastern states, to "invade Utah territory." This in an official note from the headquarters of the Nauvoo Legion, Salt Lake City, under date of August 1st, 1857, and signed by Daniel H. Wells, lieutenant general commanding. Attention was called to the fact in this communication that the people of Utah had lived "in strict obedience to the laws of the parent and home governments, and are zealous for the supremacy of the Constitution and the rights guaranteed thereby;" but "in such times, when anarchy takes the place of orderly government, and mobocratic tyranny usurps the power of rulers," the people "have left the inalienable right to defend themselves against all aggression upon their constitutional privileges." The saints for "successive years" had witnessed the desolation of their homes, the barbarous wrath of mobs poured upon their unoffending brethren and sisters; their leaders arrested, incarcerated and slain, and themselves driven to cull life from the hospitality of the desert and the savages. The Latter-day Saints were unwilling to endure longer these unceasing outrages; and if an exterminating war be proposed against them and blood alone can cleanse pollution from the nation's bulwarks, "to the God of our fathers let the appeal be made." The district commanders [^1] are then instructed to hold their respective divisions of the militia in readiness to march at the shortest possible notice to any part of the territory; to see that the law was strictly enforced in regard to arms and ammunition; and "as far as practicable, that each ten be provided with a good wagon and four horses or mules as well as the necessary clothing, etc., for a winter campaign. * * * Avoid all excitement, but be ready." [^2]

Utah WarHC240On receipt of this order there was prompt but quiet preparation made throughout the militia districts.

Utah WarHC240In addition to the military instruction in the foregoing order the military leaders were admonished "to use their influence for the preservation of the grain;" and this word of counsel was everywhere given and insisted upon, since food supplies would be of prime importance in the impending conflict. [^3]

240"THE CALL" TO SCATTERED LEADERS TO RETURN TO UTAH

Utah WarHCThe next step in preparation was to call home all the members of the apostles' quorum who were presiding over missions; and quite generally also all the "Utah elders;" and all the saints in the most distant outlying settlements, such as the San Bernardino and Carson valley settlements.

Utah WarHC241Elder John Taylor and Erastus Snow of the apostles' quorum, who had been in charge of missions in the United States, the first stationed at New York, the second at St. Louis, were already en route for Salt Lake City, where they arrived on the 7th of August. [^4] Other elders traveling as missionaries throughout the several states of the American Union also made their way home, to share the fortunes of their people.

UTAH'S MESSAGE AND PROTEST TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES

Utah WarHCSamuel W. Richards was dispatched to England to carry instruction to Orson Pratt and Ezra T. Benson of the apostles' quorum—the first being the president of the European Mission [^5]—and all the "American elders" to return home. Elder Richards was also entrusted with a special express to President Buchanan, informing the president that his army could not enter Utah until satisfactory arrangements had been made by commission or otherwise. Elder Richards also carried with him as part of his dispatches to the president and congress copies of the Deseret News of August 12th, containing a carefully prepared, though caustically worded editorial embodying the views of the presidency of the church and of the twelve apostles on the Utah crisis. [^6] These he delivered to Colonel Thomas L. Kane for transmission to the president of the United States, and then proceeded to New York, where he was interviewed by the New York Times, which gave, without prejudice, the "Mormon" view of the Utah situation as represented by Elder Richards, and which, fortunately, was much more pacific in tone than the editorial of the News of the 12th of August, and more likely to allay prejudice. [^7] Arriving in England with President Young's message to the two apostles, Elders Pratt and Benson, directing them to return home, Elder Richards was appointed to take temporary charge of the European Mission. The returning apostles, with four other Utah elders, made the journey via Isthmus of Panama, thence to San Bernardino and Salt Lake City, where they arrived in January, 1858. Twenty-four other elders from the European Missions returned home via New York—landing there on the 10th of March, 1858—and by various routes made their way to Utah. [^8]

THE SPIRIT OF UTAH'S MESSAGE

Utah WarHCRelative to the bold message carried east by Elder Samuel Richards and delivered to Colonel Thomas L. Kane, for transmission to the president of the United States, and which was delivered to him as arranged, may not that circumstance have paved the way to the tender of, or the solicitation of, the services of the colonel in the settlement of the "Utah Question" when it had reached its climax? For such service, as we shall see later, was rendered by Colonel Kane.

Utah WarHCRelative to the message itself, what follows should be said: The caption of the News editorial,—which is also the message—is, The United States Government and Utah. It expiates upon the opportunities for greatness on the part of the United States, the likelihood of losing that opportunity by corrupt political methods. Utah's area is described, a mixture of widely desert areas with narrowly limited fertile spots, but lying athwart the best central line of communication between the Pacific slope, the land of gold, and the east. "Did not the government offer large bounties in land and almost stretch its delegated powers, to pave the way for the settlement of so desolate a country," is asked. "And did they not shake off a barbarous relic of colonial usage and guarantee to the settlers in such a region, even more fully and cheerfully than is accorded to those dwelling in more desirable locations, the constitutional right of electing their own officers?" "We will answer," says the editorial. And then is passed in review the enforced exodus from Nauvoo, the service of the Mormon Battalion; the settlement of the Great Basin valleys, and a contrast between the preemption laws of other territories, and the neglect to provide such laws for Utah. The law and order maintained in Utah is contrasted with the lawlessness and violence in the territories of Nebraska and Kansas. The extreme, and, indeed, the questionable view is taken that the purpose of the government in sending its armed "Expedition" to Utah is to corrupt or exterminate the Latter-day Saints. To pave the way for the attainment of such an end, and indeed to goad the people if possible to some overt act which can be seized upon for a plausible pretext to encompass such an end; the government "persists," to use the language of the editorial, "in the barbarous colonial usage of thrusting strange and outside officers upon us—contrary to our lawful and oft expressed unanimous choice—the majority of whom are mostly well known to be utterly base and unworthy." "One of President Buchanan's cabinet has styled our legislative assemblies disrespectful and threatening," continues the editorial, "because, forsooth, they plainly though most respectfully set forth their constitutional rights in the matter of officers for Utah; and that most strictly in accordance with the teachings of Thomas Jefferson, the great father of the party now in power." Some of the closing paragraphs of the message are intemperate speech. The following quotation representing the least offensive parts: "If you intend"—addressing the administration—"to continue the appointment of certain officers, we respectfully suggest that you appoint actually intelligent and honorable men, who will wisely attend to their own duties, and send them unaccompanied by troops, which you yourself know are of no lawful use here—and your officers will be treated strictly according to their acts and merits, as you also well know has always been the case, except that we did not hang up some of the infernal scoundrels you have heretofore sent, as they most richly deserved. And if you will not receive this fair counsel, but persist in sending us officials from the tag, rag and bobtail of wh— houses, grog shops and gambling hells, we shall take the yankee liberty of guessing your kind (?) intentions towards us, and shall also take the liberty, for the first time of using that class of officials strictly in accordance with their deserts." One can but regret the harshness of this editorial, sent to the president and congress as special express from Utah; but one regrets more that such had been the character of many of Utah officials appointed by previous administrations, and that there was color of justification for its harshness and but slightly veiled threats.

CALLING IN THE PEOPLE OF OUTLYING SETTLEMENTS

Utah WarHCAbout the time that Elder Richards was sent to England to release the Utah missionaries in Europe, Peter Conover was sent with an escort of ten or twelve men to bring in the settlers from Carson valley. [^9] Conover arrived at the Carson settlement on the 5th of September, and in three weeks the settlers had disposed of their holdings and property, as far as possible, and at great sacrifice, and began the journey to Salt Lake City, where they arrived on the 2nd of November. The company comprised 450 souls, traveling in 123 wagons, separated into two divisions. Bishop William R. Smith of Davis county—later to become president of Davis stake of Zion—was captain of the first division; John Little, captain over the second; and Chester Loveland, an experienced plainsman, commander of both divisions. It was reported by their leaders that there were 160 men in the companies, capable of bearing arms. Before leaving Carson valley the settlers sent agents over the Sierras to San Francisco to purchase $800.00 worth of ammunition, besides such quantities as could be bought in the Carson settlements. [^10] Altogether they reported 2,700 lbs. of community ammunition, besides large quantities in the possession of individuals. The company also brought a large number of arms, and altogether was a substantial reinforcement to the Salt Lake valley community.

Utah WarHCThe saints from San Bernardino returned to Utah in several companies in the closing months of 1857, and in the early months of 1858, many of them making their homes in the southern settlements of the territory. They, too, brought with them large stores of arms and ammunition. A Los Angeles correspondent of the Alta, (California) under date of November 23rd, notes the departure of fifty-five "Mormon" families from San Bernardino the previous week, saying that "within six weeks one thousand persons will have forsaken their homes in that valley in obedience to the commands of their chief. Men, women and children go off without a murmur and with countenances lighted with stern joy, at the assurance they receive that they are about to fight and destroy their enemies. * * * There is not one line in the face of a Mormon that does not defiantly say, 'we will die before we submit.'" The correspondent deplores that steps have not been taken to guard the Cajon Pass—the only gateway from southern California to Utah—to prevent the transmission of munitions of war and of the enemy, whether "Mormons" or Indians. [^11]

UTAH'S MOVEMENTS IN THE FIELD

Utah WarHCThe first movement of Utah forces in the field was the trailing eastward of a "corps of observation," consisting of seventy-five men under the command of Colonel Robert T. Burton of the Nauvoo Legion. The corps left Salt Lake City on the 15th of August, [^12] under orders to protect and aid the incoming "Mormon" immigration of that year, which though small in comparison with that of the previous years, numbered over twelve hundred souls. [^13] In addition to aiding the immigration Burton's command was under orders to learn the location, strength and equipment of the United States forces approaching Utah; and report their progress and all their movements to Utah headquarters. He was also to note strategic points along the route which might be taken advantage of in opposing the army's entrance to Utah; but was under strict orders not to interfere with the life or property of any one.

Utah WarHC247About a month after Burton's departure a volunteer company was called ostensibly to found a settlement on the Snake river, in the vicinity of Fort Hall. It was known as the "Blackfoot Mission." Its real purpose, however, was to be on the northern route of the "Utah Expedition," in the event of its making a detour via Soda Springs, and Fort Hall, to watch its movements and report them. The command numbered forty-three, under the leadership of Captain Andrew Cunningham. The list of their names will be found in History of Brigham Young, Ms. [^14] As it became definitely known before the winter was far advanced that it was not the intention of the commander of the "Expedition" to attempt any other route to Salt Lake City than the direct one via Fort Bridger and Echo canon, the Cunningham command was recalled during the winter.

Utah WarHC247Another northern expedition of observation was executed under the leadership of Marcellus Monroe, connected with Colonel West's command of Weber county's militiamen. The company consisted of twelve mounted men who took their course through Ogden canon, crossed the mountains to Bear Lake, thence up Bear river valley, and across the mountains via Lost Creek to the Weber, and so to Ogden. The object of their expedition was to become familiar with the mountain passes, to locate sallying points and places for retreat in the event of an active campaign opening.

Utah WarHCAccording to Burton's own narrative he reached Fort Bridger on the 21st of August; and five days later met, at Pacific Springs, the first "Mormon" immigrant companies; and the next day several large supply trains for the government entirely unprotected by any escort.

Utah WarHC248Leaving his wagons and half of his men on the Sweet-water, Colonel Burton proceeded eastward to Devil's Gate, which he reached on the 30th of August, meeting frequently the westward moving immigrant companies. In this locality he cached considerable quantities of provisions for future use. On the 8th of September he sent an express in advance to the Platte, which four days later returned with information of the approaching United States forces. From this time Burton's command began its slow return westward, meanwhile keeping close observation of the army's movements, including its scouting operations. When Colonel Alexander's division of the "Expedition," comprising the 5th and 10th United States infantry regiments, with Phelps' and Reno's battery, camped at Devil's Gate, on the 22nd of September, Colonel Burton, with three companions, camped within half a mile of him; and from thence until the troops arrived on Ham's Fork, an indirect western tributary of Green river, Colonel Burton's command kept in the immediate neighborhood of the army, reporting by frequent express riders its every movement either to Governor Young or General Wells. [^15]

Utah WarHCUp to the latter part of August it was supposed in Utah that General Harney was in command of the "Utah Expedition." An express from Deer Creek station, 300 miles east of Salt Lake City, brought the news on the 25th that "General Harney's train lost 480 head of beef cattle, stolen by the Cheyenne Indians." [^16] Also that "General Harney is very secretive and the officers at Laramie will give nobody any information; but it has leaked out that Harney determined to remove all 'Mormon' stations on the road." Under date of 26th of August, President Young said: "I have sent word to General Harney that I wish for peace, and do not want to fight anybody; but he must not come here with a hostile army, and if he undertakes it, we shall prepare to defend ourselves." [^17]

ALBERT SIDNEY JOHNSTON IN COMMAND OF THE "EXPEDITION"

Utah WarHCAs the immigration companies began to arrive, however, they brought news of the detention of General Harney in Kansas, and of the appointment of General—then Colonel—Albert Sidney Johnston to the command of the "Utah Expedition." They brought word of the anti-"Mormon" bitterness prevailing in the east; of the talk on the plains, at the stations, the forts, and in the army camps; all of which was not very reassuring for Utah's peace, since there were threats with cursing as to what would be done with the "Mormons," once the army was in Salt Lake valley. "All the way from the states to Laramie," reported Captain John R. Murdock, "it was G— d—n the Mormons." At Laramie the officers [i.e. the local officers stationed there, not the officers of the "Utah Expedition"] tipped their hats; and from there everybody was respectful. [^18] The only offset to this vicious aspect of things eastward was the news that five hundred men had deserted from the "Expedition"—thirty in one night—and "there was much opposition in the states against the administration forcing the troops into Utah." [^19]

RIBALDRY OF THE CAMP

Utah WarHCOn the 18th of September Charles Decker and Jesse Earl came from Burton's command as an express. These brethren representing themselves as California immigrants had been within the camps of the "Utah Expedition" and had mingled freely with the soldiers. Inquiring as to what they intended to do in Utah, the answer was: "Scalp Old Brigham." "Have you seen him?" would be the return inquiry. "Yes." "How does he feel?" "Rather scary," the brethren answered. [^20]

Utah WarHC251Doubtless much of what was thus reported was merely the utterances of the irresponsible soldiery, the teamsters, and the camp followers of the "Expedition"—the mere braggadocio of the camp. Certainly it does not comport with the written instructions of the war department to the commander of the "Expedition;" nor to the high character of the official personnel of the "Expedition." As to the former, the commander of the "Expedition" in outlining "the principles" by which he was to be guided, the war department instructions said:

OFFICIAL INSTRUCTIONS OF THE "EXPEDITION"

Utah WarHC"If the governor of the territory, finding the ordinary course of judicial proceedings or the power vested in the United States' marshals and other proper officers inadequate for the preservation of the public peace, and the due execution of the laws, should make requisition upon you for a military force to aid him as a posse comitatus in the performance of that official duty, you are hereby directed to employ for that purpose the whole or such part of your command as may be required; or should the governor, the judges, or marshals of the territory find it necessary directly to summon a part of your troops, to aid either in the performance of his duties, you will take care that the summons be promptly obeyed. And in no case will you, your officers, or men, attack any body of citizens whatever, except on such requisition or summons, or in sheer self-defense.

Utah WarHC251In executing this delicate function of the military power of the United States, the civil responsibility will be upon the governor, the judges, and marshals of the territory. While you are not to be, and cannot be subjected to orders, strictly speaking, of the governor, you will be responsible for a jealous, harmonious, and thorough co-operation with him, on frequent and full consultation, and will conform your action to his requests and views in all cases where your military judgment and prudence do not forbid, nor compel you to modify, in execution, the movements he may suggest. No doubt is entertained that your conduct will fully meet the moral and professional responsibilities of your trust; and justify the high confidence already reposed in you by the government.

Utah WarHCSo well is the nature of this service appreciated, and so deeply are the honor and the interest of the United States involved in its success, that I am authorized to say that the government will hesitate at no expense requisite to complete the efficiency of your little army, and to insure health and comfort to it, as far as attainable. Hence, in addition to the liberal orders for its supply heretofore given—and it is known that ample measures, with every confidence of success, have been dictated by chiefs of staff departments here—a large discretion will be made over to you in the general orders for the movement." [^21]

GENERAL HARNEY'S INSTRUCTIONS TO CAPTAIN VAN VLIET

Utah WarHCFurthermore, when General Harney, before being relieved of the command of the "Utah Expedition," sent Captain Van Vliet to Utah to negotiate for the encampment and provisioning the "Expedition," it was stated in a letter of instructions to Captain Van Vliet, written by Captain Pleasanton, assistant adjutant general to General Harney, "that the general commanding has deemed it proper and courteous to inform President Young, of the society of the Mormons, of the object of your visit, and has also requested of him the required facilities to enable you to execute your instruction certainly and effectively." * * * You will obtain a suitable location for the troops in the vicinity of Salt Lake City, sufficiently near to be effective in supporting the civil authority in the maintenance of the territorial laws, but allowing ample room to prevent an improper association of the troops with the citizens—an object in this selection of primary importance. * * * You will impress necessity for a very careful circumspection of conduct in his command. The men should not only be carefully selected for this service, but they should be repeatedly admonished never to comment upon or ridicule anything they may either see or hear, and to treat the inhabitants of Utah with kindness and consideration." [^22]

Utah WarHCThese instructions make of the "Army of Utah" merely a posse comitatus, to aid the territorial executive and judiciary authorities, yet keeping the military subordinate to the civil authority. Evidently the "Utah Expedition" was to be no army of invasion and conquest.

Utah WarHC253As to the second consideration, the high character of the official personnel of the "Expedition," which makes it certain that the ribaldry of the soldiers and of the camp followers did not represent the purpose of the "Expedition"—it is only necessary to name them, for their names now rank high in the country's honored galaxy of the nation's great generals.

PERSONNEL OF THE OFFICERS OF THE "EXPEDITION"

Utah WarHCGeneral W. S. Harney, first assigned to the command of the "Expedition," was a veteran soldier of Revolutionary ancestry. He had served with distinction in both the Black-hawk and Florida Indian wars, as also in the war with Mexico. After the close of this war he was in the service on the western frontiers, and in 1855-6, with a command of 1,500 soldiers, defeated the Brule Sioux, at Ash Hollow, one hundred miles southeast of Laramie, under Chief Little Thunder; and as many Indian women and children were killed in the engagement, his enemies dubbed him "squaw-killer Harney." He was an efficient officer, however, and at the opening of the Civil War was in command of the western division of the army stationed at St. Louis. [^23]

Utah WarHC253General Persifer F. Smith was assigned as the commander of the "Expedition" at Harney's release, but he fell ill at Fort Leavenworth and died before assuming command of the "Expedition."

Utah WarHCColonel (afterwards General) Albert Sidney Johnston, who finally became commander of the "Expedition," was a Kentuckian, a graduate of West Point, and, at the time of his appointment to the command of the "Utah Expedition," paymaster in the United States army under the appointment of President Zachary Taylor, and later to become the hero of the battle of Shilo in the war between the states, [^24] where he met his death.

Utah WarHC254Major (afterwards General) Fitz John Porter, was assistant adjutant general to Colonel Johnston. He was the cousin of Admiral D. D. Porter, one of the most distinguished officers of the American navy, as also a member of one of the most distinguished families of America. Fitz John Porter was also a West Point graduate, and during the Civil War served with distinction in the union army.

Utah WarHC254Colonel Alexander, to whom leadership of the advanced division of the "Expedition" fell by virtue of seniority of rank, was a gentlemanly officer, of no great ability as a leader, but certainly not vicious or lawless; President Young said to him—when the colonel called to make his adieux on leaving the territory, August 8th, 1858—that he had no doubt that "if he had had half an hour's interview with him last fall (1857), the army might as well have come in last fall as this spring." [^25]

Utah WarHCLieutenant Colonel Charles F. Smith, of the 10th infantry, was a graduate of West Point, 1825, and served as instructor, adjutant and commandant in that institution from 1829-40. He had commanded a light battalion in the Mexican war and was distinguished at Palo Alto, Resaca de la Palma, Monterey, and Churubusco. He had also seen service in Kansas. In the Civil War he became the hero of the Union army at the capture of Fort Donelson, for which he was promoted to a major generalship, and for a time, under General Halleck's appointment, superceded General Grant, and but for an illness from a wound which compelled his retirement, he would have commanded at the battle of Pittsburg landing. John Fiske speaks of him as "one of the truest men and finest officers in the federal service." [^26]

Utah WarHC255Captain (afterwards Major General) Stewart Van Vliet—who bore an important part in the "Expedition" as advance courier of it, was assistant quartermaster, U. S. A., of General Harney's staff. He had before time come in contact with many of the Latter-day Saints at Winter Quarters, where he had employed hundreds of them, in the government service, and treated them fairly. Referring to the captain's presence on the stand at the tabernacle, on Sunday the 13th of September, President Young, in his public address, said:

Utah WarHC255"From the day of his (Van Vliet's) visit to Winter Quarters, many of this people have become personally acquainted with him, both through casual intercourse with, and working for, him. He has invariably treated them kindly, as he would a Baptist, a Methodist, or any other person, for that is his character. He has always been found to be free and frank, and to be a man who wishes to do right; and no doubt he would deal out justice to all, if he had the power. Many of you have labored for him and found him to be a kind, good man; and I understand that he has much influence in the army through his kind treatment of the soldiers." [^27]

Utah WarHCColonel (later Major General) Philip St. George Cooke, who commanded the six companies of 2nd dragoons in the "Utah Expedition," was also the honored leader of the Mormon Battalion in its memorable march to the Pacific coast, 1846-7. While a stern officer, Colonel Cooke was an honorable man, and rose to distinction in the Civil War.

Utah WarHC256Captain Randolph Barnes Marcy (afterwards brigadier general and inspector general of the United States army), was a most gentlemanly officer, and the one who performed the most distinguished service in the "Utah Expedition." [^28] He was a West Point graduate, served in the Mexican war during which he rose to the grade of captain. He was the father-in-law of General McClellan, and at the beginning of the Civil War served as chief of staff to that officer. General Marcy, later in life, was the author of a number of books dealing chiefly with army life on the western frontiers.

Utah WarHC256An "Expedition" so officered justifies what has been so frequently said of it, viz., that it comprised the very "flower of the American army;" [^29] and an "Expedition" made up of such a division of the army, and so officered, cannot be thought of as having for its purpose any other than honorable service; and forbids the thought of its being engaged in a wanton war of invasion and conquest, or the likelihood of its becoming an irresponsible mob revelling in bachanalian orgies in the despoiled settlements and towns of an American community.

Footnotes

"From our acquaintance with the people of San Bernardino, we must say that we know them to be a peaceable, industrious, law-abiding community. Under great disadvantage they have cultivated their farms, and caused the ranch, [San Bernardino] which was, before their occupation almost unproductive, to teem with the choicest products of the field, and the garden. With their peculiarities of religion or church we have nothing to do; we know them to be good citizens, and cheerfully testify to the fact. Besides the people of San Bernardino, our state will lose three or four hundred other Mormon citizens, many of whom are now on the way to join the departing saints." (Copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for November, 1857, pp. 796-7).

---
Notas:
[^1] On the 8th of October Colonel Alexander in a communication to the officers of his command declared to them that "no information of the position or intention of the commanding officer has reached me, and I am in utter ignorance of the object of the government in sending troops here, or the instructions given for their conduct after reaching here." (House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, x, No. 71, pp. 38-40).
[^2] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry of Sept. 9th, 1857, pp. 476-7.
[^3] See Van Vliet's Report to Captain Pleasanton A. A. adjutant general, army for Utah, dated from Ham's Fork, Sept. 16th, 1857. See also Sermons of John Taylor and Brigham Young on Sunday, the 13th of September, in the presence of Captain Van Vliet, and published in the Deseret News of Sept. 23rd; also editorial same impression of the News. See also note 10 this chapter.
[^4] Such had been the suggestion of the New York Herald of two years before (Sept. 15th, 1855) on hearing that certain young officers and troopers in Colonel Steptoe's command had induced—and in some cases by seduction—a number of young "Mormon" women to abandon their homes for the adventures of an army camp. (See John Taylor's editorial treatment of this suggestion in The Mormon of September 15th, 1855; the matter is summarized in The Life of John Taylor, ch. xxix).
[^5] The Mormon Question: A Discussion Between Elder John aylor and Vice-President of the United States, Schuyler Colfax, Deseret News, print, 1870, p. 22.
[^6] See ante this History, ch. xxxv.
[^7] In a letter to his son, William, then in England, Heber C. Kimball wrote under date of May 29th, 1855: "Last fall, after Colonel Steptoe with his command came here, with Judge Kinney, Mr. Holman and many others, we treated them as gentlemen should be treated, and invited them to our parties and habitations, and feasted them and tried to make something of them. While doing this, some of them began to take unhallowed liberties with the females." At a public meeting in February this wickedness was severely reproved by Elders Kimball and Grant. "I was moved upon," says the former, in the letter above quoted, "and exposed this wickedness and abominable corruptions in our midst. Brother Jedediah [Grant] backed me. It was quite an earthquake for them. Previous to this we were the finest men that lived, and they had expressed it publicly and privately, and afterwards they said there was not a meaner set of men than we were, from the governor down, and they were ready to take our lives." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1855, pp. 55-6).
[^8] Messages and Papers of the Presidents, published by authority of congress, 1897, vol. v, p. 455.
[^9] M. Remy's Journey to Great Salt Lake City, vol. i, pp. 478-9.
[^10] See House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, No. 71, p. 25.
[^11] It was on this point of the interview that Captain Van Vliet afterwards reported upon to John B. Floyd, United States secretary of war, in the following language: "In conclusion, I would also state that Governor Young informed me that he had no objection to the troops themselves entering the territory; but if they allowed them to do so, it would be opening the door for the entrance of the rabble from the frontiers, who would, as in former times, persecute and annoy them; and to prevent this, they, the Mormons, had determined to oppose all interference of the government in the affairs of their territory." (Senate Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, vol. iii, p. 38). This was by no means mere fancy on the part of Brigham Young. It represented a real danger, the nucleus of which would be found in the one thousand teamsters to be discharged at the end of their journey, and the camp followers, which classes are thus described in the Atlantic Monthly for March, 1859—the article was written by one who accompanied the "Expedition" and who was in sympathy with Colonel Johnston.
[^12] In a discourse Captain Van Vliet heard that day, Governor Young had said: "Were I an officer sent to Utah for the purpose of aiding the unhallowed oppression of the innocent (and in this connection I disclaim all personalities)—[though doubtless he had Van Vliet, present on the stand, in mind]—I would know the facts in the case, before I made any hostile move; and sooner than side with tyranny and murder I would resign my commission." The remarks of Van Vliet above were doubtless in response to the sentiments of President Young. The interview quoted to the point noted above is given at length in Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry for 13th of September (Sunday) 1857. What follows from the point here referred to in the text, is from Woodruff's Journal entry of the 20th of September, 1857, as "conversation that passed between President Young and Captain Van Vliet not before recorded in my journal." The parts of the interview published by Tullidge is garbled; and as given in condensed form in Wilford Woodruff— A History of his Life and Labors, Cowley, 1909, it should not have been inclosed in quotation marks.
[^13] Governor Young was quite accurate in his reference to an investigating committee for Kansas. In Leverett W. Springs' History of Kansas—of the American Commonwealth series, edited by Horace E. Scudder—occurs the following passage on the subject: "Out of the various bills, comprises, substitutes, amendments, which appeared in congress during the spring and summer of 1856, a single measure only emerged that reached any practical importance—the appointment by the house of representatives of an investigating committee, the members of which were William A. Howard, of Michigan, John Sherman, of Ohio, and Mordecai Oliver, of Missouri. This committee proceeded to the territory, held its first meeting at Kansas City, April 14th, examined three hundred and twenty-three witnesses, who represented every shade of political opinion, and on the 1st and 2nd of July presented a report, in which a great mass of facts is accumulated wholly creditable to neither side." (History of Kansas, p. 108).
[^14] The speaker described the feeling at Cedar where a rumor prevailed that a force of 600 dragoons was coming upon the town from the east. "The major [Isaac C. Haight] seemed very sanguine about the matter [i. e. that the force of dragoons were coming]. I asked him if this rumor should prove true if he was not going to wait for instructions. He replied there was no time to wait for any instructions; and he was going to take his battalion and use them up before they could get down through the canons; 'for,' said he, 'if they are coming here, they are coming here for no good.'" (Discourse is published in Deseret News of Sept. 23rd, 1857).
[^15] Deseret News for Sept. 23rd, 1857, p. 231. While walking through the garden and orchard of Professor Albert Carrington, in company with President Young, Captain Van Vliet "asked Mrs. Carrington if she was willing to cut down her fine peach orchard for her faith and religion. She said 'Yes,' and 'would sit up nights to do it, if necessary.'" (Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry for Sept. 9th, 1857).
[^16] See ante, this History, chapter civ.
[^17] All four discourses were delivered in the presence of Captain Van Vliet and will be found reported in full in the Deseret News of Sept. 23rd, 1857. And in vol. v of Journal of Discourses under date, Sept. 13th, 1857. The visit of Captain Van Vliet is described at length in the News of the 16th of September.
[^18] These reports are published in House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, x, No. 71, pp. 24-27; and in Senate Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, vol. iii, pp. 37-8. The report to Pleasanton is given in full in "The Echo Canon War," Contributor, vol. iii, p. 147, et seq.
[^19] This from the report of Colonel N. V. Jones who accompanied Captain Van Vliet and Dr. Bernhisel until they passed both sections of Colonel Alexander's command. "Elder Nathaniel V. Jones arrived this morning from the United States army. He visited with Captain Van Vliet both regiments. The first was the 10th regiment: that was a full regiment. The officers were young and full of fire, and they swore they would come in anyhow—they could whip out Utah. Captain Van Vliet advised them not to come for they could get nothing: they would have to fight their way. But they swore they would fight their way through. After Van Vliet left them they marched thirty miles instead of fifteen the next day. The second regiment he met with were old officers. They considered the matter over more and thought it an imposition to be sent out here as a political movement to kill innocent people or to get killed. They will be at Pacific Springs tonight and our brethren will commence operation upon them" (Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry for Sept. 25th, 1857). In his journal entry for the 28th September, Woodruff again reverts to a conversation with Colonel Jones in which the latter said that Captain Van Vliet "tried to persuade the army to stay on Ham's Fork or in that region; but the 10th regiment swore that they had started for Salt Lake and they would go then. Captain Van Vliet told them that we should not let them come, and they would find a different warfare from anything they had met with." (The same matter is in History of Brigham Young, Ms., for September, 1857, p. 567).
[^20] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1857, p. 532.
[^21] These instructions issued from the Headquarters of the Army, New York, June 29, 1857, signed by George W. Lay, lieutenant colonel, aid de camp, to General Winfield Scott. They were addressed to General W. S. Harney, at Fort Leavenworth, but were afterwards turned over to Colonel Johnston to be considered as instructions addressed to himself. (See letter of Assistant Adjutant General Irvin McDowell, date of Aug. 28th, 1857, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, x, No. 71, pp. 7, 8. The letter containing Harney's instructions was afterwards turned over to Johnston and quoted in the text is to be found in the same volume of House Executive Documents, No. 71, pp. 7-9).
[^22] Senate Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, vol. iii, pp. 27-8.
[^23] General Fitz John Porter, years after the "Expedition," stated that Harney knew and dreaded the rigors of a winter in the Rocky Mountains; and so late was the "Expedition" in starting that Harney both feared, and predicted disasters, and induced Governor Walker of Kansas, his friend, to ask his own detention in Kansas, on the plea of his presence being necessary to quell the border disturbances. (Porter is quoted by Linn, Story of the Mormons, p. 482).
[^24] General Johnston had seen service in the "Black Hawk War," as adjutant general in the Illinois militia forces. At the close of that war he resigned his commission in the United States army to join that of Texas, when that country was struggling for independence. Recognized as a good disciplinarian he was appointed adjutant general and perfected the organization of the Texan army rising rapidly through all the grades until, in 1837, he was made commander-in-chief, and later acted, under President Lamar, as secretary of war in the independent republic of Texas. At the outbreak of the war with Mexico, on the solicitation of General Zachary Taylor, Johnston joined the United States army, and was chosen colonel of the first Texas regiment, and served with distinction. At the close of the war he returned to private life as a planter in Brasoria county, Texas, where he remained until 1849, when he was appointed paymaster in the United States army.
[^25] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Aug. 8th, 1858, p. 879.
[^26] Mississippi Valley in the Civil War, p. 62.
[^27] Desert News, impression of Sept. 23rd, 1857. (See also History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Sept. 9th, 1857, p. 474. Reference to Van Vliet's former honorable conduct towards the "Mormons" in the Ms. History of Brigham Young, brought forth the statement from the captain that "he had always been gratified in his intercourse with Mormons; when he had benefited any of them it was not because they were Mormons, or Baptists, but because he felt it to be his duty." The Deseret News, editorially referring to Captain Van Vliet, after his departure at the end of his official visit to Salt Lake City, said: "Were all government officials like Captain Van Vliet, and did they conduct themselves with that urbanity and gentility which constantly marked his course during his short stay in Utah, then indeed the more officers sent here the better would our territory flourish." (Deseret News, impression of 16th Sept., 1857).
[^28] This service consisted of a midwinter expedition across the Uintah Mountains, with two guides and thirty-five volunteer companions to New Mexico, to secure the large number of horses and mules that would be needed in the spring to convey the "Expedition" to Salt Lake valley. The march is regarded as one of the most remarkable on record. It was persisted in by the intrepid leader after the Indian guides refused to go farther to what they insisted would be certain death. The little command finally reached the valley of the Rio Del Norte, however, with the loss of but one man; and at Fort Massachusetts and vicinity, obtained about 1,500 head of horses and mules with which the captain returned to Utah army headquarters at Camp Scott, on the 8th of June, 1858; to which point he was escorted by five companies of infantry and mounted riflemen. This expedition was the subject of high commendation by General Scott, "and was mentioned by the secretary of war in terms of highest praise." Marcy himself tells the thrilling story of his expedition in his Thirty Years of Army Life on the Border.
[^29] Tullidge, History of Salt Lake City, p. 190. The "Expedition" was made up of the 5th and 10th infantry; of Phelps', and finally Reno's, battery, of the 4th artillery, and the 2nd dragoons, 2,500 men in all. (See circular to the appropriate officer signed by General Winfield Scott, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, x. No. 71, pp. 4, 5).
