B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

257CHAPTER CVI

257THE "UTAH WAR": PRELIMINARIES OF THE CAMPAIGN—ARRIVAL OF CAPTAIN VAN VLIET

257THE great misfortune in the whole matter of this "Utah Expedition" was, that the purpose of the administration in sending it to Utah was not known by the Latter-day Saint Church leaders, nor did they know definitely what officers were commanding the "Expedition," nor what were their instructions. Neither did the "Expedition" have any clear understanding of its mission. Even Colonel Alexander, leading the advance division of the "Expedition,"—up to its arrival on Ham's Fork, and as late as October 8th—knew nothing of its purpose; he knew only of its destination. [^1] And Captain Van Vliet, advance courier of the "army," in a meeting with the leading church authorities in the "Social Hall," September the 9th, when seeking as quartermaster to make arrangements for the "Expedition's" encampment in the territory, could give no very definite, or satisfactory explanations of the purpose of the "Expedition," though he disclaimed its purpose being what was then commonly reported in Utah—namely, conquest and destruction of the "Mormon" people; and sought to allay the apprehension and prejudices of the church leaders.

EMBARRASSMENT OF CAPTAIN VAN VLIET

Utah WarHCFollowing is what occurred at the meeting on this point; D. H. Wells, who had just read a letter presented by Captain Van Vliet, to the assembled brethren, describing the purpose of the Captain's visit, said—

Utah WarHC257General Wells: "This letter states that Captain Van Vliet will explain the object of their coming here.

Utah WarHC257President Young: "Understood it merely to refer to Mr. Van Vliet's coming here.

Utah WarHC257General Wells: "Perhaps Mr. Van Vliet may have some understanding of the object of their [the army's] coming here.

Utah WarHC257Captain Van Vliet: "Had no information further than the order published for troops in this direction; which merely designates a certain number of troops, and in the first place organized the Utah military department, the same as the Kansas department, the same as the Kansas department, and then goes on to assign the troops for this department; these are the orders that are published. The instructions that may be given, I do not know, though many suppose their orders will be to support the government and the laws in case they are violated. I have seen the instructions to the troops in Kansas, and those instructions were of such a character. No such instructions have been given as has been reported, to violate all law and right; I am convinced of it." [^2]

Utah WarHC258The assurance of Captain Van Vliet, however, seemed not to have been convincing to the church leaders; and of this the captain was, perhaps, painfully conscious. [^3]

Utah WarHCOn the part of the church leaders they only knew that in "the states" there was a great uproar against the "Mormons," occasioned by the false reports of ex-Judge Drummond, et al; that all kinds of extravagant suggestions relative to "solving the Utah problem" had been made, from the distribution of Bibles in the community, to the sending of successive detachments of the United States army to the "Mormon" settlements to induce their young women to leave the homes of their people, when the detachments of troops should successively leave the settlements for California or elsewhere. [^4] What the church leaders heard from the army camps and the plains' mail stations was of the same but of deeper crimson than this. "We were well informed as to the object of the coming of the army," said Elder John Taylor, of the council of the apostles, when discussing this subject with Vice-President Schuyler Colfax, in 1869:

Utah WarHC259"We had men in all the camps, and knew what was intended. There was a continued boast among the men and officers, even before they left the Missouri river, of what they intended to do with the 'Mormons.' The houses were picked out that certain persons were to inhabit; farms, property, and women were to be distributed. 'Beauty and Booty' were their watchword. We were to have another grand 'Mormon' conquest, and our houses, gardens, orchards, vineyards, fields, wives and daughters were to be the spoils. Instead of this Mr. Buchanan kept them too long about Kansas; the Lord put a hook in their jaws, and instead of revelling in sacked towns and cities and glutting their libidinous and riotous desires in ravishing, destroying and laying waste, they gnawed dead mules' legs at Bridger, rendered palatable by the ice, frost and snow of a mountain winter, seasoned by the pestiferous exhalations of hecatombs of dead animals, the debris of a ruined army, at a cost to the nation of about forty millions. We had reason to say then 'The Lord reigns, let the earth be glad.' Oh, how wicked it was for President Young to resist an army like the above, prostituted by the guardians of a free and enlightened republic to the capacity of buccaneers and brigands." [^5]

REINFORCEMENT OF FORMER EXPERIENCES

Utah WarHCTo reinforce their conception and fears respecting the "Expedition's" purpose the church leaders and many of the saints had the bitter experiences of Missouri, held in lively recollection by them, wherein they had seen the state militia, ordered out by the governor of the state, and officered by men reputed to be of high character, side with the mob against them and become the executors of its will in the armed investment of Latter-day Saint towns, in the destruction of their settlements and of their farms and homes; they saw their women ravished by a brutal soldiery, [^6] their leaders imprisoned, while their community numbering fifteen thousand was expelled from the state under the orders of its governor, rigorously executed by the state militia. This, on practically the same basis, but on a larger scale, they had again witnessed in the expulsion of the saints from Nauvoo; only this time, instead of imprisoning their prophet leaders they had both imprisoned and slain them; and instead of driving fifteen thousand of the community from one state to another, they expelled nearly double the number from the state of Illinois, and practically drove them into a wilderness, since there was nowhere else for them to go.

Utah WarHCStill later than these experiences, and foreshadowing what might possibly be repeated on a larger scale, if the "Army for Utah" was admitted into the territory, was the more recent experience of the saints with Colonel Steptoe's command. While no reproach attaches to the colonel personally for misconduct while in Utah, subordinate officers, and the rank and file of the command left behind them a very unsavory record of immoralities and debaucheries, which were vehemently denounced, both while they were yet present in Utah, and soon after the command's departure. [^7] Seductions, desertions, the disruption of homes, and to some extent community demoralization followed the advent and hospitable treatment of the few hundreds of that command. How much greater the evils to be expected from an apparently hostile encampment, consisting of thousands of troops, and its teamsters and camp followers!

WHAT PRESIDENT BUCHANAN DID NOT SAY—M. REMY

Utah WarHCTrue, as President Buchanan pointed out in his message to congress, in December following, the church leaders had the assurance of Major Van Vliet of the peaceful intentions of the government, "and that the troops would only be employed as a posse comitatus when called on by the civil authority to aid in the execution of the laws." [^8] But, as Mr. Remy in his Journey to Salt Lake so admirably points out, President Buchanan—

Utah WarHC"Did not say that the presence of the troops who had formerly discharged that duty, or of those who had been quartered in Utah while on their way to California, under the command of Colonel Steptoe, had given great offense to the saints; that those troops had debauched, seduced, and carried off with them into California numbers of their women, and that the unfortunate 'Mormons' had nothing so much at heart as to keep clear for the future of any such scourge. Neither did he [Buchanan] state that if Major Van Vliet, who had been so well received by the 'Mormons,' had found them prepared to resist to the last extremity, it was because they were in fear not only for ther faith and their morality, but for their independence. Neither did he [Buchanan] say that he had done nothing to allay their apprehensions; that he had not officially communicated his intentions; that the 'Mormons' were left to divine them, or to learn through the newspapers; and that, as the press was daily sounding the tocsin of war against them, they had a right to suppose that it was really war that was intended, and, in fact, which had been declared against them. Besides, had they not terrible precedents in their past, which were but little calculated to give them confidence in the pacific intentions of the government, or, at any rate, in its desire to protect them from the calumnies of their enemies, and to resist the pressure of the religious sects or of the papers which were their organs; or, even if it had the desire, could they trust to its capacity of efficiently carrying it out?" [^9]

POLICY OF RESISTANCE JUSTIFIED

Utah WarHCIt is from the viewpoint of these historical facts, and from these conditions that the policy of resistance to the federal authority of the United States by the church leaders must be considered. It is easy now for writers in the dispassionate quiet of the study, with all the facts and circumstances in hand to see that it was not and could not have been the intention of the Buchanan administration, however, egregiously it blundered in respect of Utah affairs, to engage in a "war" for the demoralization or destruction of a religious community. But in the light of experiences of the Latter-day Saints, and in the absence of any clear understanding of what were the intentions of the administration—beyond the personal assurances of Captain Van Vliet, that could not be very emphatic because of his own but partial knowledge of the purpose of the "Expedition;" and ignorant also as they were of the excellent personnel of the officers in command—all this considered, it was not possible for the Latter-day Saint Church leaders to be so assured of the pacific intentions of the administration. The "Expedition" was an army, and an army meant war, not peace. It meant coercion, and very likely the subordination of the civil to the military authority. The coming of that armed "Expedition," therefore, meant to the Latter-day Saints of Utah the subversion of their constitutional rights, the destruction of their liberties—their religious freedom; their right of community self-government; perhaps, even, their community existence. Such being their conception of the mission of the "Army for Utah," they met the issue as brave and strong men, conscious of the uprightness of their own course and intentions, always meet such manifest injustice, and such a menacing of their liberties: they resolved upon resistance. Their descendants would have less cause to be proud of them as Americans had they not, under all the circumstances, resolved upon resistance.

FURTHER ON CAPTAIN VAN VLIET'S MISSION

Utah WarHCCaptain Van Vliet, assistant quartermaster U. S. A., arrived in Salt Lake City on the 8th of September. He came as the advance agent of the "Utah Expedition" to make arrangements for its encampment in the territory, and for the purchase of what would be its necessary supplies. He had left his own escort at Ham's Fork, 143 miles distant. Ignoring the warning of mountaineers, met at Green river, he accepted as guides Bryant Stringham and Colonel N. V. Jones, of General Burton's command, who gave him safe conduct to Salt Lake City, where he was courteously received by Governor Young. On the 9th, as already noted, a meeting was arranged with the leading men of the city and of the church at the "Social Hall." Here the letter he bore from General Harney to "President Brigham Young, of the Society of Mormons," making known the purpose of the captain's visit, was read, and a full discussion had on the ability of the community to supply the timber, grain, beef, hay and other supplies that would be needed for the quartering and feeding of the army; as also a place for its encampment. The discussion had of these things was very agreeably conducted and it was evident that the community could furnish everything needed by the army. The captain during his sojourn of several days visited Rush valley, thirty-five or forty miles west of Salt Lake City, which had been considered as a suitable military reservation by Colonel Steptoe, but with which conclusion Captain Van Vliet did not agree. All the captain's negotiations, however, amounted to nothing. In reporting a few days later to Captain Pleasanton, Van Vliet declared that "the governor [Young] informed me that there was abundance of everything I required for the troops, such as lumber, forage, etc., but that none would be sold to us." [^10]

Utah WarHCOn the 12th of September a prolonged interview took place between Van Vliet and President Young in which the questions at issue were freely discussed. The captain on his part, sought, albeit without success, to convince the president and the other church leaders present that the purpose of the government was not to make war upon them. "We do not want to fight the United States," said President Young, "but if they drive us to it, we shall do the best we can; and I will tell you, as the Lord lives, we shall come off conquerors, for we trust in God." The president held that the outcome of the presence of the army was intended to be that the military would hold the saints still until a mob could come and kill them, [^11] having in mind, of course, the experiences of Missouri and Illinois. He represented that both himself and the people loved the United States Constitution, and the laws. It was not the laws of the United States, but a corrupt administration of the laws under which the Latter-day Saints suffered. "There is not any of the government officers which have been sent here," said Governor Young, "who have any interest with us; but they have tried to destroy us." "This is the case with most men sent to the territories," replied Captain Van Vliet. "They received their offices as a stepping stone to the senatorship; but they have no interest for the people." The captain admitted that the saints had been lied about—"the worst of any people he had ever seen." "The greatest hold the world have now upon you is they accuse you of burning 900 volumes of the United States statutes." This President Young promptly denied; and remarked that if the government of the United States had arrived at that state that they will try to kill people for their religion, "no honorable man should be afraid of them." He held that if the United States "insist on whipping us, they will get awfully whipped." The president held that the people of Utah had treated all men sent to the territory by the government as well as they had treated Captain Van Vliet. "We wish still to treat them well," he continued, "and we would like to ward off this blow if we could; but the United States are determined to drive us to fight; we cannot do anything but what the government will take exception to it." Again came up the experiences of Nauvoo; which reference ended with the statement that he [Governor Young] had broken no law, "and neither will I be taken by any United States officer to be killed as they have killed Joseph" [i. e. Joseph Smith, the Prophet]. The captain remarked that he did not think that it was the intention of the government "to take" him, "but to install a new governor in the territory." President Young allowed that the captain believed this, "but you do not know their intention as well as I do." President Young denied that the saints were colleaguing with the Indians.

Utah WarHC266On the 14th the interview was renewed, on the eve of Captain Van Vliet's departure for the east. Governor Young said the people of Utah had always treated the United States officers well, but the latter had lied about the people. "We would still have received their governor and officers," he continued, "had they sent them here without any army; but in as much as they are disposed to send an army here to hold us still while others run their red hot iron into us and then kill us, we will now say that we will not have either their soldiers, armies, or officers any more here at all, and you may tell them so. We will just fight for our liberty and rights from this day forth. * * * If the government of the United States persists in sending armies to destroy us, in the name of the Lord we shall conquer them." It was on this occasion that President Young gave the warning of the danger to immigration from the Indians, and expressed his determination of laying waste the valley inhabited by the saints:

BRIGHAM YOUNG'S THREAT TO DESOLATE THE UTAH SETTLEMENTS BY FIRE

Utah WarHC"If they [the United States] commence the war, I shall not hold the Indians still by the wrist any longer for white men to shoot at them, but I shall let them go ahead and do as they please, and I shall carry the war into their own land, and they will want to let out the job before they get half way through. And even should an army of 50,000 men get into this valley, when they got here they would find nothing but a barren waste, we should burn everything that was wood and every acre of grass that would burn, and you may tell them that they must bring with them their forage for their animals for they will not find anything in this territory when they come. Again you may tell them they must stop all emigration across this continent for they cannot travel in safety. The Indians will kill all that attempt it."

Utah WarHCReplying to this Captain Van Vliet said if the government made war upon the people he would "withdraw from the army; for he would not have a hand in shedding the blood of American citizens." [^12]

Utah WarHC267The captain said he thought congress would do all it could against Utah's people. Governor Young replied: "If God inspires any man to speak for us it will be well. We have got to trust in God. If you will speak in favor of us, and I think you will, the Lord will bless you for so doing. He will require it of you. We have refuted lies so long we have got tired of it, and we shall now trust in God for the future."

Utah WarHC"Congress could send out an investigating committee to Kansas, [^13] or any other place but to Utah," continued the governor; "but upon the mere rumor of liars they send out 2,000 armed soldiers to Utah to destroy the people without investigating the subject at all." Captain Van Vliet replied: "The government may yet send out one [i. e. an investigating committee] to Utah, and consider it policy before they get through with it." "I do think that God has sent you out here," said Governor Young, "and that good will grow out of it. I was glad when I learned that you were coming." The captain expressed himself as anxious to get back to Washington. He had heard that General Harney had been called to Kansas as governor. He expressed his intention to stop the government trains at Ham's Fork on his own responsibility, "and leave them there." President Young said: "If we can only keep the peace for this winter, I do think something will turn up that may save so much shedding of blood." Van Vliet expressed the opinion that the troops would have to stop on Ham's Fork for the winter, "for their provisions will be late coming up."

Utah WarHC268The day of the above interview (Sunday) Captain Van Vliet had listened to four discourses in the "Old Tabernacle" by three different men, Geo. A. Smith, John Taylor and Brigham Young, the last speaking both at the forenoon and the afternoon services. Elder Smith described the military spirit and military preparations of the people in the south counties: [^14] "I never found them in better spirits," said the speaker. "They are willing any moment," he continued, "to touch fire to their homes, and hide themselves in the mountains, and to defend their country to the very last extremity." [^15]

Utah WarHC268"Would you, if necessary, brethren," John Taylor said in his discourse that day, "put the torch to your buildings and lay them in ashes, and wander homeless into the mountains? I know what you would say and what you would do."

Utah WarHC268President Young: "Try the vote."

Utah WarHC268Taylor: "All you that are willing to set fire to your property and lay it in ashes, rather than submit to their military rule and oppression, manifest it by raising your hands."

Utah WarHC269The congregation unanimously raised their hands.

Utah WarHC269Taylor [resuming]: "I know what your feelings are. We have been persecuted and robbed long enough, and in the name of Israel's God, we will be free! (the whole congregation responded 'Amen!' and President Young said, 'I say amen to that all the time')!"

Utah WarHC269President Young was even more emphatic in his expressed determination to resist the coming of the army than the other brethren. He said:

Utah WarHC269"We have transgressed no law, and we have no occasion to do so, neither do we intend to; but as for any nation's coming to destroy this people, God Almighty being my helper, they cannot come here. (The congregation responded a loud 'Amen'). That is my feeling upon the point."

269"WE ASK NO ODDS OF THEM"—THE UNITED STATES

Utah WarHC269He declared that he asked "no odds" of the United States:

Utah WarHC269"On the 24th of July last a number of us went to Big Cottonwood canon, to pass the anniversary of our arrival into this valley. Ten years ago the 24th of last July a few of the elders arrived here and began to plow and to plant seeds, to raise food to sustain themselves. Whilst speaking to the brethren on that day I said, inadvertently, if the people of the United States will let us alone for ten years we will ask no odds of them; and ten years from that very day we had a message by Brothers Smoot, Stoddard and Rockwell, that the government had stopped the mail and that they had ordered 2,500 troops to come here and hold the 'Mormons' still while priests, politicians, speculators, wh— mongers and every mean, filthy character that could be raked up should come here and kill off the 'Mormons.' I did not think about what I had said ten years ago, till I heard the president of the United States had so unjustly ordered troops here, and then I said, when my former expression came to my mind, 'In the name of Israel's God, we ask no odds of them.'"

Utah WarHCGovernor Young then refuted one of the assumptions of Senator Douglas' Springfield speech, charging that ninetenths of the inhabitants of Utah were "aliens by birth who have refused to become naturalized," [^16] in the following manner:

Utah WarHC270"There is one thing I want done, for the satisfaction of Captain Van Vliet. One of our old senators, Stephen A. Douglas, recently said, before his constituents in Illinois, that nine-tenths of our people were aliens. We have a larger proportion of foreigners in this city than in any other part of the territory, and there are a good many here today who have just come in from the plains. I want those who are native born and naturalized American citizens to raise their right hands. (Over two-thirds of the congregation raised their hands). You who have not yet received your naturalization papers will please manifest it in the same way. (Less than a third of the congregation raised their hands). Now, captain, you can see for yourself over two-thirds of this congregation are either native born or naturalized American citizens.

Utah WarHC270I have called this vote that Captain Van Vliet may be able to do as he always does, speak the truth boldly and tell them of it next winter in Washington; and, that he can, if he sees Senator Douglas in Washington, tell him that his statement was false, for he has seen for himself."

Utah WarHC270Later in the discourse he said:

Utah WarHC270"They never did anything against Joseph till they had ostensibly legalized a mob, and I shall treat every army and every armed company that attempts to come here, as a mob. (The congregation responded 'Amen'). You might as well tell me that you can make hell into a powder house, as to tell me that you could let an army in here and have peace; and I intend to tell them and to show them this, if they do not keep away."

Utah WarHC270In the afternoon discourse there was much more to the same effect:

270"Liars have reported that this people have committed treason, and upon their lies the president has ordered out troops to aid in officering this territory, and if those officers are like many who have previously been sent here, and they have come when they know they are not wanted, they are poor, miserable blacklegs, broken down political hacks, robbers and wh— mongers, men that are not fit for civilized society, so they must dragoon them upon us for officers. I feel that I won't bear such cursed treatment, and that is enough to say, for we are just as free as the mountain air.

Utah WarHCI do not lift my voice against the great and glorious government guaranteed to every citizen by our Constitution, but against those corrupt administrators who trample the Constitution and just laws under their feet." [^17]

Utah WarHC271In addition to these passages there were extravagant and ill-advised things said on this occasion, also both before and after it; and who would expect, in such stress of feeling as was occasioned by such a remembering of "the wrongs of Missouri," such a not-for-getting the "fate of Nauvoo"—who would look for cool judgment and temperate speech?

Utah WarHC271The speeches he heard that day, the interviews that preceded and followed them, justified all that Captain Van Vliet reported to Captain Pleasanton, (A. A. adjutant general, "Army for Utah," Fort Leavenworth), and later to the secretary of war in Washington; [^18] indeed the captain is to be commended for his accuracy of statement and his evident intention to serve both his country and the people of Utah by representing conditions as he found them. His course doubtless contributed much to bringing about the final composition of the difficulties.

Utah WarHCOn his return east Captain Van Vliet was accompanied by Dr. John M. Bernhisel, Utah's delegate to congress. On reaching the slowly advancing United States troops, just emerging from the South Pass, Van Vliet advised them not to attempt to enter Salt Lake valley that winter, as no arrangements could be made for their supplies; also they would have to fight their way through if the march was attempted. Some of the younger officers were disposed to make light of the warning, and expressed confidence in their ability to force their way through to Salt Lake City, and began doubling their usual march of fifteen miles per day. [^19] The matter of their reaching Salt Lake valley by forced marches, however, was determined by other than their own will.

Footnotes

The speeches of Elders Kimball and Grant, on the occasion referred to, will be found in Journal of Discourses, vol. iii, Kimball's, pp. 227-232; Grant's, 332-6. Grant's remarks are very vehement. He several times alludes to threats that had been made then "to bring an army to Utah to drive or coerce the people:" "These characters take 'Mormon' girls and debauch them, telling them that the United States will send their troops here, and the people will be broken up and driven. * * * They will threaten us with the United States troops! Why [addressing the anti-'Mormons' in the audience] your impudence and ignorance would bring a blush to the cheeks of the veriest camp follower among them. We ask no odds of you, you rotten carcasses, and I am not going to how one hair's breadth to your influence." The speeches were made on the 2nd of March, 1856.

President Young also alludes to this misconduct of Steptoe's command in a discourse delivered in Salt Lake City on the 17th of June, 1855 (Journal of Discourses, vol. ii, p. 318, et seq; and again on the 8th of July, Ibid, p. 309.) Alluding to Steptoe's command in the first discourse cited, he said: "I do not know what I shall say next winter, if such men make their appearance here, as were some last winter. I know what I think I shall say, if they play the same game again, let the women be ever so bad, so help me God, we will slay them. * * * There are some things I learned, when I was in the south country lately, which I do not wish to mention, because of the friends of those girls who are gone; but when they passed through the southern settlements they were weeping all the time, and they are perhaps now in their graves. The men who coaxed them away did not intend to take them to California. If any offer to do the same things again, in these mountains, 'judgment shall be laid to the line and righteousness to the plummet;' and they say that Brigham does not lie."

"Another class of stragglers, and one most dangerous to the peace of the camp, was composed of the thousand teamsters who were discharged from employment on the supply trains. Many of these men belonged to the scum of the great western cities,—a class more dangerous because more intelligent and reckless, than the same class of population in New York. Others had sought to reach California, not anticipating a state of hostilities which would bar their way. Now thrown out of employment, with slender means, a great number became desperate. Hundreds attempted to return to the states on foot, some of whom died on the way, and ninetenths of them would have perished, had they encountered the storms of the preceding winter among the mountains. But the majority hung around the camp. To some of these the quartermaster was able to furnish work, but he was obviously incapable of affording this assistance to all. Thefts and assaults became frequent, and promised to multiply as the season advanced. To remedy this trouble, Colonel Johnston assumed the responsibility of organizing a volunteer battalion. The term of service for which the men enlisted was nine months. For their pay they were to depend on the action of congress."

Had this contingent of the "Expedition"—the scum of the great western cities," desperate withal, and more dangerous than the same class of population in New York—had they been discharged at Salt Lake City at the end of their journey and of their service for the government—the effect of their presence on the peace and good order of the Utah settlements, would not be difficult to forecast.

---
Notas:
[^1] House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, x, No. 71, pp. 34, 35.
[^2] Some histories of these events give the 29th as the date of General Wells' departure—see Tullidge, also J. F. Wells in Echo Canon War, Contributor; Woodruff's Journal, however, gives the 27th as the date of departure, and one p. m. as the time. With this the History of Brigham Young, Ms., agrees, see entry for 27th Sept., 1857, pp. 565-6.
[^3] L. D. S. Emigrant Guide, Wm. Clayton, p. 19, Addenda, vol. iii, this History.
[^4] "The Narrows" are about four miles from the mouth of the canon, and constitute a defile where both sides of the canon become perpendicular. Elsewhere along the canon the perpendicularity is characteristic of the northern side only, where the height of the buttresses vary from 300 to 500 feet. They are denuded and water-washed by the storms that break upon them, carried by southerly prevailing winds. "Their strata here," [at the "Narrows"], says Captain Burton, "are almost horizontal, they are inclined at an angle of forty-five degrees, and the strike is northeast and southwest. The opposite or southern flank being protected from the dashing and weathering rain and wind is a mass of rounded soil-clad hills, or sloping slabs of rock, earth-veiled, and growing tussocks of grass." (City of the Saints, p. 184). Captain Burton did not think well of the strategic importance of the "Narrows," or of the whole canon. (Ibid). Subsequently fortifications were made along East Canon Creek. Colonel N. V. Jones with a force of 344 men went on to East Canon Creek to throw up breastworks and other obstructions to the enemy, leaving Jonathan Pugmire in command at the mouth of Echo. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry Oct. 24th, 1857, p. 741).
[^5] House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, x, No. 71, p. 33.
[^6] Journal of Geo. A. Smith during his presence at the front, from the 30th of September to the 24th of October, 1857, copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., for 1857, from p. 709 to 742.
[^7] Journal of Geo. A. Smith, entry for 2nd Oct, copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Oct., 1857, p. 714.
[^8] There were present General D. H. Wells, his ecclesiastical advisors, Elders John Taylor and Geo. A. Smith; also Generals Ferguson, H. B. Clawson, Lewis Robison, Colonels R. F. Burton, Bryant Stringham; O. P. Rockwell, and Captain Judson Stoddard. (Geo. A. Smith's Journal in History of Brigham Young, Ms., Oct., 1857, p. 715).
[^9] Ibid, pp 715-716.
[^10] Ibid, p. 717.
[^11] Ibid, p. 720.
[^12] This order was of course turned over to the proper officers of the "Expedition," and was indorsed as follows:
[^13] It will give the psychological atmosphere of the "Mormon" militia camps if the manner in which this order was given and received is related in Major Lot Smith's own language: "I was invited to take dinner with the commanding general and his aids. During the meal, General Wells, looking at me as straight as possible, asked if I could take a few men and turn back the trains that were on the road or burn them. I replied that I thought I could do just what he told me to. The answer appeared to please him, and he accepted it, telling me that he could furnish only a few men, but that they would be sufficient, for they would appear many more to our enemies. As for provisions, none would be supplied, as we were expected to board at the expense of Uncle Sam. As this seemed to be an open order, I did not complain." (Major Lot Smith's Narrative, Contributor, vol. iii, pp. 271-272).
[^14] Lot Smith's Narrative in Echo Canon War, Wells, Contributor, vol. iii, p. 273. This courier from Alexander was very much frightened, and he stated afterwards that he expected every minute to be killed when he found he had fallen into the hands of the "Mormons." As it was he pleaded vigorously for his life, and Major Smith with grim humor told him that "soldiers' lives were not worth much, it was only the 'bull-whackers' (i. e. teamsters) that could hope to get off easily." (Ibid).
[^15] Major Smith asked Dawson if there was any powder in the wagons. After consulting his bills of lading Dawson replied that there were large quantities of saltpeter and sulphur, and this was nearly as dangerous as powder. This in the hope, doubtless, of discouraging any further burning of the wagons. Smith told the captain he would take no chances with his own men and intimated that he would call upon him to set fire to the remaining wagons. Whereupon Dawson begged piteously not to be forced to set fire to the wagons—"He had been sick, was not well yet, and did not want to be hurt." Major Smith excused him and selected a character known as "Big James," an Irishman, instead, "he not being afraid of saltpeter or sulphur either," says Smith's Narrative, and "I thought it was proper for the Gentiles to spoil the Gentiles." Smith, himself, however, seized a torch and accompanied "Big James" in the destructive work. (Echo Canon War, Contributor, vol. iii, pp. 273-4).
[^16] Lot Smith's Narrative, Contributor, vol. iv, pp. 27, 28.
[^17] List of subsistence stores in supply trains (Russell and Waddell's) Nos. 5, 9 and 10, burned by the "Mormons" at Green River, Utah, on the night of October 4, 1857:
[^18] The letter at length is published in Echo Canon War, Contributor, vol. iv, p. 48. The closing sentence of the letter says—"If we could learn of a surety that they [the enemy] proposed making winter quarters at Fort Hall, we would cease molesting them." (Ibid).
[^19] See Lot Smith's Narrative, Contributor, vol. iv, pp. 27-29.
