B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

273CHAPTER CVII

273THE "UTAH WAR": THE CAMPAIGN—BURNING OF GOVERNMENT SUPPLY TRAINS—SNOWED IN

273THE day following the departure of Captain Van Vliet, Governor Young determined upon a definite course of action in harmony with his representations to the captain, and issued the following proclamation bearing date of September 15th, 1857.

PROCLAMATION BY THE GOVERNOR

Utah WarHC"Citizens of Utah:

Utah WarHC273We are invaded by a hostile force who are evidently assailing us to accomplish our overthrow and destruction.

Utah WarHC273For the last twenty-five years we have trusted officials of the government, from constables and justices to judges, governors and presidents, only to be scorned, held in derision, insulted and betrayed. Our houses have been plundered and then burned, our fields laid waste, our principal men butchered while under the pledged faith of the government for their safety, and our families driven from their homes to find that shelter in the barren wilderness and that protection among hostile savages, which were denied them in the boasted abodes of christianity and civilization.

Utah WarHC273The Constitution of our common country guarantees unto us all that we do now, or have ever claimed. If the constitutional rights which pertain unto us as American citizens were extended to Utah, according to the spirit and meaning thereof, and fairly and impartially administered, it is all that we could ask, all that we have ever asked.

Utah WarHC273Our opponents have availed themselves of prejudice existing against us because of our religious faith, to send out a formidable host to accomplish our destruction. We have had no privilege, no opportunity of defending ourselves from the false, foul, and unjust aspersions against us before the nation. The government has not condescended to cause an investigating committee or other persons to be sent to inquire into and ascertain the truth, as is customary in such cases.

Utah WarHC273We know those aspersions to be false, but that avails us nothing. We are condemned unheard and forced to an issue with an armed, mercenary mob, which has been sent against us at the instigation of anonymous letter writers ashamed to father the base, slanderous falsehoods which they have given to the public; of corrupt officials who have brought false accusations against us to screen themselves in their own infamy; and of hireling priests and howling editors who prostitute the truth for filthy lucre's sake.

Utah WarHC274The issue which has been thus forced upon us compels us to resort to the great first law of self-preservation and stand in our own defense, a right guaranteed unto us by the genius of the institutions of our country, and upon which the government is based.

Utah WarHC274Our duty to ourselves, to our families, requires us not to tamely submit to be driven and slain, without an attempt to preserve ourselves. Our duty to our country, our holy religion, our God, to freedom and liberty, requires that we should not quietly stand still and see those fetters forging around, which are calculated to enslave and bring us in subjection to an unlawful military despotism such as can only emanate (in a country of constitutional law) from usurpation, tyranny and oppression.

Utah WarHC274Therefore, I, Brigham Young, governor, and superintendent of Indian affairs for the territory of Utah, in the name of the people of the United States in the territory of Utah,

Utah WarHC2741st—Forbid all armed forces, of every description, from coming into this territory under any pretense whatever.

Utah WarHC2742d—That all the forces in said territory hold themselves in readiness to march, at a moments' notice, to repel any and all such invasion.

Utah WarHC2743d—Martial law is hereby declared to exist in this territory, from and after the publication of this proclamation; and no person shall be allowed to pass or repass into, or through, or from this territory, without a permit from the proper officer.

Utah WarHC274Given under my hand and seal at Great Salt Lake City, territory of Utah, this fifteenth day of September, A. D., Eighteen Hundred and Fifty-seven, and of the Independence of the United States of America the eighty-second.

274[Signed] "BRIGHAM YOUNG." [^1]

Utah WarHCFollowing this proclamation, companies of the territorial militia aggregating twelve hundred and fifty men were ordered to report at Echo canon to maintain it by force of arms. On Sunday, September 27th, [^2] Daniel H. Wells, lieutenant general of the army, with some members of his staff, and with Elders John Taylor and Geo. A. Smith, added as "counselors" left Salt Lake City for the field of probable conflict. Before starting these brethren were each set apart by the solemn imposition of hands and blessing by the presidency of the church. To their conception it was a sacred mission—this going to the battlefield in defense of their people; one upon which the divine blessing could appropriately be invoked, and holy consecration to the service made.

Utah WarHC275Arriving at Echo canon—the western mouth, distant from Salt Lake City about forty miles, [^3] as the road then ran—General Wells placed the militia men who had arrived at the rendezvous under direction of Colonels N. V. Jones and J. D. T. Mc Allister, with orders to construct such fortifications and breastworks as they might be able to make at the "Narrows" in Echo canon, and on the heights along the whole length of this mountain gorge. [^4]

Utah WarHCGeneral Wells himself with a small escort pushed on to Fort Bridger, where on the 30th he met with Colonel R. T. Burton and Lewis Robison and from them received reports concerning the movements, the present location, and probable intentions of the "Expedition." The United States forces under Colonel Alexander were now on Ham's Fork, about fifteen miles above its junction with Black's Fork, the latter a tributary,—flowing southeasterly—of Green river. His encampment the colonel had named "Camp Winfield," in honor of General Winfield Scott, then lieutenant general of the United States army. The first divisions of the "Expedition" had been making hurried marches since crossing Green river, partly to satisfy the ardor of the officers and men of the 10th regiment, impatient to reach Salt Lake valley, as per their expressed determination to Captain Van Vliet, and partly to protect several advanced supply trains which had been encamped, practically unguarded for some weeks, on Ham's Fork.

Utah WarHC276From his camp at Fort Bridger General Wells forwarded to Colonel Alexander two copies of Governor Young's Proclamation, a copy of the laws of Utah and a letter from Governor Young addressed to "The officer commanding the forces now invading Utah territory." No summary would do the document justice, hence it is given here in full:

GOVERNOR YOUNG'S PROCLAMATION TO THE COMMANDER OF THE "UTAH EXPEDITION"

Utah WarHC"Governor's Office, Utah Territory,

Utah WarHC276Great Salt Lake City,

Utah WarHC276September 29, 1857.

Utah WarHC276Sir:—By reference to the act of congress passed September 9, 1850, organizing the territory of Utah, published in the laws of Utah, herewith forwarded, pp. 146-7, you will find the following:

Utah WarHC276Sec. 2>>>>. And be it further enacted, That the executive power and authority in and over said territory of Utah shall be vested in a governor, who shall hold his office for four years, and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed by the president of the United States. The governor shall reside within said territory, shall be commander-in-chief of the militia thereof, etc., etc.

Utah WarHC276I am still the governor and superintendent of Indian affairs for this territory, no successor having been appointed and qualified, as provided by law; nor have I been removed by the president of the United States.

Utah WarHC276By virtue of the authority thus vested in me, I have issued, and forwarded you a copy of my proclamation forbidding the entrance of armed forces into this territory. This you have disregarded. I now further direct that you retire forthwith from the territory, by the same route you entered. Should you deem this impracticable, and prefer to remain until spring in the vicinity of your present encampment, Black's Fork, or Green river, you can do so in peace and unmolested, on condition that you deposit your arms and ammunition with Lewis Robison quartermaster-general of the territory, and leave in the spring, as soon as the condition of the roads will permit you to march; and should you fall short of provisions, they can be furnished you, upon making the proper applications therefor. General D. H. Wells will forward this, and receive any communication you may have to make.

Utah WarHC276Very respectfully,

Utah WarHC276[Signed] "BRIGHAM YOUNG,"

Utah WarHC276Governor and Superintendent of Indian Affairs,

Utah WarHC276Utah Territory." [^5]

Utah WarHC277General Wells' letter accompanying these documents informed the "commander of the forces then invading Utah," that he was on the ground to "aid in carrying out the instructions of Governor Young." In closing he said: "Trusting that your answer and actions will be dictated by a proper respect for the rights and liberties of American citizens, I remain, etc."

Utah WarHC277These papers were entrusted for deliverance to General Robison and Major Lot Smith, who sent them from a short distance outside of Camp Winfield—as they were permitted to do by their instructions—by the hand of a Mexican mountaineer named Marrianne. [^6] Colonel Alexander gave the only answer possible for him, to make to Governor Young's demands. He acknowledged receipt of the several communications; announced himself the present senior commanding officer of the United States troops at his encampment; he would submit the communications to the colonel commanding as soon as he arrived. It was also announced that the troops at Camp Winfield were there by the orders of the president of the United States; and that their future movements would depend upon "orders issued by competent authority," among whom, of course, the governor of Utah was not recognized.

277THE ISSUE—TERRITORY vs. BUCHANAN ADMINISTRATION

Utah WarHCThe issue for the campaign was now joined. It was for the commander of the Utah militia to take the initiative if the "war" between the United States and Utah was to eventuate in action. Immediate developments will disclose that there was no hesitancy on the part of General Wells. Of course, from the first, when resistance was determined upon it was not the intention to engage in pitched battles with the regular troops of the United States. The necessity for the Utah people conserving all their forces for what might be a prolonged "war," the final destruction of their settlements in Utah, and flight into the mountains, and perhaps southward into Mexico, made necessary and justified the Fabian method determined upon and followed.

Utah WarHC278The answer of Colonel Alexander to the several communications sent to him by General Wells was received in the latter's encampment at Fort Bridger on the evening of the 2nd of October, and forwarded by express to Governor Young. "The letters were as respectful as could be anticipated," writes the chronicle followed in this part of the campaign; "but did not comply with the governor's request, nor did it alter any of our arrangements." [^7]

Utah WarHC278A council of war was held by the Nauvoo Legion officers at Fort Bridger on the afternoon of the 3rd of October. [^8] It was decided in the council to begin active operations against the "Expedition." Major McAllister was on the Oregon road watching the movement of the troops from that point; O. P. Rockwell was sent to his assistance and with orders to burn the grass on all routes to Salt Lake valley, beginning with the road via Soda Springs. Colonel Burton, whose command was then encamped at Fort Supply was to break encampment and cooperate in these maneuvers, annoying the "Expedition" in all the ways in his power "without risking his men." [^9]

Utah WarHCAs Fort Bridger and adjacent Fort Supply, on Smith's Fork, would in all probability fall into the hands of the regular troops, and would be available for winter quarters for the "Expedition," after caching the grain that had been raised there, and other property that could not be taken away, Fort Bridger was burned on the 3rd of October, quartermaster-general of the territory, Lewis Robison, applying the torch. [^10] "It burned very rapidly and made a great fire." The property destroyed amounted to about $2,000. Two or three days later Fort Supply was burned, by the Utah militia. The mills, buildings and other property destroyed were estimated at a value of $50,000. [^11] Great activity was manifested by the several militia commands in firing the grass, running off and stampeding the stock of the "Expedition" on every possible occasion; but at first the raids upon the stock were attended with no very great success, as the herds were thoroughly guarded.

Utah WarHC279This was the inauguration of that policy of defensive warfare which had been determined upon, and which is best expressed in orders and instructions to the colonels, majors and captains leading the various separate commands operating in the field. A copy of these letters of instructions fell into the hands of United States army officers and was reported to the administration at Washington by Fitz J. Porter, assistant adjutant general to Colonel Johnston. It was found upon the person of Major Joseph Taylor, of Weber county, when he was captured early in October. Taylor was commander of one hundred men, but was captured by a squad of Captain Marcy's troops, while with his adjutant, W. R. Stowell and three others, he was temporarily separated from his command. Following is the letter of instructions found upon his person:

INSTRUCTIONS TO UTAH MILITIA OFFICERS

Utah WarHC"Headquarters Eastern Expedition,

Utah WarHC279Camp Near Cache Cave,

Utah WarHC279Oct. 4, 1857.

Utah WarHCYou will proceed, with all possible dispatch, without injuring your animals, to the Oregon road, near the bend of Bear river, north by east of this place. Take close and correct observation of the country on your route. When you approach the road, send scouts ahead, to ascertain if the invading troops have passed that way. Should they have passed, take a concealed route, and get ahead of them. Express to Colonel Burton, who is now on that road and in the vicinity of the troops, proceed at once to annoy them in every possible way. Use every exertion to stampede their animals and set fire to their trains. Burn the whole country before them, and on their flanks. Keep them from sleeping by night surprises; blockade the road by felling trees or destroying the river fords where you can. Watch for opportunities to set fire to the grass before them that can be burned. Keep your men concealed as much as possible, and guard against surprise. Keep scouts out at all times, and communications open with Colonel Burton, Major McAllister and O. P. Rockwell, who are operating in the same way. Keep me advised daily of your movements, and every step the troops take, and in which direction.

Utah WarHC280God bless you, and give you success.

Utah WarHC280Your brother in Christ,

Utah WarHCDANIEL H. WELLS.

Utah WarHCP. S.—If the troops have not passed, or have turned in this direction, follow in their rear, and continue to annoy them, burning any trains they may leave. Take no life, but destroy their trains, and stampede or drive away their animals, at every opportunity.

280Major Joseph Taylor. [Signed] "D. H. WELLS." [^12]

Utah WarHC280General Wells, meantime had visited the several militia camps in Echo canon and inspected their fortifications.

THE BURNING OF UNITED STATES WAGON TRAINS

Utah WarHCWhile yet at Bridger, October 3rd, General Wells ordered Major Lot Smith to take a small company of men and intercept the supply trains then advancing from South Pass and either turn them back or burn them. [^13] Accordingly, with a command of forty-four men, rank and file, among whom were Captain Horton D. Haight, and Thomas Abbott and John Vance, officers, he started upon his mission.

Utah WarHC281The command rode eastward all night, and early the next morning came in sight of an ox train headed westward. This was in charge of a Captain Rankin. Major Smith informed him that he must turn his train and "go the other way, until he reached the states." When the train captain inquired by what authority such orders were issued, Major Smith pointed to his men saying there was part of it, the rest was concealed in the bush. Rankin swore roundly at the orders, but nevertheless turned his train eastward. As soon as Major Smith's company was out of sight, however, he would turn again to the west. Some United States troops met him that day, and taking out his lading he left the wagons and teams standing. This near Green river, and that night Major Smith camped in close proximity to these troops.

Utah WarHCHaving had but partial success with Rankin's train Major Smith determined upon bolder measures. Though his command was small, he divided it; sending Captain Haight with nineteen men "to see if he could get the mules of the 10th regiment on any terms." With the remaining twenty-three men he started for Sandy Fork to intercept trains approaching from the direction of South Pass. When he had reached Big Sandy, a stream from the northeast, tributary to Green river, his scouts reported to him a train of "twenty-six large freight wagons on the old 'Mormon' trail." He resolved on destroying this train and rode back fourteen miles for that purpose. Arriving near the trains he discovered that the camp was very much awake, the teamsters drinking. Knowing the likelihood of men under the influence of liquor to be quarrelsome and ready to fight, Major Smith kept his command in ambush, meanwhile sending scouts to "ascertain the exact number and position of the wagons. Twenty-six wagons, in two lines, a short distance apart," was the scout's report. When Smith's command rode into the camp its leader discovered he had misunderstood his scout's report; for instead of twenty-six wagons in two lines a short distance apart, there were two lines a short distance apart with twenty-six wagons in each! Glancing over his shoulder as he rode into the campfire light he discovered that his men apparently stretched out indefinitely, and trusting to the camp's being deceived by this false appearance of numbers he proceeded with his enterprise, nothwithstanding the odds against him.

Utah WarHC282Calling for the commander, a Mr. Dawson answered, to whom Major Smith explained his intention of burning the train, but informed him that the men might take from the wagons their private property if they would do so quickly. "For God's sake," said Captain Dawson, "don't burn the trains!" "It is for his sake that I am going to burn them," replied Major Smith coolly.

Utah WarHCWithout more ado the camp was disarmed, the arms stacked and the men put under guard. In the midst of these proceedings a messenger rode into camp from Colonel Alexander. His message was for Captain Rankin, and verbal. Major Smith insisted upon its being delivered in his presence, and intimated to the courier that if he lied in repeating it his life would be forfeited. The message from Colonel Alexander notified the train captain that "the Mormons were in the field; that the captain and teamsters must not go to sleep; but keep night guard on their trains; and that four companies of cavalry and two pieces of artillery would come over in the morning to escort them to camp." [^14]

Utah WarHC283While Smith's command was burning the first train a guard from the second came up to see what was going on. He was ordered to give no alarm. Shortly afterwards, and taking Captain Dawson with him to the second train, Major Smith proceeded to set fire to it. Then ordering the train men to make no attempt to put out the fires he rode away leaving both trains ablaze. [^15] Fifty-one wagons and their contents were completely destroyed in this first burning.

Utah WarHC283Major Smith's command went to the bluffs of Green river, from which point its leaders sent a single courier to report their success to General Wells. After allowing his men a night's rest, Major Smith sallied forth again and met a supply train at a point on the Big Sandy, since known as "Simpson's Hollow." There were twenty-five wagons in this third train, and allowing the teamsters and Captain Simpson to load up two of the wagons with provisions and clothing for their personal use, the rest of the train was burned.

Utah WarHCThe capture and burning of this third train was attended with dramatic circumstances. When Major Smith came up to the train and asked for the train master he was informed that the "captain" was out after cattle. After disarming the teamster the major rode out and met the captain whose name was Simpson, about half a mile from the train. "I told him," says Smith's narrative, "that I came on business. He inquired the nature of it, when I demanded his pistols. He replied: 'By G—d, sir, no man ever took them yet, and if you think you can, without killing me, try it.' We were all the time riding towards the train, with our noses about as close together as two Scotch terriers would have held theirs—his eyes flashing fire; I couldn't see mine—I told him that I admired a brave man, but that I did not like blood—you insist on my killing you, which will only take a minute, but I don't want to do it. We had by this time reached the train. He, seeing that his men were under guard, surrendered, saying: 'I see you have me at a disadvantage, my men being disarmed.' I replied that I didn't need the advantage and asked him what he would do if we should give them their arms. 'I'll fight you!' 'Then,' said I, 'We know something about that too—take up your arms!' His men exclaimed, 'Not by a d—n sight! We came out here to whack bulls, not to fight.' 'What do you say to that, Simpson?' I asked. 'Damnation,' he replied, grinding his teeth in the most violent manner, 'If I had been here before and they had refused to fight, I would have killed every man of them.'"

Utah WarHC"Captain Simpson was the bravest man I met during the campaign. He was a son-in-law of Mr. Majors, a large contractor for government freighting. He was terribly exercised over the capture of his train, and wanted to know what kind of a report he could make to the commander, and what he could do with his crowd of cowardly teamsters left on the plains to starve. I told him that I would give him a wagon loaded with provisions. 'You will give me two, I know it by your looks!' I told them to hurry up and get their things out, and take their two wagons for we wanted to go on. Simpson begged me not to burn the train while he was in sight, and said that it would ruin his reputation as a wagon master. I told him not to be squeamish, that the trains burned very nicely, I had seen them before, and that we hadn't time to be ceremonious. We then supplied ourselves with provisions, set the wagons afire, and rode on about two miles from the stream to rest." [^16]

Utah WarHC285The amount of property destroyed in burning these seventy-four wagons was considerable, and appears in detail in Commissary Clarke's report in the House Documents of the 35th Congress. [^17] The action of Major Smith received high commendation from General Wells, and he was urged to continue his attacks upon the trains; to keep the enemy under arms by night surprises and thus wear them out. "May the Lord God of Israel bless you," said General Wells' letter, and "help you to hedge up the way of our enemies and cause them to leave the territory." [^18]

Utah WarHCWhile camped a short distance from the scene of this latest exploit, for a much needed rest, a most painful accident occurred in Major Smith's command. The accidental discharge of an old United States Yauger musket passed a heavy ball through Orson P. Arnold's thigh, breaking the bone in a frightful manner. The accident entailed upon the sympathetic command the task of carrying their wounded comrade a distance of thirty miles on foot, in an improvised litter of poles and blankets.

Utah WarHCThe incident and its connections illustrates the character of this command of mountain men and their leader. The command was in imminent danger of being attacked while engaged in their last train-burning adventure, as troops, some of whom were mounted, were not far distant. When young Arnold fell with his wounded leg under him the jagged points of the broken bones struck through the flesh of the terrible wound, and it would seem that he would bleed to death in a few minutes. "We laid our hands upon him," says Major Lot Smith, "according to the order of the church, and asked our Father to preserve him for we knew that we could not." The first words young Arnold spoke were—"I shall always be a cripple, and will never be able to fight soldiers again." He was carried to Green river where he was left in the care of mountaineers until a wagon could be sent for him to take him to Salt Lake City. While the litter was being constructed—the poles had to be obtained from a distance—and the bone was being rudely set, the picket guard came running to camp with the word that two hundred cavalry men were close upon the command. Consternation followed. One man moved that the command surrender. "I will say when to do that," sternly said Major Smith. Another proposed that they "run"—"I will kill the man that made that motion myself if he dare try it." Then Major Smith made his first "war speech." He reminded his men that they were not there of their own choice or on their own business. "Our people and their rights are being assailed," he said. It is the Lord's work that we are engaged in; and we are called by him to protect our homes and our religion. If he suffers those troops to come near us, we will trust in him and whip them, no matter about their number." This restored the morale of the command. No troops appeared. Young Arnold was always lame after this accident, but he led an active and useful business life until the spring of 1913, when he died.

Utah WarHC287At Green river another report was brought in that troops were close at hand and Major Smith sent out scouts to locate them definitely; himself the meanwhile climbing a tree for a better outlook over the river bottom. Very soon a scout ran back to the grove where the command was resting, to report that two soldiers were chasing two of the command. Acting instinctively Major Smith dropped from the tree and seizing a gun started in the direction of the "chase" and the "flight," the whole command at his heels. Then suddenly the major stopped short. "Did you say that two of our men were being chased by two soldiers," he inquired of the scout who brought the report. "Yes," said the scout. "Then I hope they will catch them; for I don't want any two men that any other two can chase." And with that all returned to the grove. It happened that the two men being "chased" were meeting two friends from Captain Haight's command, which shortly afterwards joined Smith's. [^19]

Utah WarHC287No more wagon trains came in Major Smith's way [^20] and he had to content himself thereafter with raids upon cattle herds of the "Utah Expedition" in which he was as eminently successful as in destroying trains; nearly 1,000 head of cattle being sent into Salt Lake valley from his successive raids.

THE MEETING OF A CAPTAIN AND MAJOR—A GRIM INTERVIEW

Utah WarHCOn one occasion Major Smith came nearly being captured by Captain Marcy, who was sent out to take him. Having his command increased to nearly one hundred men the major was not disposed to avoid encounter with United States troops; and this led him to follow the trail of Captain Marcy's command, when he found it leading away from the "Expedition's" main line of march. The major's intention was to run off the mules on which Marcy's men were mounted. With part of his men he had followed Marcy's troops through a pre-daylight march, and suddenly came close upon them in the very early morning. "When they saw us right at their heels," says Smith's narrative, "there was some lively scampering for a few moments." The two commands were but forty rods apart when Captain Marcy had drawn up his men in line. Major Smith rode forward alone and was met by the captain within twenty paces of the latter's line. Captain Marcy introduced himself, at the same time saying he supposed he was addressing "Captain Smith." The answer was an affirmative. He then said that the forces he commanded were United States troops and asked Major Smith what armed force it was he commanded. "We are from Utah," was the answer. "What is your business out here?" inquired Marcy. "Watching you," was the prompt reply. "What is your business?" asked the Utah leader. Marcy rather evasively said he was looking out a way into Utah. "Nonsense," said Major Smith, "you have left the main road to the valley long ago. It passes through Echo canon. I have been that way myself many a time." This was sneeringly said, at which, however, Captain Marcy only smiled. [^21]

Utah WarHC289Captain Marcy, near the close of the interview, expressed regret for the existing Utah difficulties, and said that the officers of the "Expedition" did not want to come to blows with the people of Utah. "I told him," says Major Smith, "that the administration seemed to want them to, and that their coming here put us in the position of a man holding off the hand that clutched a knife with which to cut his throat. We had a good hold on that arm raised against us, and would keep it." The captain mentioned letters of introduction he held to gentlemen in Salt Lake City, one among others to Elder John Taylor recently, of New York. The major banteringly suggested that he send them in, as the captain would not be able to go in himself that winter. Marcy still having the advantage of good temper over the major, politely asked the latter if he would not take them in for him; to which Major Smith could only say that the probabilities were that he himself would not likely go to Salt Lake either that winter. Observing that time was passing Major Smith broke off the conversation and rode obliquely towards the line of Marcy's men, the captain followed. Smith's men, at a signal from him skirted around to the right, and together, leader and men rode off to find the other part of their company left in charge of their packs. While getting into marching order they were nearly surrounded by Marcy's force and only escaped by making a bold dash through Ham's Fork, near which the other part of the command had halted. Just as they were all safely out of the river, Marcy's cavalry came dashing up and commanded them to halt. Smith's command shouted back their compliments, "more expressive than elegant," writes Major Smith, "as we leisurely rode up the hill." From the hillside among out-jutting rocks overlooking the stream and its valley, Smith's command watched their enemies on the other side of the river.

UNDER FIRE—ONLY SHOTS OF "THE WAR"

Utah WarHCMeanwhile from another direction, a troop of horsemen rode in upon them and got within short range, just as the Utah men discovered their presence. Dismounting, the troops fired about forty shots among Smith's command. The haste was evidently so great and the range so short, however, that the shots for the most part hurtled harmlessly over their heads, the only effect of the fusillade being the hitting of two horses, one of which, a gray, fell near Major Smith. For a moment the troops must have thought they had brought him down, as they raised an exultant shout when the horse fell.

Utah WarHC290Smith's command retired safely, a dozen picked men lingering in the rear of the main company, with Major Smith to engage the troops who had fired upon them if they left the hillside to follow up their attack. The attacking party did not come down, however, and the small rear guard of Smith's command soon followed their comrades towards the charred ruins of what had been Fort Supply. [^22]

Utah WarHC290These details are worthy of a place in the body of this History as they tell of the only shots fired in the "Utah War."

COLONEL ALEXANDER'S PERPLEXITIES

Utah WarHCMeantime matters grew more perplexing for the division of the "Utah Expedition" on Ham's Fork. Colonel Alexander was in a most embarrassing situation. Without definite instructions from the war department as to the purpose of the "Expedition;" without communication with Colonel Johnston, the officer in command; much of the range destroyed by the grass being burned; the presence of a seemingly ubiquitous and evasive foe, of whose numbers and effective strength he could form no definite judgment; [^23] with the rigors of a mountain winter already threatening him and no suitable winter quarters in view—all these things combined created a very great embarrassment for the colonel.

Utah WarHC291In the midst of these perplexities a council of officers was called and three places for winter quarters discussed; the east side of Wind river mountains to the northeast; Henry's Fork of Green river, and Brown's Hole; the vicinity of Fort Hall, on Beaver Head mountain, one hundred and forty miles distant from Fort Bridger. This last place was the one decided upon for winter quarters and the movement up Ham's Fork in that direction began on the 11th of October. [^24] The movement was necessarily very slow, the draught animals being so weakened that three miles a day marked the utmost capacity of forward movement, and the vanguard of the train would be seen going into camp before the rear guard had left its camp of the previous day. A week's effort brought them but a short distance on the way towards Fort Hall. Snowstorms had begun, and while at first not heavy in the open plains, the mountain passes and canons were being filled and rendered more difficult of passage.

Utah WarHCUnder these circumstances a second council of officers was held that was not altogether harmonious. Some were in favor of attempting to make forced marches into Salt Lake valley, at all hazards; but it was finally determined to return down Ham's Fork to the point of its juncture with Black's Fork. Just as this decision was reached word was received from the commanding officer, Colonel Johnston, who had arrived at South Pass. He ordered Colonel Alexander to make his way to Fontenelle Creek, a tributary of Green river, and thirty miles directly north of the point Alexander had reached on Ham's Fork, where it was reported that pasturage was abundant. Before a start could be made for the new location, however, a second order from Johnston directed that Alexander make a return march down Ham's Fork to three miles below the juncture of that stream with Black's Fork and there the commanding officer would join him. [^25]

Utah WarHC292The return march was slower, and more disastrous for Colonel Alexander's division of the "Expedition" than the movement up the stream had been, since the snowstorms were more frequent, the cold more intense, the progress slower, and attended with greater mortality to his draught animals.

THE ADVENT OF "KING WINTER" FAVORS THE UTAH FORCES

Utah WarHCWith the advent of the early winter snows great relief was felt among the Utah forces. If the "stars in their courses" did not fight against Sisera (the "Expedition") the snowstorms of the mountains did, and hampered and perplexed its movements. Several Utah commands were released from the camps in the mountains and permitted to go to Salt Lake valley to recruit and obtain fresh supplies of food and clothing, but to remain in locations from which they could be called at an hour's notice to take the field if occasion arose. General Wells himself and the greater part of his staff, together with his counselors, Elders John Taylor and George A. Smith, returned to Salt Lake City, leaving the camps in Echo canon and the squads of men watching and reporting the movement of the troops on Ham's Fork, under the direction of Major General George D. Grant and Colonel R. T. Burton. [^26]

STRENGTH IN THE THINGS NOT KNOWN

Utah WarHCAs may be supposed on the arrival of General Wells and his counselors in Salt Lake City very interesting and frequent consultations were had in which the present "war" situation was thoroughly considered. President Young appreciated the advantages that arose from the fact that he had received no official notice that he was superceded as governor of Utah by the appointment of his successor; and had no official notification of the coming of the United States troops. "I mean to send word to the United States," he said in one of the above named consultations, "that if they have sent troops here, the cattle which we have taken I will give them credit for upon compound interest. But I do not know that they have sent any; they have not notified me, officially, anything about it, and I have no right to know anything about it, but shall treat them as a mob." [^27]

Utah WarHCAt a subsequent meeting with the twelve, Governor Young voiced this intention: "If they take away our charters from us and divide up our territory, [both plans had been suggested by United States senators, it should be remembered], it will be unconstitutional, as everything is they do against us. I told Brother Bernhisel that if they took away our charters to come immediately home and we would organize our state government and fall back upon our original boundaries. Our east boundary should be Fort Laramie, the west the summit of the Sierra Nevada, and run to the Pacific coast, and we would defend it." In this Elder John Taylor concurred. [^28] Some one suggested that a young officer with Alexander's command had said that "the United States would send an army of 20,000 men, and would wipe the Mormons out another year." To which Governor Young replied by saying that great numbers might be a hindrance to such an attempt. "It would take more than twenty miles for their army and trains to move at all, and the more there is of them, the worse off they will be." [^29] Discussing the matter of the present United States force going into winter quarters and receiving reinforcements in the spring, Governor Young announced a determination to deal with Alexander's force before the arrival of reinforcements, and felt assured that by reason of the hard winter, desertions and sickness, the force would be much depleted. [^30]

VIEWS OF SENATOR SAM HOUSTON ON WAR WITH UTAH

Utah WarHCSimilar views to these were expressed upon the floor of the United States senate by General Sam Houston of Texas. As will be remembered Senator Houston was a hero frontiersman, and the founder of Texas.

Utah WarHC"The more men you send to the 'Mormon War' the more you increase the difficulty. They have to be fed. For some sixteen hundred miles you have to transport provisions. The regiments sent there have found Fort Bridger and other places, as they approached them, heaps of ashes. They will find Salt Lake, if they ever reach it, a heap of ashes. They will find that they will have to fight against Russia and the Russians. Whoever goes there will meet the fate of Napoleon's army when he went to Moscow. Just as sure as we are now standing in the senate, these people, if they fight at all, will fight desperately. They are defending their homes. They are fighting to prevent the execution of threats that have been made, which touch their hearths and their families; and depend upon it they will fight until every man perishes before he surrenders. That is not all. If they do not choose to go into conflict immediately, they will secure their women and children in the fastnesses of the mountains; they have provisions for two years; and they will carry on a guerrilla warfare which will be most terrible to the troops you send there. They will get no supplies there. You will have to transport them all from Independence, in Missouri. When the fire will consume it, there will not be a spear of grass left that will not be burnt. * * * I know not what course will be taken on this subject. I hope it will be one of conciliation. As for troops to conquer the Mormons, fifty thousand would be as inefficient as two or three thousand; and in proportion as you send troops in that vast region, without supplies, and without the hope of them, with no means of subsistence after a certain period, unless it is transported to them, the greater will be your danger. Consider the facilities these people have to cut off your supplies. I say your men will never return, but their bones will whiten the valley of Salt Lake. If war begins, the very moment one single drop of blood is drawn, it will be the signal of extermination. Mr. President, in my opinion, whether we are to have a war with the Mormons or not, will depend on the fact whether our troops advance or not. If they do not advance; if negotiations be opened; if we understand what the Mormons are really willing to do; that they are ready to acquiesce in the mandates of the government, and render obedience to the Constitution; if you will take time to ascertain that, and not repudiate all idea of peace, we may have peace. But so sure as the troops advance, so sure they will be annihilated. You may treble them, and you will only add to the catastrophe, not diminish human suffering. These people expect nothing but extermination or abuse more intolerable than even extermination would be, from your troops, and they will oppose them." [^31]

ARRIVAL OF COLONEL JOHNSTON LEARNED—"THEY SHALL NOT PASS"

Utah WarHCOn the 28th of October word was received in Salt Lake City of the arrival of Colonel Johnston, with the rest of the "Expedition's" forces and supply trains, in the vicinity of Ham's Fork. Whereupon General Wells and staff were directed to return to Echo canon to resume command of the territorial forces. Governor Young was not at all daunted at the arrival of the somewhat noted commander-in-chief of the "Utah Expedition," but asserted his determination to maintain the right of local self-government in vigorous terms.

Utah WarHC295"If any officers come to the army, the governor or judges, just inform them that they are as near as they can come. Had they have come without a military array, they could have come and not been molested; but now they cannot come. We will not have any cursed scoundrels forced upon us to judge or rule over us, and they shall not come among us. If Johnston comes with troops and intends to come in I expect they will leave their baggage, battery, and a company to guard them and come in on a forced march. Then we must not let them sleep, but use them up as soon as we can—work night and day, and not let them sleep. Brother Wells thinks that they are determined to try to come in. You will find that when the Lord sees that we are willing to fight and get ready to shoot, he will fight our battles." [^32]

Utah WarHC296The next day, October 29th, General Wells accompanied by members of his staff and by General Charles C. Rich, [^33] in place of George A. Smith—John Taylor following a few days later—returned to Echo canon.

REPORTS OF THE OUTPOSTS

Utah WarHCFrom the companies of Utah militia left to watch the movements of the troops, General Wells was informed of the movements of the two divisions of the "Utah Expedition," Colonel Alexander's returning down Ham's Fork, and colonel Johnston's coming from South Pass and their juncture on Black's Fork. This on the 3rd of November.

THE MORALE OF THE "EXPEDITION" HEARTENED BY JOHNSTON'S ARRIVAL

Utah WarHCNaturally the arrival of Colonel Johnston, commanding the "Expedition," infused new life and hope into the badly demoralized "Utah Army," worn out with its march first up and then down Ham's Fork. The colonel commanding had come with more supply trains and cavalry companies—with more at hand. This, it was thought, would put an end to further "Mormon" raids upon their herds, and their supply trains. There can be no question but what the coming of Johnston emphasized the seriousness of the whole situation for the people of Utah—the saints; and increased the likelihood of an armed conflict. Indeed how could it be voided if the attempt was made by forced marches to reach Salt Lake valley? That General Wells felt keenly the situation is evident by his reports to Governor Young. By express which arrived in Salt Lake City on the evening of the 8th November, he demanded "help, as Colonel Johnston seemed likely to want to push in." "Letters were written to several Mormon officers to muster men to send out, by order of Governor Young, who remained up, attending to sign his name till two o'clock in the morning." [^34] Besides the number already at the front thirteen hundred more were ordered into the mountains, and many were on the way two days after the appeal of General Wells had been received. [^35]

Utah WarHCOn the 11th of November an express arrived by Dr. G. W. Hickman and Elijah Ward; the former had been held a prisoner by Captain Marcy for some time. This express brought the word that "the enemy had concluded to come into Salt Lake City in twelve days on pack animals." [^36] Report was also received that Dr. Garland Hurt, sub-Indians agent who had left Springville late in September for the east in company with between 200 and 300 Utah valley Indians had arrived at the headquarters of the "Utah Expedition," and Governor Young wrote Aaron Johnson of Springville, who was well acquainted with the mountain passes immediately east of Utah valley, what chance there was for United States troops coming to Provo via Kamas Prairie, [^37] the route traversed by Dr. Hurt. About this time an express was sent in from General Wells urging "the necessity of all the saints praying for one thing, and not being divided in their wishes and desires to God. We are all to pray that the soldiers might return, and that we might not have to shed their blood." [^38]

TROUBLES OF THE "EXPEDITION" MULTIPLYING

Utah WarHCMeantime things were equally serious with the "Utah Expedition." Concentration of its several divisions had been effected on Black's Fork, three miles below the mouth of Ham's Fork. From the time he had reached South Pass, on the 18th of October, Colonel Johnston had despaired of reaching Salt Lake valley that fall, even "though not opposed by the Mormons." [^39] On the fifth of November, he reported his juncture with the forces of Colonel Alexander, and announced his intention "to march upon Fort Bridger and dislodge any force" he might find there, and await the arrival of Colonel Cooke, "when," he remarks, "as the approach of winter is too near to attempt the passage of the Wasatch range of mountains with a probability of success, I will seize upon the district mentioned in my letter from South Pass, [i. e., Henry's Fork of Green river] occupying it until an advance is practicable." [^40]

Utah WarHCThe march from Black's Fork to Bridger was a chapter of disaster for the "Utah Expedition." Sentences from Colonel Johnston's report, given in the studied brevity of military records will be sufficiently vivid for all purposes. The distance of the march was but thirty-five miles; yet "fifteen days were consumed in this tedious operation." [^41] Then he adds:

COLONEL JOHNSTON'S REPORT

Utah WarHC"The loss of battery horses, draught mules and oxen of the contractors has been very great, in consequence of snowstorms which were encountered on the route and intense cold. Our marches each were necessarily short on account of the extreme coldness and inclemency of the weather, and because of the great number of miles on the road occupied by the supply trains and others, and the failing condition of the draught animals starving from cold and hunger. * * * Shelter for our thousands of animals seemed indispensable for the preservation of life, yet a more rapid advance to attain it would, we believe, be attended with immense loss. The snowstorms raged with short intermissions after they commenced for several days, [^42] during which time it was exceedingly cold. The thermometer ranged from ten degrees abov to sixteen degrees below zero. If shelter could have been found, a halt till the storm subsided would have been ordered; but there was none. The country between this and the South Pass, with the exception of narrow valleys of water courses, is a great desert, affording no shelter by its conformation or by its woods, or even bushes from the furious blasts in these high regions; and no fuel, except the wild sage or willow bushes. There was no alternative but to press forward perseveringly, though slowly making our route by the frozen horses, mules and oxen. A sufficient number of oxen, though poor, have been saved to supply the meat part of rations six days in the week, and we have on hand bacon for one day in the week for seven months, and also flour and small rations. * * * If a further advance of the army were otherwise practicable and proper at this season of the year, the necessity of appropriating the remainder of the work oxen for food for the troops would now prevent." [^43]

COLONEL COOKE'S REPORT OF A HARD MARCH—A DESOLATE COUNTRY

Utah WarHCColonel Johnston in the above document also reports the arrival of Colonel P. St. George Cooke, lieutenant colonel with his command of six companies of the 2nd dragoons, and the necessary supply trains; also with the civil officers appointed for the territory, and their escort. They arrived at Johnston's encampment, Camp Scott, near Fort Bridger, on the 19th of November. Cooke's march, in the latter stages, had been as disastrous as that of the other divisions of the "Expedition;" in the loss of animals by freezing and starvation, and the suffering of the command, up to the attaining of South Pass, greater. "I have one hundred and forty-four horses," says his report to Colonel Johnston, "and have lost one hundred and thirty-four [though special care had been used to preserve the horses as compared with attention given to mules]." "Most of the loss has occurred much this side of South Pass, in comparatively moderate weather. It has been of starvation; the earth has a no more lifeless, treeless, grassless desert; it contains scarcely a wolf to glut itself on the hundreds of dead and frozen animals which for thirty miles block the road; with abandoned and shattered property, they mark, perhaps, beyond example in history, the steps of an advancing army with the horrors of a disastrous retreat." [^44]

Utah WarHC300In the midst of this region, utilizing the charred remains of Fort Bridger for the shelter of the more perishable part of its provisions, and sending the remnant of herds of cattle, mules and horses to Henry's Fork of Green river, guarded by companies of dragoons under Colonel Cooke, the "Expedition" settled down at Camp Scott, on Black's Fork, near Bridger, for the winter.

Utah WarHC301On their part, as soon as it was evident that the "Expedition" was safe-locked in deep snows for the winter, the "Mormon" leaders withdrew their forces from the mountain passes and canon encampments to the settlements and homes in Salt Lake valley, where in comfort, and, indeed, amid much innocent merry-making, they passed an agreeable winter.

Utah WarHC301The winter of 1857-8 was often spoken of as one of "the gayest winters ever known in Utah." W. G. Mills, writing from Salt Lake City to T. B. H. Stenhouse, N. Y., under date of April 5th, 1858, describes the "gayety" of the winter as follows: "Peace is enjoyed throughout this territory by the citizens, from north to south, and every heart beats with the love of liberty—religious, political, and social. During the winter, festivities were very prevalent, and entertainments of various kinds were enjoyed. Dramatic and literary associations were attended to overflowing, balls and parties were frequent and numerously filled, and every species of amusement suitable for an enlightened and refined people was a source of profit to the caterer, and pleasure and benefit to the patronizers. Indeed, had you seen the manner in which they enjoyed themselves, you would never have surmised for one moment that within a few miles of us there was an army—who were only waiting to kill, corrupt, and debase an innocent and virtuous community. No cases of drunkenness appeared on the streets; no lists for assault and battery on the courts of the city; no trials for larceny, petit or grand; no marks, in those respects, of the civilized manners of the world; no midnight brawlers and assassins."

Utah WarHCThis condition he contrasts with the conditions reported at Camp Scott: "The contrast is great, when this place is put in juxtaposition with the army outside. Courts were held there for weeks together; thefts, assault and battery, and wickedness of various kinds, were the order of the day. Ben Simons, an Indian chief, visited the camp on one occasion, after he sold them salt at $2.50 per pound; and, while sleeping in the superintendent of Indian affairs' tent, the sum of $300 was stolen from him. Gambling is carried on with a high hand amongst them and the concomitant crimes, although all such are strictly forbidden in the territory." [^45]

302THE "EXPEDITION" WATCHED BY A GUARD OF FIFTY—SNOW-BOUND

Utah WarHC302Of all the Utah forces that had been in the mountains, only a guard of fifty men was kept at Camp Weber, at the mouth of Echo canon. These were under command of Captain John R. Winder, with instructions to keep a relay of ten mounted men on Yellow Creek, above the head of Echo canon, relieved weekly. [^46] The relay was occasionally to trail out towards Fort Bridger, "and look at our enemies from the high butte near that place." [^47] The guard stationed at Camp Weber was instructed to keep strict surveillance at this east gateway to Salt Lake valley. If teamsters or deserters presented themselves they were to be passed on to Salt Lake City, leaving a record of who and what they were. "If officers or others undertake to come in," said their instruction, "keep them prisoners until further orders are received." "Especially, and in no case," were they to "let any of the would-be civil officers pass. If your lookout party discover any movement of the enemy in this direction [i.e., Salt Lake City] * * * take all such parties prisoners, if you can, without shooting; but if you cannot, you are at liberty to attack them, as no such party must be permitted to come into this city."

Utah WarHC303There was no attempt on the part of the "Expedition" or any division of it to enter Salt Lake valley during the winter. When the "Expedition" went into winter quarters at Camp Scott in the latter days of November, the campaign of the "Utah War" closed. It ended without the Utah forces firing a single gun. Had not the Lord fought his people's battle?

Utah WarHC303All that remains to be said about the "war," has to do with negotiations to straighten out the difficulties that had been brought about by stupendous blundering.

Footnotes

"Headquarters Army of Utah,

Black's Fork, 16 miles from Fort Bridger,

En route to Salt Lake City, November 7, 1857.

A true copy of instruction in the possession of Major Joseph Taylor, when captured.

F. J. PORTER,

Assistant Adjutant General."

(House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, x, No. 71, pp. 56, 57).

Linn quotes the body of this order, but omits the postscript with its important instruction, "Take no life." (Story of the Mormons, p. 489). A letter bearing date of Sept. 14, 1857, addressed to Wm. H. Dame, Parowan, and signed by D. H. Wells and Brigham Young, outlines practically the same plan of campaign, for southern captains of commands, but emphasizes the intention to shed no blood, if that can be avoided. "Save life always if it is possible—we do not wish to shed one drop of blood if it can be avoided. This course will give us great influence abroad." (The letter in extenso is published in Introduction to Lee's Mormonism Unveiled, pp. 18, 19). Evidently on the part of the "Mormons" the campaign was to be bloodless if possible.

No. of Rations.

2,720 pounds ham.

92,700 pounds bacon ———————————————-115,875

167,900 pounds flour ———————————————-149,244

270 bushels beans ———————————————108,000

8,580 pounds Rio coffee —————————————143,000

330 pounds Java coffee.

1,400 pounds crushed sugar.

2,970 gallons vinegar ——————————————297,000

800 pounds sperm candles ———————————- 80,000

13,333 pounds soap ————————————————333,325

84 gallons of molasses.

134 bushels dried peaches.

68,832 ration dessicated vegetables.

705 pounds tea ————————————————- 52,875

7,781 pounds hard bread ————————————— 7,781

H. F. CLARKE,

Capt. and C. S. U. S. A.

Made from bills of lading, October 10, 1857.

(House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, No. 71, p. 63).

"After much deliberation, and assisted by the counsel of the senior officer, I have determined to move the troops by the following route; Up Ham's Fork about 18 miles to a road called Sublette's cut-off; along that road to Bear river, and Soda Springs. On arriving at Soda Springs two routes will be open, one down Bear river valley towards Salt Lake, and one to the northeast towards the Wind river mountains, where good valleys for wintering the troops and stock can be found. The adoption of one of these will be decided by the following circumstances: If the force under my command is sufficient to overcome the resistance which I expect to meet at Soda Springs, I shall endeavor to force my way into the valley of Bear river and occupy some of the Mormon villages, because I am under the impression that the Mormons, after a defeat, will be willing to treat and bring provisions for sale. The supplies on hand will last six months, and if I can get possession of a town in Bear river valley, I can easily fortify and hold it all the winter." (House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, x, No. 71, p. 31).

---
Notas:
[^1] THE NEW YORK TRIBUNE EDITORIAL ON THE PURPOSE OF THE "UTAH EXPEDITION" On this subject the message said: "Our schools, to those unacquainted with the facts and circumstances connected therewith, may seem not to have received that attention which their importance demands; at the same time each ward [i. e. an ecclesiastical subdivision of the settlements] throughout the territory has provided one or more comfortable schoolhouses commensurate with the number of pupils to be accommodated; and proportionately more has been done in Utah for the true enlightenment of the rising generation than has ever been accomplished under like conditions in any other portion of the Union. * * * In this great cause," said the governor to the legislature, "your influence and example can be made productive of much good, even though your judgment should leave you, during your present session, to waive direct legislation upon this subject."
[^2] THE TAYLOR-MARCY CORRESPONDENCE: The New York Tribune editorial is so important as a document that it is given complete in Note 1, end of chapter.
[^3] THE CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN ADJUTANT GENERAL JAMES FERGUSON OF THE UTAH MILITIA, AND COLONEL P. ST. GEO. COOKE, UNITED STATES DRAGOONS The message will be found in extenso in Deseret News of Dec. 23rd, 1857.
[^4] The resolutions with the signature of Heber C. Kimball, President of the council, and John Taylor, speaker of the house; and the signature of each member of both houses, are published in the Deseret News of Dec. 23rd, 1857. "In compliance with their unanimous and cordial desire," the officers of both houses of the assembly also attached their names to the resolutions. (Ibid).
[^5] The act is certified by W. H. Hooper, secretary pro tem for Utah territory, and published in Deseret News of Dec. 23rd, 1857.
[^6] See Deseret News of Jan. 13th, 1858.
[^7] House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, x, No. 71, pp. 57-62.
[^8] "Soldier, actor, orator, and lawyer, one of the brightest and most versatile minds and from what his friends say of him, one of the most winsome and loveable natures"—is O. F. Whitney's characterization of James Ferguson, in his biography of him. (History of Utah, vol. iv, p. 180, et seq). "He was a native of Belfast, Ireland, and came of a Protestant family of that city—his parents being Francis and Mary Patrick Ferguson. He joined the Church of the Latter-day Saints in Liverpool when fourteen years of age, and migrated to Nauvoo, just in time to join the last company of exiles from that ill-fated city, and arrived in Council Bluffs in time to enlist in the Mormon Battalion. In that trying march this 'young Emmett's' wit and humor enlivened every scene, and he was a universal favorite" (Whitney). He was held in high esteem by General Wells, who made him adjutant general of his staff in the "Echo Canon War," He led a useful and eventful life, which ended all too soon in his 36th year. He died at Salt Lake City, 13th of August, 1863.
[^9] This correspondence was published first in the Deseret News of Sept. 1st, 1858. Later in Sergeant Tyler's Mormon Battalion, pp. 368-70. It will be found in extenso Note 3, end of this chapter. A letter written in a very different vein from the correspondence here referred to, is spoken of by several Utah writers (See History of the Nauvoo Legion, Young, Contributor, vol. xi, p. 403; also Whitney's History of Utah, vol. i, p. 659. It is also referred to in the History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1858, p. 491; but is not given there. The excerpt published in works above cited is very caustic and bitter in spirit; it was evidently written under great stress of feeling, but the sober, second thought doubtless withheld it from being sent to Colonel Cooke, and the published letter found in Note 3, end of this chapter, took its place).
[^10] The document in full is published in the Deseret News of Jan. 13, 1857.
[^11] All these documents, addresses and resolutions of the mass meeting, held in Salt Lake City, will be found in Deseret News of Jan. 27th, 1858.
[^12] Deseret News of the 27th January, 1858.
[^13] Ibid of Feb. 3rd.
[^14] Ibid of Feb. 17th.
[^15] Ibid of March 3rd and March 10th.
[^16] See History of Brigham Young, Ms., pp. 181-182. Under date of 20th of February, 1858, the following entry is made: "The people of this territory have voluntarily raised an armed force of one thousand mounted men, at an expense of one million dollars." (Ibid, p. 186, et passim). Many enactments were passed by this legislature granting herd grounds, ferry, and timber rights, and other special privileges to various persons. (See Acts and Resolutions of the Legislative Assembly of the Territory of Utah, 1856-7, pp. 3-25). Nearly all of these acts of special legislation were repealed by the succeeding legislature.
[^17] New York Tribune, Jan. 30th, 1858. The article is copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., January, 1858, pp. 161-167.
[^18] The letter at length is published in Echo Canon War, Contributor, vol. iv, p. 48. The closing sentence of the letter says—"If we could learn of a surety that they [the enemy] proposed making winter quarters at Fort Hall, we would cease molesting them." (Ibid).
[^19] See Lot Smith's Narrative, Contributor, vol. iv, pp. 27-29.
[^20] Governor Young expressed himself as being of the opinion that it was just as well that no more trains were destroyed, else the saints might have been under the embarrassing responsibility of sending supplies to the troops in their winter quarters "to keep them from starving." (Echo Canon War, Contributor, vol. iv, p. 48). The trains destroyed as may be seen from their bills of lading (note 17) were chiefly provision trains; while three other trains immediately following were laden with the tents and all the clothing, though of poor assortment for the rigors of a mountain winter. (See Quartermaster Dickenson's Report, dated Camp Scott, Nov. 29, 1857; also Bancroft's History of Utah, pp. 521-2).
[^21] "It was the only expression except the utmost coolness and civility I got out of him that morning, said Major Smith years later, when narrating his experiences, "and I afterwards regretted the rough manner I assumed towards him, for he remained perfectly calm, and was very gentlemanly during the whole of our interview." (Major Lot Smith's Narrative, Echo Canon War, Contributor, vol. iv, p. 168).
[^22] Major Lot Smith's Narrative, Echo Canon War, Contributor, vol. iv, pp. 167-9; and 224.
[^23] It was part of the policy of the campaign on the part of the 'Mormons" to keep the United States officers and troops mystified as to the numerical strength and effectiveness of their forces. When Major Taylor was examined before Colonel Alexander, shortly after he was captured, answering the question "what is the strength of the Mormon troops?" he answered: "from 20>,000 to 25,000 warriors." "At this broad statement," says the major's narrative, "he [Alexander] stood aghast." (Journal of Major Joseph Taylor in History of Brigham Young, Ms., pp. 611, 612). Adjutant Stowell, examined separately, answered to the same effect as to numbers—from 25>,000 to 30,000, "with quite an amount of artillery." (Ibid, p. 679).
[^24] What Colonel Alexander hoped to achieve by this detour is set forth in the following passage in his report to Colonel S. Cooper, Adjutant General, U. S. A.:
[^25] For Colonel Johnston's first order see House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, x, No. 71, pp. 38-40; and for the 2nd order, Ibid, p. 46.
[^26] History of Brigham Young, Ms., Oct., 1857, p. 742.
[^27] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 25th Oct., 1857, p. 743.
[^28] Ibid, p. 744.
[^29] Ibid, p. 745.
[^30] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 26th Oct., 1857, pp. 746-7.
[^31] Congressional Globe, 35th Congress, 1st Session, 25th Feb., 1858, p. 874.
[^32] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 28th of Oct., 1857, p. 750. Wilford Woodruff almost in daily contact with Governor Young, and in frequent council meetings with him, said when writing his "reflections" in his Journal on the progress of the "war" to this point—"President [Governor] Young had been as calm and serene as a summer's morning, and all the time has said victory would be ours, and that blood would not be shed; and he has diffused this spirit through all the church and kingdom of God established in these mountains; and all the armies of Zion have gone out to war as calm and composed as though they were going to the field of their daily labor." (Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry for 2nd Dec., 1857).
[^33] In making the appointment of Charles C. Rich, Governor Young said: George A. Smith may stop in the city this time, and let Chas. C. Rich go; he is a general and a wise man; I [shall] rely a great deal upon him in future." (History Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Oct. 28, 1857, p. 750).
[^34] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 8th Nov., pp. 776-7.
[^35] Ibid, p. 780. "Colonel Philemon C. Merrill, commanding the Davis county militia troops, passed the governor's office for the mountains with 242 men, 56 mounted; 17 officers of the line and 4 of the colonel's staff. They had 23 baggage wagons. After stopping a short time in front of the governor's office, they continued their march towards the mountains of snow, as near 2,000 of their brethren had done before, to meet the enemy. Many went with wet feet, poor shoes and straw hats on, without tents or fire at night, as they could not reach timber until next day. Yet it shows the willingness the saints have to maintain the kingdom of God, and defend themselves against their enemies. It was a very cold night." (Ibid, p. 780). Previous to this viz., on the 14th of October, Colonel A. P. Rockwood, commissary general of General Wells' staff, reported to Governor Young that at that time there were 1,100 men in the mountains; 700 more camped on the public square, Salt Lake City. (these chiefly from Utah and Tooele counties, see History of Brigham Young, Ms., Oct. 12, 1857, p. 667); that 1,500 more men could be raised in Salt Lake City, and that in 15 hours he could place 3,000 in Echo canon. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Oct. 14th, 1857, pp. 670-1).
[^36] Ibid, p. 782.
[^37] Ibid, p. 783. Dr. Hurt had left the territory with some government property, contrary to the instructions of Governor Young, who, when he learned that it was the intention of the subagent, to leave the territory by an unusual route and with a band of Indians for an escort, proposed to send him in a carriage and with a suitable escort as became an officer of the United States. (See Young's Letter to Garland, History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Sept. 26, 1857, pp. 564-5). This offer being ignored and the subagent leaving in the sensational manner described, the governor discharged him from service, and appointed Geo. W. Armstrong in his place. (House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, x, No. 71, p. 210).
[^38] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Nov. 15th, p. 783.
[^39] "I greatly regret," was the language of his report of that date to Major Irvin McDowell, General Scott's assistant adjutant general, "that the impossibility of concentrating the troops destined for this service and their supplies will prevent a forward movement before spring. It is now manifest that before the force can be united the autumn will be too far advanced to move with a probability of success, though not opposed by the Mormons." (House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, x, No. 71, p. 37).
[^40] Ibid, pp. 46, 47.
[^41] Major Lot Smith, whose command was still in the vicinity of Fort Bridger watching the movements of the "Expedition," mistaking the activity among the troops in moving from their position on Black's Fork towards Fort Bridger as an effort to march into Salt Lake valley says: "When General Johnston turned towards Salt Lake, after going up Ham's Fork, one would have thought that he would go right through in a few days, but when he finally started, he made seventeen miles in one day, and it took two weeks to fetch up the rear; then the general began to see how far off Salt Lake really was." (Lot Smith's Narrative, The Echo Canon War, Contributor, vol. iv, p. 225).
[^42] Commenting on the beginning of this snowstorm Major Lot Smith says: "The snow fell and covered the ground to a great depth, but it was not so deep as our chaplain prayed for. He asked for twenty feet. One of our men, a little fearful that his prayer would be answered, wanted to know what would become of him and the rest of us. The chaplain's prayer was the echo of thousands of others offered at the throne of grace by a people whose homes were threatened, and who looked to God alone for deliverance and saftey." (Lot Smith's Narrative, The Echo Canon War, The Contributor, vol. iv, p. 225).
[^43] Johnston's Report to Major I. McDowell, Nov. 30, 1857, House Executive Documents, x, No. 71, pp. 77-79.
[^44] Colonel Cooke's Report to Colonel Johnston, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 1st Session, x, No. 71, pp. 92-99. The report is a most graphic description of a trying but skillfully conducted march, of which the quotation of the text is the closing paragraph.
[^45] Millennial Star, vol. xx, pp. 459-462, where Mills' letter appears at length. The author of The Utah Expedition in the Atlantic Monthly for March, 1859, also describes the lawlessness of the camp, p. 374. See also ante this History, ch. cvi, et passim.
[^46] See Instructions of General Wells to Captain John R. Winder, Dec. 4th, 1857. The order in extenso will be found in Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, pp. 197-8.
[^47] "Southwest of the fort, at the distance of four or five miles, a singular butte, the top of which is as level as the floor of a ballroom, rises to the height of eight hundred feet above the valley of Black's Fork, and commands a view of the entire broad plateau between the Wind river and the Uintah and Wasatch ranges. (Atlantic Monthly, April, 1859). This was the point from which the "Expedition's" encampment was watched. It was this situation which the London Punch afterward so graphically pictured in cartoon, where the "flower of the American army" half buried in the snow is seen herded by ten "Mormons."
