B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

322CHAPTER CIX

322THE "UTAH WAR": TERRITORIAL ACTIVITIES AT SALT LAKE CITY—CONVENING OF THE LEGISLATURE—MEMORIALS TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES AND TO CONGRESS.

322IN Salt Lake City, the other capital of the territory, there was great activity among the territorial officials during the winter of 1857-8. The legislature convened on the 14th of December, and on the 15th met in conjoint session to receive the message of Governor Young and accompanying documents. The message was read by James Ferguson, chief clerk of the house, and a thousand copies were ordered printed; also it was ordered printed in the Deseret News.

SUBJECTS OF THE MESSAGE—REVIEW OF FEDERAL PROCEDURE

The document is quite temperate, all the circumstances under which it was prepared being considered. Its earlier paragraphs deal with such subjects as the advantage of their isolation from many of the perplexing conditions of more densely populated regions; agriculture and stock raising; home manufactures and industries; education; [^1] the reports of the auditor and treasurer.

Utah WarHCThe discussion of the issues between the territory and the federal government are approached through the action of the government in suspending the mails, the injustice of which is vigorously maintained. The "colonial system" adopted by the American Republic, under enactments of 1784 and 1787, respectively, and each before the adoption of the present Constitution of the United States, is deplored as being contrary to that great American principle which recognizes that governments derive their just powers from the consent of the governed; and which can only be realized in practice when administrators of the laws, as well as those who make the laws, receive their commission from the people. The aforesaid enactments are held to be entirely at variance with the very genius of the American system of government; and it is a matter of surprise that such a system of colonial government was adopted, and a still greater surprise that the usurpation of power involved therein had so long been submitted to by American citizens inhabiting the territories. The latter phase of the question could only be accounted for on the ground that in the main the usurped powers had been exercised with some regard to "justice." "And the portion of that illegal legislation copied into organic acts for territories could still be endured, were it not so grievously abused," said the message, "as is the case when officers are attempted to be forced upon a free people, contrary to their known and expressed wishes. * * * Even since the more odious features in the ordinance of 1787 have been omitted in the organic acts, more recently passed by congress for territories—which acts are but illegal patterns after that unconstitutional ordinance—officers are appointed to rule over American citizens in territories and to have a voice in the enactment, adjudication and execution of territorial laws; and worse still, those officers are frequently appointed from a class well known through the rightfully expressed wishes of large majorities, to be justly objected to by those whom they are appointed to govern. Call you that republican? It is British colonial vassalage, unconstitutionally perpetuated by tyranny and usurpation in the powers that be."

Utah WarHCAttention is called to the fact that "the previous territorial legislature, familiar with the evils visited upon the innocent by the miserably bad conduct of certain officials heretofore sent here by government, * * * respectfully memorialized the president and senate to appoint officers for Utah in accordance with an accompanying list containing the names of persons who were her first choice for the offices placed opposite those names, but if that selection did not meet with approval, they were solicited to make the appointments from a list containing other and a larger number of names of residents who were also the choice of the people; and if that selection was also rejected, to appoint from any part of the Union, with the simple request, in such event, that the appointees be good men. In this matter of appointment of officers, what more rights could the most tyrannical, in a Republican government, ask a territory to waive? Yet up to this date no official information concerning the action, if any, taken upon that Memorial has ever reached us."

Utah WarHC324Instead of taking into account or considering the expressed wishes of the people of Utah, the president and congress had listened to the "rabid clamor" against Utah by "corrupt demagogues, heartless office hunters, and the ignorant rabble, incited by numbers of the hireling clergy;" and, as reported in Utah by travelers [emigrants en route to California], presently to be confirmed by newspaper utterances, the administration was sending an army to Utah with the sole and avowed purpose of "compelling American citizens, peacefully, loyally, and lawfully occupying American soil, to forego the dearest constitutional rights, to abandon their religion * * * or be expelled from the country, or exterminated." [^2] "Where now are constitutional rights?" asks the message. "Who is laying the ax at the root of the tree of liberty? Who are the usurpers? Who the tyrants? Who the traitors?"

THE JUSTIFICATION OF RESISTANCE

Utah WarHCThe message defends the course pursued in resisting the approach of the army, and adds to that division:

Utah WarHC325"We have long enough borne the insults and outrages of lawless officials, until we are compelled in self-defense to assert and maintain that great constitutional right of the governed to officers of their own election, and local laws of their own enactment."

Utah WarHC325In conclusion the governor expresses his entire confidence in the wisdom and justice of the legislature and assures them of his hearty cooperation in every measure for promoting the interest of the territory. [^3]

Utah WarHC325The statement of the message that the federal administration was sending its army to Utah with the sole and avowed purpose of "compelling American citizens * * * to forego the dearest constitutional rights, to abandon their religion * * * or be expelled from the country, or exterminated," may seem extravagant; and yet from an analysis of the situation, given in the New York Tribune of Jan. 30th, 1858, the view presented in the text by Brigham Young is held to be one that "impresses the popular mind, and is generally accepted as the object in view," viz., that the "Expedition" against the "Mormons" "is enthusiastically regarded as a holy war, undertaken in the interest of morality and religion." If the saints cannot be corrected in their morals and converted from their religion, then the purpose is "to resort to the remedy of dispersing them by fire and sword." "This view of the object of the 'Expedition,'" adds Mr. Greely—for evidently he wrote the Tribune Editorial—"is even taken and zealously sustained on the floor of congress itself." (See Senator Houston's speech in the senate, ante). In view of this statement of the case from a source so eminent, and representing what the popular view of the purpose of the "Expedition" was; and that the same view was even expressed and "zealously maintained on the floor of congress"—is it matter for marvel that the church leaders had the same apprehension of its purpose?

THE MESSAGE APPROVED BY THE LEGISLATURE

Utah WarHCThe message was read to the joint assembly of the houses of the legislature on the 15th; and on the 21st of the same month both houses passed and every member of each house signed a series of resolutions both for themselves and in behalf of their constituents—"knowing well their feelings and sentiments"—concurring in the sentiments and doctrines of the message of his excellency, Governor Young; approving his entire policy, announcing their readiness to sustain him in every act for the protection of the lives, peace, and prosperity of the people of the territory; neither the present nor any other administration of the central government should force profane and drunken and otherwise corrupt officials upon them at the point of the bayonet, that the attempt so to do by the present administration had incurred the contempt it deserved; they would continue to resist any attempt on the part of the national administration to bring them into a state of vassalage by appointing officers whom the people have neither voice nor vote in electing; nor should the persons appointed to office for Utah by the present administration either qualify for, or assume to discharge the functions of, the office to which they have been appointed, so long as the territory is menaced by an invading army. [^4]

Utah WarHC326The next step of the legislature was to disorganize Green River county, and attach it to Great Salt Lake county for election, revenue and judicial purposes; and the representative, after the present legislative assembly, shall be apportioned to Salt Lake county. [^5] This move, of course, was intended to deprive the civil officers of Camp Scott, the control of a political subdivision of the territory.

Utah WarHCA joint resolution was passed by the legislature asking that Governor Young furnish the assembly with copies of the correspondence had with certain officers of the United States army. The correspondence was submitted accordingly, read by the clerk of the house, and ordered printed in the Deseret News. [^6]

CAPTAIN MARCY AND ELDER TAYLOR'S CORRESPONDENCE

Utah WarHCA similar request was made upon John Taylor, speaker of the house, who had some correspondence with Captain Marcy of the "Expedition," this also was read and ordered printed in the Deseret News of the same date.

Utah WarHCThese letters consisted of (1) a letter from Mr. W. J. A. Fuller, introducing Captain Marcy, and affirming that gentleman's high standing and worthiness to be taken into the confidence of "Governor Young." Mr. Fuller apprehended no sort of difficulty between the "Mormon" people and the United States forces. Of course Captain Marcy "obeys the orders of his superiors in going to Utah," said Mr. Fuller, "and I am sure," he continues, "that nothing is farther from his wishes or intentions than what is so flippantly styled here by the papers 'the subjugation of the Mormons.' In this Mr. Fuller is an important witness as to what the popular conception of the purpose of the "Expedition" was and in what follows he is also an important witness on what unworthy testimony the national administration proceeded to its extreme act of folly in sending the "Expedition" to Utah. "When our government finds out that they have acted hastily and ill-advisedly in thus sending troops into your peaceful country, I have no doubt that they will feel heartily ashamed of ever having listened to the malignant and foolish lies of that rascally libertine and whoremonger, Judge Drummond (upon whose testimony I would not hang a dog); and that they will permit Captain Marcy to carry out his favorite scheme of exploring the Colorado Basin." (2) A letter from Mr. Fuller to Captain Marcy, explaining that he had written the letter of introduction to Elder Taylor at the instance of the captain's brother. (3) A brief note from Captain Marcy, inclosing the letter of introduction, and assuring Elder Taylor that the officers of the "Expedition" had no thought of interfering with the religious or social customs of the "Mormons." From the commencement of the march there had been an almost universal manifestation of a desire for a kind and friendly intercourse. (4) Elder Taylor's reply to Captain Marcy, made famous by repeated reproductions in both pro and anti-"Mormon" literature. It bears the date of Oct. 21st, 1857. The letter found its way into the official documents at Washington. [^7] The letter of Elder John Taylor who became president of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, succeeding Brigham Young in that high office, sets forth the position of the people of Utah most admirably, and for that reason the correspondence is given in extenso as a Note (2) at the end of this chapter. Also it is a monument to the literary ability, kindliness and dignity of its writer.

THE FERGUSON-COOKE CORRESPONDENCE

Utah WarHCAnother correspondence of this period, somewhat different in character but interesting, nevertheless, as on one side, at least, it meant that bullets or rapier in single combat was behind it. This was the correspondence between Colonel James Ferguson, adjutant general on General Wells' staff of the Nauvoo Legion—Utah militia—and Colonel Philip St. George Cooke. The eastern press published a letter purporting to have been written by Colonel Cooke, dated at Camp Scott, Nov. 29th, 1857, declaring that the "Mormons" were "a set of cowards, like all assassins and bullies." Colonel Cooke, it will be remembered, was the colonel commanding in the Mormon Battalion's march to the Pacific coast, 1846; and James Ferguson, though but eighteen years of age when he enlisted, was made sergeant major of Company A, in that battalion. Because of his own connection with the battalion, and Colonel Cooke's connection with it, the young and brilliant Irishman [^8] thought proper to call his old commander to an accounting, and accordingly wrote him to the effect that the phraseology accredited to him was a very ungenerous return for the "sincere respect entertained" for the colonel "by the Mormon Battalion, and, indeed, the whole 'Mormon' people." Ferguson hoped that the colonel could disclaim the correspondence. If not, then he asked that he make an apology. Happily the colonel could disclaim authorship of the letter and courteously thanked his young friend for informing him of the "forgery." He also spoke of the high praise he had given the Mormon Battalion on its arrival on the Pacific coast, which high praise was now part of a United States senate, official document. He also referred to his association with Ferguson on the battalion staff as a pleasant one. Subsequently he gave the Utah militia adjutant permission to publish the correspondence on the subject. [^9]

THE LEGISLATURE MEMORIAL TO THE PRESIDENT AND CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES

Utah WarHCOn the 6th of January the Utah legislature drew up and individually signed a lengthy Memorial to the president and congress of the United States reviewing the whole course of the administration in respect of Utah affairs, and appealed, as American citizens who had been deeply wronged, for just treatment. "All we want," said the Memorial, "is truth and fair play. The administration has been imposed upon by false and designing men; their acts have been precipitate and hasty, perhaps through lack of due consideration. Please let us know what you want of us before you prepare your halters to hang, or apply the knife 'to cut out the loathsome, disgusting ulcer.' Do you wish us to deny our God and renounce our religion? That we shall not do." "Withdraw your troops," said the closing sentence of the Memorial, "give us our constitutional rights, and we are at home." [^10]

THE SALT LAKE MASS MEETING ON THE UTAH SITUATION

Utah WarHCOn January 12th, 1858, a great mass meeting was held in Salt Lake City, of which the Mayor A. O. Smoot, was chairman. The object of the meeting was to adopt an address to President Buchanan, also to the congress of the United States, and to pass resolutions expressive of the people's feelings upon the policy of the administration towards the people of Utah—which were, of course, the Latter-day Saints—and also to express the sentiments of the people of the city respecting the course followed by the governor and legislative assembly of the territory in the issues which had arisen between the federal administration and the people of Utah. The addresses are long, but vigorous, nevertheless, and in them the people assert their innocence of wrong doing, recount the outrages inflicted upon them by the character and conduct of those who have been sent as United States and territorial officials among them; they demand their rights as American citizens, including community self-government, and reiterate their intention to maintain those rights at whatever sacrifice circumstances might make needful.

Utah WarHC331The closing paragraph of the address to the congress of the United States is as follows:

Utah WarHC331"We call upon you to reconsider your acts, to mete out to us even-handed justice, to withdraw your army, restore our mails, execute justice upon our oppressors, and give us our constitutional rights. We ask no more, but that, in the name of God, we will have, he being our helper. * * * We come not to you with smooth speech, or honeyed words; we have not learned to cringe beneath the lash of tyranny, nor to basely lick the feet of public servants who undertake to oppress us. We approach you as your equals, and frankly, openly and above board ask for our rights. We will not tamely submit to be abused, as we have been hitherto. We approach you not as a clique, a cabal, or a miserable faction; our voice is the united voice of nearly one hundred thousand Americans, laboring under the most unprecedented cruelty, outrage and wrongs, and our cry is, give us our constitutional right, let us enjoy our liberty in peace, and let even-handed justice be administered throughout the land, for we will no longer wear your cursed yoke of unconstitutional requirements."

Utah WarHC331The series of resolutions cover the whole history of outrages committed against the Latter-day Saint communities from the expulsion from Jackson county in 1833, up to the launching of the "Utah Expedition." They most heartily endorse the policy of Governor Young, and the action of the legislature in sustaining him in that policy by resolutions of confidence and declarations of intention to maintain the policy of resistance for the future, recking not of consequences.

Utah WarHC331On the point of sustaining Governor Young in resisting the entrance of the army into Salt Lake valley, and sustaining the legislature in sanctioning that action, the resolution said:

Utah WarHC"Resolved that we highly approve of the constitutional, patriotic, and humane course pursued by his excellency, Governor Brigham Young, in taking efficient measures to intercept the progress of these unwelcome, unasked for, and corrupting intruders." [^11]

Utah WarHC332These documents are doubtless somewhat extreme in their setting forth of grievances, and some parts are not germane to the issues then joined; but that they are the fearless utterances of strong, brave, patriotic, and talented men, none can doubt who read them and give them fair consideration, making allowance only for the intense stress of feeling under which they were drawn up and adopted.

Utah WarHC332In addition to this mass meeting held in Salt Lake City, similar meetings were held in many parts of the territory: Farmington, on the 17th of January; [^12] Lake City, Alpine, Pleasant Grove, Freedom and Provo in Utah county; [^13] Manti in San Pete county; Willow Creek, Box Elder county; [^14] Parowan and Paragoona in Iron county, also Washington, Washington county; [^15] and still later in Lehi, Santaquin, Fillmore, Cedar City, and other places. All these meetings were of the same general tenor as that held in Salt Lake City, and passed resolutions in the same spirit, though less elaborate.

CREATION OF A TERRITORIAL STANDING ARMY

Utah WarHCThe legislature during its session established an "express and weekly mail" to all parts of the territory, also established a "standing army" for the territory, to which purpose was appropriated $1,000,000 to be raised by taxation. The force was to consist of ten battalions of mounted riflemen, "prepared for constant service," aggregating one thousand men. [^16]

Utah WarHC333The manufacture of gunpowder was in progress at Cedar City, Iron county, during the winter, and it tested out satisfactorily. The erection of another powder mill during the winter was begun in Provo. The people were also urged in the public discourses of the leading elders to prepare to cache flour, grain, other food stuffs, and property, in the event of its becoming necessary for the community to destroy their homes by burning, to lay waste their lands, and to retreat to the mountain fastnesses at the approach of the army now in their borders; and which was to be augmented in the spring by reinforcements the federal administration had ordered to join the "Utah Expedition."

NOTES

Mr. Henry Wilson, United States senator from Massachusetts, submitted a proposition to the senate to appoint a commission to inquire into the difficulties in Utah, and the New York Tribune, then edited by Mr. Horace Greeley, commented on that proposition under the caption—

333COMMISSION FOR UTAH

333"The proposition of Mr. Wilson submitted to the United States senate for a commission to inquire into the difficulties with Utah, is exceedingly well timed. This collision with the Mormons has come to be altogether too serious a matter to be allowed to go on without a thorough investigation of the grounds upon which we stand, and a distinct settlement in our own minds of what precisely we intend to do, and of the means and methods which we propose to employ.

As yet, as to all these points, there prevails both in the public mind and at Washington, to judge from the utterances in congress on this subject, nothing but the most vague ideas. The sending an army to Utah is commonly understood to have been undertaken on the ground that most of the United States officials in the territory—all who were not Mormons—had been compelled to quit it, and that the presence of a strong military force was necessary both to insure the personal safety of the new governor, judges and other officials, and still more to enable them to exercise any of the duties of their respective offices. It has been alleged that persons, not Mormons, resident in the territory passing through it, have been, as a general thing, subjected to great annoyances and oppressions, and that the presence of a strong military force was absolutely necessary to secure to those non-Mormons, whether residents or travelers, the ordinary rights of citizens. It has further been alleged that there are in the territory, large numbers of persons who are held at once in civil and spiritual durance, compelled by fear and force to submit to an authority and to conform to a social and religious system which they abhor, and from which they would gladly escape did they see any prospect of being protected in doing so; and to afford this protection to those standing in need of it has been stated, though not in any official form, as one of the objects of the 'Expedition.'

334It cannot be concealed, however, that apart from all these reasons for the military occupation of Utah, there is still another view of the object of the 'Expedition,' which more than all the rest, impresses the popular mind, and is generally accepted as the object in view. The Mormons have adopted polygamy as a part of their religious creed and social practices; a custom abhorrent to our ideas and manners. In this character of polygamists, they have become objects of extreme antipathy. Their pretentions to peculiar spiritual enlightenment, and to be the depositories of new revelations, cause them to be regarded by many religious persons, not merely as deluded fanatics, but as blasphemous hypocrites. Hence, the pending 'Expedition' against them is enthusiastically regarded as holy war, undertaken in the interests of morality and religion, intended to convert the Mormons to more correct ideas on the subject of matrimonial relations and religious truth; to break up their polygamous households, and to compel them to be content with one wife each; or should they not be brought to reason as to these matters by the precept and example of the new civil officers, seconded by the officers and soldiers of the army, then to resort to the remedy of dispersing them by fire and sword. This view of the object of the 'Expedition' is even taken and zealously sustained on the floor of congress itself.

334If the Mormons are ready to set themselves up as God's chosen people, standing in the place of the Israelites of old, there is scarcely less disposition in other quarters to regard them as a sort of modern Canaanites whose infamous wickedness affords sufficient warrant even for their utter extermination.

It is in this last character of the 'Expedition' that the Mormons have resisted its entrance into their country. They deny the charge of any refusal of justice to, or of wrongs and oppressions exercised upon, those persons resident in Utah or traveling through it, not of their religious faith. They deny that any part of their own people are held under restraint beyond that domestic and legal restraint which exists and must exist in all well ordered communities. They deny that the officers of the United States who have left the territory acted under any compulsion, or had any other reason for their conduct except discontent that they could not have everything their own way. Their objections to the entry of the troops into their country is, that they are to be employed as the instruments of a religious persecution, and that the real object of the 'Expedition' is to annoy, rob and plunder them, and to drive them out of Utah, as they have been heretofore driven out of Missouri and Illinois.

335The vast expense which must attend the maintenance of our army in Utah, not to mention the horrors of civil war, and the desperate character of the resistance which the Mormons threaten to oppose to the entrance of the troops affords abundant reason why the necessity of this operation should be fully established and its object clearly explained. What information may be in possession of the executive, we do not know; but all the actual knowledge which the public possesses is very limited.

335If the Mormons have chosen to pay more deference to their religious chiefs than to the officers appointed for them by the United States government, if they have preferred the arbitration of one of their bishops or elders to a suit at law before judges not of their own appointment, that is no more than they are at liberty to do.

335We can well conceive that the officers appointed by the United States might find their offices almost or quite a sine-cure, and that church jurisdiction might gradually elbow the civil jurisdiction aside, without any acts on the part of the Mormons in actual defiance of law.

335We can well imagine, too, that in a fanatical community like that of Salt Lake City, the few resident 'Gentiles' might find themselves in an uncomfortable position and subjected to a thousand annoyances which yet might not place the Mormons in the attitude of legal wrong-doers. Unfortunately it is not necessary to go so far as Utah to find abundant cases of that sort.

335It is to be supposed, however, that the investigation proposed by Mr. Wilson would show something stronger than anything of this sort, such a resistance to law as would fully justify the administration in having originally undertaken the 'Expedition.' It would also afford the government an excellent opportunity for explaining precisely what they intend the troops shall do—an explanation in the present state of public opinion much needed, and which might leave the Mormons without any colorable grounds to resist the entrance of the troops." [^17]

CAPTAIN MARCY'S LETTER

335"CAMP OF THE 5TH INFANTRY ON HAM'S FORK,

335October 13th, 1857.

335Herewith I take the liberty of sending you a letter of introduction from our mutual friend, W. J. A. Fuller, of New York City. I also beg leave to trouble you with the accompanying note of introduction to Governor Young from Mr. W. I. Appleby, which I will thank you to read to the governor at your convenience.

When I left the states I expected to have the honor of delivering these letters in person, but as our movements are so slow, I have thought it better to transmit them by the bearer, hoping that the opportunity may be afforded me of paying my personal respects at some future time.

336In the meantime, suffer me to assure you that within the circle of my observation among the officers of this army, there has not been the slightest disposition to meddle with or in any way interfere with the religious or social customs of your people; on the contrary, there has, from the commencement of our march, been an almost universal manifestation of a desire for a kind and friendly intercourse: and I most sincerely hope that this desirable result may be brought about.

336I verily believe that all the officers entertain the same feelings towards the Mormons as Captain Van Vliet, and I entertain no doubt that an acquaintance with them would satisfy you that such is the fact.

336I am very respectfully and truly yours,

336R. B. MARCY.

336Rev. John Taylor,

336Great Salt Lake City, Utah Territory."

336ELDER TAYLOR'S REPLY

336"GREAT SALT LAKE CITY,

336October 21, 1857.

336Captain Marcy.

336MY DEAR SIR: I embrace this the earliest opportunity of answering your communication to me, embracing a letter from Mr. Fuller, New York, to you, an introductory letter to me, and also one from W. I. Appleby to Governor Young; the latter immediately on its receipt I forwarded to his excellency. And here let me state, sir, that I sincerely regret that circumstances now existing have hitherto prevented a personal interview.

I can readily believe your statement that it is very far from your feelings and most of the command that are with you to interfere with our social habits or religious views. One must naturally suppose that among gentlemen educated for the army alone, who have been occupied by the study of the art of war, whose pulses have throbbed with pleasure at the contemplation of the deeds of our venerated fathers, whose minds have been elated by the recital of the heroic deeds of other nations, and who have listened almost exclusively to the declamations of patriots and heroes, that there is not much time and less inclination to listen to the low party bickerings of political demagogues, the interested twaddle of sectional declaimers, or the throes and contortions of contracted religious bigots. You are supposed to stand on elevated ground, representing the power and securing the interests of the whole of a great and mighty nation. That many of you are thus honorable, I am proud as an American citizen to acknowledge, but you must excuse me, my dear sir, if I cannot concede with you that all your officials are so high-toned, disinterested, humane and gentlemanly, as a knowledge of some of their antecedents would expressly demonstrate. However, it is not with the personal character, the amiable qualities, high-toned feelings, or gentlemanly deportment of the officers in your 'Expedition' that we at present have to do. The question that concerns us is one that is independent of your personal, generous, friendly and humane feeling, or any individual predilection of yours; it is one that involves the dearest rights of American citizens, strikes at the root of our social and political existence, if it does not threaten our entire annihilation from the earth. Excuse me, sir, when I say that you are merely the servants of a lamentably corrupt administration, that your primary law is obedience to orders, and that you come here with armed foreigners, with cannons, rifles, bayonets and broadswords, expressly and for the openly avowed purpose of 'cutting out the loathsome ulcer from the body politic.'

337I am aware what our friend Fuller says in relation to this matter, and I entertain no doubt of his generous and humane feelings, nor do I of yours, sir, but I do know that he is mistaken in relation to the rabid tone and false, furious attacks of a venal and corrupt press. I do know that they are merely the mouthpiece, the tools, the barking dogs of a corrupt administration. I do know that Mr. Buchanan was well apprised of the nature of the testimony adduced against us by ex-Judge Drummond and others, for he was informed of it to my knowledge by a member of his own cabinet. And I further know from personal intercourse with members of the senate and house of representatives of the United States, that there have been various plans concocted at headquarters for some time past for the overthrow of this people. Captain, Mr. Fuller informs me that you are a politician. If so, you must know that in the last presidential campaign that the Republican party had opposition to slavery and polygamy as two of the principal planks in their platform. You may know, sir, that Utah was picked out, and the only territory excluded from a participation in preemption rights to land. You may also be aware that bills were introduced into congress for the prosecution of the 'Mormons,' but other business was too pressing at that time for them to receive attention. You may be aware that measures were also set on foot and bills prepared to divide up Utah among the territories of Nebraska, Kansas, Oregon and New Mexico, (giving a slice to California) for the purpose of bringing us into collision with the people of those territories.

I might enumerate injuries by the score—not to say anything about thousands of our letters detained at the post office at Independence—and if these things are not so, why is it that Utah is so knotty a question? If people were no more ready to interfere with us and our institutions than we are with them and theirs, these difficulties would vanish into thin air. Why, again I ask, could Drummond and a host of other mean scribblers, palm off their bare-faced lies with such impunity and have their infamous slanders swallowed with such gusto? Was it not that the administration and their satellites having planned our destruction, were eager to catch at anything to render specious their contemplated acts of blood? Or, in plain terms, the Democrats advocated strongly popular sovereignty. The Republicans tell them that if they join in maintaining inviolate the domestic institutions of the south, they must also swallow polygamy. The Democrats thought this would not do, as it would interfere with the religious scruples of many of their supporters, and they looked about for some means to dispose of the knotty question. Buchanan, with Douglas, Cass, Thompson and others of his advisers, after failing to devise legal means, hit upon the expedient of an armed force against Utah, and thus thought by the sacrifice of the 'Mormons' to untie the knotty question; do a thousand times worse than the Republicans ever meant,—fairly out-Herod Herod, and by religiously expatriating, destroying or killing a hundred thousand innocent American citizens satisfy the pious, humane, patriotic feeling of their constituents, take the wind out of the sails of the Republicans, and gain to themselves immortal laurels. Captain, I have heard of a pious Presbyterian doctrine that would inculcate thankfulness to the All-wise Creator for the privilege of being damned. Now, as we are not Presbyterians nor believers in this kind of self-abnegation, you will, I am sure, excuse us for finding fault at being thus summarily dealt with, no matter how agreeable the excision or expatriation might be to our political, patriotic, or very pious friends. We have lived long enough in the world to know that we are a portion of the body politic, that we have some rights as well as other people, and that if others do not respect us, we at least have manhood enough to respect ourselves.

338Permit me here to refer to a remark made by our friend, Mr. Fuller, to you viz., 'that he had rendered me certain services in the city of New York, and that he had no doubt that when you had seen and known us as he had, that you would report as favorably as he had unflinchingly done.' Now those favors, to which Mr. Fuller refers, were simply telling a few plain matters of fact, that had come under his own observation during a short sojourn at Salt Lake. This, of course, I could duly appreciate, for I always admire a man who dare tell the truth. But, captain, does it not strike you as humiliating to manhood and to the pride of all honorable American citizens, when among the thousands that have passed through and sojourned among us, and know as well as Mr. Fuller did; our true social and moral position, that perhaps only one in ten thousand dare state his honest convictions? And further, that Mr. Fuller with his knowledge of human nature, should look upon you as a rare avis, possessing the moral courage and integrity to declare the truth in opposition to the floods of falsehood that have deluged our nation? Surely we have fallen on unlucky times when honesty is avowed to be at so great a premium!

In regard to our religion, it is perhaps unnecessary to say much, yet whatever others' feelings may be about it, with us it is honestly a matter of conscience. This is a right guaranteed unto us by the Constitution of our country, yet it is on this ground, and this alone, that we have suffered a continued series of persecutions, and that this present crusade is set on foot against us. In regard to this people, I have traveled extensively in the United States, and through Europe, yet have never found so moral, chaste and virtuous a people, nor do I expect to find them. And if let alone, they are the most patriotic and appreciate more fully the blessing of religious, civil, and political freedom than any other portion of the United States. They have, however, discovered the difference between a blind submission to the caprices of political demagogues, and obedience to the Constitution, laws, and institutions of the United States; nor can they in the present instance be hood-winked by the cry of 'treason.' If it be treason to stand up for our constitutional rights: if it be treason to resist the unconstitutional acts of a vitiated and corrupt administration, who by a mercenary armed force would seek to rob us of the rights of franchise, cut our throats to subserve their own party, and seek to force upon us their corrupt tools, and violently invade the rights of American citizens; if it be treason to maintain inviolate our homes, our firesides, our wives, and our honor, from the corrupting, and withering blight of a debauched soldiery; if it be treason to maintain inviolate the Constitution and institutions of the United States, when nearly all the states are seeking to trample them under their feet—then indeed are we guilty of treason. We have carefully considered all these matters, and are prepared to meet the 'terrible vengeance' we have been very politely informed will be the result of our acts. It is in vain to hide it from you that the people have suffered so much from every kind of official that they will endure it no longer. It is not with them an idle phantom, but a stern reality. It is not as some suppose the 'voice of Brigham' only, but the universal, deep settled feeling of the whole community. Their cry is 'give us our constitutional rights; give us liberty or death.' A strange cry, indeed, in our boasted model republic, but a truth deeply and indelibly graven on the hearts of 100,000 American citizens by a series of twenty-seven years unmitigated, and unprovoked, yet unrequited wrongs. Having told you of this, you will not be surprised, that when fifty have been called to assist in repelling our aggressors, hundreds have volunteered; and when a hundred have been called, the number has been more than doubled; the only feeling is, 'don't let us be overlooked or forgotten.' And here let me inform you that I have seen thousands of hands raised simultaneously voting to burn our property rather than let it fall into the hands of our enemies. Our people have been so frequently robbed and despoiled without redress, that they have solemnly decreed that if they cannot enjoy their own property nobody else shall. You will see by this that it would be literally madness for your small force to attempt to come into the settlements. It would only be courting destruction. But say you: have you counted the cost? have you considered the wealth and power of the United States and the fearful odds against you? Yes, and here let me inform you that if driven to the necessitated we would as soon meet 100,000 as 1,000, and if driven to the necessity, will burn every house, tree, shrub, rail, every patch of grass, and stack of straw and hay, and flee to the mountains. You will then obtain a barren, desolate wilderness, but will not have conquered the people, and the same principle in regard to other property will be carried out. If this people have to burn their property to save it from the hands of legalized mobs, they will see to it that their enemies shall be without fuel; they will haunt them by day and by night. Such is in part our plan. The 300,000 dollars worth of our property destroyed already in Green river county is only a faint sample of what will be done throughout the territory. We have been thrice driven by tamely submitting to the authority of corrupt officials, and left our houses and homes for others to inhabit; but are now determined that if we are again robbed of our possessions, our enemies shall also feel how pleasant it is to be houseless at least for once, and be permitted as they have sought to do to us,—

340'To dig their own dark graves,

340Creep into them and die.'

340You see we are not backward in showing our hands. Is it not strange to what lengths the human family may be goaded by a continued series of oppression? The administration may yet find leisure to pause over the consequences of their acts, and it may yet become a question for them to solve whether they have blood and treasure enough to crush out the sacred principles of liberty from the bosoms of one hundred thousand freemen, and make them bow in craven servility to the mendacious acts of a perjured, degraded tyrant.

340You may have learned already that it is anything but pleasant for even a small army to contend with the chilling blasts of this inhospitable climate. How a large army would fare without resources you can picture to yourself. We have weighed those matters; it is for the administration to post their own accounts. It may not be amiss, however, here to state that if they continue to prosecute this inhuman fratricidal war, and our Nero would light the fires, and, sitting complacently in his chair of state, laugh at burning Rome, there is a day of reckoning even for Neroes. There are generally two sides to a question. As I before said we wish for peace, but that we are determined on having if we have to fight for it. We will not have officers forced upon us who are so degraded as to submit to be sustained by the bayonet's point. We cannot be dragooned into servile obedience to any man.

340These things settled, captain, and all the little preliminaries of etiquette are easily arranged; and permit me here to state that no man would be more courteous and civil than Governor Young, and neither could you find in your capacity of an officer of the United States a more generous and hearty welcome than at the hands of his excellency. But when, instead of battling with the enemies of our country, you come (though probably reluctantly) to make war upon my family and friends, our civilities are naturally cooled and we instinctively grasp the sword. Minie rifles, Colt's revolvers, sabres and cannon may display very good workmanship and great artistic skill, but we very much object to having their temper and capabilities tried upon us. We may admire the capabilities, gentlemanly deportment, heroism and patriotism of United States officers; but in an official capacity as enemies, we would rather see their backs than their faces. The guillotine may be a very pretty instrument and show great artistic skill, but I don't like to try my neck in it.

340Now, captain, notwithstanding all this, I shall be very happy to see you if circumstances should so transpire as to make it convenient for you to come, and to extend to you the courtesies of our city, for I am sure you are not our personal enemy. I shall be happy to render you any information in my power in regard to your contemplated explorations.

341I am heartily sorry that things are so unpleasant at the present time, and I cannot but realize the awkwardness of your position and that of your compatriots; and let me here say that anything that lies in my power compatible with the conduct of a gentleman, you can command.

341If you have leisure I should be most happy to hear from you. You will, I am sure, excuse me, if I disclaim the prefix 'Rev.' to my name. Address: John Taylor, Great Salt Lake City.

341I need not here assure you that personally there can be no feelings of enmity between us and your officers. We regard you as the agents of the administration only, in the discharge of a probably unpleasant duty, and very likely ignorant of the ultimate designs of the administration. As I left the east this summer you will excuse me when I say I am probably better posted in some of these matters than you are, having been one of a delegation from the citizens of this territory to apply for admission into the Union. I can only regret that it is not our real enemies that are here instead of you. We do not wish to harm you nor any of the command to which you belong, and I can assure you that in any other capacity than the one you now occupy, you would be received as civilly and treated as courteous as in any other portion of our Union.

341On my departure from the states the fluctuating tide of popular opinion against us seemed to be on the wane. By this time there may be quite a reaction in the public mind. If so it may probably affect materially the position of the administration, and tend to more constitutional, pacific and humane measures. In such an event our relative positions would be materially changed, and instead of meeting as enemies we could meet as all Americans should, friends to each other, and united against our legitimate enemies only. Such an issue is devoutly to be desired, and I can assure you that no one could more appreciate so happy a result to our present awkward and unpleasant position than

341Yours truly,

341JOHN TAYLOR."

The correspondence as it appears in the Deseret News of Sept. 1st, 1858,—Colonel Cooke still being at Camp Floyd—was introduced by the following explanatory note to the News' Editor:

341"Great Salt Lake City,

341Aug. 20, 1858.

341Editor Deseret News:—Having been requested by numerous friends to publish the accompanying letters, and obtaining the permission of Colonel Cooke to do so, I shall feel obliged by your insertion of them in the News.

341Very respectfully

341Yours in Christ,

341JAMES FERGUSON."

342"Great Salt Lake City, U. T.,

342May 4th, 1858.

342Sir:—In looking through files of eastern papers lately received, I saw a letter purporting to have been written by you, and dated at Camp Scott, Nov. 29, 1857.

342In that letter you assert that the 'Mormons are a set of cowards, like all assassins and bullies.'

342I am what is generally termed a 'Mormon,' and as such served my country honorably under your command. Your statements I consider most unwarranted, and a very ungenerous return for the sincere respect entertained for you by the Mormon Battalion, and, indeed, the whole 'Mormon' people.

342I sincerely trust that you have it in your power to disclaim the authorship of that letter. If not, as an American citizen and a gentleman, spurning the epithets hurled at me in connection with a people of whom in the midst of their worst misforturnes I am proud, I ask you kindly and with respect, to make that apology which your high sense of honor will suggest is due.

342I have the honor to remain,

342Most respectfully, etc.,

342JAMES FERGUSON,

342Brig. Gen. Mil. U. T.

342Adj. Gen. Lt. Col. P. St. Geo. Cooke,

3422d Dragoons, U. S. A.,

342Camp Scott."

342"Head Quarters 2d Dragoons,

342Camp Faulkner, June 8, 1858.

342Sir:—I have this day received your letter of May 4th, respecting the authenticity of a letter, which, you say, was published in an eastern newspaper, 'purporting to have been written by (me),' and in which I 'assert the Mormons are a set of cowards, like all assassins and bullies.'

342I wrote no such letter: I wrote no letter for publication. I never wrote or spoke such a sentence. I left Camp Scott November 26th, and did not return: the letter, you say, was dated there November 29th.

342I never saw such a letter in the papers, or heard of its existence, until lately as a rumor from Salt Lake City.

342I thank you for informing me of this mysterious forgery. My sense of the performances of the Mormon Battalion was expressed at San Luis Rey, in an order which you remember, and which stands printed in a senate document; and I can only refer to my connection with you on the battalion staff, as a satisfactory and pleasant one.

342Very respectfully,

342Your obedient servant,

342P. ST. GEO. COOKE,

342Lt. Col. 2d Drag's.

342GEN. JAMES FERGUSON,

342Salt Lake City,

342Utah Territory."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "He [Colonel Kane] acted under a deep conviction of duty against the advice of his excellent father, Judge Kane, and other members of his family." (Letter of Secretary John B. Floyd to Messrs. Powell and McCulloch, April 12, 1858, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. 2, pp. 160-162).
[^2] Journal of Elder Francis M. Lyman, entry for Feb. 12th, 1858; also Woodruff's Journal and History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 25th Feb., pp. 214-215.
[^3] Journal of Wilford Woodruff, entry for 25th of Feb., 1858.
[^4] The colonel, by the way, seemed a bit morbid upon this subject, for he remarked in answer to President Young's suggestion that he (Kane) could now, doubtless, endure more than he could ten years ago, replied that he feared he could; and added: "I feel that my life don't pay, and I feel like going away as soon as it is the will of God to take me." (Woodruff's Journal account of the interview, entry for 25th Feb., 1858). This brought forth President Young's disquisition on life above referred to: "I know that to take this life as it is, and as men make it, it does not appear worth living; but I will tell you that when we see things as they are you will find life is worth preserving and blessings will follow our living in this life, if we do right. Now if God should say I will let you live in this world without any pain or sorrow, we might feel life was worth living, but this is not in the economy of God. We have to partake of sorrow, affliction, and death, and if we pass through the affliction patiently, and do right, we shall have a great reward in the world to come." (Ibid).
[^5] This remark represents the-whole policy of Brigham Young in this issue between the Church of Latter-day Saints and the government. It was both Alpha and Omega in his philosophy on the subject; he never deviated from it. Stating in public the latest news that had been received concerning the movements of the United States troops under Colonel Alexander, he said: "Well, we are in the hands of the Lord our God, and he will overrule things just as he pleases. Many want to know what the result will be, and they want the Lord to give them revelation. Get revelation if you can. * * * I know that all will be made right, and an All-wise, Overruling Providence will bring us off victorious. * * * God will fight our battles, and he will do it just as he pleases. * * * God is at the helm." (Remarks at the "Old Tabernacle," October 4th, 1857. Deseret News of October 14th, 1857. He frequently repeats such expressions throughout this period—see Ms. History and Journal of Discourses, passim).
[^6] Journal of Wilford Woodruff, entry 25th of Feb., 1858.
[^7] Colonel Kane as "Dr. Osborne" was made welcome at the home of Elder W. C. Staines. Elder Staines had never met the colonel, being absent on a mission to the Indians during the latter's visit with the saints in their Missouri encampments in 1846. In a few days, however, he learned who his visitor was, and asked him why he had thought it necessary to be introduced into his home as "Dr. Osborne;" to which the colonel, according to Tullidge, answered: "My dear friend, I was once so kindly treated at Winter Quarters that I am sensitive over its memories. I knew you to be a good people then; but since, I have heard so many hard things about you, that I thought I would like to convince myself whether or not the people possessed the same humane and hospitable spirit which I found in them once. I thought, if I go to the house of any of my great friends of Winter Quarters, they will treat me as Thomas L. Kane with a remembrance of some services which I may have rendered them. So I requested to be sent to some stranger's house, as 'Dr. Osborne,' that I might know how the Mormon people would treat a stranger at such a moment as this, without knowing whether I might not turn out to be either an enemy or a spy. And now, Mr. Staines, I want to know if you could have treated Thomas L. Kane better than you have treated 'Dr. Osborne.'"
[^8] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Feb. 28th, 1858, pp. 219-220.
[^9] Entry for 25th of February, 1858.
[^10] History of Salt Lake City, p. 205.
[^11] Whitney's History of Utah, vol. i, pp. 666-7.
[^12] Letter of President Buchanan, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, 1858-9, pp. 162-3. Later, of course, the president changed that attitude and sent Peace Commissioners to Utah, as we shall see.
[^13] Ibid, p. 163.
[^14] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 15th August, 1858, p. 927. The colonel, it seems, asked Elder Heber C. Kimball "what would be the result if he [Colonel Kane] spoke against the Mormons." Elder Kimball answered him by saying that "his mind would become barren and he could not do any good, but would droop and die;" but as long as he would "stand up for this church" he would "be fruitful and feel well." (Ibid, pp. 926-8). Later President Young in the course of an interview with Governor Cumming referred to this private interview with Colonel Kane and said: "I told Colonel Kane, when he undertook to counsel us, what I should do last spring; that he did not know me; that I would take no man's counsel upon the face of the earth, but would follow the counsel of God." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for April 24th, 1859, pp. 373-380).
[^15] Utah Expedition, Atlantic Monthly, for April, 1859, p. 479. The writer for the Atlantic mentions such a letter being exhibited in connection with the letters Kane carried from President Buchanan. I find no reference to such letter in "Mormon" church annals.
[^16] Utah Expedition, Atlantic Monthly, April, 1859, p. 479.
[^17] See Tullidge, Life of Brigham Young, 1877, p. 292; also History of Salt Lake City, 1885, p. 205. This idea seems to have originated with Tullidge and allowed by Linn, (Story of the Mormons, p. 503), et al. Even the writer in the Atlantic Monthly conveys this impression by saying that Colonel Kane exhibited letters from President Buchanan and from President Young, to Governor Cumming and Judge Eckles, but "to General Johnston he showed nothing; nor did the governor, to the knowledge of the camp, acquaint either that officer or any other person with the purport of his business. (Atlantic Monthly, April, 1859, p. 479). The Atlantic Monthly plunges still further into error by saying later: "Considering that he [Kane] was within the guard lines of a military encampment, in a country where a state of warfare existed, it was perhaps too great forebearance on the part of the general (Johnston was made brevet general during the winter, 1857-8) not to have required be informed of his business, since he, himself volunteered no explanation." (Ibid, 481).
