B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

343CHAPTER CX

Utah WarHC343THE "UTAH WAR:" COLONEL THOMAS L. KANE'S ARRIVAL IN UTAH—NATURE OF HIS MISSION

343IN THE midst of the Utah conditions described in the preceding chapter, Colonel Thomas L. Kane appeared upon the scene. He arrived in Salt Lake City on the 25th of February, 1858, coming from New York via Isthmus of Panama to Los Angeles, thence by the southern overland route.

THE HAZARDOUS JOURNEY

Though in a delicate state of health, Colonel Kane, even against the protests of his father, Judge John K. Kane [^1]—undertook this long and difficult journey, attended only by a single companion—a servant—and this in the interests of his friends, the Latter-day Saints. The last stage of the journey the colonel traveled in a heavy spring carriage, drawn by four horses. There was also a saddle horse for the use of the party. The colonel was accompanied only by three men, "Mormons," John Mayfield, George Clark, Joseph S. Tanner. At Cottonwood Springs, some twelve or fifteen miles from Las Vegas, the little party came upon the camp of Amasa M. Lyman and his family, and a few others, then en route for Utah. Elder Lyman had joined the party only a day or two before, having come from Salt Lake valley for the purpose of meeting his family and accompanying them to Utah. When Colonel Kane reached this friendly camp he was suffering greatly from the cold and the general hardship of the journey, and was glad to rest a day with these kindly disposed people and be refreshed by their hospitality, not the least item of which was the "home cooking" of "Sister Lyman." A buffalo robe was cut up and made into leggings and hand and arm mufflers, the product of the skilled needle work of sister Rhoda Ann Lyman, wife of Francis M. Lyman, eldest son of Amasa M. Lyman, who was also in the family encampment. Thus refreshed and warmer clad to meet the bitter cold of the remaining desert journey, and with the elder Lyman added to his company, the colonel continued his journey to Salt Lake City, where he arrived as above stated. [^2]

Utah WarHC344The colonel had traveled under the assumed name of "Dr. Osborne," a cognomen he preserved for some time even in Salt Lake City, except in the meetings of the leading authorities of the church, where he was known and treated as their old, familiar friend of earlier days at the encampments on the Missouri.

THE ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE COLONEL'S MISSION

Utah WarHCA meeting was called on the evening of the day of the colonel's arrival, at which the presidency of the church and several of the leading apostles were present. He was introduced as "Dr. Osborne" by Joseph A. Young, and, according to Wilford Woodruff, who was present at the meeting, and made a somewhat extended record of the interview in his daily Journal—was very formal in opening, and announced himself as authorized to lay before these church leaders "most fully and definitely the feelings and views of the citizens of our common country, and of the feelings of the executive towards them, relating to the present position of officers of this territory, and of the army of the United States now upon your [our] borders." "After giving you the most satisfactory evidence in relation to matters concerning you now pending," continued the colonel, "I shall then call your attention and wish to enlist your sympathies in behalf of the poor soldiers who are now suffering in the cold and snows of the mountains, and request you to render them aid and comfort, and to assist them to come here and to bid them a hearty welcome into your hospitable valley." [^3] He then turned to Governor Young and requested an interview with him alone, and begged the other gentlemen of the company to excuse his formality. President Young and the colonel retired accordingly and were absent about half an hour. But when they returned to the meeting no further reference was made that evening, nor apparently for some time afterwards, to the special mission of Colonel Kane. The rest of the evening was passed in pleasant and informal conversation. There was reference made to Captain Van Vliet's report of Utah conditions, Colonel Kane bearing witness that said report had done great good for the people of Utah. Replying to questions on the respective subjects, he stated that Dr. Bernhisel had taken his seat in congress; that all in congress were not "united in putting Utah down." The conversation turned upon the prosperity of the saints, upon the healthful appearance of the brethren present, the probable reasons for it, the labors of President Young, Colonel Kane's own health—his indifference to length of days [^4]—which brought forth a disquisition on life by President Young, in which he incidentally said—"It is not in the power of the United States to destroy this people, for they [the United States] are in the hands of God, and so are we; and he will do with us as he pleases, and if we do right God will preserve us." [^5] The president closed the interview by saying directly to Colonel Kane—

Utah WarHC"Brother Thomas, the Lord sent you here, and he will not let you die. No! you cannot die till your work is done: I want to have your name live with the saints to all eternity. You have done a great work, and you will do a greater work still." [^6]

MYSTERY OF THE KANE-YOUNG PRIVATE INTERVIEW

Utah WarHCWhat passed in that thirty minutes private interview between Governor Brigham Young and Colonel Kane has never been definitely known. What plan of reconciliation the colonel proposed to Brigham Young was never explicitly revealed; except that from the colonel's remarks in the introduction of his mission to the council, as given in preceding paragraphs, it may be inferred that his plan contemplated not only the peaceful entrance of the army at Camp Scott into Salt Lake valley, but that it would come with the assistance of the saints, and the partaking of their hospitality. But whatever recommendations the colonel made, they evidently were not acceptable to President Young. And that was doubtless the reason why there was no further mention of the purpose of Colonel Kane's mission when the two returned to the council meeting after their half hour private conversation. [^7]

347"DOCTOR OSBORNE" INTRODUCED TO THE PEOPLE

Utah WarHC347On the 28th of February, President Young made public reference to the presence in the city of a "gentleman from Washington," a "Dr. Osborne," about whom the people were anxious to hear, and for that reason had gathered to the tabernacle in such large numbers, and at so early an hour (9:30 a. m.). "His errand," said President Young, "was of no particular moment to the people or himself [i. e. to President Young]; that he had come on his own responsibility and at his own expense, to see and learn the situation of affairs here, etc." After giving instructions in relation to the brethren who were going out into the mountains to stand in the defense of the people he again refered to "Dr. Osborne" and what he had recommended, saying: "Dr. Osborne had pleaded with him, in his own name, to stay the hand of the brethren against the army, for they were in our power." [^8]

PRESIDENT BUCHANAN EXPLAINS KANE'S STATUS

Utah WarHCThis makes it clear that Colonel Kane did not come to Utah in any official capacity from the president of the United States to treat with the "Mormon" people, neither as "an ambassador from the chief executive of our nation," as unfortunately phrased in Woodruff's Journal, [^9] nor as "the agent of the administration," as he is called by Tullidge, [^10]—or as "a private envoy of the government;" [^11] but, as stated by President Buchanan in his letter acknowledging the expressed intention of Colonel Kane, his purpose was to voluntarily serve "the Mormons, at his own expense, and without official position." Moreover, President Buchanan declared in the aforesaid acknowledgment—"I could not at the present moment, in view of the hostile attitude they [the 'Mormons'] have assumed against the United States, send any agent to visit them on behalf of the United States." [^12] President Buchanan had little hope of the success of Colonel Kane's self-imposed mission; but he furnished him with a letter, since nothing could divert the colonel from his purpose, commending him to the favorable regard of all officers of the United States whom he might meet in the course of his travels, and who would no doubt, in the exercise of whatever discretion their instructions might permit, render him all the aid and facilities in their power in expediting the journey he had undertaken "of his own accord," to accomplish the pacific and philanthropic objects he had in view. [^13]

348AGAIN THE PRIVATE YOUNG-KANE INTERVIEW

Utah WarHC348Referring again to the fact that President Young did not accept the proposals of Colonel Kane for the settlement of the Utah difficulties, discussed in their private interview, and in further evidence of that fact, I quote what President Young said in August of 1858 in the presence of Wilford Woodruff, Heber C. Kimball, Joseph Young, "and several others:"

Utah WarHC"President Young in conversing with the brethren, said, both good and bad men will act out what was in them; but God controls all the acts of men. When Colonel Kane came to visit us, he tried to point out a policy for me to pursue. But I told him I should not turn to the right or left, or pursue any course, only as God dictated. I should do nothing but what was right. When he found that I would not be informed, only as the Spirit of the Lord led me, he felt discouraged and said he would not go to the army. But finally, he said, if I would dictate he would execute. I told him that as he had been inspired to come here, he should go to the army and do as the Spirit of the Lord led him, and all would be right. He did so, and all was right. He thought it very strange that we were not afraid of the army. I told him we were not afraid of all the world; if they made war upon us the Lord would deliver us out of their hands, if we did right. God controls all these matters." [^14]

COLONEL KANE AT CAMP SCOTT

Utah WarHCIt was in this spirit then that Colonel Kane went to Camp Scott after remaining in Salt Lake City from the 25th of February to the 8th of March. President Young furnished him an escort of horsemen and gave him a letter "accrediting him as a negotiator in the existing difficulties." [^15] The colonel's "Mormon" escort accompanied him to the Little Muddy, within about twelve miles of Camp Scott, from which point he proceeded alone, arriving at the camp on the evening of March the 12th. His entrance into Camp Scott is thus described by the writer for the Atlantic Monthly:

Utah WarHC"On the previous evening,—March 12th,—the monotony of the camp had been unexpectedly disturbed by the arrival, from the direction of Salt Lake City, of a horseman completely exhausted by fatigue and cold, who proved to be no other than Mr. Kane, whose mission to the 'Mormons' by way of California was at that time totally unknown to the army. The next morning he introduced himself to the governor [i. e. Cumming], was received as his guest, and remained in conference with him throughout the day. What was the character of their communication is unknown, except by inference from its results." [^16]

Utah WarHC350It was quite generally held that it was Colonel Kane's studied intention to ignore the army and its commander in his negotiations for the pacification of the territory, and its reconciliation with the federal administration. [^17]

Utah WarHC350In pursuance of this intention it is said that he ignored the challenge of the sentry of the picket post he first encountered; and when the sentry, receiving no answer to his challenge, fired upon him, the colonel "broke the stock of his rifle over the sentry's head." When surrounded by the excited post, "with characteristic politeness, as well as diplomacy, [he] requested to be conducted to the tent of Governor Cumming," which was done, and Governor Cumming received him cordially.

Utah WarHC350One must needs think an American picket post of the regular army had peculiar notions of a picket's duty, if it would take an entire stranger entering their lines with violence in the manner described, to a civil officer residing in the camp, and not before the proper military commander.

THE SENTRY CHALLENGE AND THE BROKEN GUN STOCK

Utah WarHCThe story so far as I know rests upon the narrative of Tullidge, [^18] who cites no authority for the incident, neither do any of those writers who follow him. That some unpleasantness with the picket guard took place, however, is quite certain from correspondence between Johnston and Kane, preserved in official documents; but whether the above is the correct version of it or not may be matter of some doubt.

Utah WarHCTwo days after his arrival in Camp Scott, Colonel Kane addressed a letter to Colonel Johnston calling attention to a report in the camp that a horseman or group of horsemen, discerned at a considerable distance—eleven or twelve miles from Fort Bridger, on Muddy Creek—were approached by a party of soldiery of Johnston's command, and, without notice, fired upon. Colonel Kane wrote to inform Johnston, if he was not already aware of the fact, that there might be "a person or persons in waiting" for communication from him respecting certain proposals that he had submitted to Colonel Johnston from Brigham Young with reference to cattle and flour to be sent to the army—mentioned later in the text of this History—and he therefore asked Colonel Johnston "to issue such orders as will prevent unnecessary bloodshed." F. J. Porter, assistant adjutant general makes a note on Colonel Kane's letter that no such party under the circumstances mentioned had been fired upon. Colonel Johnston addressed a note to Colonel Kane, saying: "I regret that the party in question, if a portion of your escort, did not come in with you, or was not reported to me. In that case their safety would have been assured to them; and I now have to say to you, if the person or persons alluded to can be communicated with by you, or you can inform me where they can be found, I will give such orders as will insure their protection, and take care that they suffer no molestation." In a second letter to Johnston, Colonel Kane gave a description of his guide to the vicinity of Camp Scott—Lewis Robinson—and said of Colonel Johnston's strict orders respecting armed persons or parties approaching the camp: "But that it would be out of place on my part, I would express my regret at the strictness of your orders." He also said that he had been informed that he would need a "countersign" to enable him to pass sentinels, etc., when desirous to "communicate" with those outside the camp, who might be waiting for his communications. "Will you be good enough to give me what you think I should be provided with," he concluded. [^19]

Utah WarHC352It may have been the incidents named in this correspondence that gave rise to Tullidge's version of Colonel Kane's alleged adventure. It at least seems strange, however, that the sentry challenge and the "broken gun stock" gets no mention in this correspondence.

GENERAL JOHNSTON'S VIEWS ON THE UTAH SITUATION

Utah WarHCOf course Colonel Kane's mission had primarily to do with the civil authorities appointed for Utah, and then residing in Camp Scott, viz., Governor Cumming and Chief Justice Delaney R. Eckles; but, as we shall presently see from correspondence between Colonel Johnston and Colonel Kane, if the former took no part in the negotiations for the settlement of Utah's affairs, in which Colonel Kane was so prominent a factor, it was because he stubbornly refused to become a party to the consideration of those matters Colonel Kane had to propose. Unconditional submission to the proclamation previously issued by Governor Cumming was the only basis of settlement, from his viewpoint, that could be made that would be honorable to the government. Previous to Colonel Kane's advent into Camp Scott, namely, date of January 20th, 1858, Colonel Johnston had written Major Irvin McDowell, assistant adjutant general of the United States army, as follows:

Utah WarHC"Knowing how repugnant it would be to force these people into unpleasant relations with the federal government, I would, in conformity with the views also of the commanding general, on all proper occasions have manifested in my intercourse with them a spirit of conciliation, but I do not believe that such consideration for them would be properly appreciated now, or rather would be wrongly interpreted; and, in view of the treasonable temper and feeling now pervading the leaders and a greater portion of the Mormons, I think that neither the honor nor the dignity of the government will allow of the slightest concession being made to them. They should be made to submit to the constitutional and legal demands of the government unconditionally. An adjustment of existing difficulties on any other basis would be nugatory. Their threat to oppose the march of the troops in the spring will not have the slightest influence in delaying it; and if they desire to join issue, I believe it is for the interest of the government that they should have the opportunity." [^20]

Utah WarHC353Knowing that Colonel Johnston entertained these stern views with reference to Utah affairs, the reader will better understand how he could not enter into the negotiations Colonel Kane had to propose; and how that gentleman, learning Colonel Johnston's uncompromising attitude, would soon come to leave him outside of consideration in pursuing the object of his mission.

THE TENDER OF UTAH "BEEF" TO THE ARMY

Utah WarHCThe day after the departure of Colonel Kane from Salt Lake City, President Young sent by special express—his son, Joseph A. Young, and George Stringham—a letter, saying that he had just learned through the "southern Indians" that the troops of the "Expedition" were "very destitute of provisions." A Mr. Gerrish, formerly a merchant of Salt Lake City, supposed to be detained at Camp Scott by Colonel Johnston, had quite a herd of cattle in Salt Lake valley—about two hundred head,—a portion of which were tolerable good "beef." As Mr. Gerrish would doubtless like a good market for his herd, and President Young knew no better market than that afforded by the United States army, he proposed sending out this herd, that Mr. Gerrish might dispose of it to the army who surely needed the beef. President Young in this letter also declared his intention to send out fifteen or twenty thousand pounds of flour to the army, "to which they will be made perfectly welcome, or pay for, just as they choose," said the communication. All this President Young proposed to forward "in a few days," as soon as the arrangements could be made and the snow would admit of such a shipment. [^21] This proposition Colonel Kane early submitted to the colonel commanding the "Expedition" who answered curtly by letter on the 15th of April, saying that President Brigham Young was "not correctly informed with regard to the state of the supply of provisions of this army." "There has been no deficiency," he declared, "nor is there any now. We have abundance to last until the government can renew the supply." And then he adds with some show of feeling—"Whatever might be the need of the army under my command for food, we would neither ask nor receive from President Young and his confederates any supplies while they continue to be enemies of the government." He denied that Mr. Gerrish had been detained in his camp, that as a matter of fact that gentleman had started for the eastern states some weeks before, and had been at liberty, as had every other citizen, to go wherever he pleased except to Salt Lake City, or some other position occupied by an armed body of "Mormons" opposed to the government, all intercourse with the enemy being prohibited by the 56th and 57th articles of war. If Mr. Gerrish desired his cattle sent to him, he would interpose no obstacle, beyond stipulating that they should be delivered on the Muddy, "ten miles in advance of this camp"—i. e. Camp Scott. "However unfortunate the position now occupied by that portion of the citizens of Utah belonging to the sect of Mormons," he concludes, "it is of their own seeking, and it is one from which they can be relieved by the mere act of obedience to the proclamation of Governor Cumming. Having the question of peace or war under his own control, President Young would, should he choose the latter, be responsible for all the consequences." [^22]

GENERAL JOHNSTON GIVEN FULL OPPORTUNITY TO PARTICIPATE IN PEACE NEGOTIATIONS

Utah WarHCTo this Colonel Kane answered by note consenting, "at the request of his excellency, Governor Cumming," to bear the reply the colonel had requested him to communicate to President Young. "I fear," said Colonel Kane, "that it must greatly prejudice the public interest to refuse Mr. Young's proposal in such a manner at the present time. Permit me, therefore, to entreat you, most respectfully, to reconsider it; and, adverting to my offer made you orally on Sunday afternoon (March 14th—two days after Kane's arrival in camp), ask permission to impart to you additional information with respect to the posture of affairs at Salt Lake City, if you can encourage me to believe that by so doing I may yet hope to modify your views." He begged not to hasten Colonel Johnston's determination as to the proposition made— desired evidently that he might have time to think matters over; but no further consideration was given to Colonel Kane's entreaty. [^23] It is evident from this correspondence that Colonel Kane did not fail to give General Johnston an opportunity to enter into negotiations with himself and the civil officers of the territory in the settlement of Utah affairs.

355THE KANE-JOHNSTON DUEL CHALLENGE

Utah WarHCFollowing this correspondence an episode occurred at Camp Scott which tended further to strain the relations between Generals Kane and Johnston. An invitation to an officers' dinner was dispatched from headquarters to Colonel Kane—regarded by General Johnston's friends as in itself a great compliment in a camp where rations were so abridged. The orderly entrusted with the delivery of the invitation "whether maliciously or not it does not appear," says the Atlantic Monthly writer, "pretended to have mistaken his directions and proceeded to place him under arrest." "The mistake, when discovered," continues the writer here followed, "was of course immediately rectified." [^24] Colonel Kane, however, was convinced that the arrest was a studied insult, and wrote a challenge to Colonel Johnston, and "applied to a gentleman from Virginia to act as his second." The gentleman declined to act, and Colonel Kane's action coming to the knowledge of Judge Eckles, the latter informed Governor Cumming that he had ordered the United States marshal to arrest all the parties concerned, "in case another step should be taken in the affair." The Atlantic Monthly writer declares that it was not until some time afterwards that these transactions came to the knowledge of General Johnston. [^25]

GOVERNOR CUMMING TO ENTER SALT LAKE WITHOUT MILITARY ESCORT

Utah WarHCAfter a stay of about three weeks at Camp Scott, Colonel Kane was successful in persuading Governor Cumming to go to Salt Lake City without a military escort, and trust to the people receiving him as governor. Since the military escort, according to certain of the church leaders, was the most obnoxious feature connected with the coming of the new civil officers; and that had they come without a military escort they would have been received, the action of Colonel Kane would put these protestations to the test. [^26]

Utah WarHCUndoubtedly Colonel Kane on this point felt assured, and may have received such advices as warranted him in urging such action either before leaving Salt Lake City, or later through communication with Utah leaders after his arrival at Camp Scott, for he met on several occasions those who had accompanied him as an escort, and one absence of an entire day is noted by the Atlantic Monthly writer, "in order to hold a secret interview with a party of Mormons who had come into the vicinity of the camp." [^27]

Utah WarHC357Colonel Kane, however, was only successful in persuading Governor Cumming to try this experiment. Judge Eckles was unwilling to accept the proposition. On the 3rd of April, Governor Cumming announced his intention to Colonel Johnston of going to Salt Lake in company with Colonel Kane, without a military escort; and two days later he was on the way.

THE FIRST ATTEMPTED FEDERAL ACTION AGAINST "POLYGAMY"

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe day of the governor's departure the "district court" commenced its spring term at Camp Scott, in Green River county. In his charge to the "grand jury" the judge is said to have been explicit on the subject of polygamy. The incident is important as being the first effort to apply what was alleged to be "existing law" against this feature of the marriage system of the Church of the Latter-day Saints.

Conflict over PolygamyHC357The precise language of the charge to the jury on the subject of polygamy is given as follows:

Conflict over PolygamyHC"It cannot be concealed, gentlemen, that certain domestic arrangements exist in this territory destructive of the peace, good order, and morals of society,—arrangements at variance with those of all enlightened and Christian communities in the world; and sapping as they do the very foundation of all virtue, honesty, and morality, it is an imperative duty falling upon you as grand jurors diligently to inquire into this evil and make every effort to check its growth. It is well known that all of the inhabited portion of this territory was acquired by treaty from Mexico. By the law of Mexico polygamy was prohibited in this country and the municipal law in this respect remained unaltered by its cession to the United States. Has it been altered since we acquired it? After a most diligent search and inquiry, I have not been able to find that any such change has been made: and presuming that this law remains unchanged by legislation, all marriages after the first are by this law illegal and void. If you are then satisfied that such is the fact, your next duty is to inquire by what law in force in this territory are such practices punishable. There is no law in this territory punishing polygamy, but there is one, however, for the punishment of adultery; and all illegal intercourse between the sexes, if either party have a husband or wife living at the time, is adulterous and punishable by indictment. No consequences in which a large proportion of this people may be involved in consequence of this criminal practice will deter you from a fearless discharge of your duty. It is yours to find the facts and to return indictments, without fear, favor, affection, reward, or any hope thereof. The law was made to punish the lawless and disobedient, and society is entitled to the salutary effects of its execution." [^28]

Conflict over PolygamyHC358It is quite evident, however, that neither the jurists nor the legislators of the United States regarded this reasoning as sound, nor that of the writer in the Atlantic Monthly who includes the "common law," as well as the old Spanish law, as constituting a possible basis of jurisprudence in the territory on this subject of marriage—since before attempting any action against the plural marriage relations countenanced by the "Mormon" church, they considered special enactments of congress for the territories necessary; and at no time invoked either the old Spanish law or the "common law" against this institution of marriage. Besides, had either the "common" or old Spanish law been invoked against the plural marriage features of the "Mormon" system, the question would still remain as to whether the "bigamy" or "polygamy" of those laws described the "plural wife system" of the New Dispensation, a question already considered and the distinction drawn. [^29]

Conflict over PolygamyHC358Furthermore the United States statutes at large on the judiciary of territories provided—

Conflict over PolygamyHC"And be it further enacted, that the judges of the supreme court in each of the territories, or a majority of them shall, when assembled at their respective seats of government, fix and appoint the several times and places of holding the several courts in their respective districts, and limit the duration of the terms thereof." [^30]

Conflict over PolygamyHC359There had been no meeting of the three judges at the territorial capital and the division of the territory into judicial districts, and the assignment of judges to the respective districts. In none of these respects had Judge Eckles complied with the law, nor could he under circumstances then obtaining in the territory; and he had not qualified by taking the oath of office himself, nor did he until July 19th, 1858, when he appeared before Probate Judge Elias S. Smith and took the oath. In such fashion were things done by the federal officials sent to Utah. The judge was in overhaste to begin prosecutions [^31] of the class of offenses at which he aimed.

Conflict over PolygamyHC359No indictments for polygamy were returned by the "grand jury" under these instructions, nor were any proceedings had upon the indictments for treason previously found against Brigham Young and sixty of his associates; and this doubtless because of the unsettled state of things in the camp and in the territory, and what must have been the consciousness of the illegality of the procedure by the officers of the Camp Scott court. "The business of the court," says the chronicle here followed, "was restricted to such crimes as larceny and assault and battery, among the heterogeneous mass of camp followers." [^32]

Footnotes

"No, colonel," replied Elder Staines, "I could not."

"And thus, my friend," added "Dr. Osborne," "I have proved that the Mormons will treat the stranger in Salt Lake City as they once did Thomas L. Kane at Winter Quarters."

---
Notas:
[^1] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1858, p. 266.
[^2] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Sunday, 21st of March, 1858, pp. 269-272.
[^3] A rising vote of the congregation showed that three-fifths of the congregation were of this class. (Ibid, p. 271).
[^4] See Pamphlet of Instruction and Remarks made up from the Conference of the 21st of March, p. 7. Much of it is quoted by Stenhouse in Rocky Mountain Saints, pp. 384-6.
[^5] See Bean's Report of his exploring party in History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for June 7th, 1858, pp. 610-616; also Ibid, p. 426, where the correctness of Evans' Report is confirmed.
[^6] History of Brigham Young, Ms., p. 724.
[^7] See letter of John Kay to Elder Thomas Williams, copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., May, 1858, pp. 502-5; also Millennial Star, vol. xx, p. 475; New York Herald of June 23, 1858, St. Louis Intelligencer of Nov. 23, 1858, copied into the Deseret News of Feb. 17, 1858.
[^8] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1858, pp. 560-566, 570; also pp. 588-9.
[^9] Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry for May 26, 1858.
[^10] Ibid, entry for May 30.
[^11] History of Our Own Times, Justin McCarthy, Am. Ed., vol. ii, pp. 264-5.
[^12] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 23rd March, pp. 273-4.
[^13] See statement of W. H. Hooper, secretary pro tem of the territory of Utah, addressed to Governor Cumming, under date of April 13th, 1858. House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii, pp. 74-5. "This information," Mr. Hooper says, "I derived from parties present at the scene of the difficulties, and it is confirmed by affidavits on file with the probate court of this (Salt Lake) county." (Ibid). Powell and his associates, B. F. Ficklin and Cravan Jackson, charged with this procedure, denied by affidavit before Judge Eckles at Camp Scott, that they participated in the affair. (See House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii, pp. 79-82; also Deseret News of April 14th, 1858).
[^14] See History of Brigham Young, Ms., for 1858, pp. 231, 302, 338, 341. The fact of the presence of the white man Powell with the Indians in their attack upon the Salmon river settlement is sustained by the affidavit of Thos. S. Smith, president of the mission, who was wounded in the assault upon the settlement. (Ibid, p. 367).
[^15] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1858, p. 302.
[^16] Ibid, pp. 340-1.
[^17] Atlantic Monthly, April, 1859, p. 479.
[^18] Letter of W. H. Hooper to Governor Cumming, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii, p. 74. "We learn from the Indians that emissaries are endeavoring to entice them, in the south part of the territory, to violence, with some success. Indians say they are to have a price for 'Mormon' scalps." (Letter of George A. Smith to T. B. H. Stenhouse, in History of Brigham Young, Ms., May 11th, 1858, p. 523).
[^19] Hooper's second letter to Governor Cummings on this subject, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii, p. 76. From the Indians in the south came the report that they were to receive a "price for Mormon scalps." (Letter of George A. Smith to T. B. H. Stenhouse, History of Brigham Young, Ms., May, 1858, p. 523). Also again, a letter is read from J. L. Lee, residing in the south, in which the same declaration is made. (Ibid, p. 524).
[^20] Ibid, p. 75.
[^21] Hooper to Governor Cumming, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii, pp. 74-5.
[^22] Ibid, pp. 77-82.
[^23] Letter of Magraw and Bridger, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii, pp. 82-84.
[^24] Deseret News of April 14th, 1858. Also Hooper's Letter, already cited.
[^25] Deseret News of April 14th, 1858.
[^26] Letter to T. B. H. Stenhouse, date of April 5th, 1858, History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1858, pp. 307-8.
[^27] Millennial Star, vol. xx, p. 461.
[^28] Lieutenant J. C. Ives, in the winter of 1857, was engaged in an exploration of the Colorado river. It was anticipated that the navigability of the stream would be established at least up to "the foot of the great canon of the Colorado," where it was proposed to establish a base from which to outfit the military forces designed to invade Utah from the south. (See correspondent in New York Times, and in the St. Louis Intelligencer, of Nov. 23rd, 1857; copied into Deseret News of 17th Feb., 1858.) These rumors led President Young to send a party of men under Amasa M. Lyman to investigate and ascertain what likelihood there was of attack from this Colorado river quarter. Lyman's party consisted of nineteen men in all; they left Cedar City on the 31st of March, and returned in the latter part of May. The party went as far as the head of the navigable waters of the Colorado, traversing trackless deserts and sun-parched mesas. They visited the Mohave, and Aiats Indians, the latter being unusually large of stature. They learned of the Ives and Beal exploring parties in that quarter; but there was little likelihood of the Colorado region being made a base of action against Utah. (See Journal of F. M. Lyman—who was one of the party of nineteen—entries for April and May, 1858; also History of Brigham Young, Ms., May, 1858, p. 560).
[^29] This fact is disclosed in a letter from Mr. E. F. Beal, to Hon. John B. Floyd, secretary of war, which was published in the Missouri Republican of the 23rd of March. Mr. Beal's letter was a report to the hon. secretary of war, of a midwinter journey from Tejon [Cajon] Pass in the Sierra Nevada Mountains to Kansas City via Albuquerque by means of a camel pack train. In the course of his report Mr. Beal said: "In a previous letter I informed you that I had sent the camels back to Fort Tejon [Cajon] from the Colorado river, in charge of my clerk, in order that they might be used in the campaign against Utah. I parted with these noble brutes with much regret. A year of hard and almost unremitting labor with them had attached us all to them with feelings stronger, I think, than any one experiences for either the horse or dog. It is to be hoped that the government will continue the importation of this valuable animal until sufficient have been obtained for the use of the whole army. It is cheaper at first cost, lives longer, and is infinitely stronger and hardier than the mule, while its capacity for work is four times greater. For military purposes, I regard it as invaluable, in a country where forage is difficult to obtain." (Missouri Republican, April 9th, 1858).
[^30] "The policy of making California the base of operations against the Mormons has been urged upon the executive. Among the arguments in its favor is the fact that the valley of Salt Lake can be approached at all seasons from the Pacific, through the lower valleys and passes. Nor can the entrance to the Mormon country from that direction be successfully defended against Gentile troops. An army of twenty thousand men could enter Salt Lake valley in midwinter by the way of Los Angeles and San Bernardino. * * * But, in addition to these advantages of operating from California, the presence of so large a force in that country would overawe and terrify the numerous hostile Indian tribes there, who are becoming exceedingly troublesome; while it would effectually cut off the Mormon retreat towards Sonora—an object really of great importance." (St. Louis Intelligencer, Nov. 23rd, 1857; the article was reproduced from the New York Times of an earlier date).
[^31] Official letter of George W. Lay to Colonel Johnston, date of Jan. 23rd, 1858, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii, p. 33.
[^32] Ibid, letter of Feb. 4th, 1858.
