B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

360CHAPTER CXI

360THE "UTAH WAR:" CHANGE IN POLICY OF THE CHURCH LEADERS—FLIGHT FROM UTAH SETTLEMENTS DETERMINED UPON

360MEANTIME important changes had been going on in Salt Lake City—changes in mental attitude on the part of the church leaders towards the situation in Utah that were of great importance.

A "MORMON" "COUNCIL OF WAR"

Although the plans Colonel Kane suggested to President Young were seemingly not acceptable to him, yet the president's contact with the view entertained in the east, as represented by the colonel—since he could rely upon that representation—doubtless had its effect upon his mind. "A council of war" was held on the 18th of March, in the Historian's Office, at which there were present the first presidency, eight of the twelve apostles, and thirty of the leading military officers of the territory. The conclusion in this council was to abandon the idea of armed resistance to the United States forces. The minutes of the council close with the following paragraph: "President Young's plan was to go into the desert and not war with the people [i. e. of the United States], but let them destroy themselves." [^1] The following Sunday the temper of the meeting at the tabernacle was markedly different than such meetings had been. It was flight now, rather than fight. The regular service of the day was converted into a special conference. President Young "spoke of the situation of affairs at this crisis and presented the policy which he intended to pursue, which was to remove the grain and the women and children from the city and then, if needs be, burn it and lay the country waste." [^2] He presented the view that the Republican party had succeeded in disgracing the administration at Washington (presumably by forcing the Democratic administration into this anti-"Mormon" attitude—by the "twin relic" plank of their platform—); and that as soon as the administration could withdraw the troops it had sent to Utah, and save the credit of the nation, it would do so; and if in pursuance of such developments the saints were obliged to lay waste Salt Lake City, it would be for their good; and he predicted that in less than twelve years, they would have better homes than at the present. It was declared to be the intention to give those who had never before been driven from their homes the honor of forming an advance company to lead the way into the desert and find a suitable place of settlement. Five hundred families were called for to form this advance company. [^3]

361Of course, as we have seen, destruction of their settlements and flight to the mountains and deserts had been coupled with the proposed resistance to the entrance of the United States army from the first, in the event of the army being successful in forcing its way into Salt Lake valley; but the move as now proposed was to proceed without first resisting the army, and it is evident from the amount of urging and defense that was made respecting the proposition that it did not at first meet with universal approval.

PRESIDENT YOUNG'S MISCONCEPTION OF A PLACE OF REFUGE

President Young seems to have conceived the idea that in the southwestern part of the then territory, hundreds of miles removed from all lines of travel, there was a country of alternating desert and fertile valley, with long distances from water to water, larger in area than any of the eastern states, with but few Indians inhabiting it, and its fertile portions capable of sustaining a population of 500,000. [^4] It was to this region that he declared it to be his intention to remove and the people could follow him should they so elect.

Four years before Bishop David Evans, of Lehi, had been called upon to explore for that region, but he had failed to find the country described. President Young felt that he had not penetrated far enough into the interior desert waste to find the succession of watered areas, and was not satisfied with his efforts. Later, namely in March, 1858, he sent out George W. Bean from Provo, and Colonel W. H. Dame and Nephi Johnson from Parowan, to make a more extended exploration. These parties were made up chiefly of men from the southern settlements. Bean's company numbered one hundred and four persons, and were equipped for making settlements, teams, wagons, agricultural implements, seeds of various kinds, etc. They moved down the Sevier river some distance southward, thence went southwestward, crossing alternating low mountain ranges and desert valleys, with occasionally very limited fertile spots, but few places suitable for settlement. In the White river valley, about one hundred and fifty miles from Cedar Springs, however, they left forty-five of their number to open a farm. The remainder of the company divided and explored northwest and southwest through various valleys, but such springs and small streams as they found were too far north for settlement under the present instructions. Turning southward they went over the "rim of the basin" to the headwaters of the Muddy river, and in Muddy river valley met with the Dame and Johnson party—numbering between sixty and seventy men. Westward from this valley they learned from Indians met with that there was a great desert—doubtless the Ralston, the Great Admargosa and Death Valley Deserts—which observation from the mountain range overlooking it confirmed. From the Muddy river valley the whole body of explorers divided, Dame taking with him twenty-eight men from Bean's party for the purpose of locating them in some suitable valley south-ward if one were found; while the remainder of the party under Bean started eastward for Beaver City, at which place they arrived on the 31st of May. In all the Bean party had traveled about eight hundred miles; they had crossed seven ranges of mountains and as many valleys, the latter ranging from ten to thirty miles in width, and from fifteen to one hundred miles in length; but they found no such place for habitation for the people as President Young had hoped for; but confirmed the correctness of Bishop David Evans' previous report. [^5]

363The Dame party was to explore the country north and west of Parowan. If they found gold they were to keep it secret. The Dame party, noticed already in connection with Bean's—established a "Desert Camp" about one hundred and fifty miles west of Parowan, where they began farming, but it was soon afterwards abandoned. [^6]

363It should be observed that Bean's report of his exploring journey and its discouraging tenor was not made to President Young until the 7th of June, by which time nearly all the exodus from the northern settlements had already arrived as far south as Provo.

This question of the objective point in the great "move south" of 1858, may thus be said to be disposed of. Some had thought that the state of Sonora in the republic of Mexico, was the point of destination, and it is so mentioned in some of the letters of the period, where the matter is discussed at length. [^7] There was also during the month of May a proposition made by the representatives of one Colonel Kinney of California,—Messrs. John B. Cooper and James M. Harbin—to sell to Brigham Young 30,000,000 acres of land on the Mosquito coast in Central America. The region was a narrow coast strip extending from the 11th degree of north latitude, northward along the east coast of the states of Nicaragua and Honduras for several hundred miles. The British government had exercised a protectorate over the country for some time, but this was now resigned to Honduras. President Young, however, was not favorably impressed with this proposition, and the more vigorously it was urged upon his attention the firmer seemed to grow his determination to remain in Utah. [^8] "I would not go to that country," said President Young to Mr. Cooper, "if it was covered fifteen inches deep with gold, and we owned it all. We are here, and here we will stay in this territory." [^9] It appears also that a Colonel Clarkson, Major Brookie and Judge Cliff also urged the claims of the Mosquito country upon the attention of President Young, but to no purpose. [^10]

364Following that conference meeting of the 21st of March, mentioned in a previous paragraph came a half veiled declaration of intention of flight and destruction of Salt Lake City, and other northern settlements, under the caption—

364"UNCIVILIZED MODE OF WARFARE"

364"At a special conference held in the tabernacle in this city, on the 21st inst., (March) it was unanimously agreed to abandon 'Sebastopol' to our enemies, without the consent of Lord Raglan, if they persist in carrying out the unconstitutional policy adopted by the present administration."

The significance of the historical allusion will be appreciated when the dispatch of the Russian general who evacuated Sebastopol is recalled: "It is not Sebastopol which we have left to them [i. e. to the allied forces], but the burning ruins of the town, which we ourselves set fire to, having maintained the honor of defense in such a manner that our grandchildren may recall with pride the remembrance of it, and send it on to all posterity. * * * The Russians had made of Sebastopol another Moscow." [^11]

AN INDIAN MENACE TO THE SAINTS

About this time ugly rumors were rife as to the attitude of the Indian tribes of the mountains and deserts with reference to their "Mormon" neighbors. In March a friendly Indian reported that their chief had been to the "soldiers' camp," that the commander there had said that Brigham had killed many of the Indians' children, and he would now kill them [i. e. the "Mormons"]; that officers had said that Joseph Smith was a great captain, and they had got his head off easily. Brigham Young was a small captain and they would soon cut off his head. [^12]

The settlement of the saints at Limhi, on Salmon river, had been broken up by an attack of the Bannock tribe of Indians on the 25th of February; instigated, it was reported at the time, and believed, by a mountaineer, of the name of John W. Powell, and other white men who were in the vicinity from Camp Scott purchasing beef cattle for the "Expedition." Two settlers, James Miller and George McBride, were killed, and five others wounded. Two hundred and twenty-five head of horses were driven away. The party of Indians making this attack numbered about two hundred and fifty. The settlers had lived in peace with these Indians from the commencement of the settlement in 1855. Many acts of kindness had been extended to them by the citizens, nor had there been any misunderstanding between them until the arrival of this cattle-purchasing party from Camp Scott. "From the camp of this detachment," according to the statement of Chief Snagg of the Shoshones, a white man named J. W. Powell, came to the lodges of the Bannocks and Shoshones, two days previous to the killing referred to, and incited the Indians, giving them his aid and participation in the affair. [^13]

366Early in March, Andrew Cunningham with two hundred men was sent to the Salmon river settlement to give safe conduct to the colony through the Indian country to Salt Lake City. He was absent about one month on the expedition, which covered eight hundred miles of travel. The Indians in the vicinity of the settlement were greatly grieved at the departure of the saints. [^14] An express of ten men led by B. F. Cummings, sent in advance on the return journey, to bring news of the Limhi colony's rescue, were ambushed and fired upon by the Bannock Indians, and one of their number, Baily Lake, was killed, and several horses and packs taken by the Indians. [^15]

366Colonel N. V. Jones reported that several brethren who had been to the camp of Ben Simons, the Cherokee Indian trader, on Bear river, were told at three different times that Colonel Johnston had offered them $150 for every "Mormon" they would bring to him, and $1,000 for Lot Smith. [^16]

ALLEGED "EXPEDITION'S" EFFORTS TO INCITE INDIANS AGAINST THE SAINTS

In January, in consequence of great anxiety for the safety of Captain Marcy, Colonel Johnston permitted Dr. Hurt, the Indian agent, to cross the Uintah range of mountains in company with four Pah-Utah Indians to the Indian villages located on the Uintah river. "It was his intention, in case of need," says the chronicle, "to employ these Indians to warn Captain Marcy of danger and afford him relief. It proved to be unnecessary to do so, and Dr. Hurt returned in April." [^17] This was doubtless what Dr. Hurt was authorized to do by the colonel; but what he really did was the following: Indian messengers were sent to various tribes urging them to take sides with the "soldiers" against the "Mormons" in the spring, and rumors were current among many bands that they would be employed by the "soldiers" to "drive off the cattle and horses of the Mormons as soon as the passes to Bridger were practicable." [^18] From Uintah Dr. Hurt "sent frequent messages to have all the Utahs come out and join in the onslaught upon the Mormons." A number of such messages were sent to Chief Arapeen of the Utahs, offering him large presents if he would join the troops with his people for this purpose. "These items," writes Secretary pro tem, W. H. Hooper, to Governor Cumming, "though but reports from Indians, are so substantially corroborated by the facts, that I felt myself bound in the discharge of my duty, to submit them. [^19]

In addition to the incidents here related, Indian depredations also occurred in Rush valley and in the north of Utah county. About the first of March, a mixed band of Shoshones and Utahs, led by Chief Little Soldier drove off a number of cattle and horses owned by the settlers, resulting in the loss of fifty head of horses and mules; and when Mr. Hooper's herdsmen were collecting his cattle for the purpose of driving them to Salt Lake valley for safety, the Indians charged and fired upon them, but without harmful results.

368Early in April, the 7th, another raid was made by the Utahs upon the settlers' herds in the north of Utah county, and about one hundred head of horses and mules driven away. This time the raid was led by Tintic, one of the chiefs who had accompanied or followed—early in the preceding winter—Dr. Hurt in his flight to Fort Bridger. The Indians in explanation of their course, declared that "a big captain among the white men at Bridger had employed them to steal the cattle and horses of the Mormons and drive them to them." "It is a well known fact," adds Mr. Hooper, "that communication between this band and Fort Bridger has been kept up all winter." [^20]

368"The results of these depredations," writes Mr. Hooper to Governor Cumming, "has been a compulsory abandonment of our frontiers, and a consolidation of all our settlements, forcing us to keep out large detachments of military in various parts of the territory to keep the Indians in check. This is the more aggravated, and felt the more severely by the citizens, as, with the exception of occasional outbreaks from small predatory bands, easily checked, and for two years entirely stopped the aborigines had been friendly and well disposed to the citizens until the arrival in our territory of the troops now encamped at Bridger." [^21]

DENIAL OF "EXPEDITION'S" OFFICERS IN EMPLOYING INDIANS AGAINST THE SAINTS

Governor Cumming forwarded Mr. Hooper's charges that these depredations were incited by officers or agents connected with the "Utah Expedition" to Colonel Johnston; and Dr. Hurt, Indian Agent Forney, as well as Messrs. Powell, Ficklin and Jackson, entered denials of them, and denounced Mr. Hooper's charges as also those—essentially the same—made in a Deseret News editorial of April 14th, 1858, as absolutely false. [^22] Mr. W. M. F. Magraw, of Utah mail contract fame, and James Bridger, mountaineer, thought it necessary to write Major Fitz John Porter, assistant adjutant general, a defense of Colonel Johnston's attitude in respect of employing the Indians against the "Mormons," in which they give accounts of interviews between the colonel and Chiefs Little Soldier and Wash-a-kee, wherein those chiefs were told, in answer to their practical tender of service, that "they would not be allowed to participate in it [i. e. the trouble between the administration and the people of Utah] at all;" except it might be in service as guides, herders, or scouts; if at any time the general required them for such service he would send for them, "and pay them for their services." The general "advised them to go back to their people and remain quiet." [^23]

All this may be admitted as Colonel Johnston's course in the cases cited, but it still remains as an historical fact, that no trouble occurred around Fort Limhi until J. W. Powell and associates appeared among the Indians; that the Indians of Rush valley had been peaceably disposed for years until the advent of the army and the flight of Dr. Hurt; that when they made their stock-dealing raids the Indians openly avowed their intention of taking the stolen animals to the United States Army; and the evidence is quite clear that Dr. Hurt while absent from Camp Scott upon his Uintah mission did seek to incite the southern Indians against the people of Utah; [^24] and if General Johnston is to be relieved of responsibility in this matter, and his policy was that described in the statements of Messrs. Magraw and Bridger, then his policy was ignored by his subordinates. But whether the hostilities of the Indians were incited with the approval of the commander-in-chief of the "Expedition," or by his subordinate officers and agents without his direction; or by the Indians themselves acting upon their own initiative, taking advantage of the unsettled state of affairs to gratify their predatory inclination to profit by a state of war, their unrest and unprovoked attacks upon outlying settlements, increased the difficulties and the apprehensions of the Latter-day Saint church leaders, and of the people.

POLICY OF THE SAINTS RESPECTING THE USE OF INDIANS IN THE "UTAH WAR"

On the part of the Latter-day Saints strict neutrality for Indians in these Federal-Utah difficulties was the policy determined upon. "When has one of Colonel Johnston's command been killed or their animals run off by Indians incited thereto by the citizens of this territory," the News editorial was able to ask; and then could make the following answer: "Never, for Governor Young and the 'Mormons' have ever counseled the Indians to remain strictly neutral, as all truth-telling red and white men, cognizant of the facts, will substantiate." [^25] Elder George A. Smith, historian of the church, could thus put in contrast the policy of Governor Young and that followed by the "Utah Expedition:"

370"It has been the policy of Governor Young and our people to keep the Indians neutral, should a contest ensue, [i. e. between the United States army and the Utah militia]. I read in the last papers received from the states loud boasts of having secured the Utah and other Indians as allies against the 'Mormons.' Strange as it may seem to civilized persons, all the reckless and unprincipled Indians of the mountains have been hired, with new guns, blankets, clothing, ammunition, paint, &c., to steal, rob, murder, and do anything else that can be done to destroy the 'Mormons.' Indian agents have sent messengers to all the peaceable Indians to incite them to deeds of rapine and bloodshed. A number of scattered settlements have been attacked, and innocent blood stains the skirts of the present administration whose agents have procured the murders." [^26]

371Also G. W. Mills writing to Stenhouse under date of April 5th, 1858, said:

371"The war chiefs of several tribes of Indians, during the time of the excitement last fall and winter, applied personally to Governor Young for his advice and permission to go out with the tribes and 'use up' the soldiers, which they deemed themselves amply capable to do; but he, in every instance, told them to keep away from the army and show no bad feelings whatever, and requested them to avoid killing the white men. I have seen the chiefs exhibit sanguine feelings in relation to killing the soldiers, but entirely softened down by the counsel and expressions of Governor Young. He wrote to Ben Simons, the Delaware (Cherokee) Indian chief of the Weberites, in reply to a letter, to stand in a neutral position, neither take part with 'Mormons' nor the soldiers, in the event of a collision; and had always endeavored to suppress that bloodthirsty spirit of the treacherous red men." [^27]

PROPOSED MOVEMENT AGAINST UTAH FROM CALIFORNIA

About this time also rumors reached Utah of projected movements up the Colorado river by means of boats; [^28] and another in which camels were to be employed in the transportation of troops and supplies from southern California, [^29] with a view of cutting off any contemplated retreat of the "Mormons" into Mexico. For some time the desirability of making California the base of operations against Utah had been urged upon the administration; [^30] and it appears that President Buchanan at last yielded to such importunities and decided to send General Scott himself to the Pacific coast, to personally direct such a movement; the date of the commander-in-chief's departure was fixed upon—5th of February, 1858—and officially announced to Colonel Johnston; [^31] but before the date fixed upon for General Scott's departure the project was abandoned [^32]—and abandoned, it is claimed, because the army contracts for sending reinforcements and supplies to General Johnston in the spring created such a scandal [^33] that the administration dared not proceed with its Pacific coast plans, involving further expenditure by creating another base of operation in California. [^34]

INCREASE OF THE FEDERAL ARMY AGAINST UTAH

In addition to the unrest and war-like outbreaks among the Indian tribes of the territory, and these rumors of projected invasions from the south and west, the church leaders were of course aware of the fact that substantial reinforcements, amounting to above three thousand men with ample supply trains and armament were to move in the spring from Missouri river points, and the administration had asked congress for still further levies of troops and supplies.

The official statement of these reinforcements to be added to the "Utah Expedition," together with a statement of the number already engaged in it, was issued from the headquarters of the United States army as follows:

"The force now in Utah under Colonel Johnston, (eight companies 2d dragoon, 5th and 10th infantry, Phelps' light battery, 4th artillery, and Reno's heavy battery), if up to the maximum standard, would amount to 118 officers, 2,470 men—2,588 aggregate. It is estimated that these troops require 850 recruits, which number will be put at Fort Leavenworth to accompany the reinforcement, with 44 officers. The entire force to be provided for on the march is 177 officers, 3,735 men—aggregate, 3,912. The whole army of Utah, (reinforcement included), to be supplied with subsistence, is 251 officers, 5,335 men—5,606 aggregate. All disposable recruits will be put in march for Fort Leavenworth as early in the spring as practicable. The troops to march from the points indicated must be supplied with three months' subsistence for consumption on the route, and one year's supply for the entire army of Utah will be sent with them. A reserve supply of eight months to be thrown forward to Fort Laramie before the setting in of a winter. [^35] It was stated by General Harney that the wagons necessary to transport the one year's supplies referred to, not considering the three months' supplies to be used en route would be from 1,800 to 2,000." [^36]

The secretary of war, John B. Floyd, "in view of the menacing attitude of affairs in Utah" recommended five new regiments, "as the very smallest addition to the army which the exigencies of the service will allow." This on the 5th of December, 1857. [^37] The president in his message of that year, Dec. 8th, recommended four regiments; [^38] and congress passed an act 7th of April, 1858, authorizing the president to call into service two regiments of volunteers "for the purpose of quieting the disturbances in the territory of Utah." By June 10th, the president thought that such progress had been made with reference to the settlement of Utah affairs that he released congress by special message from the obligation of making the appropriation necessary to equip and pay for the services of these regiments of volunteers. [^39] Such, however, was the status of public feeling on the Utah question, in President Buchanan's opinion, that in his annual message of 1858, Dec. 6th, when referring to the call for volunteers, and saying that happily there had been no occasion for calling these regiments into service, he added: "If there had not been, I should have felt serious embarrassment in selecting them, so great was the number of our brave and patriotic citizens anxious to serve their country in this distant and apparently dangerous 'Expedition'." [^40]

374The probable reason for the anxiety of the "brave, patriotic citizens," to serve the country as volunteers against the Latter-day Saints, was best explained on the floor of the United States senate by Albert G. Brown, United States senator from the state of Mississippi. He said:

"The point on which I place my chief objection to the employment of volunteers is this: if you send volunteers to fight the Mormons you will have civil war beyond all question. It is very well known that these people have had their disturbances in Illinois and Missouri before they left the states. They left enemies behind. Those enemies thirst for vengeance today. Call for the volunteers, and the old enemies of the Mormons will be first to come forward and offer their services, and say, 'we will take the field; we will go and fight these Mormons.' They go with a view of shedding blood; they go for vengeance, and they will have it. Send a volunteer force against the Mormons from Missouri and Illinois, and you will have war as certain as that a God reigns in heaven. No human agency can prevent it. The volunteer soldier will have volunteer officers. They will be of a piece and all be of a party, and all thirst for vengeance on account of old scores. The extract from Colonel Johnston's letter, read by the senator from Massachusetts yesterday, had attracted my attention before; and if I felt perfectly sure that the extract was authentic, I should demand from the executive that Colonel Johnston should be deposed from the command; and whoever goes there in command of your troops, saying you ought to have war, and that war is the best thing for the United States, is certain to bring on war. I say that the man who goes there thirsting for blood, who wants to shoot down these poor, deluded people who are following Brigham Young, will bring war, disgrace, and dishonor on your country. I want no war, I want no bloodshed. If you will send no volunteers to Utah you will have no war. There is no necessity for it. Brigham Young and his followers do not mean to fight. They will not fight. They will not fight you unless you force war on them. That is my judgment." [^41]

375"TRUST IN GOD"—SOLE REFUGE

It would certainly appear from the foregoing that the forces to be launched against the Latter-day Saints in Utah seemed quite overwhelming. It is cause for no wonder, therefore, if the situation seemed appalling to the church leaders. In the midst of such threatening portents they with their brave people had but one source of comfort—one hope, one refuge, and that was Trust in God. The leaders as well as the people were compelled to fly to that refuge; aside from it Brigham Young was as helpless as the humblest church member. In the latter days of March, the "move south" then being under way, President Young and his counselors and a number of the twelve were on their first day's drive from Salt Lake City southward; the roads were very dusty, the wind blowing into their faces so that sometimes they could not see their horses for it; they passed about one hundred heavily loaded teams with families going south, and met as many more with empty wagons going north to assist those without teams to move from the northern settlements; there was no grass along the road for these teams, they had to depend upon the well-nigh exhausted supply of hay. That night President Young's party stopped at Lake City, in Utah county. A public meeting was held in the evening at which the president spoke. "He compared himself to a man who had a family of fifty blind persons to lead over rough, bad roads, bridged, but planks out of the bridges, and had to cross on the string pieces. He exclaimed—'Oh, how thankful I would be if the people could all see better than I!'" [^42]

376The following Sunday, April 4th, meantime having returned to Salt Lake City to direct the movements of the people, in remarks made in the tabernacle, President Young alluded to the ancient prophets being mistaken about the second advent of the Messiah [i. e. mistaken as to his immediate return to earth, see II Thess., iv] and to the possibility of this people being mistaken also. He "spoke of the wicked upon our borders [the army at Bridger], and said it would satisfy his feelings if the Lord would permit him to say 'go out and slay your enemies, and rid the earth of them,' but he had to hold in the people and himself, and he was tired." [^43]

376These incidents clearly indicate that for this man Brigham Young, as for the humblest of his people, there was no refuge but trust in God; from every human viewpoint their case was overwhelmingly hopeless. And at this point the tide in affairs turned in their favor. Word was received by special express that Colonel Kane had succeeded in persuading Governor Cumming to come to Salt Lake City and assume the duties of his office, unattended by the army or any military escort whatsoever.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1858, pp. 337-8, Brigham Young, Jun. (Son of President Brigham Young, and later a member of the apostles' quorum, and Colonel N. V. Jones) carried the express.
[^2] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1858, pp. 341-2. Later President Young said he hoped "the feeling of the people, when the governor came in, would be cold enough to freeze peaches; but he considered Colonel Kane had performed a great feat in bringing in the governor, and passing backward and forward to Johnston's camp" (Ibid, p. 349).
[^3] Ibid, pp. 337, 338.
[^4] Ibid, p. 337.
[^5] "His speech, to a great extent, repudiated his last winter's proclamation." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1858, p. 337).
[^6] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for April 13th, 1858, p. 358.
[^7] Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 390.
[^8] Ibid, p. 390.
[^9] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for April 13th, 1858, p. 358.
[^10] Report of General W. H. Kimball to President Young. History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 15th April, 1858, pp. 365-6.
[^11] See New York Tribune Editorial of Jan. 30th, 1858; this History, ch. cxiii, Note 1 end of chapter.
[^12] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry of April 13th, 1858, p. 357.
[^13] Ibid, p. 364.
[^14] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for April 14th, 1858, p. 361. The president expressed himself as "fully satisfied, by the talk he had with Cumming, that he desired the destruction of the saints" (Ibid).
[^15] Ibid, pp. 361-3.
[^16] House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii, pp. 72-3.
[^17] House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, No. 30, p. 91.
[^18] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 15th April, 1858, p. 366. The News was accordingly printed from Fillmore beginning on the 5th of May. Eighteen weekly numbers were issued from Fillmore, the last bearing date of Sept. 1st, 1858. The News then returned to Salt Lake City. There arose no necessity to move it south to Parowan.
[^19] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1858, p. 428.
[^20] Ibid, entry for 20th and 21st of April, pp. 422-3.
[^21] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 19th of April, 1858, pp. 396-7.
[^22] House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, vol. ii, pt. ii, pp. 93, 94.
[^23] The letter to the Bulletin, and all the papers certifying to the correctness of Governor Cumming's report to Secretary Cass, will be found in Deseret News for Oct. 27, 1858.
[^24] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 20th April, 1858, pp. 422-3.
[^25] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 20th April, 1858, pp. 422-3.
[^26] From a report to Honorable Lewis Cass, secretary of state, Washington, D. C., under date of May 2nd, 1858, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii, pp. 91-97.
[^27] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 25th April, 1858, p. 436.
[^28] Cumming's report to Cass, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii, pp. 94-5.
[^29] Journal of Discourses, vol. v, p. 232.
[^30] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1858, pp. 465-6.
[^31] Report of Secretary of State Cass before cited (see footnote 26).
[^32] The full report of Governor Cumming to Secretary Cass will be found in House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii, pp. 91-97.
[^33] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 25th April, 1858, pp. 443-4.
[^34] Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 393.
[^35] Ibid.
[^36] Story of the Mormons, p. 509.
[^37] History of Brigham Young, Ms., June, 1858, p. 647.
[^38] Ibid, p. 370.
[^39] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1858, pp. 445-6.
[^40] Ibid, p. 475.
[^41] Ibid, p. 490. "It made Governor Cumming feel bad to see the moving," says the chronicle.
[^42] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 30th April, pp. 469, 470.
[^43] Ibid, pp. 567-8.
