B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

377CHAPTER CXII

377THE ENTRANCE OF GOVERNOR CUMMING INTO SALT LAKE CITY UNACCOMPANIED BY UNITED STATES TROOPS

377AN express bringing the word that Governor Cumming was on his way to Salt Lake City without a military escort, to assume the duties of his office, arrived in Salt Lake City on the evening of the 8th of April. [^1] On the 9th an informal council meeting was held by several leading brethren, in President Young's office. Elders George A. Smith and D. H. Wells both expressed their dislike to having Alfred Cumming "become by any means governor of the territory in virtue of the laws of the United States, which he would do if he came here and was sworn into office. President Young said he did not care anything about it; the Lord would overrule it for good which ever way it happened. He did not wish to see Governor Cumming unless he particularly desired an interview." [^2]

GOVERNOR CUMMING'S JOURNEY FROM CAMP SCOTT TO SALT LAKE—ECHO CANON EXPERIENCES

Colonel Kane with Governor Cumming, as already stated, left Camp Scott on the 5th of April, for Salt Lake City. They had one carriage, one wagon, and two attendants. The day following their departure from Camp Scott they met a small company of "Mormon" militia at Quaking Asp Hill, who conducted them to the military encampment at the head of Echo canon. The journey through the canon was made in the night. At many points in the canon the Utah militia had great bonfires burning, and met the governor at three encampments in military order. [^3] At these camps Governor Cumming delivered addresses expressing the belief that the troubles of the people would soon be ended, and that "he hoped the day was near when the peaceable inhabitants of Utah, would be allowed to follow their peaceful vocations without having to lay in the mountains." [^4] The militia who heard these speeches noted the fact that the governor's utterances at their camps were markedly different from the spirit of his proclamation of the 21st of November, addressed to the people of Utah territory. [^5] The governor himself afterwards expressed some anxiety as to these speeches, and great wonderment at his reception by the militia in Echo canon. The illuminations there, he said, in a conversation with a number of gentlemen in Salt Lake City on the day following his arrival, "outstripped anything he had ever expected to see." Colonel Kane said he never expected to see such a sight again. "The effect could not be described." [^6] Cumming said he would be glad if "a sketch of his reception at Quaking Asp Hill could be taken. The illumination could not be." "On finding himself in Echo canon the governor said he did not know what to think. He was surrounded by armed soldiers, who on his arrival presented arms in honor of his coming: he said he did not know what to do: but he delivered a speech, and he did not know but what he had committed himself. Colonel Kane assured him his speech was a happy effort, for an extemporaneous address."

A GRIM SENSE OF HUMOR MANIFESTED

It is of general repute that the governor was a little imposed upon in his night journey through Echo canon. In order to make as impressive an appearance of their forces as possible, as also, doubtless, to keep concealed the location and the nature of their "fortifications" in the canon, the journey of the governor's party was made in the night. After the militia at the first campfire halt had been drawn up in form and solemnly addressed by his excellency, they were dismissed and hurried down to the second encampment to again solemnly receive the governor in military array, and again hear his speech; again to cheer what he had to say about returning peace; and so again at the third encampment this performance was repeated. Stenhouse, who makes too much of the incident, states that when the governor discovered the trick played upon him, "he was ever afterwards unpleasantly reticent when the affair was mentioned." He also says that Cumming held Brigham responsible for the mortifying joke; [^7] but that is not likely, since Brigham Young did not know of the governor's advent into the "Mormon" camps in time to plan it. Stenhouse makes the followng attempt at description of the illuminations:

379"From one end of the canon to the other, great fires could be seen at night on the hillsides and on the mountain tops, representing the works and bivouacks of a great army, while the lurid flames of the pinetree fires rendered the darkness still more impressive, and conveyed to the bewildered governor the idea that near at hand there was a mighty host under arms. The military chieftains managed to keep his excellency in a continued strain of feverish expectation. At every important bend of the road the governor and his escort would be suddenly challenged by the pickets, and the countersign demanded. On one occasion there was a call to arms, and a mock effort at hostility, but some of the principal officers arrived just in time to save his excellency's life, and to call off the pugnacious militia, and hinder them from taking him prisoner!" [^8]

At the mouth of Echo canon Colonel Kane detained the governor by a day's shooting; and further down the Weber, at the camp of Ben Simons, the Cherokee Indian trader and interpreter, another day was spent in shooting. By express Colonel Kane sent word to President Young that he expected to arrive in Salt Lake City with the governor on Monday, the 12th of April. [^9] Undoubtedly the delay en route was meant to kill time in order to give opportunity for the church leaders and the people to adjust themselves to the new situation created by Governor Cumming consenting to come among them without a military escort, to assume the duties of his office.

380The snow was still so deep on Big Mountain, over which the road usually traveled passed into Salt Lake valley, that it was decided to bring the governor through Weber canon via Farmington to Salt Lake City. "At the mouth of Weber canon the Farmington guards, mounted and in uniform, met him. On his reaching the courthouse (in Farmington) the band played The Star Spangled Banner. Sunday evening he stopped at Judson Stoddards at Farmington. Monday morning he was visited by the Farmington band in carriages: they played Hail Columbia, Yankee Doodle, the Star Spangled Banner, and other popular airs. Cumming made a speech, remarking that he was astonished at such attachment for national airs, he believed it could not be feigned." [^10]

GOVERNOR CUMMING FINDS THE PEOPLE EN EXODUS FROM THE TERRITORY

It was a strange view, however, that met the eyes of Governor Cumming on his journey the next day through Davis county towards Salt Lake City. The road was thronged with people from the northern settlements moving southward, their wagons loaded with provisions and household effects, while loose cattle, horses, sheep, even pigs were driven in droves before them. They were leaving their homes at the call of their prophet upon another hegira—this time not only into a wilderness, but into a desert. But they were moving confidently, even cheerfully, leaving men in charge of their deserted homes with orders to lay them waste by applying the torch to everything that would burn, and the ax to every shrub and tree that had been planted, in order to leave the settled valleys of Utah a blackened, treeless waste, giving them back to desolation—a protest against the injustice of forcing upon an American community officers whom they had no voice in selecting; and, from their viewpoint, dragooned upon them by military power; a protest against the violation of the American principle that governments derive their just powers from the consent of the governed; a protest—again from their viewpoint—since popular conception of the purpose of the "Utah Expedition" was that it should suppress the "Mormon" marriage system [^11]—a protest, therefore, against the interference of the secular authority with the freedom of religion.

381At the Hot Springs, three miles north of the corporation limits of Salt Lake City, the governor's party was met by the mayor, aldermen and some of the councilmen, of Salt Lake City; and by them Governor Cumming was escorted to the lodgings secured for him at the home of W. C. Staines, where the party arrived about 11 a. m., the mayor riding with the governor.

MEETING OF THE GOVERNORS—EX AND DE FACTO

The day following his arrival Governor Cumming expressed a desire for President Young to call upon him; and accordingly, about four in the afternoon, in company with George A. Smith, the now ex-governor of Utah called upon his successor. Heber C. Kimball joined the party later. They were introduced by Colonel Kane. The conversation for the most part was on commonplaces—the "beauty of the valley," "the improvements," "the fruit," some of which the governor had tasted, as Colonel Kane had taken a few apples with him into Camp Scott. Governor Cumming spoke of his satisfaction at the arrangement made for his reception by Colonel Wm. H. Kimball at the Echo canon camps. Only once did the conversation approach the question which both the present and the former governor of Utah knew was inevitable. This was near the close of the interview. Ex-Governor Young asked Governor Cumming to take a ride with him through the city and view the improvements. Cumming replied that he would do so in a few days, after he was rested. The ex-governor remarked to Cumming, perhaps quizzically, that if he had only come in last fall he would have been made more comfortable. Doubtless the vision of that winter in Camp Scott and all its discomforts and dangers rose before the mind of the ease-loving governor of Utah as he declared in answer to the above remark, that he had "a crow to pick with Governor Young in relation to that." Ex-Governor Young replied that as he (Young) was a preacher, he would give him a text to consider for that event; and this was the text: "The people who know me best, love me best." Upon which Colonel Kane exclaimed: "That is not only a text, but a sermon." Thus the first interview closed.

It will be of interest to note, parenthetically, some of the "asides" and impressions on both parties to this first interview. The day following the arrival of Governor Cumming, Colonel Kane, when calling upon President Young remarked that "he [Kane] had caught the fish, now you can cook it as you have a mind to." [^12] "George A. Smith's first impression when he saw Cumming was that he was a toper," says our chronicle; "but examing him with his glasses, he concluded he was a moderate drinker and a hearty eater. He was well dressed, in black, had a ruddy face and grey hair. His head was small around the top; * * * his probable weight about two hundred and forty pounds." Through remarks of Colonel Kane to General Wm. H. Kimball the brethren learned the impressions that his visitors of the 13th of April made upon Governor Cumming, who prided himself on being something of an adept in physiognomy: "Governor Young was a man of lamb-like disposition, and possessed a superior brain—a mind capable of grasping anything. President Kimball was a fierce, brave, unflinching, unchangeable man, and more to be dreaded than any of the others; fine, determined temperament, and a very fine man: and if any of them needed hanging, it would be he. George A. Smith possessed an unaccountable memory, would make an excellent historian, and a number one politician if he had a chance. They were three exceedingly fine, intellectual men, and he had been deceived in what he had heard of them. He liked them." [^13] These three constituted the first presidency of the church, it will be remembered.

SECOND INTERVIEW—PRIVATE ITEMS

This first interview was followed the next day by a strictly private one between the "two governors," the only other person present being Colonel Kane. In this interview Governor Cumming asked twice for ex-Governor Young's office—i. e. his office room. Colonel Kane explained that ex-Governor Young's office was part of his private residence. President Young was not well impressed with the intentions of Governor Cumming. Relating the incidents of this private interview to George A. Smith, President Young said the governor "came pretty near commanding me to forbid the people leaving their homes;" saying, "there would be nobody left here but renegades who followed the army for juries." [^14] The conversation turned upon the illegality of the post office department stopping the mail, which Cumming did not attempt to defend; upon the change of conduct on the part of the Indians: "For some time," said President Young, "the people in Utah had lived in peace with the natives, now they come to their homes and draw their bows upon the women and say that the 'Mormons' are squaws, and will not fight; but that the soldiers will fight and kill all the 'Mormons.' The operations of Dr. Hurt in the Uintah valley was alluded to, and the statement by the Indians that they had been offered $150 a piece for "Mormons" was repeated. "It ain't possible," (sic!) said Governor Cumming. "It will not be easy to make the people believe anything else," replied ex-Governor Young. Cumming at the close of the interview agreed to let the ex-governor see his private instructions. [^15]

GOVERNOR CUMMING'S REPORT OF CONDITIONS TO GENERAL JOHNSTON

Governor Cumming however must have thought that he was making progress in the matter of bringing order out of the chaotic state of Utah affairs, since on the 15th of April he wrote to General Johnston detailing the incidents of his journey to Salt Lake City, in the course of which he said:

384"I have been everywhere recognized as the governor of Utah; and so far from having encountered insults and indignities, I am gratified in being able to state to you that in passing through the settlements, I have been universally greeted with such respectful attention as are due to the representative of the executive authority of the United States in the territory."

The governor also reported that ex-Governor Brigham Young had paid him "a call of ceremony;" that at subsequent interviews the ex-governor had evinced a willingness to afford him every facility which he might require for the efficient performance of his administrative duties. "His course, in this respect," said the communication, "meets, I fancy, with the approval of a majority of this community." "The territorial seal with other public property," continued the governor, "has been tendered to me by William H. Hooper, Esq., late acting secretary pro tem." He had not yet examined the subject critically, but he apprehended that the records of the United States courts, territorial library, and other public property remain unimpaired. "Having entered upon the performance of my official duties in this city," said the governor, "it is probable that I will be detained for some days in this part of the territory." In conclusion the governor presents the charges of inciting the Indians to acts of hostilities against the people of Utah, by officers and agents of the "Utah Expedition," and informs the general commanding at Camp Scott that he may be compelled to make a requisition upon him for a sufficient force to chastise these Indians, as he desired to avoid calling upon the territorial militia; and notes that the charges against the officers and agents of the "Utah Expedition" call for investigation. [^16]

BRIGHAM YOUNG'S TENDER OF GENERAL SUPPLIES TO THE ARMY

Accompanying the above communication was another offer by Brigham Young of supplies of provisions for the army, tendered through Governor Cumming. The offer brought forth no response from the general commanding; the communication making the tender was, however, counter-signed by the assistant adjutant general, F. J. Porter, and entered with the official documents of the "Expedition."

385The tender of supplies was as follows:

385"Great Salt Lake City, April 16, 1858.

385Sir:—Learning that you propose sending an express to Colonel Johnston's camp, I avail myself of the opportunity of proffering, through your excellency, to Colonel [General] Johnston and the army under his command, inasmuch as they are supposed to be measurably destitute, such supplies of provisions as we have, and they may need, prior to the arrival of such supplies from the east.

385Trusting that you will appreciate the sincerity of the motives prompting this courtesy, I have the honor to be, very respectfully,

385[Signed] "BRIGHAM YOUNG."

385His Excellency, Governor A. Cumming.

385Headquarters, Department of Utah,

385Camp Scott, Utah Territory, May 28, 1858.

385F. J. PORTER,

385Assistant Adjutant General." [^17]

386It is clear that in the tender of courtesies and benefits, and exhibition of generous manliness, the now ex-governor registered much higher throughout than General Johnston, though in the latter we have the right to expect the bearing of the chivalrous gentleman of the south.

THE "MOVE SOUTH" CONTINUES

While so much of progress was made, as noted in the matter of receiving the new governor, the "move south" by the people was in progress. Daily the streets of Salt Lake were thronged with wagons and stock bent on this strange hegira. On the 15th of April, Albert Carrington, editor of the Deseret News was instructed by President Young, after two more issues of the paper, to move the printing establishment to Fillmore, and publish the paper from there; then a month later, from Parowan—still further south—and this without offering any explanation of apology for thus being, practically, a publishing house on wheels. [^18]

386At the Historian's Office the church records, papers, and books were securely packed in boxes and shipped south to Provo, where an Historian's Office was improvised, in the counting room of the music hall. [^19] The caching of wheat and the other grains went steadily on in various places. Teams came up from the south to move the tithing grain to places where it would be securely cached. Governor Cumming was much distressed and puzzled over the evident determination of the people to leave their homes, deliberate arrangements for the destruction of which had been made in the event of the army moving in the direction of Salt Lake valley from its winter quarters at Camp Scott.

In the midst of these conditions the health of Brigham Young was precarious. On the 20th of April there were some symptoms of apoplexy, [^20] but he soon recovered.

INVESTIGATIONS BY GOVERNOR CUMMING: REPORT

Consultations between Governor Cumming and leading churchmen and civil officers and lawyers were frequent. The governor was given the opportunity to examine the court records and expressed his astonishment that they were not burned. With Colonel Kane he visited the Utah library and with equal astonishment found that it had not been destroyed as reported. Assisted by Colonel Kane and W. C. Staines, the latter the state librarian, he took an inventory of the books and ascertained that they were all there. He called upon Captain W. H. Hooper and inquired about the safe belonging to the secretary of the territory. From his house the captain took the governor over two high fences at the back of his premises into his barn, where he presented the government safe. To the governor's inquiry as to why he kept the safe in such an out of the way place, Hooper replied: "We were going to burn the city shortly, and did not want to burn any United States property!" James W. Cummings showed the governor the records of the United States district court; whereupon the governor gave Cummings an order—styling him clerk of the United States district court—on W. H. Hooper, secretary pro tem of the territory—for a safe in which to keep the court papers and records; "thereby recognizing Hooper and Cummings," says the chronicle, "the former as secretary of the territory pro tem, and the other as clerk of the United States district court." [^21] It was upon the facts ascertained in this investigation that Governor Cumming in his report of the 2nd of May, to Mr. Cass, United States secretary of state, could say:

"Since my arrival I have been employed in examining the records of the supreme and district courts which I am now prepared to report upon as being perfect and unimpaired. This will doubtless be acceptable information to those who have entertained an impression to the contrary. I have also examined the legislative records and other books belonging to the office of the secretary of state, which are in perfect preservation. I believe that the books and charts, stationery, and other property appertaining to the surveyor general's office will, upon examination, be found in their proper place, except some instruments which are supposed to have been disposed of by a person who was temporarily in charge of the office. The condition of the large and valuable territorial library has also commanded my attention, and I am pleased in being able to report that Mr. W. C. Staines, the librarian, has kept the books and records in most excellent condition." [^22]

Sometime afterwards, to wit, in the month of September, 1858, a correspondent in Salt Lake City for the San Francisco Evening Bulletin reported that the Utah public records were all in confusion, notwithstanding Governor Cumming's report to the contrary as above, to the secretary of state. Alleged defects of the records both in the United States district courts at Salt Lake City, and also in the records in the territorial secretary's office, are alleged, followed with this statement of the correspondent: "How Governor Cumming, in view of these facts was able to reconcile his conscience to his report that these records are in a perfect state of preservation, I cannot tell you." "I do not believe him capable of deliberate prevarication," the correspondent adds, "and yet it is difficult to explain his report on any other theory." It was also charged that some of the records of the supreme court clerk's office had been seized by Brigham Young "during the rebellion and had not been restored." This Bulletin article greatly angered Governor Cumming and he proceeded to vindicate his report to Mr. Cass, secretary of state, by an itemized statement of the journal and bar docket of the first and third judicial district courts, from 1851 to 1857; and had the completeness of them certified to by Henry Cabot and Kirk Anderson, who made the examination and itemized the records, and had it countersigned by John Hartnett, secretary of the territory, and P. K. Dotson, marshal, who were present when the examination was made. The same as to the books and records in the office of the secretary of the territory; so also in relation to the legislative records. John G. Lynch, clerk of the supreme court, certified under date of Oct. 25th, to the completeness of the records from 1851, when the court was organized, to 14th of March, 1857, being the last day of said court, all which records "complete and in good condition he received from his predecessor." In the signed statement by Hartnett and Dotson it is also said: "If the personal or official veracity of his excellency may, in any way, have been questioned in this matter, we unhesitatingly pronounce it most unjust, and so certify to the country. [^23]

389Wonderment now shifts to the question why the misrepresentation to the San Francisco Evening Bulletin, for it seems to be purely malicious.

SENATORIAL "BEE" PUT IN GOVERNOR CUMMING'S "BONNET"

In one of the many interviews between Governor Cumming and leading churchmen, Daniel H. Wells, of the first presidency, informed the latter that the people had resolved not to be governed by officers sustained by bayonets, and suggested that without resigning his office, Cumming go right back to Washington and get Utah admitted as a state "as the only alternative to prevent collision and bloodshed." Cumming answered that they would ridicule him should he go back; but "he fancied;" says the record of the conversation, "the day would come when he would be our senator." [^24]

On the same occasion General Wells asked Governor Cumming if indictments had not been found by Judge Eckles against Presidents Young and Kimball at Camp Scott. The governor replied in the affirmative. General Wells reminded the governor of the fate that had overtaken Joseph and Hyrum Smith, when they went to Carthage, Illinois, and sternly said that Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball were not going to Camp Scott. "Cumming did not feel inclined to talk upon the subject." [^25] Later—early in May—copies of indictments "of the court held in Johnston's camp" (Camp Scott) were printed. The indictments "include the presidency, editor of the Deseret News, and a thousand others whose names were unknown to the jury." The account also states that "on receiving the resolutions of the legislative assembly (referred to in chapter cviii), a special term of the grand jury was called for the purpose of indicting every member and officer who signed them for high treason." Efforts were made also to indict Hon. John Bernhisel, the delegate to congress. Cumming asked General Wells on the occasion of the above interview about two men detained here [i. e. Salt Lake City] as spies, one of whom is said to be of some importance in the 5th infantry, though he came here [Salt Lake City] in the capacity of teamster. Brother Wells said, "the men could not go [could not have gone], back to the army, but they might have gone on to California."

GOVERNOR CUMMING'S PUBLIC SPEECH TO THE PEOPLE OF SALT LAKE CITY

On Sunday the 25th a public meeting was held at the "Old Tabernacle," in Salt Lake City, which Governor Cumming attended, and addressed the people, being introduced to the assembly by President Young as the "governor of Utah." The following is the governor's account of his remarks at that meeting:

"My presence at the meeting in the tabernacle will be remembered by me as an occasion of intense interest. Between three and four thousand persons were assembled for the purpose of public worship; the hall was crowded to overflowing; but the most profound quiet was observed when I appeared. President Brigham Young introduced me by name as the governor of Utah, and I addressed the audience from 'the stand.' I informed them that I had come among them to vindicate the national sovereignty; that it was my duty to secure the supremacy of the Constitution and the laws; that I had taken my oath of office to exact an unconditional submission on their part to the dictates of the law. I was not interrupted. In a discourse of about thirty minutes duration I touched (as I thought best) boldly upon the leading questions at issue between them and the general government. I remembered that I had to deal with men embittered by the remembrance and recital of many real, and some imaginary wrongs, but did not think it wise to withhold from them the entire truth. They listened respectfully to all that I had to say, approvingly even, I fancied, when I explained to them what I intended should be the character of my administration; in fact, the whole manner of the people was calm, betokening no consciousness of having done wrong, but rather, as it were, indicating a conviction that they had done their duty to their religion and their country. I have observed that the Mormons profess to view the Constitution as the work of inspired men, and respond with readiness to appeals for its support." [^26]

391This report of the governor's remarks when compared with the synopsis in the annals of the church are not at radical variance. The report as it stands in the History of Brigham Young, Ms., is as follows:

391"Governor A. Cumming said he had been appointed by the president, with the consent of the senate, to be the governor of this territory. It was true there was a large body of armed men on the frontier, but, they were not sent to destroy the 'Mormons,' but to protect them from the lawless savage. He was sent to enforce the law. Said he would, in all future moves, consult with the gentlemen who had enjoyed our confidence. He and the officers had nothing to do with our social and religious views; we had the right to serve God, in any way we pleased. Did not expect his would be a path of roses; but expected opposition by some misguided men. Requested the 'brethren,' if they saw him go a little astray, not to treat him harshly, but to counsel with him, as a friend." [^27]

391It had been reported to Governor Cumming that there were people detained in Utah against their will, whereupon the governor at the above named meeting had the following notice read:

NOTICE.

"It has been reported to me that there are persons residing in this and in other parts of the territory who are illegally restrained of their liberty. It is therefore proper that I should announce that I assume the protection of all such persons, if any there be, and request that they will communicate to me their names and places of residence under seal, through Mr. Fay Worthen, or to me in person during my stay in the city.

392A. CUMMING,

392Governor of Utah Territory."

392He afterwards reported to the secretary of state that up to the 2nd of May he had kept his office open at all hours of the day and night and had registered "fifty-six men, thirty-three women, and seventy-one children," as desirous of his protection and assistance in proceeding to the states. "The large majority of these people are of English birth, and state that they leave the congregation from a desire to improve their circumstances, and realize elsewhere more money by their labor." Not because they were, or had been—let it be noted—abused by their co-religionists, or "restrained of their freedom;" but to "better their industrial condition," which was quite beside the causes which were supposed to have called forth the governor's "notice," offering to assist those alleged to be restrained of their freedom. "Certain leading men among the Mormons," continues the governor's account of this matter, "have promised to furnish them flour, and assist them in leaving the country." [^28]

This notion that people were held in Utah against their will doubtless arose from remarks of President Young made in what we may call the early days of the "Utah War;" when, on the 13th day of Sept., 1857, Captain Van Vliet being present, and on the stand in the tabernacle, President Young said: "I have told you that if this people will live their religion, all will be well; and I have told you that if there is any man or woman that is not willing to destroy anything and everything of their property that would be of use to an enemy, if left, I wanted them to go out of the territory; and I again say so today; for when the time comes to burn and lay waste our improvements, if any man undertakes to shield his, he will be sheared down; for 'judgment will be laid to the line and righteousness to the plummet.' Now the faint-hearted can go in peace; but should that time come, they must not interfere. Before I will suffer what I have in times gone by, there shall not be one building, nor one foot of lumber, nor a stick, nor a tree, nor a particle of grass and hay, that will burn, left in reach of our enemies. I am sworn, if driven to extremity, to utterly lay waste, in the name of Israel's God." [^29] The number in the community that accepted the invitation of Governor Cumming to receive his special protection and assistance to leave the territory was small even when it represented, in large majority, those who were desirous to leave in order to "realize elsewhere more money for their labor," as well as those who thought themselves restrained of their liberty—eighty-nine in all, exclusive of their children. Those persons who called upon Governor Cumming "generally wished to see him alone; and their wants were a little tobacco, sugar, coffee, tea, etc. One man thought a thousand dollars would do to get him away from this place [i. e. Utah]!" [^30]

393Governor Cumming at the aforesaid meeting of Sunday the 25th of April, suggested that if any were present who were inclined to address the meeting on topics of interest to the community he would like to hear them—seeking doubtless by this means an expression of public sentiment. "This invitation," he reports, "brought forth in succession several powerful speakers who evidently exercised great influence over the masses of the people." [^31]

UTAH'S GRIEVANCES VOICED

Among these several speakers, and chiefly, were Elders Gilbert Clements and John Taylor. The speeches covered a wide range of subjects. The persecutions of the saints in the past, the injustice endured by non-interference in their behalf by those charged with the administration of the law; the discrimination against Utah in the matter of land preemption laws; the administration ignoring the selection of lists of officers from Utah for territorial positions; the un-Americanism of dragooning upon an American community officers whom they had no voice in selecting, and who were declared to be, under all the circumstances, obnoxious to the people. "Let that army be removed and let an investigating committee come and diligently inquire into the cause of complaint," said Gilbert Clements, and he would say "that all would be well." "These troops" said Elder Tayor, "must be withdrawn before we can have any officers palmed upon us." "We have never said we would not receive their officers," said Gilbert Clements, "but that we would not receive them at the point of the bayonet." Referring to Governor Cumming's claim that the army was in Utah for the protection of the people, the same speaker exclaimed—"why in the name of God did they not come when we were weak!" Governor Cumming parried these thrusts as best he could. The course of the administration in the matter of appointing territorial officers was the same in Utah as in other territories. Other territories, however, he was answered, had not the same crying necessity that Utah had for home rule; and had not sent in protests against the Washington appointments, with accompanying lists of local men—several for each office—from which the administration might choose, and which the petitioners begged and pleaded might be chosen; and in the event of it being impossible for these to be appointed, then in the name of American decency to "appoint good men to the offices." "The government had granted preemption rights to settlers in all the territories but Utah," said John Taylor. "Not until the Indian title had been extinguished," replied Governor Cumming. "Why then has not the Indian title been extinguished in Utah?" retorted Taylor, to which there was no answer.

A BOISTEROUS MEETING

The meeting was quite spirited, not to say boisterous. Cumming reporting it to Secretary Cass says that the congregation became greatly excited and joined the speakers in their intemperate remarks, "exhibiting more frenzy than I had expected to witness among a people who habitually exercised great self-control." He adds:

"A speaker now represented the federal government as desirous of needlessly introducing the national troops into the territory 'whether a necessity existed for their employment to support the civil officers or not,' and the wildest uproar ensued. I was fully confirmed in the opinion that this people, with their extraordinary religion and customs, would gladly encounter certain death than to be taxed with a submission to the military power, which they wrongfully consider to involve a loss of honor. In my first address I had informed them that they were entitled to a trial by their peers; that I had no intention of stationing the army in immediate contact with their settlements, and that the military posse would not be resorted to until other means of arrest had been tried and failed. I found the greatest difficulty in explaining these points, so great was the excitement. Eventually, however, the efforts of Brigham Young were successful in calming the tumult, and restoring order before the adjournment of the meeting." [^32]

Doubtless the part of President Young in the meeting astonished his own following. He reproved Elder John Taylor, saying "the matters which Brother Taylor wished to bring before the people he did not wish to hear; he had seen enough of them"—referring doubtless to events in Missouri and Illinois, which Elder Taylor had discussed. "He had been mortified to see the enthusiasm [almost riotousness] manifested here today. Said he had used his influence and powers of mind and reason to keep the people from doing that which they believed to be their imperative duty. He hoped and believed that all matters would be amicably adjusted, and we in peace again." [^33] With this the meeting closed.

396This meeting Stenhouse represents as "an understood thing;" that the participants were but acting the parts of seeming boisterousness and disorder; and represents that years afterwards Governor Cumming in conversation declared to him [Stenhouse] that "it was all humbug," and "all of a piece with the incidents of his passage through Echo canon." [^34] Stenhouse urges that such subterfuge was resorted to on the one hand to save Brigham Young from an appearance of personal submission to Gentile authority, and on the other to save President Buchanan from "the appearance of folly in the beginning, and weakness in the ending, of the 'Utah Expedition."' [^35] Just how this was achieved by playing at boisterousness in this meeting is not very clear. Linn after presenting the Stenhouse view of the matter half skeptically remarks: "If all this was a piece of acting, arranged by Young to show his flock that he was making no abject surrender, it was well done." [^36]

396On one point Governor Cumming appeared extremely sensitive. One of the speakers (Clements) had inadvertently said that President Buchanan as a climax to his atrocities had appointed "a Missourian to govern the Mormons;" whereupon the governor somewhat excited shouted that he was "no Missourian"—"I am a Georgian, sir; a Georgian!" The speaker stood corrected. A line in one of the Utah campfire doggerels made the same mistake:

396"Old Sam has sent I understand

396Du dah!

396A Missouri ass to rule our land,

396Du dah! Du dah day, etc."

George A. Smith, the church historian, also believed up to the arrival of Cumming in Salt Lake City, that he was not only a "Missourian," but one of the Jackson county mob. "I supposed from his name," said he in his speech before the Peace Commissioners, "he was one of the Jackson county mobbers. I have but recently learned that he is not the Cumming of the Jackson mob, but a gentleman from Georgia. From the first I heard of his appointment until I saw his face, I held him in utter horror and detestation" [^37]—confounding him with one Cumming, an Indian agent at Independence, Jackson county, Missouri, whose name is signed with a number of others of the Jackson mob, to a manifesto against the saints. [^38] The likelihood of the boisterousness of the people at this meeting being a planned and acted affair, is extremely unlikely. It should be remembered that it was Governor Cumming who gave the opportunity for any one in the congregation to address the meeting on topics of interest to the community. Was he in the plot? And why should Brigham Young be interested in saving the face of President Buchanan in sending an army to Utah?

397In the afternoon the saints again assembled, and President Young addressed the meeting. He expressed confidence that in the "present move of the saints [meaning their abandonment of their homes—all the while going on—] * * * God would overrule for their good, and it would redound to his honor and glory." He "exhorted the brethren to be patient and let the Lord work. Said he did not think we were prepared to meet the blow, and therefore thought the Lord would avert it for a time." [^39]

GOVERNOR CUMMING AND THE MOVING SAINTS

Meantime the "move south" continued; hundreds of wagons, daily thronged the highways, and the settlements of Utah county were crowded with south-bound emigrants for an unknown destination. Governor Cumming made several journeys along this line of moving caravans between Provo and Salt Lake City, vainly pleading with the people to return to their homes. On one of these journeys from Provo to Salt Lake City, in company with Colonel Kane, he met four hundred wagons between Provo and Willow Creek (a small stream east of the settlement of Draper); and two hundred more between that point and Salt Lake City. [^40] In a subsequent journey between Springville and Salt Lake City (May 6th), the same gentlemen met eight hundred teams en route south. [^41] Cumming appealed to Brigham Young to know "if there was not some way to stop the moving. President Young replied that if the troops were withdrawn from the territory, the people would stop moving; but that ninety-nine out of every hundred of this people, would rather live out their lives in the mountains than endure the oppression the federal government was now heaping upon them." Governor Cumming said "he would show [ex-] Governor Young his reports to the government; and he would do all he could to prevent the troops from coming into the settlements, and more from coming into the territory (the California mail had a few days before brought word that the government was about to send six thousand more troops to Utah); and if they would come in [i. e. in spite of his efforts] he would say to the people 'take care of yourselves."' [^42]

398At this outburst of feeling, so favorable to the people of Utah, President Young humorously remarked—"In that case you might as well join us and 'use them up' [i. e. the army]. Cumming answered he could not quite come to that yet." [^43]

DEPARTURE OF COLONEL KANE FROM UTAH—ARMY ACTIVITIES

In the midst of these conditions Colonel Kane received word of the death of his father, Judge John K. Kane, and felt the necessity of hastening his departure for the east. On the 4th of May, in an interview, Governor Cumming informed President Young of his intention to return to Camp Scott and bring in Mrs. Cumming. He would require the army to remain where it was until he got returns from the dispatches he had just prepared to send to Washington by Colonel Kane, and if they refused to obey his orders, he would call upon the militia of the territory to see that they did." [^44]

399This matter of the movement of the troops from Camp Scott to Salt Lake valley was rapidly approaching a crisis. Spring had come; the road ways and canons would soon be relieved of snowdrifts and become passable. The cattle on Henry's Fork of Green river, guarded by Colonel Cooke's dragoons, had thriven well, and from that quarter sufficient teams could be had to move two hundred wagons. The supply trains that had been parked during the winter at Fort Laramie were approaching Camp Scott, under Colonel Hoffman's command. So, too, was Captain Marcy with 1,500 mules and horses he had collected during the winter in New Mexico, the herds being guarded by an escort of five companies of infantry and mounted riflemen. More than three thousand reinforcements had concentrated at Fort Leaven-worth and with abundant supply trains were prepared to march. Johnston himself had sent word to Governor Cumming of his intention to arrive in Salt Lake City on the first of June, and that he would "plant one [army post] in Salt Lake City, and another on Provo Bench." [^45] Hence if anything was to be done to head off this movement, and save the territory from the threatened devastation by the people, it must be done at once.

399On the 13th of May Governor Cumming and Colonel Kane left Salt Lake City, the latter to continue his journey eastward with dispatches from Governor Cumming to the administration, the former to bring in his wife and dissuade Johnston from taking up his march for Salt Lake City until he could receive answers from his dispatches to President Buchanan.

COLONEL KANE APPROVES PRESIDENT YOUNG'S COURSE

Before leaving the city Colonel Kane assured President Young, in conversation, that he approved of the course he and the saints had taken, saying—"It is the cream of creams. You have taken the right course, and I want you to keep it; I would not have had you take any other course for anything." This President Young reported to a number of the brethren a few days after the departure of the colonel for the east. [^46] On the same occasion President Young also stated that Colonel Kane had said that in conversation with President Buchanan on the eve of his [Kane's] starting for the west, he had told the president of the United States that "as an American citizen he would make an apology for him to Governor Young, as it was due for not sending him a notice that he was going to send an army to Great Salt Lake City." [^47]

400Referring to this and to the support of his policy by Colonel Kane President Young said: "This is the reason why we have let the army alone. Kane said, 'I have feared all the time you would chew that whole army up."' [^48] President Young added "that General Sam Houston had it right when he said, 'if you [the United States] make war upon them [i. e. the 'Mormons'], you will get awfully whipped.'" [^49]

COLONEL KANE HATED AT CAMP SCOTT

At Camp Scott, Kane was heartily disliked, and even hated. It was plainly to be seen that if his efforts for reconciliation were successful, the army sent to Utah with so much pomp and circumstance, but which had suffered so much both of physical discomfort and humiliation of military pride, would have no opportunity of making conquest of the "wretched fanatics," by whom it had been placed at such disadvantage in the eyes of the country, and of the world. It was reported that two attempts were made upon the colonel's life at Camp Scott, but what grounds existed for such report our annals do not disclose. [^50]

401The colonel was accompanied by a special mounted escort of six men, selected by President Young, with reference to their experience as plainsmen, endurance, fidelity, and courage. Major Howard Egan was commander of the escort, of which John Murdock, — West, John Q. Knowlton, — Van Ettan, and — Worthing were the members. [^51]

401The overland journey from Fort Bridger to Florence, Nebraska, the "Winter Quarters" of previous years—was made in twenty-three days; and here, after entertaining them at dinner, where he expressed his gratitude for their attentions to, and their watchfulness over him, Colonel Kane separated from his escort, excepting Major Egan, who accompanied him to Washington, in order to bring return dispatches from the administration; his companions of the escort, meantime, awaiting his return at Florence.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Linn, influenced by the statements of Stenhouse (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 386), denies that the administration was influenced to change its policy by criticism for sending an army to Utah before an inquiry into the causes of the alleged offenses had been made, and takes to task Bancroft for accepting "the ridiculous Mormon assertion that Buchanan was compelled to change his policy toward the Mormons by unfavorable comments 'throughout the United States and throughout Europe.'" (Story of the Mormons, p. 501, and note). Bancroft's statement (History of Utah, p. 529) is not sustained by citations of authority for his declaration, but the evidence will be supplied by the text and citations in this chapter.
[^2] Autobiography of Lieutenant General Winfield Scott, Sheldon and Co., publishers, New York, 1864, p. 604.
[^3] Published by Appleton and Co., New York.
[^4] Autobiography of Lieutenant General Winfield Scott, p. 604.
[^5] Atlantic Monthly, April, 1859, p. 476. Congressional Globe, 35th Congress, 1st Session, pt. i, p. 428.
[^6] New York Tribune, Jan. 30th, 1858. This History, Note 1, end of chapter.
[^7] New York Herald, Nov. 12th, 1857, copied into Millennial Star, vol. xix, p. 814.
[^8] New York Daily Times of Dec. 24>, 1857. "The tone of the debate," says Colonel Albert G. Brown, in Atlantic Monthly for April, 1859, "showed there was little difference of opinion in the house concerning Utah affairs; the unanimity, however, being due in part to ignorance and indifference. The issue of slavery in Kansas was absorbing. Mr. Warren's resolution was referred to the committee on territories, and slumbered upon their tables through the whole session" (p. 476).
[^9] New York Tribune quoted in Millennial Star, vol. xx, pp. 108-9.
[^10] New York Tribune, 14th of January, 1858; Deseret News of 21st April, 1858.
[^11] New York Herald quoted in Millennial Star, vol. xx, p. 214.
[^12] New York Times, Jan. 28th, 1858; Deseret News of May 5th, 1858.
[^13] Congressional Globe, for Feb. 25th, 1858, 35th Congress, 1st Session, pt. i, pp. 873-4.
[^14] Linn declares it was these scandals coming to light that stopped General Scott from going to the Pacific coast to direct activities against Utah from that point (Story of the Mormons, p. 500).
[^15] For a collection of these criticisms following the news in the east that the "Mormon" exodus had begun, see Note 1, end of this chapter.
[^16] Washington dispatches to the New York Herald, 1st and 5th of February, 1858.
[^17] Washington correspondence to the New York Herald, copied into the Deseret News of April 7th, 1858.
[^18] That news did not reach the administration until early in June. See Special Message of President Buchanan to congress, dated June 10th, 1858 (Message and Papers of the Presidents, vol. v, p. 487).
[^19] New York Tribune, quoted in Millennial Star, vol. xx, p. 108.
[^20] "In their appointment," says Colonel Albert G. Brown, "Mr. Buchanan imitated the example of President Washington, who designated a similar commission to convey his proclamation (providing for peaceful submission within a limited time) to the whiskey-insurgents in Pennsylvania (1794)." (Utah Expedition, Atlantic Monthly, April, 1859, p. 485; cf. History United States, Bryant-Gay-Brooks, Scribner's, vol. iv, p. 118, et seq).
[^21] See ante, this History, ch. xcvi, footnote 20.
[^22] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cv:25, 27.
[^23] New York Tribune, May 8th, 1885.
[^24] New York Tribune, June 12th, 1858.
[^25] New York Times, June 14th, 1858.
[^26] New York Times, June 17th, 1858.
[^27] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 25th April, 1858, p. 436.
[^28] Cumming's report to Cass, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii, pp. 94-5.
[^29] Journal of Discourses, vol. v, p. 232.
[^30] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1858, pp. 465-6.
[^31] Report of Secretary of State Cass before cited (see footnote 26).
[^32] The full report of Governor Cumming to Secretary Cass will be found in House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii, pp. 91-97.
[^33] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 25th April, 1858, pp. 443-4.
[^34] Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 393.
[^35] Ibid.
[^36] Story of the Mormons, p. 509.
[^37] History of Brigham Young, Ms., June, 1858, p. 647.
[^38] Ibid, p. 370.
[^39] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1858, pp. 445-6.
[^40] Ibid, p. 475.
[^41] Ibid, p. 490. "It made Governor Cumming feel bad to see the moving," says the chronicle.
[^42] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 30th April, pp. 469, 470.
[^43] Ibid, pp. 567-8.
[^44] Ibid, p. 475.
[^45] Ibid, pp. 500-1.
[^46] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for May 24th, 1858, pp. 567-8. Also Woodruff's Journal, entry for 25th of May, 1858.
[^47] Ibid.
[^48] Ibid, p. 568.
[^49] Ibid. Houston's speech referred to will be found in Congressional Globe, 35th Congress, 1st Session, pt. i, pp. 873-5, 25th Feb., 1858, also in part, this History, chapter cvii. Houston said: "They [i. e. the 'Mormons'] will fight; and if they fight he [Johnston] will get miserably whipped." For further comment by Senator Houston upon the probable results of a war with the "Mormons," see Note I, end of chapter cviii. Doubtless the senator's views upon the advantages that he supposed were with the people of Utah, in the event of war, were extravagant; but they were shared by many other people, and it was to the advantage of the saints that such was the case. Many others, and among them Colonel Johnston, held other views, and regarded the resistance that the people of Utah could make as not very formidable. Happily the issue of opinion thus joined, never came to trial.
[^50] Thomas Bullock writing from Chimney Rock,—some distance east of Fort Bridger,—while en route for Salt Lake City, wrote the editor of the Millennial Star, under date of 27th of May, as follows: * * * I understand that hell is at Fort Bridger, and we don't want to go there. The soldiers were as mad as devils when Colonel Kane and his escort passed through their midst; and they have made two attempts to kill the colonel, but have failed" (Millennial Star, vol. xx, p. 476).
[^51] Millennial Star, vol. xx, p. 467. Murdock's Biographical Sketch, Tanner, 1909, ch. vii.
