B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

402CHAPTER CXIII

402PRESS CRITICISM IN THE UNITED STATES AND IN EUROPE ON THE BUCHANAN ADMINISTRATION FOR ITS COURSE TOWARDS UTAH

402MEANTIME important events had been happening in the east. President Buchanan found his administration severely criticized for sending an army to Utah without first ascertaining by an official investigation whether or not there was any occasion for such a spectacular movement. [^1]

GENERAL SCOTT'S OBJECTIONS TO THE "UTAH EXPEDITION"

It is now known that Lieutenant General Winfield Scott did not approve of sending the army to Utah at all, on "the general ground of inexpediency," and especially because the season at which it was concluded to send the army "was too late for the troops to reach their destination in comfort or even in safety; he expressed the belief that the movement was inaugurated merely to give occasion for large contracts and expenditures, that is, to open a wide field for fraud and peculation;" but he exonorates Governor Cumming, General Johnston and the army officers generally from both knowledge of, and complicity in, the scheme.

"The 'Expedition' set on foot by Mr. Secretary Floyd, in 1857, against the Mormons and Indians about Salt Lake, was, beyond a doubt, to give occasion for large contracts and expenditures, that is, to open a wide field for frauds and peculation. This purpose was not comprehended nor scarcely suspected in, perhaps, a year; but, observing the desperate characters who frequented the secretary, some of whom had desks near him, suspicion was at length excited. Scott protested against the 'Expedition' on the general ground of inexpediency, and especially because the season was too late for the troops to reach their destination in comfort or even safety. Particular facts, observed by different officers, if united, would prove the imputation. The governor of the territory, Mr. Cumming; the commander of the troops, Brigadier General A. S. Johnston, and our officers, stood above all suspicion of complicity." [^2] In the book, Mr. Buchanan's Administration on the Eve of the Rebellion, Mr. Buchanan is represented as being no little surprised to learn that General Scott "had protested against the 'Utah Expedition.'" The president could not have inferred the "existence of any such protest;" and the author further claims that "most certainly Mr. Buchanan, until he read the autobiography [of Scott], never learned that General Scott had protested against the 'Utah Expedition.'" [^3] On the contrary "General Scott explicitly states that they, (the instructions to the 'Utah Expedition') had been prepared in concert with the war department and sanctioned by its authority whenever required." [^4] The book, Mr. Buchanan's Administration on the Eve of the Rebellion does not give the name of the author, but being published by the Appletons, is a guarantee of a reliable work. It may be that the protest of General Scott was expressed only to the secretary of war, his immediate head in the military department, and had no further hearing; but we must needs accept the statement of his Memoirs or question the veracity of a man who, while possessed of many foibles in character, was nevertheless possessed of the soldierly quality of a high sense of honor, of which truthfulness is necessarily the basis.

SENATOR WILSON AND THE METROPOLITAN PRESS DEMAND AN INVESTIGATION

We have already seen that General Harney had no stomach for the Utah enterprise, and that very likely he induced his friend, Governor Walker, to represent to the war department that his presence was so necessary in Kansas that he should be relieved of the command of the "Utah Expedition;" though lateness in starting, and the fears of General Harney of the rigors of a probable winter in the mountains, are assigned as the reasons for this manifest reluctance.

404Senator Henry Wilson of Massachusetts, in the senate of the United States, as early as January 27th, 1858, introduced a joint resolution authorizing the appointment of a commissioner to examine into the "Mormon" difficulties "with a view to their adjustment;" and although this resolution was referred to the senate committee on military affairs, and was never heard of again, [^5] yet the New York Tribune took up the matter, and commented at length upon Mr. Wilson's resolution, showing that the country at large was very much in need of ascertaining by "thorough investigation the grounds upon which we [i. e. the United States] stand, and a distinct settlement in our own minds of what precisely we intend to do, and the means and methods which we propose to employ;" and adding: "as yet, as to all these points, there prevails both in the public mind and at Washington, upon this subject, nothing but the most vague ideas." The Tribune reminds the administration that "the vast expense which must attend the maintenance of our army in Utah, not to mention the horrors of civil war, and the desperate character of the resistance which the Mormons threaten to oppose to the entrance of the troops, affords abundant reason why the necessity of this operation should be fully established and its object clearly explained." [^6]

405But previous to this, when the news of "Mormon" resistance to the army by burning the grass of the ranges, and also burning some of the supply trains, reached the east, very widespread and severe criticism was made of the government's course, not only in sending the army so late upon its long march to Salt Lake valley, but going beyond that into an inquiry as to why it was sent at all. A correspondent of the New York Herald, under date of November 12th, wrote:

405"Justice to the gallant men who have been ordered on this needlessly desperate service, requires that the plain unvarnished facts should go out to the country; so that, in the event of a disgraceful catastrophe (which from all appearances, does not seem improbable), the public may know with whom to settle the account." [^7]

405On the 23d of December, Mr. Warren, representative from the state of Arkansas, moved the adoption of a resolution directing an inquiry into the propriety of excluding Utah's delegate from a seat in the house on account of "the territory being in a state of rebellion against the United States;" whereupon the New York Daily Times points out that this was improper procedure, and adds:

405"This action strikes us as being much more hasty than wise. It is like most of the anti-Mormon movements—the result of impulse rather than good policy or common sense. It would puzzle ordinary men, we suspect, to explain why a hostile army was sent against Utah at the outset. There were undoubted disorders in the affairs of the territory; but it has never yet been shown that they were such as could only be remedied by fire and sword. * * * The whole Utah business has been mismanaged in the most extraordinary manner from the beginning; and if it does not end in open and bloody rebellion, it is not likely to be saved from that issue by any special wisdom on the part of the general government." [^8]

The New York Tribune commenting on a letter received from its own Utah correspondent, dated Nov. 5th, and therefore depicting conditions attending the "Expedition" at their worst, said:

406"The annals of military operations are sufficiently full of disastrous blunders; but they will scarcely furnish a more striking instance of the kind than this sending of two thousand men a thousand miles into the wilderness, to pass the winter at that dreary place. For any purpose of operating against the Mormons, these troops would have been a hundred times better posted, had they remained in Kansas. A start from Kansas early in the spring would have brought them to Salt Lake City by midsummer,—quite as soon as they can expect to arrive there now, even if the cold, and the Mormons, and the diet of lean beef, which forms the chief part of their rations, should leave them, when the spring opens, with numbers, strength, or spirit for the enterprise."

406Again, the Tribune said:

406"Had it been the object of the government to encourage Brigham Young to oppose the entrance of the troops into Utah, and to aid the Mormon leaders in working up the fanaticism of their deluded followers to the highest pitch of desperate resolution, they could hardly have chosen a method of procedure better adapted to that end. If the troops, according to the original plan, had pushed forward in the spring and arrived in Utah by July, as they might and should have done, it is not likely that any resistance would have been opposed to their entrance into the country, or that the civil officers would have found any serious difficulty in entering upon the formal discharge of their duties."

406After this the same great Journal proceeds to point out that the administration had exposed itself to the suspicion that it never intended any movement against the "Mormons" at all, but that its "fell purpose" was to coerce the freestate men of Kansas to accept the policy of the administration for the admission of Kansas as a slave state. Following is the passage from the Tribune:

406"The political exigencies of Kansas, and the retention of the troops in that territory to aid in keeping down the freestate men, and sustaining the border-ruffian regime, having interfered with this movement [i. e. the early departure of the troops for Utah], evidently the true policy would have been to have held back the troops for the winter. In that case, the Mormons, would probably have regarded the 'Expedition' as abandoned. At all events the interval might have been employed in disseminating among them a more correct idea of the real object of the enterprise; and when the army moved forward in the spring, it might have been in such force as to deter the Mormon leaders from the idea of an armed resistance.

407Instead of either of these reasonable courses, finding itself exposed to the suspicion of never having really intended any movement against the Mormons, the government undertook to relieve itself from that charge by precipitating the troops, just at the beginning of the winter, into a position where they can do no good, where they are exposed to suffer greatly, and in which, worn down and diminished in strength and numbers, as they necessarily must be by a winter spent in cantonments under such circumstances, should the Mormons attack them in the spring, they may have great difficulty to maintain themselves till supplies and reinforcements can come up.

407In addition to all the other criticisms to which this unlucky winter encampment at Fort Bridger lies open, in the present state of the federal treasury, the expense of it is not to be overlooked. The exceedingly heavy cost of transportating to such a distance and through such a country a six or eight months' supply for two thousand men will be entirely thrown away." [^9]

407Referring again to the subject in January, the Tribune said:

407"The government at Washington, by its shameful mismanagement of this whole 'Expedition,' has placed Colonel Johnston and his whole army in this dangerous position. What does that government intend to do by way of getting them out of it? Does it intend to leave these two thousand men, or such of them as may survive the winter, to be cut to pieces by the Mormons in the spring? If not, something ought to be done at once for their relief and reinforcements. Merely issuing orders for new troops to hold themselves in readiness to march in the spring does not at all meet the necessities of the case. Long before these troops could arrive, it might be all over with the force they were sent to relieve. The responsibility of this whole business rests upon the government, and a very serious responsibility it is. Should Colonel Johnston and his two thousand men come to any harm, their blood will rest upon the heads of those who placed them in their present position." [^10]

On the 27th of January, a resolution introduced by Mr. Zollicoffer of Tennessee, was passed by a unanimous vote in the national house of representatives requesting the president to submit to the house the information which gave rise to the military "Expedition" to Utah, together with the orders and correspondence; and on the 26th of February this information was sent to the house by the president. When it was published the New York Herald remarked that the documents "contain nothing of importance on the subject that is not familiar to the public." [^11]

408The New York Times commenting on the Zollicoffer resolution the day following its introduction, said:

408"We are very glad to learn that a resolution was adopted yesterday in congress, on the motion of Mr. Zollicoffer, of Tennessee, calling on the president for information in relation to the difficulty with the Mormons, as to the causes for the 'Utah Expedition,' and whether Brigham Young is actually in a state of rebellion or resistance to the United States authorities. The resolution will probably elicit some highly interesting information, and furnish the people with satisfactory reasons for the extraordinary preparations which appear to be on foot for sending a great military force to Salt Lake City. * * *

408The general feeling of the people of the Union in all sections, and of all sects and parties, is so decidedly adverse to the Mormons that the government is not likely to be held to a very strict account for its acts towards them, even though they should be utterly exterminated, or driven from their present resting place. * * * We are very glad, therefore, that Mr. Zollicoffer has asked for more light on the subject, and we await the president's reply to the call with no small degree of interest." [^12]

408The Times would doubtless share the disappointment and the disgust of the Herald, expressed above, when the documents were published.

408In the senate during the discussion of a proposed bill to increase the regular army—which was mainly urged on the ground of necessity because of the unsettled state of affairs in Utah—the administration was subjected to criticism for the course pursued towards Utah. Senator Sam Houston, of Texas, already quoted in a previous chapter and on another phase of the subject said:

"I am opposed to the increase of the regular army; and if it is intended for the Mormons, I tell you that we cannot wait two years to raise troops to subdue them. If they have to be subdued—and God defend us from such a result—and the valley of Salt Lake is to be ensanguined with the blood of American citizens, I think it will be one of the most fearful calamities that has befallen this country, from its inception to the present moment. I deprecate it as an intolerable evil. I am satisfied that the executive has not had the information he ought to have had on this subject before making such a movement as he has directed to be made. I am convinced that facts have been concealed from him. I think his wisdom and patriotism should have dictated the propriety of ascertaining, in the first place, whether the people of Utah were willing to submit to the authority of the United States. Why not send to them men to whom they could unbosom themselves, and see whether they would say, 'We are ready to submit to the authorities of the United States, if you send to us honest men and gentlemen, whose morals, whose wisdom, and whose character, comport with the high station they fill; we will surrender to them; we will give up our (political) authority, and act in obedience to the laws of the United States.' If this course had been taken by the executive, I am sure he would never have recommended war; and if the facts had been before the secretary of war, I am sure he never would have made the recommendation which he has submitted to us." [^13]

409There can be no question, then, but what the Buchanan administration was sharply criticised for its action in sending an army to Utah without previous official investigation of the alleged misconduct on the part of the Latter-day Saints and their leaders; and that criticism during the winter grew sharper as the scandals about the contracts for army supplies and their shipment across the plains began to develop; [^14] and again sharper when news of the "Mormon Exodus from Utah" reached the east, and the public mind was made to realize the seriousness of the administration's blunder in sending troops to Utah. [^15]

Early in February dispatches were sent from Washington to the New York Herald reporting that Utah's delegate to congress, Dr. Bernhisel, had held several long consultations with President Buchanan, in which he had proposed that the army should be withdrawn from Utah and that a commission be dispatched to the territory to arrange for the settlement of its difficulties. It was said that the president "rejected rather than received the proposition which Bernhisel made in virtue of his power as delegate from Utah, and not pursuant of instructions from Governor Young." [^16]

410Two days later the Washington correspondent of the Herald wrote:

410"That propositions for the prevention of hostilities in Utah have been seriously talked over with the president is unquestionable, and that he would accede to honorable arrangements by which the effusion of blood could be spared is a matter on which I can entertain no manner of doubt. * * * If President Buchanan can get rid of the Mormons by negotiation, instead of by the sword, he will find many to sustain him in this measure. However much the Mormons may be despised, and however much their doctrines may be abhorred, fratricidal war is repugnant to the feelings, and only a dire alternative which finds approbation when every other means have failed. Many who anticipated a job, and counted on the part of the spoils to be gathered from fitting out 'Expedition' after 'Expedition,' with all the paraphernalia of war, the subsistence of troops, etc., may be disappointed and cry out war, war, still more lustily; but the satisfaction of those who have no such hopes, and who would undoubtedly be called upon to replenish the treasury to the tune of forty or fifty millions before the war was ended, as that sum has frequently been named in connection with this prospective war, will be a compensation to outbalance the disappointment of the former. Again: who can calculate the amount of misery which would, as a matter of consequence, befall thousands of harmless women and children, should that territory be put to the sword. * * * It is probably premature to speak of withdrawing the troops; but that hostilities may be retarded to permit of the last effort being made to settle peaceably the difficulty, by vacating the territory or by some other compromise, is neither impossible nor improbable. You would be astonished to see how many favor this new move." [^17]

THE APPOINTING OF A PEACE COMMISSION FOR UTAH

It may be that President Buchanan rejected proposals from Bernhisel early in February, but later he evidently thought better of them; at least so far as to appoint a Peace Commission to effect a settlement of affairs in Utah; for in April, President Buchanan appointed as Peace Commissioners to Utah Messrs. L. W. Powell, who had lately been governor of the state of Kentucky, and was now United States senator-elect from that state; and Major Ben McCulloch, of Texas, who had served with distinction in the war with Mexico. The president entrusted them with a signed "Proclamation of Pardon," bearing the date of the sixth of April, 1858. It recited at considerable length the offenses popularly alleged against the Latter-day Saints and their church leaders, declaring them to be in a state of "rebellion" and "treason," yet "in order to save the effusion of blood, and to avoid the indiscriminate punishment of a whole people for crimes of which it is not probable that all are equally guilty," he offered "a free pardon to all who will submit themselves to the authority of the federal government." As this action was taken before the possibility of the reception of the news in the east that Colonel Kane had succeeded in bringing Governor Cumming into Salt Lake City without troops, and having him "everywhere recognized as the governor of Utah;" [^18] and before the news could possibly have reached the east that President Young had inaugurated the desertion of Utah by the Latter-day Saints—threatened as a possibility from the beginning of hostilities—the action in appointing this Peace Commission, could have been caused by no other consideration than that rising storm of public criticism, awakened first by the spirited resistance of the people of Utah under the leadership of Brigham Young; and deepened when it became known that the saints were actually deserting their settlements, with every preparation made to lay waste their country and leave it a fire-blackened desolation.

411THE QUESTION OF "TREASON" AND "REBELLION" ON THE PART OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS

Of course, technically speaking, the issuance of President Young's proclamation forbidding the army for Utah to enter Utah territory, or if it had entered to lay down its arms and return by the route it had come; and following this by the overt acts of burning the ranges, running off the army stock and burning its supply trains—by which its very existence was put in jeopardy—all this, I say, laid the people of Utah open the charge of "treason" and "rebellion;" but the question to be considered by the reader and the student of history is: Were they fairly open to such a charge before the army was started on its march to Utah? The situation briefly stated was this: Here is a community against whom, it is true, are alleged many offenses—but the charges are made by very questionable characters—and none of the charges previous to the appearance of the army upon the scene by any stretch of interpretation could have been made to reach the bad eminence of "treason" or "rebellion;" and, moreover, the truth of these charges was stoutly denied by the saints, and an investigation demanded by them. Then without investigation and without official notification of its intention—much less explanation of its purpose—the administration sends an army to Utah, which by popular rumor, by declaration of the press of the country, as well as by the braggadocio of the teamsters and camp followers, the purpose of the army for Utah is declared to be to make a war of conquest upon the saints, to whip them into submission, to crush out a "rebellion" which, up to that time, really had no existence. The church leaders, instructed by sad experience, by these threatening portents, were made apprehensive of the loss of their liberties, of the destruction of their homes, of the sacking of their towns and settlements, of the violation of the chastity of their women, of their community existence. Fearful of these direful calamities, Governor Young declared the approaching army a mob and proposed treating it as such; his people to a man sustained his position; and the army was so regarded and so treated. Then the saints are proclaimed "traitors" and "rebels." Be it so. But the truth known, their "rebellion" and "treason" shall be to them titles of honor, since they were acquired not in seeking the overthrow of the federal government, nor to establish anarchy, but—from their viewpoint—to preserve their liberties, to perpetuate the American principle of home rule, to defend the purity and integrity of their homes, to maintain religious freedom, and to establish for themselves and their posterity the right of community existence.

In this connection it should also be said, that while the orders issued to captains in the field directing them when raiding the stock herds or burning trains of the "Expedition" "to take no life," except in self-defense, may not be regarded as eliminating the element of actual war from the resistance to the advance of the army into Salt Lake valley; nor, strictly speaking, does it eliminate the element of "treason"—since treason is declared by the Constitution itself to consist in levying war against the United States, or in adhering to their enemies or giving them aid or comfort; nor can the "shed-no-blood" clause argue that bloodshed is necessary to rebellion or treason; but all this does indicate that there was an absence of desire to shed the blood of their fellowmen, that they would, if they could, avoid coming to sword thrusts with the general government. The order, doubtless, grew out of that generally accepted idea that the taking of human life is the deed which always characterizes the beginning of civil warfare. As the New York Tribune said at the time:

"In point of law, the shedding or not shedding of blood might make no difference. In point of sentiment and feeling, and of action stimulated by sentiment and feeling, it makes a great deal. Hence, in these cases, it is always a great point to throw the responsibility of the first bloodshed on the opposite party. Brigham Young has sense enough to know that, great as is the existing antipathy against him and his people, a conflict commenced by his orders, in which the blood of United States soldiers should flow, would greatly aggravate it. On the other hand, it may be found that extreme proceedings against Major Taylor, [a Utah militia officer captured by United States troops and at the time held a prisoner], who, it seems, is charged with high treason, as having been one of the party concerned in stopping and burning the provision wagons, will produce a state of feeling in the Mormons which, perhaps, in the present position of the troops, might as well not be precipitated." [^19]

THE EMPHASIZED EARNESTNESS OF THE SAINTS

Governor Young's Proclamation, which designated the United States army for Utah as a mob, and forbade its entrance into the territory, or, if it had already crossed its borders, then to depart by the way it came; followed as it was by steps to hinder the army's progress towards Salt Lake City by burning the grass before it, running off its stock and burning its trains—in themselves acts of war—gave to the world evidence of the terrible earnestness of the saints in resisting an infringement of their rights as American citizens, and what they regarded as a menace to their community existence. If Brigham Young and his followers had the daring to take these war-like measures, which put the forces under General Johnston at their mercy, and exhibited the blundering of an American administration to the world, it was a moral certainty that the saints would go the rest of the way with their program of resistance: they would lay waste their country, flee to the desert, perish by thousands it might be, but they would leave the shame of it to those who had pursued them with military terrors; they would leave the great republic of the western world, to be arraigned before the civilization of an age of boasted religious freedom and Christian enlightenment. Fronted with these great, moral responsibilities there was no other thing for the Buchanan administration to do than to seek a peaceful solution of the Utah troubles by abandoning everything like an armed conquest of the people, and grant them pardon of their offenses, fancied or real.

Hence the Peace Commission for Utah. [^20] And in that remarkable change of public sentiment towards the Latter-day Saints, which made the Commission possible, and led the press of the country that but a short time before looked complacently upon the prospect of the "Mormon question" being settled by a famine [^21]—occasioned by a combination of drought and a plague of grasshoppers, by which the people would be destroyed—to the attitude of defending them against the injustice of the Buchanan administration, and so censuring that administration that its policy was changed (abundantly made apparent in the text of this chapter, and supplemented by the quotations from leading journals in the Note following this chapter)—the Latter-day Saints of that period saw the hand of the Lord plainly manifested in their deliverance in a manner most remarkable. So remarkable, indeed, that it has no parallel save only in the softening of the Egyptian Pharaoh's heart towards ancient Israel, that they might accomplish Jehovah's purposes. [^22] Relating to a local event in its early experience the church had a direct promise of this kind; and one can see no reason why the principle and promise should not be expanded to meet more general conditions of hazard and impending danger, such as the peril involved in the events dealt with in this "Utah War" episode. The local event referred to was in connection with the expulsion of the saints from Jackson county, and their course of action pending arrangements for their return to the lands from which they had been driven:—

415"And behold, I [the Lord] will give unto you favor and grace in their eyes [i. e. in the eyes of the people of Clay county, Mo.], that you may rest in peace and safety, while you are saying unto the people, 'Execute judgment and justice for us according to law, and redress us of our wrongs.' * * * And I will soften the hearts of the people, as I did the heart of Pharaoh, from time to time, until my servant, Joseph Smith, Jun., and mine elders, whom I have appointed, shall have time to gather up the strength of my house." [^23]

NOTE

CRITICISM OF THE FEDERAL ADMINISTRATION FOR SENDING THE ARMY TO UTAH, AFTER THE NEWS THAT THE THREATENED "MORMON" EXODUS FROM UTAH HAD BEGUN REACHED THE EAST

After describing the settlements in the north part of the territory that had been abandoned, the New York Tribune said:

416"All these settlements, built up in the course of ten or eleven years by the untiring industry of the Mormons, are now in the progress of abandonment, and decreed, on the advancement of the troops into the valley, total destruction. It is probable, also, though that does not yet distinctly appear, that this abandonment extends to the line of settlements along the shores of Utah Lake, some sixty miles south of Salt Lake City, and of which Provo, containing about four thousand inhabitants, is the principal.

416Where these unhappy people are to go, or what is to become of them, does not appear. They are moving south; but, so far as we know, there are in that direction no inhabitable tracts of any considerable extent within seven hundred miles of their late settlements. So extraordinary a migration is hardly paralleled in history. The depopulation of Acadia, a hundred years ago—strong political reasons as there were for it—has not left a very fragrant odor behind it. The driving of the Mormons from their homes, by military terror, will hardly contribute much to the honor of the country, or to the posthumous reputation of Mr. Buchanan's presidency." [^24]

416About a month later the Tribune remarked:

416"He (Governor Cumming) is evidently very little pleased with the idea of being left governor of a deserted territory, from which the inhabitants had fled at his approach. He exhibits much anxiety to put a stop to the migration of the Mormons. * * * Should the Mormons execute their threat of burning Salt Lake City and abandoning that part of the territory, it may be questioned whether, so far as facilities are concerned for overland communication between the Mississippi valley and the Pacific, anything would be gained by the change. There can be no question that the Mormon settlement has proved a great convenience to travel by that route; and, taking as true all the charges and complaints which have been made against the Mormons, it may well be doubted whether the sort of population which would be likely to succeed them would be found more hospitable or less exacting. To anybody but the Mormons, the Salt Lake valley could hold out little attraction, except as a convenient station for levying a heavy tribute on the travel to and from California; and it is very doubtful whether the miscellaneous vagabonds of the prairies, into whose occupancy the valley would be likely to fall, might not soon become much more obnoxious to travelers by that route than the Mormons ever have been." [^25]

417The New York Times, two days later, said:

417"Governor Cumming seems to have treated the Mormons kindly, but with a good degree of frankness and of firmness. His tone was very different from that observed by Colonel Johnston, in his negotiations at the head of the army,—being much more respectful and conciliatory, and much better calculated to win the confidence and command the assent of the Mormon community. In fact, the whole military movement against them seems to have been a blunder, and to have accomplished nothing. * * * If President Buchanan had begun operations by sending the governor alone, or by sending his ridiculous 'Peace Commission,' and said nothing about an army until these endeavors had been repulsed, there is no great reason to doubt that he would have attained the same result, and saved some ten or twelve millions of dollars to the federal treasury.

417* * * The Union [an administrative newspaper] will find it difficult to manufacture any great amount of glory for its employers out of the 'Utah War.' Their 'energy' has been mainly shown in rolling up a mountain of expense, without having the slightest possible advantage to show for it.

417It is impossible to read Governor Cumming's dispatch without feelings of pity and almost respect for the fanatics who were leaving their homes and plunging into the remote wilderness, to avoid what they were evidently sincere in regarding as tyranny and oppression on the part of the government. Governor Cumming himself was evidently impressed by their earnestness, and by no means inclined to underrate the resistance they would have offered to the violent coercion of the army." [^26]

417Three days later the Times returned to the subject:

417No dispassionate person, whatever his political partialities, can fail to see that the various enterprises undertaken by Mr. Buchanan do not seem to prosper in his hands. * * * The Mormon war was as promising a little quarrel as ever an enterprising statesman gloated over. It contained every element of success and popularity. Impudent imposture, murders, rapes, polygamy, treason, intrusion on the United States' territory, defiance to the government and to public opinion—nothing was wanting to convert our venerable president into a glorious crusader on behalf of law, order, morality, and national dignity. The pudding was full of plums. It, too, has failed him. Even Brigham the prophet has not turned out as well as was expected, and refuses to be a traitor. * * *

417The latest news from Utah places the administration in a position marked by a singular mixture of farce and tragedy, and the whole story of the war is crowded by as much ignorance, stupidity, and dishonesty as any government ever managed to get in the annals of a single year. An army was sent to chastise rebels before it was clearly ascertained whether or not there were any rebels to chastise.

* * * Whatever our opinions may be of Mormon morals or Mormon manners, there can be no question that this voluntary and even cheerful abandonment by 40,000 people of homes created by wonderful industry, in the midst of trackless wastes, after years of hardship and persecution, is something from which no one who has a particle of sympathy with pluck, fortitude, and constancy can withhold his admiration. Right or wrong, sincerity thus attested is not a thing to be sneered at. True or false, a faith to which so many men and women prove their loyalty, by such sacrifices, is a force in the world. After this last demonstration of what fanaticism can do, we think it would be most unwise to treat Mormonism as a nuisance to be abated by a posse comitatus. It is no longer a social excrescence to be cut off by the sword; it is a power to be combatted by the most skillful, political, and moral treatment. When people abandon their homes to plunge with women and children into a wilderness, to seek new settlements, they know not where, they give a higher proof of courage than if they fought for them. When the Dutch submerged Holland, to save it from invaders, they had heartier plaudits showered on them than if they had fertilized its soil with their blood. We have certainly the satisfaction of knowing that we have to deal with foemen worthy of our steel.

418However this singular affair may end, nothing can release us from the responsibility we have incurred in it. * * * If the conduct of the recent operations has had the effect of strengthening their fanaticism, by the appearance of persecution, without convincing them of our good faith and good intentions, and, worse still, has been the means of driving away 50,000 of our fellow citizens from fields which their labors had reclaimed and cultivated, and round which their affections were clustered, we have something serious to answer for. Were we not guilty of a culpable oversight in confounding the insubordination of conscientious fanaticism with the insubordination of ribald license or ambition, and applying to the one same harsh treatment which the law intends for the latter alone? Was it right to send troops composed of the wildest and most rebellious men of the community, commanded by men like Harney and Johnston, to deal out fire and sword upon people whose faults ever were the result of honest religious convictions? Was it right to allow Colonel Johnston to address letters to Brigham Young, and through him to his people, couched in the tone of an implacable conqueror towards ruthless savages? Were the errors which mistaken zeal generates ever cured by such means as these? And have bayonets and cannon ever been used against the poorest and weakest sect that ever crouched behind a wall to pray or weep, without rendering their faith more intense, and investing the paltriest discomforts with the dignity of sacrifice?" [^27]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Letter of the Commissioners to the secretary of war, April 25th. (House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pp. 163-4).
[^2] The windows had been taken out of the "Council House," as indeed they had been from most of the houses in Salt Lake City in the "move south" to preserve them. Those of the "Council House" were replaced before the beginning of the meeting on the 11th (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry June, 1858, p. 622).
[^3] Original Notes of Minutes of the Meeting with the Commissioners, File of Documents, marked "Powell," etc., 1858, Historian's Office.
[^4] Minutes of the Council, History of Brigham Young, Ms., June 11th, 1858, p. 630.
[^5] See Original Notes of Minutes of the Meeting with Commissioners, Files of Documents, marked "Powell," etc., for 1858, Historian's Office.
[^6] History of Brigham Young, Ms., June 9th, 1858, p. 662.
[^7] Johnston during the winter had been made brigadier general by nomination of the president and confirmation by the senate, "Uniform discretion manifested in his command of the 'Utah Expedition,'" being the ground of the promotion.
[^8] The Utah Expedition, Atlantic Monthly, April, 1859, p. 486.
[^9] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 11th June, 1858, p. 629. This incident has been grossly exaggerated and given dramatic and untruthful from it. Tullidge's Life of Brigham Young, and his History of Salt Lake City—in the former, chapter xx; in the latter, chapter xxiv.
[^10] The correspondence will be found in full in House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii, pp. 114 and 116.
[^11] Minutes of the Conference in History of Brigham Young, Ms., 11th of June, 1858, p. 630.
[^12] President Young had asked Governor Cumming at one of his interruptions if he could be kept still until the halter was put round his neck. To which that gentleman answered, "surely not!" "Neither would you, Major McCulloch," said President Young. Then came McCulloch's objection to having the government spoken against. (Minutes of the Meeting as above).
[^13] Original Notes of the Minutes of the Meeting, Church Documents of June, 1858, file in Historian's Office; also History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry of June 11th, 1858.
[^14] "President Buchanan sent by them [i. e. the Commissioners] a proclamation. accusing us of treason and some fifty other crimes, all of which were false." (Wilford Woodruff's Journal, entry 11th June, 1858.) "This proclamation contains forty-two false charges into which he [Buchanan] has refused, up to this time, to make the least inquiry or investigation" (Speech of George A. Smith before the Commissioners, History of Brigham Young, Ms., June, 1858, p. 642).
[^15] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 11th June, 1858, p. 635.
[^16] Messages and Papers of the Presidents, vol. v, pp. 493-5.
[^17] John Kay sang "Ocean Shells," and "To the Land of the West;" Erastus Snow, "White Canoe," and "Wives, Children and Friends;" W. C. Dunbar sang, "Do What is Right," or as recorded in the minutes, "God Will Protect Us in Doing What's Right" (Original Notes of Minutes, Documents, etc., file of 1858.)
[^18] The speaker has reference here to the plan that was made in Echo canon to flood part of the canon to make it impassable.
[^19] The speech complete will be found in History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for June 12th, 1858, pp. 639-653.
[^20] Original Notes of Minutes in Filed Documents, June, 1858.
[^21] Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry for June 12th, 1858.
[^22] Minutes of Conference with Commissioners in History of Brigham Young, Ms., June 12th, 1858, pp. 653-4. Later at Provo, in remarks at a public meeting, on the same subject, President Young said: "We have no shirt collar dignity to sustain, for we have no character [i. e. reputation] only such as our friends and enemies give us: it is only a shadow and we are willing that they should have the shadow, and make the name of our president [Buchanan] honorable if we can." (Discourse at Provo, June 27th, 1858, Deseret News, vol. viii, p. 86).
[^23] See Original Notes of Minutes, p. 8, Church Documents, file of 1858. "Zion" is a thrillingly heroic "Mormon" song, written in the spirit of the times by Elder Charles W. Penrose, then a young, active missionary in England, who had not at the time been in Utah or America, but he later became a member of the quorum of the twelve apostles (1904); and a member of the first presidency (1911); and still later first counselor (1913). Two of the stanzas, and one of the refrains, whence the song gets its name, "Zion," follow:
[^24] Letter of Commissioners to the Secretary of War, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii, pp. 167-8.
[^25] House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii. pp. 168-172.
[^26] See correspondence to the New York Herald, letter dated Salt Lake City, 2nd July, 1858; also History of Brigham Young, Ms., 31st July, 1858, pp. 841-2.
[^27] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry of July 3rd, 1858, pp. 761-2; also pp. 759-760.
