B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

419CHAPTER CXIV

419PEACE COMMISSIONERS FOR UTAH AGREED UPON—PRESIDENT BUCHANAN'S "PROCLAMATION OF PARDON"

419THE Peace Commissioners appointed by President Buchanan left Fort Leavenworth for Salt Lake City, on the 25th of April, 1858. At St. Louis they had selected five ambulances and harness which were shipped to the point of their departure across the plains. Their party consisted of a sergeant and five dragoons, a wagonmaster, five teamsters, and a guide. Each ambulance was drawn by four mules; they also had three saddle horses to relieve the monotony of riding in the ambulances. They had but little baggage and were able to carry sufficient forage for their teams from point to point. They found the ambulances so comfortable as sleeping apartments that they did not carry tents. Such the outfit with which they made the entire journey to Salt Lake City. [^1]

ARRIVAL OF THE COMMISSION AT CAMP SCOTT AND SALT LAKE

The Commissioners arrived at Camp Scott on the 29th of May, where they remained three days, learning all they could from that point of the recent happenings in Utah. And there was much for them to learn, for at the time of their departure from the Missouri frontiers nothing was known of the success of Colonel Kane's mission. On the 7th of June they reached Salt Lake City, and were astonished at its extent, and at the fact that it was practically deserted, most of the inhabitants, with the church leaders, having joined in the "move south," and had proceeded on their journey as far as Provo, where they were quartered either in the homes of their friends or in temporary board shanties. Word was sent to them of the arrival of the Commissioners and something concerning the nature of their mission and the desire they had for consultation with the leading men of the church. Accordingly a large number of the church leaders and their immediate friends returned to Salt Lake City, and arrangements were made for a meeting at the "Old Council House," [^2] at 9 a.m., on the 11th of June.

THE COMMISSION IN SESSION AT SALT LAKE

There was a large attendance of leading brethren at the council; Governor Cumming and the new superintendent of Indian affairs, Jacob Forney, were in attendance with the Commissioners. The visitors were seated by President Young on the dais of the court room hall, while himself and associate church leaders occupied seats on the floor of the hall facing them. President Young, acting as the master of ceremonies, introduced the Commissioners to the assembly "who rose to their feet and received them respectfully." [^3] During the meeting the gentlemen to both sides of the consultation kept their seats. [^4]

That morning when on his way to the meeting President Young had met Porter Rockwell, who had just arrived as an express from Echo canon, with the word that General Johnston "had given orders to his army to march on Monday"—14th of June [^5]—for Salt Lake City. As soon therefore as the council meeting with the Commissioners was organized, President Young announced his information to the Commissioners, who denied the likelihood of such an occurrence. They had before disclaimed that any control of the movements of the military "Expedition to Utah" had been given to them; but before leaving Camp Scott arrangements had been made by them that the army would not move in its march to Salt Lake valley until its commander should hear from them from Salt Lake City, a statement that was confirmed by Governor Cumming; [^6] but, according to the Atlantic Monthly writer, the Commissioners "urged General Johnston [^7] not to delay the advance of the army one moment beyond the time when he should be ready and desire to march." [^8] The likelihood of the former arrangement being the understanding receives support from the fact that when Brigham Young made the above announcement to the Commissioners, "Commissioner Powell assured Governor Young that it would cost Johnston his commission if he should move without authority from them." [^9]

421As a matter of fact, and notwithstanding the incredulity of the Commissioners, General Johnston had given such an order and acted upon it. It became the subject of a spirited correspondence between Governor Cumming and the general. On 15th of June Governor Cumming wrote General Johnston:

421THE CUMMING-JOHNSTON CORRESPONDENCE

421"On the 11th and 12th of June a conference was held between the president and leaders of the Church of Latter-day Saints and the Peace Commissioners. I was present at the conference by invitation, and heard a statement made by President Young to this effect: that he had evidence of your intention to advance the army on the 14th or 15th of this month, without awaiting for communications from the Commissioners or myself.

421To this statement I gave a prompt and positive denial, alleging that General Johnston would not violate a pledge made by him to the Commissioners and to myself, on the 30th of May, at Camp Scott.

Secretary Hartnett, [the new secretary of the territory], who left Fort Bridger on Friday, the 11th, being the first day of the conference at Great Salt Lake City, arrived here on Sunday, the 13th instant, and, to my great surprise, informed me that you had requested him to inform the Commissioners and myself of your intention to take up the line of march for this city on the 15th of June.

422At the time when this communication was made to Secretary Hartnett the conference had only commenced, you could therefore not have received any communication from the Commissioners or myself. We should necessarily wait to know the result of the conference before communicating with you. I earnestly request that you will make such disclosures as may be made without detriment to the public service which may enable me to reconcile the apparent discrepancy between my statement and that recently communicated through Mr. Hartnett.

422I am aware that you will probably have received communications from the Commissioners announcing the termination of the conference previous to the day appointed for your departure from camp, but this does not affect the question. I stated to President Young that you were pledged not to march until you had received communications from the Commissioners or myself, that you had told me that you would issue a proclamation setting forth your intentions."

422To this Johnston answered on the 19th of June:

422"Sir, Your letter of the 15th instant was received today. At the conference with the Commissioners at your tent—it being understood that I could not commence the march from Fort Bridger before the arrival of the supplies, and that the preparation for the march, depending upon their arrival, could not probably be made before the 15th or 20th instant, and understanding from them that they believed before that time they would be able to ascertain the result of their mission—I did say, as represented by you, that 'I would delay the march of the troops until I heard from them;' but by no means did I intend to give to what I said the binding force of a pledge, should it be in confliction with a good military reason for pursuing a different course, nor did I suppose the Commissioners and yourself so understood it. As I used the language asserted by you to President Young, the distrust, if any is incited, should rest upon me; and I now disclaim any intention of misleading anyone. The instructions of the president to the Commissioners were positive that the army should occupy the territory of Utah, and my orders do not allow the discretion of making delay, unless reasons should be offered for so doing which should appear to me sufficiently cogent." [^10]

PURPOSE OF THE COMMISSION—DISCUSSIONS

Commissioner Powell stated the purpose of their mission to be to use their best exertions in effecting an amicable adjustment of the "unfortunate difficulties" existing between the general government and Utah. Major McCulloch, in a few words, concurred in what his associate had said. President Young asked to see the Commissioners' letter of appointment. Powell replied that the request was a proper one and it would be presented, and read to the meeting, but they had neglected to bring it to the meeting with them.

423President Young at some length reviewed the history of the settlement of Utah, the coming of, and treatment accorded to, United States officials. He considered also some of the allegations against the "Mormons" in the introductory part of President Buchanan's Proclamation of Pardon, "and acquitted himself and his people, argumentatively and conclusively—first rate," says the chronicle. [^11] At times his criticism of the administration was severe, and Governor Cumming began interrupting. Commissioner Powell said in an undertone, that he did not want Mr. Young interrupted. Major McCulloch interrupted to say that "it was not agreeable to hear the government spoken against." President Young answered: "Do not mistake me, talking against men (corrupt men) who were in office, [I] was not speaking against the government. Electing a man president did not make him a despot—a king. I'll thank you, major, kindly, if you will correct me wherein I speak against the government of the United States." [^12]

Commissioner Powell followed President Young. He declined to discuss questions of the past raised by the previous speaker; it was the present and future with which he was concerned. He differed in his opinions from the previous speaker respecting the "wisdom and patriotism of James Buchanan; we believe him sincerely to be a good and patriotic man;" and he again insisted that General Johnston's movements were erroneously reported to President Young.

424"What do you want of us," sharply inquired President Young, which brought matters to an issue.

424"We only want you to let the government send in the troops, and that you submit to the laws;—let the army come in, go through and locate lands—protect the inhabitants." [^13]

424President Young asked Commissioner Powell if he justified Missouri in the treatment of the Latter-day Saints. The Commissioner did not know the facts. The same question was asked relative to the treatment received by the saints in Illinois. Again the Commissioner pleaded ignorance of the facts—"unjustifiable ignorance, perhaps," he conceded.

424Other speakers now took part, Erastus Snow and Gilbert Clements. They dealt with the accusations against the Latter-day Saints in President Buchanan's Proclamation of Pardon, and declared that the charges were untrue; the number of them ranged from forty to fifty. [^14] President Young remarked that the brethren must have analyzed the proclamation to find so many, and evidently sought to check this kind of criticism of President Buchanan by saying that "these gentlemen," referring to the Commissioners, "were the friends of President Buchanan, and believe him to be sincere, and he did not wish them [i. e. the brethren] to do or say anything that would not present him in as favorable a light as possible." [^15]

424Other speakers followed in the same general tenor as Clements and Snow. Finally President Young said:

424"We want some security for our safety."

425To which Powell answered:

425"We have no more security for you than what is contained in the proclamation—[Buchanan's]."

LIMITATIONS OF THE COMMISSION—NOT INVESTIGATION AND ADJUDICATION

Commissioner Powell had made it very clear that himself and associate were not sent to investigate the charges made against the Latter-day Saints, and practically repeated in President Buchanan's Proclamation of Pardon. The appointment they had received did not authorize inquiry and adjudication, but rather directed them to state clearly what the administration required of the people in order to the granting of a free pardon—recognition of, and submission to, the national authority; admission of the army into the territory without resistance; and a pledge of obedience to the laws and Constitution for the future. And on its part, the administration disclaimed any intent to interfere with the religion of the Latter-day Saints; that was recognized as being a matter between themselves and God. "The Constitution and laws of the United States," it was averred, "could take no notice of their creed, whether it be true or false." All which was embodied in the proclamation of the president, that here follows:

425BY JAMES BUCHANAN

425President of the United States of America

A PROCLAMATION

"Whereas the territory of Utah was settled by certain emigrants from the states and from foreign countries, who have for several years past, manifested a spirit of insubordination to the Constitution and laws of the United States. The great mass of these settlers, acting under the influence of leaders to whom they seem to have surrendered their judgment, refuse to be controlled by any other authority. They have been often advised to obedience, and these friendly counsels have been answered with defiance. Officers of the federal government have been driven from the territory for no offense but an effort to do their sworn duty. Others have been prevented from going there by threats of assassination. Judges have been violently interrupted in the performance of their functions, and the records of the courts have been seized and either destroyed or concealed. Many other acts of unlawful violence have been perpetrated, and the right to repeat them has been openly claimed by the leading inhabitants with at least the silent acquiescence of nearly all the others. Their hostility to the lawful government of the country has at length become so violent that no officer bearing a commission from the chief magistrate of the union can enter the territory or remain there with safety; and all the officers recently appointed have been unable to go to Salt Lake or anywhere else in Utah beyond the immediate power of the army. Indeed, such is believed to be the condition to which a strange system of terrorism has brought the inhabitants of that region, that no one among them could express an opinion favorable to this government, or even proposes to obey its laws, without exposing his life and property to peril.

426After carefully considering this state of affairs, and maturely weighing the obligation I was under to see the laws faithfully executed, it seemed to me right and proper that I should make such use of the military force at my disposal as might be necessary to protect the federal officers in going into the territory of Utah, and performing their duties after arriving there. I accordingly ordered a detachment of the army to march for the city of Salt Lake, or within reach of that place, and to act in case of need, as a posse for the enforcement of the laws. But, in the meantime, the hatred of that misguided people for the just and legal authority of the government has become so intense that they resolved to measure their military strength with that of the Union. They have organized an armed force far from contemptible in point of numbers, and trained it, if not with skill, at least with great assiduity and perseverence. While the troops of the United States were on their march, a train of baggage wagons, which happened to be unprotected, was attacked and destroyed by a portion of the Mormon forces, and the provisions and stores with which the train was laden were wantonly burned. In short, their present attitude is one of decided and unreserved enmity to the United States and to all their loyal citizens. Their determination to oppose the authority of the government by military force has not only been expressed in words, but manifested in overt acts of the most unequivocal character.

426Fellow citizens of Utah, this is rebellion against the government to which you owe allegiance. It is levying war against the United States and involves you in the guilt of treason. Persistence in it will bring you to condign punishment, to ruin and to shame; for it is mere madness to suppose that, with your limited resource, you can successfully resist the force of this great and powerful nation.

If you have calculated upon the forbearance of the United States—if you have permitted yourselves to suppose that this government will fail to put forth its strength and bring you to submission—you have fallen into a grave mistake. You have settled upon territory which lies geographically in the heart of the Union. The land you live upon was purchased by the United States and paid for out of their treasury. The proprietary right and title to it is in them and not in you. Utah is bounded on every side by states and territories whose people are true to the Union. It is absurd to believe that they can or will permit you to erect in their very midst a government of your own, not only independent of the authority which they all acknowledge, but hostile to them and their interests.

427Do not deceive yourselves, nor try to mislead others by propagating the idea that this is a crusade against your religion. The Constitution and laws of this country can take no notice of your creed, whether it be true or false. That is a question between your God and yourselves, in which I disclaim all right to interfere. If you obey the laws, keep the peace and respect the just rights of others, you will be perfectly secure, and may live on in your present faith, or change it for another, at your pleasure. Every intelligent man among you knows very well that this government has never directly or indirectly sought to molest you in your worship, to control you in your ecclesiastical affairs, or even to influence you in your religious opinions.

427This rebellion is not merely a violation of your legal duty; it is without just cause, without reason, without excuse. You never made a complaint that was not listened to with patience. You never exhibited a real grievance that was not redressed as promptly as could be. The laws and regulations enacted for your government by congress have been equal and just, and their enforcement was manifestly necessary for your own welfare and happiness. You have never asked their repeal. They are similar in every material respect to the laws which have been passed for the other territories of the Union, and which everywhere else (with one partial exception) have been cheerfully obeyed. No people ever lived who were freer from unnecessary legal restraints than you. Human wisdom never devised a political system which bestowed more blessings or imposed lighter burdens than the government of the United States in its operation on the territories.

427And being anxious to save the effusion of blood, and to avoid the indiscriminate punishment of a whole people, for crimes of which it is not probable that all are equally guilty, I offer now a full and free pardon to all who will submit themselves to the authority of the federal government. If you refuse to accept it, let the consequences fall upon your own heads. But I conjure you to pause deliberately and reflect well, before you reject this tender of peace and good will.

Now, therefore, I, James Buchanan, president of the United States, have thought proper to issue this, my proclamation, enjoining upon all public officers in the territory of Utah, to be diligent and faithful, to the full extent of their power, in the execution of their laws; commanding all citizens of the United States in said territory, to aid and assist the officers in the performance of their duties; offering to the inhabitants of Utah, who shall submit to the laws, a free pardon for the seditions and treason heretofore by them committed; warning those who shall persist, after notice of this proclamation in the present rebellion against the United States, that they must expect no further lenity; but look to be rigorously dealt with according to their deserts; and declaring that the military forces now in Utah, and hereafter to be sent there, will not be withdrawn until the inhabitants of that territory shall manifest a proper sense of the duty which they owe to the government.

428In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed to these presents.

428Done at the City of Washington, the sixth day of April, one thousand eight hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the United States.

428the eighty-second

428[Signed] "JAMES BUCHANAN."

428By the President:

428Lewis Cass, Secretary of State." [^16]

PRIVATE INTERVIEWS—SUBJECT: PASSAGE OF THE ARMY THROUGH SALT LAKE

The evening session of the conference consisted of a series of private interviews between Presidents Young, Kimball, Wells, and Elder George A. Smith, and the Commissioners. The question discussed was—

428"Shall the army come in through the city, and pass through to their winter quarters without molesting or burning."

428President Young held a private consultation, first with Commissioner Powell alone; then with Commissioner McCulloch alone; then with both together. This consultation lasted until very late.

428While these private interviews were being held, the other brethren assembled engaged in conversation and singing. [^17] Erastus Snow prayed.

The second day's conference convened at 10:15 a. m. This day the council chamber was crowded. The first speaker was Elder John Taylor, his speech in the minutes is described as "clear, calm, eloquent, and good." The Commissioners complimented him as he proceeded in his remarks, as they did Elder George A. Smith, who followed him. The latter's speech is preserved in extenso in the church annals Ms.—it has never been published; yet, better than any other document extant. it reflects the spirit in which the proclamation of pardon was considered and accepted by the church leaders and the people. It was delivered for the most part in a humorous spirit, but at the vital parts of the issues involved was based on sound judgment and the facts. Excerpts on such points follow:

GEORGE A. SMITH'S SPEECH TO THE COMMISSION

"Our present position is, in many respects, a critical one. We desire, life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. We claim 'the right to regulate our own institutions, in our own way, subject to the Constitution of the United States.' These constitutional principles and privileges, are dear to us above all things else. We can cheerfully lay our bones in the dust when our days are numbered! but we can never surrender our constitutional rights. We can see our wives and children turned out of doors and driven from their homes over and over again, but we can never disgrace the blood of our ancestors, by submitting tamely to be ruled by bayonets.

429We are Americans! Citizens of this great republic! Our fathers bled for its liberties, which they have bequeathed to us, as a priceless treasure; and no tyrant shall ever wrest them from us.

429When the president of the United States refused to listen to our petitions, treating them with silent contempt, and answered our applications for an investigating committee by marching his legions into this territory, when he arrayed his bayonets to sustain the acts of corrupt officials, who had used their official influence to bring destruction upon us, I was ready to throw my * * * body between my children and their bayonets. * * * Mr. Buchanan sends us high-minded and honorable gentlemen; they come the bearers of an executive proclamation, which I have carefully looked at in various ways. My first impression was, that the president was determined to exasperate the citizens of this territory, by official slanders, charging them with a list of horrible crimes, that would incite them to a rebellion which could never have been produced by another cause.

This proclamation contains forty-two false charges, into which he has refused, up to this time, to make the least inquiry or investigation. When these charges were first made against us, by anonymous correspondents of the press, and fugitive officials, we denied them, and furnished Mr. Buchanan with sufficient testimony to satisfy any unprejudiced mind, they were false; we called for an investigation and however prejudiced he might have been, the testimony we furnished, must have satisfied him at least that there were two sides to the question. But our repeated demands for investigation were treated with silent contempt, the mails stopped and the army sent; and all the information we received from the government was through stray newspapers which came in by private conveyance, informing us that the 'Mormons' were to be taught by the bayonet that the 'Christian religion was the law of the land,' or be exterminated. Spurred on by all the prejudice combined speculators, disgraced officials, lying editors, scurrilous, degraded letter writers, and hypocritical priests, could get up, the best appointed army ever concentrated by the United States since it was a government, was on its way to execute the repeated threats of death and extermination to the 'Mormons', when Governor Young, by the voice of a whole people, impelled by the first law of nature, self-preservation, and in the discharge of his constitutional duties, said to the advancing army, 'stop!' and they did stop.

430The commissioning of high-minded gentlemen authorized to inquire into the state of affairs here and ascertain the facts, was what we had asked for. We expected them to come prepared to make the necessary investigations, and report the truth, which would set us right before the country. But, gentlemen, you tell us you came not to inquire, that it was not your intention to investigate, indeed that you have no power to make inquiries. Then, what are you authorized to do? Why, to say to the citizens of the territory of Utah that the president will not use the national bayonets to interfere with their religion,—that he will not deprive them of 'life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness'—that he does not claim such a right, and does not intend [to claim] it. This, gentlemen, as I understand it, is the substance of the message which you have brought us. Am I not right?

430This being the case, how does it stand? Simply this way: I have left my homes with my family, kindred and friends, that were not murdered, some five different times. Willingly? Yes! because I was obliged to or fight, and I am afraid to fight. (laughter).

I am a man of peace, and not of war. I accept the pardon. I may have some serious objections to the form in which it is couched, and to the forty-two false accusations therein. But friends, should we throw ourselves in the attitude of defense against the advancing columns of the army, it brings on hostilities and bloodshed immediately. Let us drop upon this army and crush it in pieces, and it will not end there. One hundred thousand men would probably come here to exterminate us, and to wipe out the administration's disgrace, and even all this might be a matter of moonshine. I was in favor of stopping the army last fall, we gained by that means a winter's quiet. You know a sick patient would pay a large sum of money to physicians to lengthen out a miserable existence, even for a little while. And again our religion forbids the shedding of blood, and inspires dread of the consequences; and above all things the shedding of innocent blood. We are informed, upon reliable authority, that there are many in that army that do not thirst for our blood,—a portion of the soldiers do not want to kill us, and some of the officers do not desire our destruction; so that in coming in contact with those soldiers we would be compelled to put to death those who do not want to kill us, and in this way we might be brought into a position to shed innocent blood, though in justifiable self-defense. Had the administration sent volunteers, who in their hearts desired to murder us, and who enlisted expressly for that purpose, it would have been far different. Should we be compelled to kill them, we would kill those only, who in their hearts had desired to shed our blood, and voluntarily walked twelve hundred miles to accomplish it."

GEORGE A. SMITH'S VIEW OF GOVERNOR CUMMING

Referring to Governor Cumming and the course he had taken in finally coming to Salt Lake City without troops, Elder Smith said:

431"I held him in utter horror and detestation, surrounded as I understood him to be by two thousand five hundred bayonets, and all the other appliances of a formidable army, prepared to come into the midst of our citizens, saying, 'd— —n you, submit to my will or I will pierce your vitals.' These sentiments and feelings I had in my breast toward Governor Cumming; and would have carried them with me to my grave, had he not at length broke out from among this forest of arms, and thrown himself into the midst of the settlements, unescorted and alone, as a citizen governor, who said he was not an enemy, and had not come to trample upon the rights of American citizens. He showed himself brave, generous and noble by this act. He declared he did not wish to govern a people who did not want him; but was ready to fulfil the duties of his office, if desired, and I began to respect him. There is no man, who feels a greater horror and detestation, than I do of a civil officer, who will not go beyond the reach of a bayonet to perform his duty; he is not a man, but a brute, who would undertake to govern freemen on such principles. I see in Governor Cumming a manly, free, generous spirit. He says, 'I come not to govern you as a military despot; but as a fellow citizen.' This is right.

What shall we do next? Shall we go out here into the mountains, and raise a mill pond, [^18] that will compel us to shed blood? Shall we be found in this position? Or shall we with all its horns and heels swallow the difficulty, and say, gentlemen, walk in and fulfil your pledges, we have confidence in you. Should the pledges be violated, what better off would they be, then where they are? This is the best policy we can adopt; if they will do as they should do, and let us alone, they can pass along in safety. * * * But, gentlemen, if Mr. Buchanan, actually means, as he says, that the citizens of Utah should have the same privileges as other citizens of the United States, all right; but if I cock my revolver and point it desperately at your head, and say, I mean peace; my conduct looks rather suspicious; and while Mr. Buchanan points at us his artillery, minnie rifles, and bayonets, his promise of peace looks suspicious. Withdraw your armies, and that act would cry louder for peace than a thousand proclamations and promises. It is hard for me to believe that peace is intended while you point your cannon at our houses; and while they remain there I have good ground to suspect treachery and foul play. I lack confidence in your words unless your actions correspond.

432From my known disposition to avoid personal danger, (laughter) my military friends on my left, will be but little influenced by the proposals I wish to submit. I propose to say to the army, walk in gentlemen, select your camp grounds, and fulfil your orders. If we take this course, in what light will the nations view our position? The result will be that the civilized world will say, the citizens of Utah are disposed for peace, their desires are not to come into collision with the parent government, if they can honorably avoid it; and as to the long list of charges that have been enumerated against us by Mr. Buchanan in his 'proclamation,' the world will say,—except a few party friends,—Mr. Buchanan don't believe them true, or he would not have pardoned them all indiscriminately; or else he does not feel able to punish them: but his mistaken policy dictated that charges grave and serious should be enumerated in his 'proclamation' to ease him down from his awkward position without bursting. Instead of this measure disgracing us in the eyes of intelligent men, it will lift us higher in the scale of humanity. I say then let us not reject these overtures."

432Elder Smith concluded his remarks in a paragraph through which runs a fine strain of irony:

432"As I said before, I have full confidence that Mr. Buchanan will not violate the pledges which he has now made to us—unless he fully believes that it is for his own interest so to do; and in consequence of the 'peculiar' condition of the treasury, I believe that his interests will not prompt him to do so, during his administration." [^19]

432SPEECH OF BRIGHAM YOUNG et al—"ZION"

432Following this speech there were remarks by James Ferguson, and Gilbert Clements, after which President Young closed the meeting in a speech which the original notes of the minutes characterize as "the finest effort of his life." [^20] Wilford Woodruff says that "he spoke in the power of God; those Commissioners heard the voice and roar of the Lion." [^21] Unfortunately the speech in full is not extant. One important passage is preserved in the minutes of the conference, bearing upon the settlement of matters by the conference:

433"As to the gentlemen Commissioners, they have no power to investigate the past, but (are) to inquire if we will submit to the Constitution and laws of the United States. We always have, and always expect to. I have no character [i. e. reputation]—no pride to gratify—no vanity to please. If a man comes from the moon and says he will pardon me for kicking him in the moon yesterday, I don't care about it, I'll accept of his pardon. It don't affect me one way or the other." [^22]

433In concluding the conference, President Young called upon William C. Dunbar to sing "Zion;" or, as stated in the original notes of the minutes of the conference, "O, Ye Mountains High," [^23] etc.

COMMISSIONER POWELL ANNOUNCES SUCCESS OF NEGOTIATIONS

At five p. m. Commissioner Powell addressed a public meeting in the "Council House" on the general situation in Utah, and the results of the peace conference. No formal action seems to have been taken during the conference on accepting President Buchanan's Proclamation of Pardon, but it appears to have been the general understanding that it was accepted; and upon that understanding Messrs. Powell and McCulloch, on the very evening the conference closed—June 12th—hastened to write the secretary of war, saying:

434"We have settled the unfortunate difficulties existing between the government of the United States and the people of Utah. * * * They will cheerfully yield obedience to the Constitution and laws of the United States. They [the 'Mormons'] consent that the civil officers shall enter upon the discharge of their respective duties. * * * No resistance will be made to the officers, civil or military of the United States, in the exercise of their various functions in the territory of Utah." [^24]

434This message was sent by special express to Camp Scott, thence to be forwarded to the east with all speed. On the 26th of June a more extended report was made to the war department, giving in some detail the proceedings of the peace conference and quite fairly representing the contentions of the church leaders, in which they are represented as saying—

434"They stated that they were attached to the Constitution and government of the United States; they spoke harshly of many of the officials who had held office in the territory: they spoke of the wrongs and injuries heretofore done them; they said they desired to live in peace under the Constitution of the United States. They denied that they had ever driven any official from Utah, or prevented any civil officers entering the territory; they admitted that they burnt the army trains, and drove off the cattle from the army last fall, and for that act they accepted the president's pardon. All the charges that had been made against them except the one last named, they denied." [^25]

On the 3rd of July the Commissioners addressed a supplemental report to the secretary of war, being a statement of their procedure up to that date—the eve of their departure for the east. Later, namely August 24th, they filed with the secretary of war, at Washington, the official minutes of the peace conference, signed by Brigham Young and the Peace Commissions. These minutes are of such importance that they are given here in full with an explanatory note by the Commissioners; and certified by Brigham Young.

435Before presenting the document, however, it is due to the truth of history to record the fact that an agreed official statement of what had taken place in the negotiations between the Commissioners and the church leaders was the occasion of some unpleasantness and marred somewhat the departure of the Commissioners from the territory.

Albert Carrington took the minutes of the peace conference, and J. V. Long and Leo Hawkins are named as stenographers, and reported the speeches. But with the exception of the speech of George A. Smith our church annals do not show that any of these speeches were transcribed from the shorthand notes. President Young, it appears, promised the Commissioners copies of the minutes and of their speeches; but for some reason these were not furnished the Commissioners until upon the very eve of their departure. The first draft of the minutes, with their remarks, were very unsatisfactory. Powell would not even attempt to correct them, saying that the report put language into his mouth he never used, and omitted many of his most important remarks. He refused to correct such a document; but said if a correct report of his speeches were sent to him, also the questions he answered, and the speeches of the "Mormons" to which he replied were sent in accordance with the promise of Brigham Young, he would correct the report and return it to them. [^26] Several consultations were had between Elder Carrington and the Commissioners, the latter showing vexation in the matter, and great anxiety lest "the reports of the conference would be published without the revision of their speeches. Carrington informed them that he did not do things in that style, and assured them that we would not publish anything that was said on that occasion, without the concurrence of the speakers." [^27] Finally Carrington took the Commissioners to President Young and the matter of the minutes was settled to their satisfaction. President Young signing the minutes of the conference agreed upon, which were afterwards filed as official documents in the war department at Washington, as stated above. A copy of this agreed-upon statement identically and officially signed was delivered to each side of the negotiations.

436AGREED-UPON STATEMENT OF PEACE NEGOTIATIONS

436"Washington, D. C.,

436August 24, 1858.

436Dear Sir: We have enclosed herewith a copy of a paper containing a concise statement of what was said in the conference held in Great Salt Lake City on the 11th and 12th of June last, which is certified by ex-Governor Brigham Young, as correct.

436We have the honor to be, very respectfully, your obedient servants,

436L. W. Powell,

436Ben McCulloch,

436Commissioners to Utah."

436—Minutes of Conference between Peace Commissioners L. W. Powell and Ben McCulloch and Brigham Young and other 'Mormon' Church leaders:—Official.

436"In the conference held in Great Salt Lake City, on the 11th and 12th of June, 1858, L. W. Powell and Ben McCulloch, Commissioners to Utah, and ex-Governor Brigham Young and others, touching difficulties between the United States government and the people of the territory of Utah, Governor Powell in behalf of the Commissioners, said in substance, as follows:

436He stated the object of the mission, and distinctly made known the views and intentions of the president concerning the people of Utah. He stated that the Commissioners had no power to make any treaty or compact with them. The object of the mission was to make known to the people of Utah the policy the president intended to pursue toward them, and to induce them to submit quietly and peaceably to the authority of the United States.

He stated that it was the determination of the president to see that the authority of the United States be maintained in Uah, and that the Constitution and laws of the nation should be enforced and executed in this territory; that the president would send the army of the United States to the valley of the Great Salt Lake, in such numbers, at such times, and to such places in the valley or other parts of the territory, as he might think the public interest demanded, and retain it there as long as he should think the interest of the United States required him to do so.

437That such military posts would be established in the territory of Utah, and in the valley of Great Salt Lake as the secretary of war should think necessary to protect the emigration to and from the Pacific, prevent Indian depredations, and to act as a posse comitatus to enforce the execution of civil process should it be necessary. He said that the object of the president in sending a portion of the army to Utah, was to enforce the execution of the laws, and protect the civil officers of the government in the exercise of the duties of their offices, that in the event the inhabitants of the territory quietly and peaceably submitted to the execution of the laws of the United States, and would peaceably receive the officers of the government appointed for Utah, and permit them without resistance to exercise the various functions pertaining to their respective offices, there would be no necessity for the army to be used to enforce obedience to the civil authority. If they should refuse to receive in a peaceable manner the officers of the government, or should in any way resist the execution of the laws of the United States within the territory, the president would employ if necessary the entire military power of the nation to enforce unconditional submission and obedience to the Constitution and laws of the United States.

437If the civil officers of the territory were peaceably received and no resistance made to them in the discharge of their official duties, the army then in the territory, or such portion of it as might hereafter be sent there, would only be used to protect emigrants and inhabitants from Indian depredations.

437We stated that it was not the intention of the president, in sending a portion of the army to the territory to deprive the people of Utah of any of their constitutional rights, but to see that the authority of the United States was respected, the civil officers protected and obedience yielded to the Constitution and laws, as enjoined by the president in his proclamation; should they quietly and peaceably submit to the authority and laws of this country, the army would be used as promptly to protect them in all their constitutional rights as it would be to compel obedience to the authority of the United States.

437We called their attention to the proclamation of the president which had been distributed among them.

437We stated that the president, in order to avoid the effusion of blood, and to cause them to return to their allegiance to our common country, had deputed the Commissioners to make known to them the designs and intentions of the government, and the policy that would be pursued towards the people of Utah, which we had now done. We stated that the president asked nothing of them but what it was their duty as good citizens to perform, and that we trusted our mission would result in the restoration of peace, quiet, and order in the territory.

We further stated that the Commissioners had no power to give an order to the army, but that we had conferred with General Johnston, and that his army would not march to the valley of Great Salt Lake until he received information from us; that we did not know where General Johnston would make his permanent posts when he arrived in the valley of Salt Lake. General Johnston, however, told us that it was not his intention to station his army in or very near one of their large cities; that such a location would be calculated to demoralize the army; that he wished to make his permanent posts where wood, water, and grass were abundant. Governor Young expressed a desire that the Commissioners would investigate certain charges that had been made against the people of Utah, to wit: as to whether the 'Mormons' had killed Lieutenant Gunnison's party and Colonel Babbit, and burned the records and library of the federal court, and the truth of the charges made by Judge Drummond and others. The Commissioners declined to go into the investigation desired for the reason that such an investigation was not within their instructions, and that it was impossible for them to do so if they desired it, for want of evidence and time.

438Ex-Governor Young and others state that they were and had ever been attached to the Constitution and government of the United States, and desired to live in peace and quiet under the government; they denied all the charges that had been made against them, except the burning of the army trains and driving off the cattle from the army last fall; that they admitted, and for that they accepted the president's pardon; they claimed that they were more ardently attached to the Constitution of the United States than others who made charges against them. Upon the president's views and intentions being made known as set forth herein, it was agreed that the officers, civil and military of the United States should peaceably and without resistance enter the territory of Utah, and discharge, unmolested, all their official duties.

438Great Salt Lake City, July 3, 1858."

CERTIFIED BY BRIGHAM YOUNG

"I have examined the foregoing statement of the substance of what was said in the conference held at Great Salt Lake City, Utah territory, on the 11th and 12th of June, 1858, by Governor Powell and Ben McCulloch, Commissioners to Utah, and ex-Governor Young and others, touching the difficulties that existed between the United States government and the people of Utah; the statement in writing examined by me is contained in six pages, hereto attached, and is, in substance a correct synoptical statement of what was said in said conference; the above is correct as far as I can recollect at present.

438[Signed] "BRIGHAM YOUNG." [^28]

UNDERSTANDING HAD WITH GENERAL JOHNSTON ON MARCH OF THE ARMY THROUGH SALT LAKE CITY

Referring back to the sequence of events at the close of the peace conference, the Commissioners not only sent off their message to the war department, under date of June 12th, as already stated, but by the same express they sent a similar message to General Johnston, with the statement that the houses, fields, and gardens of the people, particularly in and about Salt Lake City, were very insecure, and the animals of the army would cause great destruction if the greatest care should not be observed in the march, and in selecting camps. The people were also apprehensive that after the army had reached the valley it would not properly respect their persons and property. The Commissioners had given assurances that they would not be molested in these respects, but suggested to General Johnston that it would be well for him to issue a proclamation to the same effect, as it would greatly allay the anxiety of the people. In reply General Johnston congratulated the Commissioners upon the successful termination of their mission, and issued the suggested proclamation in which he said:

439"I * * * assure those citizens of the territory who, I learn, apprehend from the army ill treatment, that no person whatever will be in any wise interfered with or molested in his person or rights, or in the peaceful pursuit of his avocations; and, should protection be needed, that they will find the army (always faithful to the obligations of duty) as ready now to assist and protect them as it was to oppose them while it was believed they were resisting the laws of their government."

439The general announced to the Commissioners his intention of leaving his encampment on Bear river on the 17th of June; his expectation of reaching Salt Lake City in five days; and closed with the declaration—"I desire to encamp beyond the Jordan on the day of the arrival in the valley. [^29]

On the 14th of June Governor Cumming issued his proclamation of the acceptance and now effective operation of President Buchanan's Proclamation of Pardon to the people of Utah, saying—

"Whereas, The proffered pardon was accepted, with the prescribed terms of the proclamation, by the citizens of Utah; Now, therefore, I, Alfred Cumming, governor of Utah territory, in the name of James Buchanan, president of the United States, do proclaim that all persons who submit themselves to the laws and to the authority of the federal government are by him freely and fully pardoned for all treasons and seditions heretofore committed. All criminal offenses associated with or growing out of the overt acts of sedition and treason are merged in them, and are embraced in the 'free and full pardon' of the president. And I exhort all persons to persevere in a faithful submission to the laws and patriotic devotion to the Constitution and government of our common country.

Peace is restored to our territory!

440The governor's proclamation is signed by A. Cumming, governor; and John Hartnett, secretary." [^30]

Footnotes

In thy mountain retreat, God will strengthen thy feet;

On the necks of thy foes thou shalt tread;

And their silver and gold, as the Prophets foretold,

Shall be brought to adorn thy fair head.

* * * *

Here our voices we'll raise, and we'll raise, and we'll sing to thy praise,

Sacred home of the Prophets of God;

Thy deliv'rance is nigh, thy oppressors shall die,

And the Gentiles shall bow 'neath thy rod.

* * * *

O Zion! dear Zion! home of the free;

In thy temples we'll bend, all thy rights

We'll defend

And our home shall be ever with thee.

Some months following the peace conference, Governor Cumming told President Young that Commissioner Powell had said that he would "never forget the name of Dunbar, as Governor Young had called upon him to sing at the end of the peace conference—'He sang a comic song.' Powell thought it was such a ludicrous movement, it almost looked as though he (Young) regarded the conference as a farce" (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Nov. 12th, 1858, pp. 1082-3). Either Commissioner Powell had a strange sense of humor, or else he had in mind some other song rendered during the conference meetings, of which there were quite a number sung.

---
Notas:
[^1] See instructions of General Harney, first commander of the "Expedition" to Captain Van Vliet, ante, chapter cv, this History—giving to the captain instructions as to locating a permanent encampment for the army.
[^2] Deseret News of July 14th, 1858, where the speech is published in full.
[^3] Atlantic Monthly, for April, 1859, pp. 486.
[^4] See General Orders No. 30, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, p. 119; and Report of General Johnston to Army Headquarters of the 28th of June from camp "near Salt Lake City," Ibid, p. 121.
[^5] Atlantic Monthly, for April, 1859, p. 490.
[^6] Ibid.
[^7] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for June 26th, 1858, pp. 735-6. Sometime later, when Colonel Cooke and Captain Marcy made a formal call upon President Young at his office, Heber C. Kimball "blessed" Colonel Cooke "for his kindness to the battalion boys" (Ibid, entry for Aug. 10th, 1858, p. 923).
[^8] Atlantic Monthly, April, 1859, p. 491.
[^9] From a discourse delivered in Provo, June 27th, Deseret News, July 14th, 1858. There was some slight trespass upon fenced fields west of the Jordan, some crops destroyed, and fencing used, the property of Joseph Young, brother of Brigham Young, for which and for the damage done to the pasturage hitherto used by the people, compensation was claimed, but not allowed. Major Dickensen, and Captain Marcy, to whom the matter was referred, denying the responsibility of the army for the damage done (see History of Brigham Young, Ms., July 14, 1858, p. 782, and August 19, p. 937). George A. Smith declares that there was a mile of post and pole fencing burned, and about one hundred tons of hay used by the army while encamped on the Jordan. (Letters to Stenhouse, History of Brigham Young, Ms., July 9th, 1858, p. 775).
[^10] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for the 30th of June, 1858, pp. 758-9.
[^11] Editorial Deseret News, July 14th, 1858, issued at Fillmore.
[^12] Deseret News of July 14th, 1858.
[^13] Messages and Papers of the Presidents, vol. v, p. 487.
[^14] Messages and Papers of the Presidents, vol. v, p. 503, et seq.
[^15] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 11th June, 1858, p. 635.
[^16] Messages and Papers of the Presidents, vol. v, pp. 493-5.
[^17] John Kay sang "Ocean Shells," and "To the Land of the West;" Erastus Snow, "White Canoe," and "Wives, Children and Friends;" W. C. Dunbar sang, "Do What is Right," or as recorded in the minutes, "God Will Protect Us in Doing What's Right" (Original Notes of Minutes, Documents, etc., file of 1858.)
[^18] The speaker has reference here to the plan that was made in Echo canon to flood part of the canon to make it impassable.
[^19] The speech complete will be found in History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for June 12th, 1858, pp. 639-653.
[^20] Original Notes of Minutes in Filed Documents, June, 1858.
[^21] Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry for June 12th, 1858.
[^22] Minutes of Conference with Commissioners in History of Brigham Young, Ms., June 12th, 1858, pp. 653-4. Later at Provo, in remarks at a public meeting, on the same subject, President Young said: "We have no shirt collar dignity to sustain, for we have no character [i. e. reputation] only such as our friends and enemies give us: it is only a shadow and we are willing that they should have the shadow, and make the name of our president [Buchanan] honorable if we can." (Discourse at Provo, June 27th, 1858, Deseret News, vol. viii, p. 86).
[^23] See Original Notes of Minutes, p. 8, Church Documents, file of 1858. "Zion" is a thrillingly heroic "Mormon" song, written in the spirit of the times by Elder Charles W. Penrose, then a young, active missionary in England, who had not at the time been in Utah or America, but he later became a member of the quorum of the twelve apostles (1904); and a member of the first presidency (1911); and still later first counselor (1913). Two of the stanzas, and one of the refrains, whence the song gets its name, "Zion," follow:
[^24] Letter of Commissioners to the Secretary of War, House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii, pp. 167-8.
[^25] House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii. pp. 168-172.
[^26] See correspondence to the New York Herald, letter dated Salt Lake City, 2nd July, 1858; also History of Brigham Young, Ms., 31st July, 1858, pp. 841-2.
[^27] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry of July 3rd, 1858, pp. 761-2; also pp. 759-760.
[^28] House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, vol. ii, pt. ii, pp. 175-177. Very brief minutes of the conference with the promise that "a full report of the sayings and doings at the conference will be furnished by the reporters as soon as they can transcribe their notes," is the statement that appears in the Deseret News of June 23rd, 1858. It was this declaration of intention which made the Commissioners apprehensive of the reports of their speeches.
[^29] All the above communications referred to in the text will be found in House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, pt. ii, pp. 119-121.
[^30] House Executive Documents, 35th Congress, 2nd Session, vol. ii, p. 113.
