B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

441CHAPTER CXV

441THE ARMY'S ENTRANCE INTO SALT LAKE VALLEY—RETURN OF THE PEOPLE TO THEIR HOMES

441MEANTIME there was no movement among the people then en march southward, to return to their homes from the settlements of the south where some, meanwhile, had halted. The question uppermost in their minds, and in the minds of the church leaders was—would the army conduct itself in harmony with the pledges of the governor and Peace Commissioners? Their past experiences with state military commanders, and state militia, justified their skepticism. Might not the army of the United States pursue the same course? Would the army pass through Salt Lake City without quartering itself there? And would it choose a permanent encampment sufficiently removed from that city and other settlements that the distance itself would afford practical separation between the people and the soldiery? For this, both the church leaders and the people required stronger guarantees than verbal promises or written proclamations.

441Though not known to the people these had been the instructions of the war department to the army from the beginning of the "Expedition's" movement westward, that is the army was not to be encamped in or even in proximity to any of the larger settlements of the territory. [^1]

POWELL'S SPEECH AT PROVO—PATRIOTIC

On the 16th of June the people of Provo and the rear division of the moving caravan south, were addressed, on invitation of the church leaders, by Commissioner Powell. The speech, a most admirable and patriotic one, was well received by the people, and many of its utterances cheered. Yet it was frank in its assertion of what was expected of the people; and equally emphatic in its expression of the purpose and duty of the government towards the people. In proof of which the following excerpts are given:

442"The federal government demands nothing of you, fellow citizens, today, which it does not require of the inhabitants of every state and territory within the Union, that you shall be obedient to the laws of your country, that you will respect the civil authority, and that its officers shall be received by you and enter on the discharge of their duties unmolested. All this I am happy to say you assure me you are willing to yield, and you claim that you have never been otherwise. [i. e. inclined].

442Another matter—the stationing a portion of the national army among your settlements—was a topic of debate. The president claims and will exercise the right to send the army whenever he pleases, wherever his judgment directs. Indeed it is necessary for him to have that right in order to perform the functions of his office. His intention in sending troops to this valley was not to despoil you of any rights, civil, political, or religious, but to see that the authority of the nation was respected, and the laws executed in this territory."

442On the side of the duties of the government to the people, Commissioner Powell said:

442"I have told you what the government requires of the people of this territory, and you have told me that you will comply with its requirements. I assure you now that it will sustain you in all your constitutional rights, will listen with patience and attention to the details of any grievances of which you may complain, and will protect you in all your rights guaranteed by the national Constitution, using its military power for that purpose, if necessary. Should it fail in these promises I will be the foremost to denounce it. I believe that I express the feelings of the president of the United States upon this subject. His desire is that you will submit quietly to the laws. He asks nothing more of you. He has acted in this matter according to the duties imposed on him by his official oath. But I trust that all is settled. I hope that seeds of contention will not germinate among the people of this territory. War is a calamity which I ever would avert, but if we do ever come to war, I hope it will be to vindicate the honor of our national flag. I want to see our soldiers facing the enemies of the republic, but American fellow citizens—never! If this day the nation should be so unfortunate as to become involved in war, and the government should call on the people to fly to arms to maintain our republican Union and glory, I hope there would be more than one Mormon Battalion to rally to battle for our common country. (Cheers)."

443The following patriotic sentiment would find warm echo in the hearts of the people, for it was in strict harmony with their own principles:

443"There is a providence which has disentangled this country from many such difficulties [i. e. such as had arisen in the Utah-Federal misunderstanding]. It is God who rules our destiny. * * * A nation badly governed would have been incapable of such progress. Why, then, should there be any people, here or elsewhere, who should hesitate to acknowledge their loyalty to that government and its institutions? There may occasionally come a little difficulty, but I tell you that whether it comes in Pennsylvania, South Carolina, or Utah, it will die out. I know there is patriotism enough in the nation if any part of the people refuse obedience to the laws, to enforce submission. But I believe there ought never to be occasion for the government to use force to compel its children to submit. It is a government whose right to existence is the love of the people, and if it ever ceases to deserve that love, then farewell to the Constitution and the Union of the States." [^2]

443It is a pleasure to record the fact that Senator-elect Powell remained constant to these patriotic sentiments throughout the Civil War period then dawning. He was one of the senators from a southern state—Kentucky—who remained true to the Union cause to the close of his senatorial term, 1865. His fellow Commissioner from Texas, be it remembered, was appointed in 1861 commander in chief of the southwestern division of the Confederate forces; was an active general in the field against the Union and while reconnoitering the enemy forces at Pea Ridge rode within range of a hidden company of sharp shooters and was mortally wounded. His death occurred on March 7th, 1862.

THE ARMY BREAKS CAMP AT FORT BRIDGER

As already stated in the preceding chapter, General Johnston on the 13th of June gave his order for breaking his winter camp and beginning the march to Salt Lake valley on the same date. The scene, at once imposing, and staged in a dramatic setting, is thus described by the writer for the Atlantic Monthly so frequently quoted in these chapters on the "Utah War."

444"On the 13th of June, the long camp was broken up, and the army moved forward in three columns on the route through the canons. Although the season was so far advanced, snow had fallen at the fort only three days before. The streams were swollen and turbulent with spring floods, and difficulty was anticipated in crossing the Bear and Weber rivers. Material for bridging had, therefore, been prepared, and accompanied the first column. Southwest of the fort, at the distance of four or five miles, a singular butte, the top of which is as level as the floor of a ballroom, rises to the height of eight hundred feet above the valley of Black's Fork, and commands a view of the entire broad plateau between the Wind river and the Uintah and Wasatch ranges. Little parties of horsemen could be seen spurring up the gullies on its almost precipitous sides, to witness from its summit the departure of the army. The scene was in the highest degree picturesque. Almost at their feet lay the camp, the few tents which remained unstruck glittering like bright dots on the wing of an insect; the whitewashed wall of the fort reflecting the sunshine, while stacks of turf chimneys, lodge poles, and rubbish, marked the spots where the encampment had been abandoned. The whole valley was in commotion. Along the strips of road were winding clumsy baggage trains the regiment of dragoons was trailing in advance; the gleam of the musket-barrels of the infantry was visible on all sides; and every puff of the breeze that blew over the bluff was freighted with the rumble of artillery carriages and caissons. Here and there were groups of half-naked Indians galloping to and fro, with fluttering blankets, gazing at the show with the curiosity and delight of children." [^3]

THE MARCH OF THE ARMY THROUGH SALT LAKE CITY

The march of the army through Salt Lake City was made on the 26th of June. General Johnston so managed his previous day's march as to enter the valley from Emigration canon early in the morning, in order to be able to make the march to a point west of the Jordan river in one day, and thus avoid the necessity even for a single encampment within the city limits. The city was deserted by the Latter-day Saints and their leaders, except for a few guards left to watch the passage of the army, and a number of "Gentile civilians" who chose to remain. The order of the march was as follows:

ORDER OF ARMY MARCHING DIVISIONS

(1) Brevet Colonel C. F. Smith's battalion, constituting the advance guard;

445(2) Tenth infantry and Phelps' battery;

445(3) Fifth infantry and Reno's battery;

445(4) Colonel Loring's battalion of mounted riflemen;

445(5) Volunteers;

445(6) Colonel Cooke's second dragoons constituting the rear guard;

445Each command was followed by its train and a portion of the supply train;

445The headquarters were with the advance." [^4]

445The Peace Commissioners rode with the general's staff. The bands played at intervals during the day's march; other than this and the necessary noise of the supply trains dragging their snail pace along South Temple street, the march was undemonstrative and noiseless; in fact so marked was the "stillness," that one writer, supposed to be a correspondent with the "Expedition," said that it was so profound, "that during the intervals between the passage of the columns, the monotonous gurgle of City Creek struck on every ear." [^5]

445The same writer also gives the following vivid description of the army's march through the city:

445"It was one of the most extraordinary scenes that has occurred in American history. All day long, from dawn till after sunset, the troops and trains poured through the city, the utter silence of the streets being broken only by the music of the military bands, the monotonous tramp of the regiments, and the rattle of the baggage wagons. Early in the morning, the Mormon guard had forced all their fellow religionists into the houses, and ordered them not to make their appearance during the day [an error this, the people long before had left the city as already stated]. The numerous flags, which had been flying from staffs on the public buildings during the previous week, were all struck. The only visible groups of spectators were on the corners near Brigham Young's residence, and consisted almost entirely of Gentile civilians." [^6]

COLONEL COOKE HONORS THE MORMON BATTALION

Colonel Cooke, leading the 2nd dragoons, constituting the rear guard of the "Expedition," "passed through the city with his head uncovered, as a token of his respect for the Mormon Battalion," and thereby further endeared himself to his old command. [^7]

446General Johnston kept his promise as to the good order in which the march should be conducted through Salt Lake City, as also in camping beyond its limits:

446"Not a field was encroached upon, not a house molested, not a person harmed or insulted, by troops that had been so harassed and vituperated by a people now entirely at their mercy. By their strict subordination they entitled themselves to the respect of the country as well as to the gratitude of the Mormons." [^8]

446To this word from within the camp, should be added the testimony of Brigham Young, given in Provo, the day following the march of the army through the city:

446"What is the present situation of affairs? For us the clouds seem to be breaking. Probably many of you have already learned that General Johnston passed through Great Salt Lake City with his command under the strictest discipline. Not a house, fence, or sidewalk has been infringed upon by any of his command. Of course the camp followers are not under his control; but so far as his command is concerned while passing through the city, he has carried out his promises to the letter." [^9]

During the peace conference, Cache valley, about eighty miles north of Salt Lake City, was urged upon the attention of the Commissioners by the church leaders as the most desirable place for the permanent location of the army; but it was rejected because considered too far removed from the center of population, and Cedar valley, thirty-six miles distant from Salt Lake City, and west of Utah Lake—from which it is separated by a ridge of mountain and some low hills on the north—was selected instead; and which in a few days the army reached and began the preparation of their permanent quarters.

THE RETURN OF THE PEOPLE TO THEIR HOMES

With the marching of the army into its permanent quarters, removed some considerable distance from the settlements of the saints, as per agreement, there remained no longer any reason why the people should not return to their homes, and accordingly the announcement was made on the 30th of June, at Provo, that—

447"All who wish to return to their homes in Great Salt Lake City are at liberty to do so."

447President Young on that date, with an escort of thirty men from Provo, commanded by Captain Wm. Wall, led the return; [^10] and the movement "back home" began along the whole caravan of wagons extending in a broken line from Provo to many of the southern settlements of the territory.

447An unusual rainfall during the month of June, that year had assured a fairly good grain and fruit crop; and the peaceful pursuits of an industrious people and an orderly community life were permitted to resume their wonted course.

The "return home" movement had been a foregone conclusion for some time, if the agreement entered into with the Peace Commissioners on the 12th of June was carried out. The usual representations made that either on the 4th or 5th of July the return home began are wrong as to dates. "The first presidency and a few others left Provo at 6 p. m. of June 30, and arrived at their homes in Great Salt Lake City at 3 a. m. of July 1st. [^11] The statement of anti-"Mormon" writers that after both Governor Cumming and the Commissioners had pleaded in vain with the people to return to their homes, and Governor Cumming had announced his intention of publishing a proclamation advising the people to return—that then Brigham Young said to the governor, "Do as you please, I shall get upon the tongue of my wagon and tell the people that I am going home, and they can do as they please"—and that this was done (see Stenhouse, Waite, Linn, et al, and even Tullidge). All this scarcely comports with the facts in the case; and is evidently related to exhibit Brigham Young's alleged arbitrary power over the people. As before stated, the matter of returning to their homes had been a foregone conclusion for some time, the people were anxious for it, and only awaited the passage of the army to its permanent quarters, in good faith, to begin the return home movement. The matter had been discussed by Brigham Young at the Sunday public meeting in Provo, on the 27th of June, where he announced the orderly passage of the army through Salt Lake City. He then said: "So soon as General Johnston finds a place to locate his command—when we get news what he is going to do with his troops—we will go home. Women, do not induce your husbands to go home just yet, but wait until the proper time. It will not be long first." [^12] Three days later the suggestion to return home was published as related above.

PRESIDENT BUCHANAN LAUDS THE "EXPEDITION" AND ITS "ACHIEVEMENTS"

President Buchanan, on the 10th of June, having received Governor Cumming's dispatches of the 2nd of May to the effect that he had everywhere been received as governor of Utah, and that the difficulties in Utah were in a fair way of peaceful settlement, sent a special message to congress congratulating that body upon "this auspicious event," and suggesting that it would not now be necessary to make any appropriation for the purpose of calling out and equipping the two regiments of volunteers authorized by a special act of congress in April previous. [^13]

449In his annual message to congress in December following the president recapitulates at some length the Utah events of the year, which resulted in the settlement of the differences "without the effusion of blood."

449He lauds the course which had been followed by the administration; justifies the sending of the "Expedition," and the preparations for sending the very large reinforcements that were called for, holding that "a less decisive policy would probably have resulted in a long, bloody, and expensive war." The army and its officers, Governor Cumming, the Commissioners, Messrs. Powell and McCulloch, and Colonel Thomas L. Kane are all commended for their services, and the president recommends that the benefits of "our land laws and pre-emption system be extended to the people of Utah, by the establishment of a land office in that territory. His passage on Colonel Kane is as follows: "I cannot, in this connection, refrain from mentioning the valuable services of Colonel Thomas L. Kane, who from motives of pure benevolence and without any official character of pecuniary compensation, visited Utah during the last inclement winter for the purpose of contributing to the pacification of the territory." [^14]

This whole matter of the settlement of the so-called "Utah Rebellion" is a fine example of what is called in state policy "muddling through." It was no clean-cut victory for the Buchanan administration; nor could it be considered an altogether satisfactory settlement of the territorial difficulties by the church leaders of the Latter-day Saints. On the false reports of the "run-a-way federal appointees" for the territory without an investigation, the administration secretly organizes an "Expedition" to suppress the supposed "rebellion" and marches it to Utah. Here in the borders of the territory it meets effective resistance, and is humiliated in the eyes of the nation and the world; for that humiliation arising from the ridiculous situation into which the army is maneuvered by the elements and a few companies of Utah militia, is witnessed and deplored by our own vexed nation, and laughed at by the world. Then, after the blunder is made, the president after arranging for reinforcements of his first defeated "Expedition" sends Peace Commissioners to Utah not to investigate the charges and adjudicate the case, but with a "Proclamation of Pardon" in their pockets if the church leaders and people who have effectively resisted and humiliated the army will consent to its peaceful encampment in the territory, and promise submission to the Constitution and laws of the country.

450True, the president in his proclamation of pardon reiterated some forty false charges of the territorial "run-a-way officials," and if the church leaders and the people accept the pardon offered they will seemingly confess to the charges made. But this they emphatically and boisterously refused to give assent to and limited their assent to the charges made in the proclamation to those that relate to acts of resistance to the approach of the army, fearlessly demanding an investigation of all others; and asserting that in accepting the pardon that acceptance went no further than acceptance of what they regarded as the necessary forceful resistance to the advance of the army. In other words, the supposed "culprits" determined the counts in the indictments upon which they would be pardoned, and disclaimed and rejected without trial all others as non-existent. And with this self-selection of the parts of the indictment on and for which they would accept the president's pardon the president hysterically congratulates and lauds the statesmanship and wisdom of his administration!

As to the pledge required of the church leaders that they would submit to the Constitution and the laws of the country, that was only to reaffirm what had always been their habitual mental and practical attitude towards the Constitution and the laws of the country and therefore no new or necessary pledge of allegiance.

451On the part of the church leaders and the people the settlement of the Utah difficulties by the "Pardon" and "Proclamation of Peace" must have been unsatisfactory in that it did not provide for, neither did it include an investigation and adjudication of the false charges of disloyalty, lawlessness and threats of violence enumerated by the president of the United States; and therefore gave no triumphant vindication of the saints against these charges in the eyes of the world. But what did result in benefit to the saints from this settlement was it halted that "move south" which had it been persisted in—and that would have been inevitable had no settlement with the administration been made—we now know from our knowledge of the extent and barrenness of the desert which faced them, and into which they were fleeing that barring some stupendous miracle, would inevitably have spelled overwhelming disaster to the Latter-day Saint community.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for July 5th, 1858, p. 763. Commenting on these precautions, Captain Burton says: "He has guards at his gates, and he never appears in public unattended by friends and followers, who are, of course, armed. * * * However, in the case of the prophet, there is an absolute necessity for precautions: as Gentiles have themselves owned to me, many a ruffian, if he found an opportunity, would, from pure love of notoriety, even without stronger incentive, try his revolver or his bowie-knife upon the 'Big Mormon.'" (City of the Saints, p. 222).
[^2] "The Presidency are quite retired and are seldom seen. The people are in a great measure left to themselves to see what they will do. There are no public meetings, and consequently no public sacraments. The word of the Lord is seldom heard through his prophets by the people." (From a letter of Samuel W. Richards to E. W. Tullidge, July 23rd, 1858; Millennial Star, vol. xx, pp. 620-22. See also History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry July 4th, 1858, p. 762-800, passim). When Wilford Woodruff in company with Cyrus H. Wheelock solicited the privilege of holding a public meeting in the interest of the Deseret Agricultural and Manufacturing Society, "President Young informed them that he did not want meetings held on any subject." (Ibid, p. 923). This must doubtless have canceled some earlier—July 18—arrangements made for preaching in the wards by Elder Joseph Young, of the first council of seventy, and Presiding Bishop Edward Hunter. (Ibid, p. 798).
[^3] Horace Greeley's Overland Journey, New York to San Francisco, 1860, pp. 244-7.
[^4] Greeley, Ibid, p. 247. Greeley states that the adobes were made by "Mexicans," which is not true, as there were no Mexicans to speak of in the territory. The adobes were made chiefly by the "Mormons" of "Cedar Fort."
[^5] History of Brigham Young, Ms., Nov., 1858, p. 1068.
[^6] The day of the president's arrival in Salt Lake City from the "move south"—July 1st—"several gentlemen called upon him and wished to deliver letters to him personally. All such sought interviews were declined. Some would not leave their letters because they could not deliver them personally." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1858, p. 959).
[^7] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1858, pp. 915-918, 923-25.
[^8] Ibid, pp. 916-918.
[^9] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Aug. 26, 1858, p. 950; also Woodruff's Journal, entry of same date, and where a list of the male members of the party are given—fifty-two in all.
[^10] See Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 402. Also Atlantic Monthly for May, 1859, p. 571. Burton's City of the Saints, p. 216.
[^11] New York Tribune, Jan., 1858.
[^12] History of Brigham Young, Ms., Oct. 27, 1858, p. 1043; also Ibid, p. 1183.
[^13] Letter of John L. Smith to Stenhouse, Ibid, p. 1197.
[^14] This was the case of Thomas H. Ferguson, a "Gentile," convicted of murder, and the first white man to be executed in the territory. (See Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 540; also Rocky Mountain Saints, Stenhouse, p. 403). Of course the day of execution had to be changed.
