B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

452CHAPTER CXVI

452A CHAPTER OF HORRORS—CONDITION IN UTAH AFTER THE ADVENT OF THE "UTAH EXPEDITION"—A "REFORMING AGENCY"

452AFTER the return from the "move south," President Brigham Young went into practical retirement. The entrance to his house, the Bee Hive (then called his "Mansion"), and the "Lion House," were securely locked and bolted, and constantly guarded by brethren, to whom the names of those seeking admittance to the president were submitted. [^1] No public meetings were held. The tabernacle in Salt Lake City was not opened for public worship. Silence was enjoined; matters were to be left, apparently, to take their own course. [^2] This doubtless in recognition of the fact that sometimes silence is more potent than speech; new adjustments even take place under its reign.

THE "UTAH EXPEDITION" ARMY ENCAMPMENT

The encampment of the army in Cedar valley was called Camp Floyd, in honor of the then secretary of war, soon to be engaged, and even then, perhaps, engaged in a widespread conspiracy for the dismemberment of the federal Union; and at any rate, a little later came to be regarded as the arch enemy and traitor to the government of the United States.

453Cedar valley is about ten miles in width and thirty miles long, through which a small stream flows southward from copious springs at the foot of the western hills, just south of which the military post was located. There was but one "Mormon" settlement in the valley, at the time, this was known as Cedar Fort, which had been organized into an ecclesiastical ward in 1853, with Allen Weeks as bishop. There were about one hundred and fifteen souls at the time of the ward organization, and perhaps not more than two hundred at the advent of the army. Exposure to Indian assaults forced the settlers to live in a stone wall enclosure—part of the wall is yet standing—hence "fort" in the name.

Camp Floyd, for the most part, was formed of small low, but neat adobe houses—between three and four hundred in number; "enough," writes Horace Greeley, who visited the camp in July, 1859—"enough to make six or eight Kansas cities"—of course, of that period. Near by there sprang into existence a suburb on which was conferred the euphonious name of "Frog Town," later, and now, Fairfield, "whence grog and other luxuries, including execrable whiskey at about ten dollars per gallon,"—wrote Greeley—"are dispensed to thirsty soldiers, who have not already drank up more than their pay amounts to." The valley was covered with sagebrush (artemisia) and grease wood; but the immediate camp was freed from these growths and made level as a floor, beaten hard by the continual tramping of the three thousand troops inhabiting it—"the largest regular force ever concentrated upon the soil of our country in a time of peace." [^3] The adobes were made from bluish clay mud in the vicinity of the camp; the board roofing and other timber was obtained from the mountains east of Salt Lake valley. The total cost of building the post to the government was about two hundred thousand dollars. [^4]

THE UTAH FEDERAL CIVIL OFFICERS WHICH CAME WITH THE "EXPEDITION"

The civil officers who came in with the army were Chief Justice Delano R. Eckles, and John Hartnett, secretary of the territory. Governor Cumming's entrance into Salt Lake City has already been detailed. Jacob Forney, territorial superintendent of Indian affairs—which office was now separated from that of governor—came in with the Peace Commissioners. Judge Charles E. Sinclair arrived in Salt Lake City on the last day of July. Judge Cradlebaugh did not arrive until early in November. About the same time United States attorney for the territory, Alexander Wilson, of Iowa, arrived in Utah. He was accompanied by his wife whom he had but recently married. He brought letters of introduction from Jeremiah S. Black, United States attorney-general in Buchanan's cabinet, to Governor Cumming; and letters of like character from Colonel Thomas L. Kane to President Young. [^5] These gentlemen with Peter K. Dotson, territorial marshal, completed the list of federal officials for the territory.

454With the settlement of the army at Camp Floyd and the coming and installation of these federal civil territorial officers, the Utah stage was again set for the further unfolding of those events which make up the history of Utah territory and of the Church of the Latter-day Saints—which, for some time as yet, are inseparable in their historical relations.

ATTEMPTED SOCIAL AMENITIES—"REFORM AGENCIES"

In the first few weeks following the entrance of the army and its settlement in Cedar valley, there were various attempts made by the army and civil officers to open intercourse with President Young and other church leaders; [^6] but such had been the strained relations between these United States officials of the army and of the territory on the one hand; and the leading church officials on the other—such the absolute difference of viewpoint on the questions involved—such the distrust, as yet, of the church leaders of most of the United States officials, both military and civil—that intercourse, beyond what official courtesy required, was not long attempted. [^7]

The general statement concerning reserve in the matter of relations between the two classes spoken of should be modified by noting a few exceptions. So long as Colonel Alexander and Captain Marcy remained in the territory their association with the church leaders were very agreeable. The meeting of Colonel Cooke with the church leaders, as also that of Captain Bryan and Lieutenants Bristol, Rich, and Kensel, are spoken of as very pleasant interviews. "They conversed upon a variety of subjects, such as the water, wood, weather, coal, roads, the products of the earth, and the detention of the army." The interview between the secretary of the territory, John Hartnett, and President Young was not so agreeable, as the antagonism between them was very pronounced. [^8] Mr. Wilson, United States attorney for the territory, was more diplomatic and acquired a better standing. Governor Cumming, of course, was in friendly relations with the church leaders, and on the 26th of July accompanied by Mrs. Cumming, went with a "Mormon" party of nearly one hundred in number, including President Young, his counselors, and seven of the twelve apostles, on a strictly private picnic excursion of several days into Big Cottonwood canon, where a most enjoyable time was had in song, prayer service, dancing, and feasting. [^9] No mention was made of the excursion in the Deseret News until the 8th of September. But notwithstanding these exceptions, the relations between the two classes of Utah's citizens named, were restrained, and finally limited to necessary official intercourse, and even this was carried on—so far as President Young was concerned—by secondary parties. [^10]

456With the coming of the army and the civil officers for Utah, there had been assembled those "reforming agencies" from which so much was expected in the moral regeneration of the Latter-day Saints. The New York Tribune, when the "Expedition" was forming for its journey, remarked, in a vein of irony, perhaps, but representing truly the ideas that obtained in some quarters respecting the "Expedition:"

456"The impending 'Expedition' against them [the 'Mormons'] is enthusiastically regarded as holy war, undertaken in the interest of morality and religion, intended to convert the Mormons to more correct ideas on the subject of matrimonial relations and religious truth; to break up their polygamous households; * * * or should they not be brought to reason as to these matters by the precept and example of the new civil officers, seconded by the officers and soldiers of the army, then to resort to the remedy of dispersing them by fire and sword." [^11]

456And yet, following within the first few months of the advent of these "reforming agencies," the people to be "reformed" were edified by the sight of an associate judge of the supreme court of the territory frequently reeling through the streets of Salt Lake City drunk and sometimes helpless. So insufferable was he in this respect that Governor Cumming, who himself was not above reproach in this weakness, "was displeased with him." His court—the district included Salt Lake City—was so disgraced by these habits that it was a matter of public criticism. [^12]

On one occasion his honor was led helpless from the ballroom by his friends; on another he helplessly fell into a gutter of the street while in a quarrel with C. L. Craig, an Indian agent, and drew a pistol on his adversary, and Craig drew a knife upon the judge, but both "were too drunk to do any hurt." [^13] Perhaps this unfortunate weakness in the judge accounts for the act for which he is best known to fame in Utah, that of sentencing a man to be executed on the Christian Sabbath. [^14]

457A letter in the handwriting of Chief Justice Eckles was picked up in the streets, written to one Lieutenant Bennett, in which the chief justice deplores the fact that he has not been able to procure for him (the lieutenant) a mistress as yet. His efforts in this detestable business are given in terms too gross for reproduction; but the circumstance is too well attested to admit a doubt of the fact of it. [^15] Yet when the chief justice was about to depart from the territory in the fall of 1858, a number of the civil and military United States officers for the territory, and prominent Gentile merchants, in tendering him a complimentary dinner, envied him the satisfaction he would feel in joining his "family and friends in a moral and civilized community," and regretted that his services would be withdrawn from the territory during the winter.

The letter tendering this dinner appears in the San Francisco Bulletin of Sept. 30th, with the names of the thirty-two gentlemen who were to give it, and is reproduced in the Deseret News of Oct. 27th. The invitation letter also contained the following clause: "Your presence in Washington will do much to remove misapprehensions which seem to prevail there, and to cause measures to be taken for the better security of the persons and property of loyal citizens of the United States who are resident in this community." This gave offense, not only to the Latter-day Saints, as being slandered by these innuendoes, but to Governor Cumming and his friends. Letters were addressed by the editor of the Deseret News to the gentlemen signing the invitation, asking them to be more specific as to the meaning of the indirect charges of unsafety of persons and property in Utah. This brought statements from Secretary Hartnett and Superintendent of Indian Affairs Jacob Forney, saying that they had signed the letter, "as many other signers of the letter referred to, in full confidence that it was only what it purported to be, an invitation to take dinner;" and not "to cast reflection, even the smallest, on any community or person." "Nor did I suppose for a moment," said Secretary Hartnett, "that the letter was to be used, as it has been, to subserve a political purpose." [^16] Forney's letter is of similar import. "I had no design," he said, "to cast reflection, even by implication, on this or any other community, especially in any such an oblique manner." [^17] In the same impression of the News is a strong editorial resenting the imputations of the "dinner letter."

458The people of Utah were further edified by the scandalous gallantries of army officers who sought, and sometimes successfully, to induce women to go to Camp Floyd, there to enter into illegal and shameful relations. [^18] One army officer while passing through Nephi on duty, became the temporary guest of a prominent family, and sought, by offering a considerable sum of money to a second person, to purchase the favors of the matron of the household. [^19]

RELATION OF THE ARMY AND ITS FOLLOWERS WITH INDIAN WOMEN

In addition to these "gallantries," the army was further disgraced by the shameful relation of soldiers and camp followers of the army with the Indian women of the tribes in contact with both Camp Scott and Camp Floyd. [^20]

459Little Soldier, chief of the Cumumbahs, or Snake Diggers—who was camped near the soldiers at Camp Scott, details the brutality of soldiers who, entering the tents of the Indians whenever the men were absent, would lay hold of and ravish the women. The chief in consequence of these things left the camp.

459Many of the squaws for their "favors" received money, which their husbands would force from them in order to buy the execrable whiskey of the camps; and as the savage knows nothing of self-restraint, this ended in drunkenness. Sometimes various parts of soldiers clothing, from caps to trousers, and even Sibley tents were bartered for these licentious favors. [^21]

459P. W. Conover, whose two sons were interpreters, informed George A. Smith, church historian, that Antero Yampants, chief, and Peteetneet, burned six squaws in consequence of their having contracted the "Mexican Dierhed"—a venereal disease. [^22]

It is only proper to say, that the term "soldier" with the Indians, means the entire army and attaches; [^23] so that it is fair to presume that most of the atrocities practiced upon the Indians, of the kind here enumerated, were the work of teamsters and camp followers, by far the worst element of the "Expedition," and the least under discipline. [^24] But when this "Expedition" was projected and accepted in the popular view as a means of "reforming the Mormons," the possibility of an evil example growing out of the assemblage of such elements as invariably attach themselves to such "Expeditions," ought to have been considered.

STREET IMBROGLIOS

The people of Utah were further edified in the ways of "civilization" by frequent street imbroglios among gamblers and other camp followers and teamsters of the "Expedition," amounting at times almost to riots on the streets. [^25] There were also frequent armed conflicts between these elements and the police; and worse yet, in some cases, prominent merchants and some army officers sided with the rowdies against the police.

460In a letter to Stenhouse, under date of Sept. 11th, George A. Smith said:

460"Christianity continues to progress with the arrival of its most able expounders and defenders who preach by precept and example; but much to our gratification, at present, they are practising on each other. Several murders have been committed, two of which have occurred in this city; the mayor of our city has to hold a court every day. Street fights prove rather expensive, but are of frequent occurrence. Our brethren, however, keep out of the way and they [the non-'Mormons'] have the fun all to themselves. Although the annoyance to the people, and drunken sights are disgraceful to the community, they are unavoidable as long as the United States treasury pays the expenses." [^26]

461"For want of space we omit the details of rapidly increasing profanity and drunkenness, of the progress of gambling, whoredoms, etc., and for the present merely note the fights as yet most prominent. A short time past two colored 'gentlemen' quarreled in the streets; one was stabbed and the other shot dead by his antagonist. On the 9th inst. (A date, by the by, which was enlivened by five other fights between newly-arrived citizens), Longford M. Peel and Oliver R. Rucker, from Leavenworth, met and fought with pistols, in Miller, Russel & Co's store, Peel killing Rucker, and himself receiving three wounds from which it is not yet known whether he will recover. As there is a fair prospect for a weekly crop of the thrilling and exciting incidents so common in the world, it is but fair to presume that news from this isolated portion of our country will no longer be quoted as 'unimportant.'" [^27]

461"Police riots," or "rows with the police," said an editorial in the Deseret News, "are getting to be of weekly occurrence in our city." Under the caption—"Peace Breaking—Attack on the Police," in the same impression of the News, is given in detail an account of a riot in which a Mr. Kincaid, merchant in Salt Lake City, and Dr. Covey of the United States army were leading spirits. "It is matter of regret," said the editorial account of the affair, "that the professors of civilization (!) and claiming to be the very essence of modern refinement, should be found among those whose orgies make night hideous and our streets dangerous." [^28] Mayor Smoot reported the action of the police in this instance to Governor Cumming, who thoroughly sustained the "course pursued by the police with the mob, and wished they had notified him, so that he might have led the police; for it would have been better for the responsibility to fall on him than on the mayor and police." [^29]

PROSTITUTION AND ATTENDANT CRIMES

Prostitution reared its horrid front in the community, and its patrons were chased from the streets by the city police. [^30] Editorially the Deseret News advised that in order to preserve the peace and quiet of the city, ladies remain at home; and that gentlemen limit themselves to reasonable hours, or at least to their legitimate walks and line of business. [^31]

462"The miserable howling and demoniac yells of the midnight brawlers, maddened by the intoxicating draught," wrote John L. Smith, chief clerk of the territorial legislature, in a letter to Stenhouse, "contrasts strangely with the peace which has ever before reigned in 'Deseret'." [^32] As a result of the lawlessness the police force of Salt Lake City was increased by the addition of two hundred members—four-fold what it had previously been. Out of the number seven special guards of twenty men in each, were organized; and each guard-group was to furnish men for duty through twenty-four hours—covering the week. [^33] "Of that class of beings who burden communities with their presence and tax them with their idleness and crime," said the editor of the Deseret News of this period, "this city has had within its precincts, for a length of time, a legion, and the expense that has accrued in consequence of their presence and acts, to the corporation and to the county, has been more than double the amount that has been required to suppress and punish crime and support pauperism from the first settlement in the valley in 1847 to July, 1858; and there have been more murders committed and more blood shed in the county within the last eight months, than before, since its organization;" [^34] and the county was organized by the general assembly of the "State of Deseret" in December, 1849—nine years before.

OTHER TESTIMONY THAN "MORMON"

"Mormon" annals do not stand alone in describing this perilous state of community life in Utah during this Camp Floyd period. "The unruly crowd of camp followers which is the inseparable attendant of an army," wrote Albert G. Brown, Jr., to the Atlantic Monthly, "has concentrated in Salt Lake City, and is in constant contact and conflict with the Mormon population. An apprehension prevails, day after day, that the presence of the army [i. e. in the city] may be demanded there to prevent bloodshed. The governor [Cumming] is alien in his disposition to most of the federal officers; and the judges are probably on their way [this in May, 1859] to the states to resign their commissions." [^35]

Among the problems of those days was the discharged soldier. So long as the men were in the army and under the strict discipline of the general commanding, there was little difficulty; [^36] but the soldier discharged, paid off in army warrants,—if a balance of his pay was due him, but more frequently he was penniless—and often made desperate and demoralized by army life, became a terror to the civil authorities who must now deal with him in his relations to the community. It must not be forgotten that many of these troops were made up of the teamsters of the "Expedition," taken into the army as soldiers by General Johnston at Camp Scott, and who are spoken of by one writing from within the army lines as belonging with other camp followers "to the scum of the great western cities—a class more dangerous, because more intelligent and reckless than the same class of population in New York." [^37]

464Every time therefore that there was any considerable number of the troops discharged by reason of their terms expiring, a wave of anxiety passed over the civil community. A few instances will illustrate the fact: The first companies to leave Camp Floyd were Captain Marcy's four companies of mounted riflemen from New Mexico, and Brevet Colonel Bee's command of enlisted teamsters. This in the latter part of July. These troops were marched from the territory under their respective commanders, and hence under military discipline. Colonel Bee sent for Elder John Y. Greene to act as guide for these companies from Camp Floyd to Emigration canon; the object being to leave the territory without passing through Salt Lake City; and this was done. [^38] Yet such was the anxiety of the church authorities; and such the uncertainty as to what might happen on the departure of these companies, that "extra companies of guards [were] posted secretly near the dwellings of the first presidency." [^39]

On the 27th of October a Mr. Miller, of the firm of Miller and Russell, told Mayor A. O. Smoot of Salt Lake City that four hundred and fifty soldiers would be discharged from Camp Floyd on the first of November; that two hundred trains to which were attached six hundred men from the east were making a determined effort to get into Salt Lake City and be discharged there. Mr. Miller had paid off through his firm thirty-five teamsters, and anything they would not steal, he would not have as a gift; and the other six hundred teamsters who would be in soon, were no better than they were." "President Young advised Mayor Smoot to see Governor Cumming and get him to use his utmost exertions to have the soldiers above alluded to marched out of the territory, and if he refused, then have the city council get up a remonstrance." [^40]

465Later it was learned that the soldiers to be discharged were the "quartermaster's men, who are a great deal worse" (i. e. than the ordinary soldiers) says the chronicle. [^41] Governor Cumming interested himself in the matter, and presented the case to General Johnston. Captain Jefferson Hunt, of Mormon Battalion fame, and familiar with the southern route to California, was instructed by President Young to get up trains and carry discharged soldiers to California. [^42] Some of the discharged teamsters and quartermaster's men bought some large freight wagons, and, because they could be bought at a low figure, some poor cattle that had just come in from the states, and thus made up a train to go to California by the southern route. [^43] These arrangements combined disposed of these companies of discharged men; but ever as the circumstance of a considerable number of men being discharged recurred, there was always attendant upon it this dread and anxiety for the civil authorities.

This whole Camp Floyd epoch was a period of demoralization, greatly deplored by the authorities of the church, but before which, for the time being, they were helpless. Many church members, loving this present world, and throwing off the wholesome restraints of religious influence, entered the realm of license to which the times invited them. In his "prayer circle" Elder Wilford Woodruff, of the council of the twelve apostles, [^44] according to his own account, exhorted his brethren in the following strain:

466"I told them we were surrounded by the wicked * * * who were filled with wickedness and sought our destruction; that we were much exposed and should be on our guard and magnify our calling and maintain our dignity before all men as saints of God and elders in Israel; and not mingle with, or drink with, the wicked. If we had business with them let us do it and go our way. * * * There is silence in Zion. No warning voice in the streets or in the 'tabernacle of the Lord.' Every one is left to go his own way, and many are turning away from the Lord, and in this hour of temptation and darkness, it is our duty to live our religion and to set a good example before all men, and watch and pray that we enter not into temptation." [^45]

Such the moral effect of the "Utah Expedition" upon the Latter-day Saint community. Instead of resulting in a reformation, in any betterment of manners, more respect for the government, [^46] more honor for a much vaunted "Christian civilization," boastful of its enlightment, the several evil effects of its presence in Utah, here enumerated, inaugurated a period of demoralization from which the community did not recover for a number of years. Nor could the would-be "reformers" of the saints by such agencies as this "Utah Expedition" be justly surprised if their hopes in that "Expedition" as a moral and religious crusade, were a disappointment to themselves, and excited only the ridicule and contempt of the saints, ending in a deepened attachment for their own moral and spiritual system of life. A due consideration of the lessons of history in such matters should have taught the would-be-reformers by means of the "Utah Expedition"—a manifestation of force—that such an outcome was inevitable. A military force, coercion in any form, in fact, is the poorest agency for effecting moral and religious reforms. The reluctant victim, to paraphrase Gibbon, may even be dragged to the foot of the altar, but the heart still abhors and disclaims the sacrilegious act of the hand. [^47]

467"There has been," wrote Elder John Taylor, of the council of the twelve,—"there has been a very riotous, obstreperous and vindictive spirit manifested by our missionary civilizers; who, while they are utterly regardless of common decency themselves, seek to embroil us in difficulties and trouble; and provoke us if possible to commit some overt act to reopen the wounds that have so far been healed, and cause a renewal of hostilities [and this effort will be made more apparent in the chapter following] in the diabolical hope of fattening themselves upon the prey of their victims." [^48]

Relative to the purpose of those who sought to bring about the "renewal of hostilities" that they might "prey upon their victims," it can be said that at the very height of Judge Cradlebaugh's effort to incriminate Brigham Young in the Springville homicides, this passage was written of the non-"Mormon" merchants: "The merchants of Salt Lake City say that if they cannot get up a collision between the 'Mormons' and the army at this time they will all be 'broke' [fail in business—be ruined] which is equivalent to acknowledging that they are at the bottom of this outrage upon this people." [^49] This at first sight might seem paradoxical; but a collision between the "Mormons" and the army meant reinforcements to the army, an influx of more people, more government contracts, more business hereabouts in Utah—hence the preying upon the "Mormons" as victims.

468What could be expected from such "reform agencies" as these but failure and disappointment? Nor is it to be considered matter of wonderment if the "Mormon" people and their leaders justly held it in scorn. "When you get back to the states," said Brigham Young to a United States officer, just on the eve of leaving for the east, "no doubt you will be asked many questions about me. I wish you would tell them that I am here, watching the progress of civilization." [^50] This in the light of the facts set forth in this chapter, is a stinging rebuke to those who looked upon the "Utah Expedition" as a "reforming agency" that would reclaim the "Mormons" from the error of their ways.

Another purpose this chapter will serve is that it will be an absolute vindication of the course of Brigham Young and his associate leaders of the church in resisting the entrance of even the United States army into the then newly settled and recently organized territory of Utah. In making up his judgment upon that statement the intelligent reader will remember that Governor Young and his associate leaders were in no way officially notified of the organization of that army or the purpose for which it was being marched into Utah. And as we have seen, [^51] not even its advanced courier sent to look out a suitable camp site for it could give any official statement of the purpose for its coming. He could only give his personal conviction that the evil intent which popular rumor ascribed to it did not truly represent its purpose. That was held by the Utah leaders to be not sufficient guarantee for the security of the people of the territory. And whatever might be the disciplinary instruction to the officers and the army proper there was the large camp following and the very large contingent of teamsters to be accounted for, and the problem of discharged soldiers all of which several groups would not be subject to army discipline and would constitute uncontrollable elements—as they actually became—of menace to the peace and moral security of the whole people of Utah.

469The "Expedition" had been adjudged necessary and was launched upon its mission wholly upon the false testimony of the "run-a-way federal officials" of Utah; and the popular understanding of its purpose was the overthrow of the "Mormon" church and the breaking up of the "Mormon" community by force if necessary. That is what the presence of an army would mean under the circumstances.

The question to be considered here and now, and in the light of the truth of the facts set forth in this chapter is—what would have been the effect of the admission of that "Expedition" into the settlements of the Latter-day Saints of Utah without the resistance made to it, followed by the gesture of the people destroying their homes and again marching the poorly equipped mass into a desert wilderness? What would have been the effect of admitting that "Expedition"—it was no more than a small army of the United States; it was that plus its army of teamsters who were not enlisted men, but employees, and an unusually large number of army camp followers, parasites of gamblers, whiskey sellers and adventurers intending to fatten upon by absorbing the pay of the enlisted men and officers—what would have been the effect of admitting such an "Expedition" into Utah unchallenged and without the sobering effect of the courageous resistance to its advancement, and the taming effect of the rigors of a fierce winter in the bleak regions of Camp Scott—Fort Bridger? No one of course may be able to give a conclusive answer to that question, since it is conceded to be difficult to determine what would have been the course of historic events if something had happened which did not happen. But of this we may be certain: the resistance of Brigham Young and his following to the entrance of that army into the settled parts of Utah, with the consequent taming effects of a winter spent amid the ice and snows of a bleak mountain region of all but arctic rigors, not only had a sobering effect upon the "Expedition," but also served notice upon it that it had to deal with a high-spirited people, under a leadership alert, efficient and fearless who would not hesitate to dare the venture of war measures even with the government of the United States if necessary to the preservation of their personal and community rights.

470There can be no doubt but what this resistance had a very much needed modifying effect upon that "Expedition" after its arrival in Utah; and which together with their threatened exodus from Utah and actually begun before the arrival of the "Expedition" into Salt Lake valley—startled the nation and led to the demand upon the administration for an inquiry into the cause of all this, and led at least to the appointment of a commission if not of inquiry and adjudication which it should have been-a Peace Commission which, however "muddling" in its methods, brought about the settlement set forth in these chapters dealing with the subject.

This present chapter of horrors dealing with moral conditions following the advent and the settling of the United States "Utah Expedition" in Utah, and because of its advent into that territory over the protests of its people the Latter-day Saints—is the vindication of the church leaders and membership of that church at the bar of history for their resistance to the entry of that "Expedition" into their settlements, aye, though it came in the authority of the United States of America; for the facts of this chapter reveal the true character of that "Expedition." And only God knows what "might have been" the result but for the heroic course followed by the fine leadership of the church sustained by the willing cooperation of a devoted people—the body of the church.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] It is said that Governor Cumming arrived at his decision to assemble the legislature at Fillmore "without investigating the law on the subject, or consulting the members of the legislature." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., Dec., 1858, pp. 1152-3). This statement is an error, as the governor seems to have had the matter brought to his attention both by conversation and written communication—wherein the law bearing on the case was brought to his attention—with members of the legislature, and notably with Daniel H. Wells (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Oct. 9th, 1858, pp. 1004-5; also p. 1078); and still he was of opinion that the legislature should meet at Fillmore. The enabling act provided that the assembly should hold its first session at such time and place in the territory as the governor should appoint; and after that the governor and assembly should locate the seat of government for the territory at such place as they may deem eligible, which place, however, shall thereafter be subject to be changed by the said governor and legislative assembly." (Organic Act, sec. 12). Although Fillmore City had been designated as the seat of government by act of the governor and legislative assembly, yet by resolution, approved Dec. 15th, 1856, the same authority declared "that the seat of government is removed from Fillmore City to Great Salt Lake City, until otherwise provided by law." (Acts, Resolutions and Memorials of the Legislative Assembly of Utah, authorized compilation of 1866, ch. 79, p. 106). This would seem to be conclusive as to authorization by law for the legislature to meet at Salt Lake City; and in fact the legislative assembly of 1857-8 had met there; and surely it was as competent for the legislature of 1856 to adjourn the legislature to Salt Lake City as it was for that of 1858 to do the same thing. One is tempted to believe that this hocus pocus about the meeting of the legislature at Fillmore, arose from a desire to discredit the proceedings of the previous legislature which had met in Salt Lake City—1857-8—under the authorization of the legislative resolution of 1856.
[^2] See History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for Dec., 1858, pp. 1096, and 1181; also Letter of John L. Smith, Ibid, p. 1191; Deseret News of Dec. 22nd, 1858. By the decision of the judges the legislature was compelled to make this journey of about three hundred miles—the round trip—in midwinter, having to break the road most of the distance through the snow both ways, and this for the accomplishment of no purpose unless it was in the hope of adding "mileage" to the account of the United States officials, or discrediting the legislature of 1857-8. Secretary Hartnett was "accompanied by a detachment of United States troops—infantry mounted in wagons," says John L. Smith. "An appendage," he adds, "very common for United States officials in this territory, simply designed to impress the unsophisticated 'Mormons' with a due appreciation of the dignity of federal appointees." (Letter to Stenhouse, date of Dec. 24th, copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., Dec., entries, p. 1190, et seq). President Young suggested to brethren of the legislature, that they "try and please the Lord without offending the devil," which, paradoxical as it seems, represented the needs of the hour. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., Dec., 1858, p. 1147).
[^3] The message complete is published in Deseret News of Dec. 22nd, 1859.
[^4] See Letter tendering banquet to Judge Eckles on the eve of his departure for Washington, Deseret News of Oct. 27th, 1858.
[^5] The judge's charge to the grand jury is given in extenso in the Deseret News, impression of 24th Nov., 1858. Bancroft says "to ask a Mormon grand jury to indict the leading dignitaries of their church for polygamy was, of course, little better than a farce." (Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 539). In justice it must be said that the judge's charge to the jury discloses no such purpose; it was an attempt to call the attention of the grand jury to, and direct the investigation of, a matter of general public report—so expressed by the judge.
[^6] Charge to the grand jury, (Ibid). "In brief," says Stenhouse, "he [Judge Sinclair] wanted to bring before his court Brigham Young and the leading Mormons to make them admit that they had been guilty of treason, and make them humbly accept from him the president's clemency." (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 402).
[^7] The remarks of United States District Attorney Wilson are given at length in the Deseret News of Dec. 1st, 1858.
[^8] See Deseret News of Jan. 12th, 1859. Editorially the News said: "It is a pity that the United States have incurred so much expense for a matter which we have ever deemed to be no cause of action; or, if cause for any action, at least no more than a fine for contempt by Judge Stiles at the time the [intimidating] remarks were made."
[^9] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Dec. 1st, 1858, pp. 116 and 121.
[^10] "The court is resolved to bring out Brigham Young before it on a subpoena as a witness in the case of Burr; Governor Cumming felt troubled about it more than anything else, fearing that Brigham Young would not comply." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 29th Dec., p. 1114).
[^11] History of Brigham Young, Ms., Dec. 1st, 1858, pp. 1118-9. Sometime before, in conversation with Judges Sinclair and Cradlebaugh, "Governor Cumming said he did not think it good policy to establish forcible measures to get Brigham Young to court on every frivolous case; and even not at all until the character of the United States court was better established than heretofore; 'for you all know damned well,' said his excellency, 'that the people have not been very civilly treated in many instances by dignitaries; and during the present excited state of things, I think it would be policy to take pacific measures and not try to disturb the people any more.'" (Reported by A. O. Smoot, mayor of Salt Lake City, History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 29th Nov., pp. 1113-4).
[^12] Ibid, pp. 1120-21. The summons served on President Young by the court record was an alias subpoena, but what official document it was the second time does not appear, as no other service was attempted upon the required witnesses. (Ibid, pp. 1120-1. Also Deseret News of Dec. 8th, 1858).
[^13] Court Record in Deseret News of Dec. 8th, 1858.
[^14] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 12th of Jan., 1859, p. 105.
[^15] See letter of Seth M. Blair to Senator Sam Houston, date of Jan. 15th, 1858, copied in History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for Jan., 1858, p. 130. Also Court Record of Judge Sinclair's court, 3rd District, Deseret News of Dec. 1st, 1858; and January 12th, 1859. For Judge Cradlebaugh's ruling see Court Record of 2nd District, March 9th, 1859, Deseret News of March 16th, 1859.
[^16] This legislation and its history have been already considered at some length. (Ante chapters cii and ciii. See charge to grand jury, March 8th, Deseret News of March 16th, 1858).
[^17] See Blair's letter to United States Senator Sam Houston of Texas. Also Deseret News of March 16th, 1859; and letter of George A. Smith to Colonel Thomas L. Kane, date of Jan. 14, 1859, copied in History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for January, 1859, p. 132, et seq.
[^18] The court sat thirty-eight days altogether, as per former statement in the text, but only twenty-three days up to the time of the date of this letter, 24th Dec., 1858; while court continued until 18th of January following. (See Deseret News of Jan. 18th, 1859).
[^19] Letter of John L. Smith to Stenhouse, date of Dec. 24th, 1858, copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for Dec., 1858, p. 1194.
[^20] Letter to the president of the European Mission, Asa Calkings, copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries of Dec., 1858, pp. 1187-8.
[^21] Letter copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for Jan., 1859, pp. 133-5.
[^22] Letter of John Jaques, assistant church historian, to Stenhouse, date of April 22nd, 1859, copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for April, pp. 370-1.
[^23] See New York Herald of 25th May, 1859.
[^24] Ante, chapter ci, this History.
[^25] Deseret News impression of March 30th, 1859. "Some United States troops are here. Perhaps it is an unusual thing for them to be here. I knew that there were those who were guilty, out by the camp, and also that there were many guilty around here, of numerous offenses. I was informed that there was no prison here, and those troops were sent by the commanding general, at my request, to take care of the prisoners now in custody, and not to interfere with any one. They are here to take care of and preserve the peace. If prisoners are brought they will be taken care of, and the whole authority of the troops is to detain those persons in custody that may be taken prisoners, until they are called for by the court, and they have no power beyond that." (Court Record, 2nd District, judge's remarks to the grand jury, Deseret News, March 16th, 1859).
[^26] Judge Cradlebaugh remarked: "I wish to call the attention of the public to a letter which I received yesterday from the commanding general. He has seen cause to send an additional number of troops here (nine hundred), and he desires that I shall state to the court that they are not here to interfere with the citizens of the territory, unless the conduct of the citizens should make it necessary that such interference should take place in self-defense. The commands sent over are not sent with a pretense to make an attack upon citizens, therefore none need entertain those views. The desire of the commanding general is to aid the court in the discharge of its duty, and to bring offenders to justice. The troops come here to be within reaching distance, for the purpose of enforcing the law, and not for the purpose of violating it in any way." (Second Judicial District, Court Record, March 21st, Deseret News of March 30th, 1859).
[^27] Governor Cumming's proclamation of 27th March, 1859. Deseret News of 30th March, 1859. Judge Black, attorney-general in Buchanan's administration, reviewing and condemning the course of Judge Cradlebaugh and General Johnston, says that "ten companies" in addition to the first, "made their appearance in sight and remained there during the whole term of the court." (Senate Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 32, p. 2).
[^28] The petition in extenso, will be found in Deseret News, impression of March 30th, 1859.
[^29] These petitions, protests and answers will be found in the Court Record of the 2nd Judicial District, Deseret News, impression of March, 1859, 16th, 23rd and 30th, respectively.
[^30] Memorial and Petition to Governor Cumming, see Deseret News of March 30th, 1859.
[^31] The letters of both the governor and the general will be found in House Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 78, pp. 18-21.
[^32] See letter of General Johnston to Governor Cumming, of March 22nd, House Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 78, p. 20.
[^33] House Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 78, pp. 23-34. Also the Proclamation was published in Deseret News of March 30, 1859.
[^34] House Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 78, p. 22.
[^35] The Memorial in extenso will be found in Deseret News, impression of 30th of March. Also House Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 78, pp. 14-17.
[^36] See charge of Judge Cradlebaugh to grand jury, published in Desert News of March 16th, 1859.
[^37] Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 560.
[^38] See ante, ch. ci, note 16.
[^39] Deseret News of 30th March, 1859.
[^40] See Stenhouse, Tullidge, et al.
[^41] See copy of remarks as revised by him in Deseret News of March 30th, 1859, p. 26. But the evidence that he addressed these words to the grand jury admit of no doubt, though deleted from his published address as when corrected for publication.
[^42] Quoted in the Deseret News of June 1st, 1859. The New York Tribune was also pronounced in its condemnation of the Utah judges. See the Tribune excerpt copied in Deseret News of May 25th, 1859.
[^43] Letter of George A. Smith, church historian to Stenhouse, date of March 30th. History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for March, 1859. To make the arrest of these two Indians it became necessary to resort to a military posse; "and an Indian, not one of those charged with the offense, was unfortunately killed." (Governor Cumming's message, Deseret News of Dec. 22nd, 1858).
[^44] Deseret News of March 30th, 1859, p. 32.
[^45] Senate Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 32, p. 37. Mr. Wilson made his report to the president, instead of to the attorney-general, because he had been assailed before the chief executive by two associate justices, Sinclair and Cradlebaugh. (See document cited at the beginning of this note).
[^46] Ibid, p. 29.
[^47] These parties were A. F. McDonald and Hamilton H. Kerns, charged with complicity in the Springville homicides. They were arrested by Marshal P. K. Dotson just on the eve of going before the grand jury on this case, and are the parties referred to in the protest of the grand jury above, of whose evidence said jury was deprived because of their arrest. (See Court Record in Deseret News, 30th March, 1859, p. 19).
[^48] Report of the United States attorney for the territory of Utah, Alex, Wilson, Nov. 15th, 1859. Senate Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 32, p. 28. Also Deseret News of April the 6th, 1859.
[^49] See Linn's Story of the Mormons, pp. 448-50. "This particular case," says Stenhouse, "is probably the best illustration of how men are 'killed to save them.'" Rocky Mountain Saints, chapter xliv, where the case is treated at length, including the alleged confessions of some who were implicated in the assassinations or were accessories before the fact.
[^50] Deseret News of April 6th, 1859.
[^51] His signed statement certified by Lucius N. Scovil, clerk of the court, will be found in Deseret News of April 6th, p. 40. By reference to the "civil authorities" he could only have reference to Governor Cumming and United States attorney for Utah, Mr. Alex, Wilson. The most charitable view to take of Judge Cradlebaugh and his course is to charge it, as Church Historian George A. Smith does, to insanity. "The judge has but one eye, and it occasionally manifests signs of insanity. In every address to the juries, he has made an attack on the religion of the Mormons; and it will be doubted whether his Mormomania is not the result of his hatred to the Mormon enthusiasm; it does not seem possible that a judge, entirely sane, would turn such desperadoes as 'Moze' and 'Looking Glass' loose [the two Indians charged with rape] to prey on the community, were not this the case. The effects of this military despotism has already reached the extreme that has caused hundreds in Utah country to leave their homes, and it is not at all probable that they will return while this reign of terror exists. By the governor's proclamation, we are given to understand that this whole matter has been brought to pass without his knowledge, and in violation of his instructions. Angry feelings exist in the breasts of many of the officers of the army, who burn for revenge upon the people for their detention in the mountains in the winter of 1857." (Letter to Stenhouse, copied in History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for March, 1859, pp. 297-8).
