B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

472CHAPTER CXVII

472MEETING OF THE LEGISLATURE—THE JUDICIARY PLUS ARMY SUPPORT—A CRUSADE

472ONE of the first problems which confronted the new civil administrators of affairs in Utah was the question which place the legislature should meet in, Fillmore or Salt Lake City. The question was referred by Governor Cumming to Judges Eckles and Sinclair, who decided that Fillmore was the seat of the territorial government, and the place where the legislature must meet; which decision seemed to appeal to Governor Cumming.

472Accordingly his excellency issued a proclamation for the legislature to meet at Fillmore, much against the desire of the members of the legislature, who knew that the accommodations the little village could afford, were not adequate to the needs of the assembly and its attaches; besides, the legislature of 1856 had declared the seat of government removed to Salt Lake City, which they held as valid in law. But since the governor and the judges decided to have the assembly meet in Fillmore, even if afterward there must be an adjournment to Salt Lake City, that course was followed. [^1]

FILLMORE DECLARED THE CAPITAL: PRECAUTIONARY MEASURE

The majority of the assembly, however, "not believing that the decision of the judges and of the governor was lawful," took the precaution to meet on the 13th of December in Salt Lake City—to which place the legislature had adjourned in 1856. The respective houses organized and then adjourned to meet at Fillmore where a minority of the members (those living in the south of the territory) met and adjourned from day to day until a majority of the members arrived, which was not until the 18th of December. On that date the two houses met in conjoint session; Secretary of the Territory Hartnett, presented the message of Governor Cumming which was read and an adjournment taken by resolution to meet in Salt Lake City, on the 27th of December. [^2]

THE GOVERNOR'S MESSAGE

The message of Governor Cumming was an excellent state document. It dealt quite frankly with the recently past difficulties and their adjustment, pointing out that by the acquiescence of the people in the conditions of President Buchanan's pardon, all political difficulties between the federal government and the people of Utah were now adjusted. "And I trust," he took occasion to add, "that your future history will attest the sincerity of your professions of devotion to the Constitution and to the law."

474He represented that the presence of the army must be felt as a reproach upon the patriotism by every honorable citizen; and yet the army could only be removed by avoiding every semblance of disloyalty, as the public opinion of the country must be satisfied of the loyalty of the people of Utah as a condition precedent to the army's removal. A number of practical suggestions relative to Indian affairs, to manufacturers, to building bridges and jails, to revision of previous legislative enactments, to defraying the expenses of territorial courts, to common schools, etc., etc., closed the document. [^3]

COURSE OF THE JUDICIARY

Governor Cumming, as the chief executive of the territory, made an honest effort at conciliation with the people of Utah on the basis of President Buchanan's pardon of "Mormon offenses" as accepted by them—pardon for their overt acts in resisting the entrance of the army into Salt Lake valley, but otherwise denying the truth of the allegations of the pre-amble of the proclamation of pardon. Unfortunately the federal judges were not united with him in these efforts to establish peace. Chief Justice Eckles in a few months, as we have already seen, returned to the east evidently with the intention and for the purpose of influencing the administration at Washington to further acts of restriction against the saints, or else to an enlargement of the powers of federal officers in the territory. [^4]

Judge Sinclair in his first charge to the grand jury of his district—which included Salt Lake City—directed them to give special attention to treason and to polygamy, the latter was reported to be quite prevalent in the territory. The judge did not directly urge the finding of indictments for this latter offense; he conceded that the statutes of the territory were a blank upon the subject; and that there was "nothing in the acts of congress that touches that question;" but he urged that the grand jury investigate and report upon the extent of the practice, that responsibility might rest where it belonged for its continuance—with the territorial legislature or the national congress. "Let the facts concerning it go to the world," was his admonition to the jury, "and, according to my reading of the law, your responsibilities and those of this court will be at an end." [^5]

Respecting the crime of treason the judge was more insistent, urging that treason must be judicially determined and the pardon personally accepted before it was effective. Of the president's pardon, "although a public fact in the history of the country, this court cannot take judicial cognizance," [^6] said the judge. With this view, however, Mr. Wilson, the United States district attorney, was not in sympathy, and gave his reasons at length to the grand jury in open court by permission of the judge. He held that the Peace Commissioners were invested with authority to carry into effect the provisions of the proclamation—they did so and returned to their homes. The conditions, expressly set forth in the proclamation were accepted and acquiesced in by the people of Utah, whom they concerned; the governor of the territory had officially announced the acceptance of pardon, with the prescribed terms, by the people, on the 14th of June, 1858; and the conditions on which the pardon had been granted had been faithfully adhered to and carried our. For these reasons the district attorney held "that there are now no acts of sedition, treason, or rebellion against the government of the United States in this territory;" and therefore he could present no bills to the grand jury against any inhabitant of Utah territory for such offenses. [^7] There the matter was dropped.

476Sinclair's court also took up the matter of "intimidation" of Judge Stiles' court by James Ferguson et al, in February, 1857. The bills brought against the associates of Ferguson, Hosea Stout and J. C. Little, were dismissed, but Mr. Ferguson was brought to trial. After occupying the time of the court through several weeks, the case went to the jury, which brought in a verdict of "not guilty;" and thus the cause celebre, which had been widely used to create popular sentiment against the people of Utah, ended. [^8]

In the case of Burr vs. Ferguson, an action growing out of the alleged intimidation case in Judge Stiles' court in 1857, Brigham Young was served with a summons to appear as a witness at the instance of D. H. Burr, the plaintiff, a Gentile lawyer, prosecuting the case for the disbarment of Ferguson. The service of the summons, which took place at the president's residence, created some uneasiness among his personal friends; and it exhibits the tension of feeling under which the community lived in those trying days when it is recalled that such men as Heber C. Kimball, D. H. Wells, Orson Hyde, Orson Pratt, George A. Smith, F. D. Richards and John Taylor thought it necessary to arm themselves and accompany their prophet-leader to the court for his protection. [^9] The matter seems also to have greatly agitated Governor Cumming, who feared that in view of the treatment accorded to church leaders before the courts in the past, Brigham Young might refuse to respond to the summons, and thereby bring on a controversy with the courts. [^10] The governor called at the president's office and proposed to accompany him to the court; and later volunteered to go to the court and inform the judge that when "Mr. Young was wanted, he himself would introduce him." [^11]

477President Young asked the privilege of remaining in his office—but a short distance from the court—until his evidence was wanted, a request that was readily granted by Judge Sinclair. The case, however, was continued from the 1st until the 3rd of December, at which time President Young, not wishing to ask further favors of the court, and also to show his appreciation of the previous courtesy accorded him, walked into the court room promptly at the hour appointed for the sitting, "that no hindrance of business might be charged to neglect on his part, nor any circumstance occur to cause the judge to regret having extended a highly appreciated courtesy." [^12] The president was accompanied by Governor Cumming, his friends previously named and a number of others from his own and the Church Historian's office. The case was continued from time to time until finally it was taken out of court by the prosecuting witness, and therefore President Young was not placed on the witness stand.

"That I might have been guilty, at the time referred to of contempt," said Mr. Ferguson in addressing the court, "I will not entirely deny. That every lawyer who spoke during that term ought to have been fined, I fully believe. The judge would have been honored for doing so." [^13] It will be remembered that it has already been noted that George P. Stiles, the judge in whose court the contempt had been shown by Ferguson, and perhaps by others, was a disreputable character, and it was likely that disgust for the man led up to contempt for the judge.

478The acquittal of Mr. Ferguson in the intimidation case was not a white-washing affair by a 'Mormon' jury, as might be supposed but was a unanimous verdict by a mixed jury. "General Ferguson's defense," writes our chronicle of the times, "has been of a highly scientific character. The jury that acquitted him contained three of our ["Mormon"] most bitter enemies, and several who do not claim to be citizens of this country, who came here with the army, and who calculate to go away in the spring. A unanimous verdict from a mixed jury is a denial of the charges in Mr. Buchanan's proclamation bearing upon the intimidation of the courts and the destruction of their records. [^14]

478It was in connection with this case that the charge was made that the United States court records were destroyed. In President Buchanan's Proclamation of Pardon the incident is referred to in these words: "Judges have been violently interrupted in the performance of their functions, and the records of the court have been seized, and destroyed or concealed." "Not guilty," is the unanimous verdict of a mixed jury.

CONFLICT ON TERRITORIAL AND FEDERAL COURT OFFICIALS

Judges Sinclair and Cradlebaugh each held that the United States district attorney, and the United States marshal were the proper officers to function in both the United States and the territorial courts rather than the territorial attorney general and the territorial marshal, [^15] and this notwithstanding the territorial law provided that the latter should "execute all orders or processes of the supreme or district court in all cases arising under the laws of the territory;" and the former should "attend to all legal business on the part of the territory, before the courts where the territory is a party; and prosecute individuals accused of crime in the judicial district in which he kept his office, in cases arising under the laws of the territory." Territorial district attorneys were to discharge the same functions in their respective districts. [^16] Judge Cradlebaugh held that the criminal jurisdiction given to the probate courts by the territorial legislature was invalid. "It seems that the legislature has vested them with criminal jurisdiction to prevent the district court from having anything of the kind to do," said the judge. "We say they [the legislature] have no power to do so. The fact of a person having been brought before that [the probate] court is no bar to his being brought before this [i. e. the district court]; it is no more a bar than it would be if he had been brought before a vigilance committee in California." This ruling for the time being, until it could be contested in the courts on appeal, threw the selection of both grand and petit juries and the whole machinery of the courts into the hands of the anti-"Mormon" party, by which the liberties of "Mormons" accused of crime were greatly imperiled. Moreover the judge held that the territory should meet the court expenses of these federal officers when transacting territorial business, [^17] which would make it possible for the United States judiciary to prey upon the treasury of the territory. As an illustration of this very great probability take the first session of Judge Sinclair's court, which ran through a term of one hundred days, of which there were but thirty-eight days when the court was in session; but the fee expenses of the officers, deputy marshals, jurors, grand and petit, witnesses, etc., continued through the term until discharged. It was held that the dilatory tactics of Judge Sinclair by which his court term was prolonged was to provide his retainers, transients, and loafers about the city, with the means of subsistence. "Judge Sinclair," wrote John L. Smith, chief clerk of the territorial legislature, "commenced his court the 4th of October; but not continuing his term of sixty days, according to 'Banvier,' he has adjourned from week to week and only sat altogether twenty-three days, [^18] averaging about one hour per day. The probable design of this is to feed at the expense of the United States his juries and other officers composed mostly of strangers, who are anxious to procure the means of subsistence until they can get away. [^19]

480Relative to the whole course of Judge Sinclair, George A. Smith at the time, under date of Dec. 24th, 1858, wrote:

"The court for the third judicial district, in this territory, has been in session since November 1, but has actually sat only twenty-three days, averaging one hour per day, and has done little or no business. The transverse jury has never been sworn. Judge Sinclair has made every effort in his power to rake up all difficulties cancelled by President Buchanan's general amnesty. The judge has ruled that the United States marshal and his deputies are the officers of the courts in all territorial cases, thereby setting aside the sheriffs of all the counties, the territorial attorneys, and other officers. This ruling is in direct violation of the law and of all precedents in any of the territories of the United States for the last sixty years, or since the days of John Adams, at which time the territory of Kentucky, in the face of similar ruling, was about to rebel against the United States government, and join the Spaniards, but was prevented by the government conceding the point. Judge Sinclair's decisions abrogate the principle of the Nebraska law, and are a direct infraction of the Constitution of the United States, leaving the people of this territory in worse than colonial vassalage. The United States supreme court in Washington will no doubt rectify these matters, but it will take some time and impose considerable expense." [^20]

A DESPICABLE JUDICIARY

Referring to the probable disastrous effects of these rulings upon the territorial treasury, George A. Smith, writing to Colonel Kane, said:

481"The United States court in this district closed its first case on the 11th inst. after a session of thirty-eight sitting days, and occupying the time of one hundred days. The court is authorized to expend six days of its session, or so much of it as may be necessary, to accomplish United States business; but by prolongation, the marshal is enabled to deplete the treasury, and to sustain some of the strangers who are in the country. However correct legal men may regard this course of wasting time, the citizens look upon it as a species of ridiculous loaferism.

481It is rumored that the judge has adjourned court for want of expense money, court expenses will undoubtedly be a very sore item in this territory, if the judges and other imported officers make an on-slaught on the county treasuries similar to what has been before attempted here by the United States judges on the national treasury. The expenses of one term of Judge Drummond's court here was more than four times the amount of the whole territorial revenue.

481These expenses were contracted under the act authorizing the first six days of the term, or so much of it as might be necessary, to be devoted to the transaction of the United States business. With a single exception, the Hon. Z. Snow, all the judges who have been sitting in this territory, have pursued a similar course, saddling upon the federal treasury claims to the amount of nearly half a million. Rich and proverbially liberal as Uncle Sam is acknowledged to be, he has refused to pay these court expenses, and the paper certified by the judges as necessary and reasonable in amount is not worth three per cent. If Judge Sinclair and his drunken clique expect the counties to furnish at the ratio on which the federal funds have been expended since he opened court, they will find themselves drawing upon an empty box.

481In this barren country fees of courts must necessarily be low, and loyal service rendered cannot meet with that ample reward which the old and wealthy states of Pennsylvania, New York, Virginia, and Ohio can afford to pay.

It is very annoying to a community to feel sensible that every act of the court that has jurisdiction over them, is a step towards placing them in an unfavorable position before their fellow countrymen. But while whiskey presides in our judicial halls, we expect the streets will be 'icy,' and the reports unfavorable.

482If the members of the legislature ever make the attempt to furnish funds for these courts to expend on the ratio on which the United States court has been expending in this district for the last four months, every member voting for such an appropriation would be sure to find it his political grave; while his constituents would stand a fair chance of being sold out for taxes." [^21]

482Throughout the course of Judge Sinclair was despicable. He threatened that when his court convened in the ensuing May term, for 1859, he would have three-fourths of the army at Camp Floyd quartered in one of the public squares of Salt Lake City, "ready to carry out his orders;" and in every way manifested a disposition to bring on a collision between the army and the people.

482"The speculators still seem determined to let no opportunity slip to create a 'muss.' There are strong rumors that Judge Sinclair is about to bring a large detachment of troops to this city to convince the inhabitants that he really is a much more important personage than they have any idea of." [^22]

482A Salt Lake correspondent of the New York Herald wrote his paper on the 23rd of April as follows:

"In my last letter I informed you of the threat of Judge Sinclair that he would hold court in this city during May, with three-fourths of the army now at Camp Floyd, quartered in Union Square, ready to carry out his orders. The apprehension of a collision which that threat inspired measurably died away in the bosoms of the people generally, and the youthful judge was beginning to get credit for ideal braggadocio, and his tongue was regarded as having divulged what was in his heart to do, if he only could get the chance; but, alas! the day after the departure of the last mail from here, rumors of his intentions were in circulation at Camp Floyd, which leaves us no reason to doubt that his threat was no idle boast, but is in reality the fixed determination of his heart, to lead to a collision between the citizens and the troops. Of this Governor Cumming is apparently fully convinced, as also the other officials outside of the judicial clique. By the departure of the next mail, plans will be better developed, if not even then carried into execution, or at least attempted; and should you then hear of the eagerly-sought-for collision having taken place, it can be witnessed that we have not sought it, but that it is the deep-laid scheme of sutlers, degraded judges, and disappointed officers of our great republican army, for the sake of perishable gold, gratification of personal revenge, and the empty glory of swords to be crimsoned with the blood of fellow citizens." [^23]

JUDGE CRADLEBAUGH'S COURTS—PLUS MILITARY DISPLAY

Of the judicial procedure of Judge Cradlebaugh, in the second judicial district, I have already spoken, in part, in connection with his attempts to secure indictments against supposed perpetrators of the Mountain Meadows Massacre, and the Parrish or Springville homicides committed within his judicial district. [^24] The effort to bring to the bar of his court the perpetrators of the above named crimes was an act in itself worthy of all commendation, for they were atrocious crimes; it was the judge's methods only that are open to criticism. He organized his court on the 8th of March, at Provo. On application to General Johnston a detachment of one hundred soldiers was detailed to attend upon the court, commanded by Captain Heth, the officers being given headquarters in the building used as a courthouse,—a seminary school building—in a room immediately under the one occupied by the grand jury; while the troops were tented on the seminary block. The judge conceded that the presence of the troops was an unusual thing, but he regarded their presence as necessary to take care of the prisoners—as he had heard there was no jail at Provo—and to "preserve the peace." [^25]

484Twelve days later the number of troops was increased by an additional detachment of nine hundred men [^26] under command of Major Paul. Eight companies comprised this second detachment; a company of artillery, and one of cavalry, added to its efficiency. The detachment camped within sight of the courthouse. [^27]

This unusual and unnecessary display of military power in civil affairs was vigorously protested by the people of the second judicial district. A respectful but vigorous petition signed by five hundred citizens of Provo was addressed to the mayor and city council declaring that their "feelings were aggrieved and outraged" by "the appearance of a military force" in their peaceful city, "surrounding the court and investing the halls of justice." The petition further characterized the proceeding as a "high-handed outrage, a direct infringement upon the rights of American citizens and a gross violation of their liberties and municipal immunities." They declared Judge Cradlebaugh's statement that there was no jail in Provo to be an error. "It is well known to all our citizens," declared the petitioners, "that we have one, and that the civil officers, both of the city and the county, hold themselves in readiness at all times to secure and take care of prisoners." The petitioners held that the troops could only be present for one of two purposes: either the judge was afraid of his own personal safety, and the troops were there for his protection; or they were there to intimidate the citizens, witnesses, and jurors, and pervert justice. As it was impossible to believe the first suggestion, and the officers were quartered in a room immediately under that where the grand jury met—"with only a slight ceiling between"—it looked like the purpose of the detachment's presence was intimidation. The judge's statement that the troops were there "to take care of the prisoners and to preserve the peace," was regarded—the first suggestion, as being "an attack upon the fidelity of our civil officers;" and the second, "a direct insult to the inhabitants of this city." "We therefore," concluded the petition, "request your honorable body [the mayor and city council] to order the removal of these troops from our midst." [^28]

485The mayor and city council informed the judge of the petition of the people, and added to their representation the further statement of fact that the presence of the troops had made it exceedingly difficult for the officers of the city to preserve the peace between the unruly portion of citizens and the soldiers—several unpleasant incidents having already occurred; and the presence of the soldiers stationed around the place of holding the court "savoring of a military interference with the municipal regulations of American citizens," the city council asked for the immediate removal of the troops beyond the city limits.

485The judge declined to comply with this request, reaffirming the necessity of the presence of the troops to take charge of prisoners, and declared that the troops were a quiet and orderly set of men. He challenged the statement of their annoying or interfering with the citizens. "This I will say, however," said the judge, "that as soon as I can dispense with their most useful services I shall do so."

This brought forth a more vigorous protest from the mayor and city council: the city authorities had been under the necessity of doubling the police force to preserve the peace between indignant citizens and the troops; several soldiers found drunk on the streets had been arrested, and the police, "not wishing to bring a stain on the court by putting them in jail," had taken them to their quarters and delivered them to their officers; a soldier had interfered with a civil officer when the latter was quelling a street row; other soldiers "had been caught in the act of attempting to break into houses at night," said the second communication of the city council, "that can be proven by many witnesses." The army itself was degraded by the service imposed upon it by the court, said the council—it was unworthy of the gallantry of soldiers "to use them as a county jail—a walking calaboose!" And "all experience has proven that the introduction of soldiers into cities or villages has had a uniform tendency to produce hostile feelings." But most of all the protest was leveled at the usurpation of civil functions by military authority. In conclusion the request for the removal of the troop was renewed.

486No better protest against the usurpation of military power over the civil authority is to be found in our American annals than in the protest of the city council of this obscure town of Provo, in the territory of Utah.

"Whatever may have been the object of clothing the court with a military escort, it has the most dangerous tendency; it usurps the functions of civil officers—performs the duties the law never designed for the army, and renders null and void the civil officers that have been appointed by law; it presents the judiciary to the people in the light of a military inquisition. The lives and liberties of all persons accused are jeopardized by the examination of witnesses and the action of jurors under the influence of a military intimidation and espionage. * * * Should such an order of things continue, we have reason to fear that the time is not far distant when witnesses will be sworn at the point of the bayonet, and the law executed by the sword. As a beginning, a single corps, highly honored for its discipline, the superior skill and scientific attainments of its officers, is placed out of its constitutional sphere to perform the duties of sheriff, marshal, or jailor, the military power then supersedes the civil, in a limited degree to be sure, but military power seldom retrogrades, and jurors are controlled by them; the court follows in the wake—that bulwark of human liberty—an independent, high-minded judiciary, sustained by the people, is thus annihilated. The legislative and executive departments are soon overcome, and the sword of a Julius Caesar puts an end to the whole fabric of liberty." [^29]

487"Contrary to all those principles of equity and justice that should characterize a court, it has pleased Judge Cradlebaugh to set aside, in several instances, the civil authorities and, without the least valid reason known to us, to employ federal troops to execute the orders of his court, thereby clearly indicating on his part, so far as we can discern, an utter disregard of the latest expressed views and policy of the administration concerning Utah, and the views and policy of your excellency and all good citizens, and a settled purpose, for some cause, to force an angry collision between the citizens and troops, which is well known is not so difficult to accomplish in the best ordered town or city in the Union, especially when one class is caused to illegally supplant, taunt, and oppress the other." [^30]

487Several other settlements of the judicial district joined with the citizens of Provo in the protest and demand for removal of the troops, but the request was not heeded. Indeed it was after the first protest to the attendance of the troops upon the court was made by the city council of Provo, that the number of troops was increased from one hundred to one thousand; and after the second protest Judge Sinclair meanwhile continued to employ federal troops to execute the orders of his court in Salt Lake City.

Governor Cumming himself was in Provo from the 14th to the 20th of March, and on the latter date wrote a communication to General Johnston reciting the facts connected with the presence of the troops at Provo, expressing the opinion that their presence was unnecessary and asking that the troops be withdrawn from within the walls of the city and to be so disposed as to "relieve the inhabitants from the influence of a military encampment in their vicinity." This General Johnston declined to do, giving such interpretation of his instructions as warranted his granting a military force for special service in one as well as the other of the coordinate branches of the territorial civil government, that is to say, to the judiciary as well as to the executive branch of such government. [^31] He justified himself in the present instance in consequence of "the arrest of the mayor of Provo and the intention to arrest the bishop of Springville," which was likely to result in some excitement. [^32]

GOVERNOR CUMMING'S PROTEST AGAINST THE USE OF MILITARY DISPLAY IN CONNECTION WITH CIVIL COURTS

This refusal on the part of General Johnston led Governor Cumming to issue a proclamation reciting the facts involved in the case, and making a solemn protest against the present use of a military force, and also against all future movements of troops incompatible with the instructions given to him by the general government, which instructions he annexed and published in connection with his proclamation. [^33]

Governor Cumming in a letter to Lewis Cass, secretary of state, said of this incident: "Persons who had been served with subpoenas as witnesses have been arrested in court as criminals, and committed to the guard-tent. Among the prisoners was the mayor of Provo. His arrest and confinement in a guard-tent created a feeling of indignation among the inhabitants of Provo. He was released the next morning for want of evidence against him. His arrest was probably the reason why Wall [the 'Mormon' sheriff] said he 'did not like to see the mayor treated like a dog,' and that 'it would be necessary to increase the police force to keep the boys in order.' Not the slightest disturbance occurred, however. The above-mentioned remark of Wall is supposed to have induced Captain Heth, who was the officer commanding the detachment at the courthouse, to make requisition upon General A. S. Johnston for an increase of force, whereupon Major Paul was ordered to march upon Provo with eight companies of infantry, one of artillery, and one of cavalry, who are now encamped in the vicinity of Provo. All these military movements have been made without consulting me at all. I believe them to have been made without sufficient cause. There has been no 'opposition,' nor 'any just cause to expect opposition,' on the part of the inhabitants who, so far as my information is concerned, have manifested no disposition to oppose the civil officers in the discharge of their duties." [^34]

489Meantime the citizens of Provo drafted a Memorial and Petition to Governor Cumming, detailing the facts and showing how such a course as that inaugurated by Judge Cradlebaugh and General Johnston, violated every principle and guarantee of the settlement of the late difficulties between the people of Utah and the national administration, and ended by asking the governor to fairly and fully report to the proper department in Washington the official proceedings of Judge John Cradlebaugh in the second judicial district. [^35]

JUDGE CRADLEBAUGH'S CONFLICT WITH THE GRAND JURY

Pending the appeal to the federal administration it is fitting that other procedure of Judge Cradlebaugh's court should be considered. As already stated his determination to ferret out and bring to trial the perpetrators of the Mountain Meadows Massacre and the Springville homicides was a commendable thing in itself, but he proceeded on most unwarrantable grounds, not only in surrounding his court by a military force, but by the assumption that the crimes he would particularly punish were crimes that received community sanction, and that the perpetrators of them were community-protected. He mentioned larcenies committed near Camp Floyd, the Mountain Meadows Massacre, and the Springville homicides, then said:

490"To allow these things to pass over gives a color as if they were done by authority. The very fact of such a case as that of the Mountain Meadows shows that there was some person high in the estimation of the people, and it was done by that authority; and this case of Parrishes shows the same, and unless you do your duty, such will be the view that will be taken of it. You can know no law but the laws of the United States and the laws you have here. No person can commit crimes and say they are authorized by higher authorities, and if they have any such notions they will have to dispel them." [^36]

490"Judge Cradlebaugh's address," remarks H. H. Bancroft, "was ill-advised. The 'higher authorities' of which he spoke could only mean the authorities of the church, or in other words of the first presidency; and to condemn and threaten to impeach that authority before a Mormon grand jury was a gross judicial blunder. Though there may have been cause of suspicion, there was no fair color of testimony, and there is none yet [1890, date of Bancroft's work] that Brigham or his associates were implicated in the massacre. And to the natural reluctance that a 'Mormon grand jury' would have to proceed against religious leaders whom they knew personally, with whom they had crossed the plains and the mountains in a great pioneering journey, the further fact might be added, that bringing them before Judge Cradlebaugh's court, was bringing them, under all the circumstances, into a military encampment where there would have been slight opportunity of a fair and impartial hearing of the cause." [^37]

490After two weeks' service the grand jury not proceeding with that promptness in the special cases mentioned in his charge to them at the opening of the court session, Judge Cradlebaugh summoned them into court, and summarily dismissed them "as an evidently useless appendage of a court of justice." [^38] The grand jury resented this impeachment of their integrity as officers of the court, in the following manly protest:

491"We, the undersigned, having been lawfully summoned as grand jurors for the second judicial district of the territory of Utah; and having been summarily and insultingly discharged by the Hon. John Cradlebaugh, United States associate justice for said territory, while in the faithful and diligent performance of our duties as a sworn inquest, do hereby enter our solemn protest against the language and conduct of the aforesaid Judge Cradlebaugh addressed and used towards us at the time of our discharge.

491We were surrounded in our deliberation in our jury room by a detachment of the army; and army officers' quarters within hearing of the evidence of witnesses while being examined by us.

491We presented indictments for offenses against the laws of the United States. Our indictments were treated with contempt, and the prisoners indicted have been liberated without trial. Witnesses subpoenaed to be examined by us have been treacherously arrested, and thus have we been deprived of their evidence.

491Notwithstanding being thus trammeled by the court, we have honored our oath and were endeavoring to faithfully discharge our duties when we were dismissed by his honor, with a slanderous and insulting harangue.

491Provo City, Utah County,

491Territory of Utah,

491March 22, 1859,

491John Riggs, Foreman,

491In behalf of the Grand Jury." [^39]

491Judge Cradlebaugh further insulted the grand jury when discharging them by saying,

491"You are the tools, the dupes, the instruments of a tyrannical church despotism. The heads of your church order and direct you. You are taught to obey their orders and commit these horrid murders. Deprived of your liberty, you have lost your manhood, and become the willing instruments of bad men. I say it to you, it will be my earnest effort, while with you, to knock off your ecclesiastical shackles and set you free." [^40]

491The remarks though directed to the grand jury do not appear in the published harangue of the judge to the grand jury as corrected and revised by him. [^41] Commenting on the speech of Judge Cradlebaugh when dismissing the grand jury, the New York Herald of May 7th said:

492"His address in discharging them is one of the most extraordinary judicial speeches which can be furnished from the records of any court in the civilized or semi-civilized world. * * * In this vindictive and most undignified speech he has clearly shown himself unfitted for the position he occupies."

492On the same subject the Philadelphia Ledger said:

492"From the specimen he [Cradlebaugh] gave of his temper and fractious feeling, he evidently is an unfit person to preside over a court of justice and we do not wonder that the grand jury refused to find any bills. * * * Judges who act so indiscreetly and perversely in authority should be recalled." [^42]

492At the time of dismissing the grand jury Judge Cradlebaugh also said:

492"When this people [i. e. the Mormon people] come to their reason, and manifest a disposition to punish their own high offenders, it will be time to enforce the law also for their protection. If this court cannot bring you to a proper sense of your duty, it can at least turn the savages in custody loose upon you."

492The savages referred to were two Indians on trial before the court for rape and attempted rape. Their names were "Pangunts," commonly known as "Moze;" and "Namowah," commonly called "Looking Glass." Their crime, and there was little doubt of their guilt, was a peculiarly revolting one, since the assault was made upon a mother and her daughter at the Indian farm near Springville. The latter was a child of ten, and in her case the crime was attended by cruel lacerations which, with the accompanying brutality, caused her life to be despaired of for a long time. [^43]

492Yet the judge, true to this threat, turned the parties arrested for this crime loose upon the community, saying to them when dismissing them:

493"Crime should be prosecuted, ordinarily, but in looking at the constitutional rights guaranteed to you, the grand jury having adjourned [the grand jury had been summarily dismissed by the court before completing its business] the court feels it its duty to discharge you."

493"With regard to these Indian prisoners," said his honor, later, "they will be kept in the care of the military authorities until they get to Camp Floyd, when they will be finally discharged." [^44]

THE FEDERAL ATTORNEY FOR UTAH OPPOSED TO THE PROCEDURE OF JUDGE CRADLEBAUGH

Concerning this whole procedure of summarily dismissing the grand jury, United States attorney for Utah, Mr. Wilson, in his report to President Buchanan, said:

493"During the session of the grand jury and the sitting of the court I endeavored to investigate and prosecute all the cases which came to my knowledge, ordering subpoenas for witnesses whenever, either before the grand jury or the court, persons were mentioned by the witnesses as being likely to know anything about the cases under examination. But the session of the grand jury and the sitting of the court were too short to make a complete examination of all the cases. Had the grand jury been permitted to remain longer in session, and had the court remained in session until the business was finished, I might have been enabled to have brought the guilty parties, or some of them, to justice. But the opposition of the people to the military at the courthouse, in a quiet village, in a time of peace, rendered it impossible to get witnesses, the Mormon people saying that the really guilty parties were not so much wanted as a chance to get at the church authorities, and bring about a collision in the territory." [^45]

493And concerning the Mountain Meadows Massacre, and the probable success attending upon a proper and legal method of handling it, the United States attorney said:

"In my judgment, the best and the only practical way of thoroughly and successfully investigating and trying this case, would be for a court to be held as near the scene of the massacre as possible; and for this purpose an ample fund should be provided, such as would be fully sufficient to enable the officers of the court to make a patient and thorough search for evidence, and for the arrest of the guilty parties, and to bear the expenses of witnesses, and all the necessary contingencies which might attend the court, during any length of time that might be required for a complete finishing of the case. That this horrible massacre, through such means and a patient investigation, can be brought to light, and the guilty parties punished, I have a faith as firm as in the eternal justice of providence." [^46]

494After the dismissal of both the petit and the grand jury, Judge Cradlebaugh issued bench warrants from hearings had in his chambers against parties suspected of crime; and indeed while the grand jury was still in session witnesses who had been summoned before it were arrested on warrants issued by the judge in chambers, and this without the knowledge of the district attorney or the clerk of the court. [^47]

494The judge also sat in chambers as a committing magistrate, examined and bound over for future trial, A. F. McDonald, Hamilton H. Kerns, John Daley, Alfred Nethercott, Abraham Durfee and Joseph Bartholomew, as the perpetrators of the Springville homicides. The judge admitted witnesses for the defense and arguments both for the prosecution and defense; and he himself gave an exhaustive review of the case. All the parties were committed without bail and given in charge of the territorial marshal; but later John Daley was admitted to bail in the sum of $1,000, to appear as a witness on the trial of the other defendants. [^48]

THE SPRINGVILLE HOMICIDES AS "BLOOD ATONEMENT" CASES

Respecting these Springville homicides there has existed a persistent belief among anti-"Mormon" writers that they represented cases of "blood atonement," or "killings ordered by church authorities." [^49] Such evidence as is cited in the case is purely circumstantial, or rests upon the testimony of very questionable characters, who themselves were implicated in the murders. On the other hand, the commonly accepted view of the "Mormon" community was doubtless voiced by the editor of the Deseret News—Judge Elias Smith, a man of strong intelligence and of most excellent character, who, when commenting on Judge Cradlebaugh's review of the case in chambers, said:

495"We have carefully examined all the evidence furnished by a remarkably accurate stenographic reporter, and can only conclude that 'evidence before the court goes to show' that Durfee, Potter and two of the Parrishes got into a row about matters best, if not only, known to themselves, and for that Potter and two Parrishes were killed." [^50]

495Having disposed of the Springville cases the court of the second judicial district adjourned, but not before Judge Cradlebaugh made a spiteful entry on the record which accused the whole community, as well men holding civil authority under the territorial government as the "Mormon" church leaders of being in a conspiracy to obstruct the cause of public justice, and to cripple the earnest efforts of his court. [^51]

496The adjournment of the court and the retirement of its military attachment with the prisoners was quite spectacular, and is thus described in the Deseret News of that period:

496"Immediately upon the adjournment of the court and simultaneous therewith, the troops under command of Captain Heth commenced their march from the seminary lot and stationed themselves in the main street. At this juncture sixteen platoons of infantry, averaging from twenty-five to thirty in each platoon, one company of cavalry and a detachment of artillery, with two brass pieces, entered the city by the north gateway, commanded by Major Paul. They proceeded down the main street, their martial band playing the tune that goes to the well known song, 'Doo Dah.' At a point about three blocks south of the seminary, they wheeled and commenced their return march, the band playing, 'The Girl I Left Behind Me.' When eight platoons of infantry had passed the courthouse, a halt was called, and Captain Heth's company, with the prisoners, were marched into the center of Major Paul's command, and the grand military denouement was consummated by the whole force taking up its line of march for Camp Floyd." [^52]

"After the close of the court at Provo," says John Jaques, assistant church historian, in a letter to Stenhouse, "the prisoners were escorted by the military to Camp Floyd, and there incarcerated in small cells. On approaching the camp, several hundred of soldiers, camp followers, gamblers, etc., met the prisoners and escort with a rush, and clamoured loudly against the prisoners, with cries of 'hang them,' 'lynch them,' etc. Captain Heth, commander of the escort, ordered the mob back and forced a way through. Money was very scarce and consequently the inspiring spirit of whiskey was not generally diffused or it is probable that the prisoners would have fallen a prey to the mob." [^53] McDonald, one of the prisoners, politely doffed his hat and mockingly said to Captain Heth, "that he supposed this was an introduction to civilization." [^54]

THE APPEAL TO WASHINGTON AUTHORITIES

Both parties to the controversies that had now arisen between the federal judges on the one hand, and Governor Cumming and United States Attorney Wilson on the other, promptly appealed to the proper departments of the federal administration, Judges Sinclair and Cradlebaugh in a conjoint letter from Camp Floyd to President Buchanan, under date of April 7th, detailing their views of the recent happenings in the territory; [^55] United States Attorney Wilson, by letters under date of March 28th, and April 8th, to Attorney-General Jeremiah S. Black; and Governor Cumming in several communications to Hon. Lewis Cass, secretary of state, under dates of 25th, 27th, and 31st of March, with many inclosures, citizens' petitions, memorials, correspondence with General Johnston, Judge Cradlebaugh, and his own proclamation and protest. The conclusion of the whole matter was that the executive and the people of the territory were sustained all down the line in their contentions and petitions, as against the United States judges and the military.

VICTORY OF THE CAUSE OF THE PEOPLE OVER JUDICIAL TERRORISM

In his letter to Judges Cradlebaugh and Sinclair, Attorney-General Jeremiah S. Black, under date of May 17th, cuttingly said:

"The condition of things in Utah made it extremely desirable that the judges appointed for that territory should confine themselves strictly within their own official sphere. The government had a district attorney, who was charged with the duties of a public accuser, and a marshal, who was responsible for the arrest and safekeeping of criminals. For the judges, there was nothing left except to hear patiently, according to the evidence adduced on both sides. It did not seem either right or necessary to instruct you that these were to be the limits of your interference with the public affairs of the territory, for the executive never dictates to the judicial department. The president is responsible only for the appointment of proper men. You were selected from a very large number of other persons, who were willing to be employed on the same service, and the choice was grounded solely on your high character for learning, sound judgment, and integrity. It was natural, therefore, that the president should look upon the proceedings at Provo with a sincere desire to find you in all things blameless."

498The attorney-general admitted that it might be true that public opinion in Utah would be opposed to the conviction of parties who deserved punishment, but even if that were true, "every inhabitant in Utah must still be proceeded against in the regular, legal, and constitutional way." Then came Judge Black's findings:

498"On the whole, the president is very decidedly of opinion:

498To the United States attorney for the territory, the attorney-general on the same date wrote:

"On proper occasions, and in a proper and respectful manner, you must oppose every effort which any judge may make to usurp your functions. Do not allow your rights to remain unasserted. If the judges will confine themselves to the simple and plain duty imposed upon them by law of hearing and deciding the cases that are brought before them, I am sure that the business of the territory will get along very well. This must be impressed upon their minds, if possible; for if they will insist upon doing the duties of prosecuting attorney and marshal as well as their own, everything will be thrown into confusion and the peace of the territory may be destroyed at any moment. * * * Your conduct at Provo seems, from all accounts of it, to have been perfectly proper, and is fully approved by the president. Your refusal on a former occasion to violate the promise of pardon contained in the president's proclamation was equally praiseworthy and correct." [^57]

499In answer to Governor Cumming's request that the discrepancy which existed between the instructions given to the civil and military departments in Utah might be removed "by some further action on the part of government;" and that all requisitions for troops be made by or through the governor of the territory, in order to avoid the confusion which will always arise from the pursuance of a different policy, the secretary of state under date of May 2d, answered:

499"I am instructed to inform you that orders have been issued from the war department which will remove any such discrepancy between the civil and military departments of the government as that to which you refer; * * * and it is earnestly hoped that the harmony will not again be interrupted." [^58]

499To General Johnston, the secretary of war, John B. Floyd, under date of May 6th, wrote:

499"Peace being now restored to the territory, the judicial administration of the laws will require no help from the army under your command. If the services of the United States troops should be needed, under any circumstances, it could only be to assist the executive authority in executing the sentence of law or the judicial decrees of the court. And that necessity could only arise when the services of a civil posse were found to be insufficient. You will therefore only order the troops under your command to assist as a posse comitatus in the execution of the laws upon the written application of the governor of the territory, and not otherwise." [^59]

These several instructions and orders from the federal administration, put a stop to the wild judicial career of the federal judges of the period, one of whom, Judge Cradlebaugh, with a strong, and somewhat heterogeneous military detachment [^60] was fast creating a reign of terror in the south part of the territory. But when the officer commanding the detachment of troops accompanying the judge received orders from General Johnston to return to Camp Floyd, since hereafter the troops were to be used in connection with the civil affairs of the territory only in the "execution of the sentences of the law, or the judicial decrees of the court, and then only on the written application of the governor," the zeal of the judge was cooled; he returned with the troops to Camp Floyd, and soon afterwards, as explained elsewhere, [^61] he brought his judicial career in Utah to a close.

500Another event in "Mormon" community life proper to mention here, and with which Colonel Kane's name is at least distantly associated, was the election of Captain William H. Hooper in the fall of 1859, to succeed, as Utah's delegate to congress, Dr. John M. Bernhisel, who had served from the organization of the territory until succeeded by Captain Hooper. It was doubtless as much the desire of the doctor to be relieved from a difficult post as it was for his constituents to seek a new representative, that led to the change, since the doctor's services, though rendered in a quiet, unobtrusive way were nevertheless satisfactory, and doubtless quite as effective as a more aggressive course would have been. [^62]

President Young, however, in 1854, had written to Colonel Thomas L. Kane "offering him the appointment of delegate from Utah territory," and invited him, meanwhile, to aid Dr. Bernhisel. At the same time the president also wrote Bernhisel of his tender to Colonel Kane of the post of delegate, and advised him to counsel with the colonel. [^63] Nothing came of the proposal, as doubtless Colonel Kane was not willing to have the purely disinterested service he had hitherto rendered the Latter-day Saints marred by the acceptance of a position that would have the appearance of a political reward; and certainly his holding no official position—rendered him all the more serviceable in the "Utah War" issue, and after that in supporting the policy and retaining in office, Governor Cumming.

501Horace S. Eldredge had been first nominated for the position of delegate, but owing to his absence from the territory at the time of his nomination, and the likelihood of his not returning before the day of election becoming apparent, his name was withdrawn, and Captain Hooper was placed in nomination and elected by nearly a unanimous vote. [^64]

501The Baltimore Republican, commenting on Mr. Hooper's election, gave the following biographical and character sketch of him, after his arrival at the capital from Utah.

501"By what would seem to be a singular coincidence, three of the present delegates in congress from the territories are native-born Mary-landers. Among them we recognize a native of this state, in Hon. William H. Hooper, representing the territory of Utah, as the successor of Dr. Bernhisel. * * * Mr. Hooper is a man of superior intelligence and energy and activity, fine manners and address, and who in his frank and open intercourse will do much—whatever may be the faults of his people—to remove those prejudices which—whether rational or not—have hitherto prevailed against the Mormon people.

There is something singularly interesting in the history of this gentleman and his connection with that peculiar people whom he now represents in the councils of the nation. He was born in Dorchester county, on the eastern shore of our state [Maryland] at the old home of his family called Warwick Manor, and is a son of Henry Hooper, and a grandson of James Price. Residing for a few years in this city, employed in a mercantile house, at the age of 21 he removed in 1835 to Galena, Illinois, and engaging largely in commercial business, and soon accumulated a fortune. In the crash of 1837, by the collapse of one of the banks in the state, his house, then one of the largest in the west, became involved, winding up by the ultimate payment, however, of every dollar of liabilities. He then turned his attention to steamboating from St. Louis on the Mississippi, [in the capacity of a captain on the steamers he navigated—hence the title which clung to him through life], and soon acquired again a liberal fortune, which was swept from him by the great fire in that city in 1850. Added to this misfortune soon came a bereavement in the death of his wife, and following this a total prostration of his own health. He was pronounced beyond hope of recovery by his physicians, and advised as a last resort to cross the plains to California, to a milder climate. Broken down and dejected, he reached Salt Lake City, unable to move farther. In this condition he was kindly ministered to by the gentle care of the people of Salt Lake, and in time was restored to health. He then resolved to remain among those who had thus established a claim upon his gratitude; entered anew into mercantile business; acquired a liberal fortune, and married a lady who is his present companion. By nearly a unanimous vote he was last year chosen as representative of the territory in congress, and by his gentlemanly bearing, unexceptionable character, and superior intelligence has already established himself in the confidence and respect of the people at the seat of government." [^65]

Footnotes

The theory of the Judge's dementia, receives support from the manner in which he acted on entering the territory. He called at the home of "Eph Hanks" in the mountains east of Salt Lake City on the 3rd of November. The previous night he had spent on Big Mountain, where he had frozen all his fingers. He was accompanied by a woman who claimed to be a "Mormon," and a man acting as his teamster. From the Hanks ranch the judge sent on his carriage and the woman to Salt Lake City, while he himself remained with Hanks who treated his fingers for frostbite. "The judge has the appearance of being an ox driver," says Hanks in his narrative of the judge's visit to his ranch, "and was very roughly dressed." The following morning Judge Cradlebaugh started for town. "I started a short time after him," says Hanks, "and met General Burr [surveyor general for Utah territory] and his son in a carriage. They asked me if Judge Cradlebaugh had stopped with me over night? I told them he had, and that he had started for town on foot this morning. They said they had come to meet him, but had seen nothing of him. I told them he must have taken the other road. They went on and took the other road. I rode on and overtook the judge riding on a load of wood. I told him that the carriage he had just met contained General Burr and his son, who had come out to meet him. He replied, 'I do not want any of those airs, I have come here to do my duty.' As we got to the mouth of the canon we saw the carriage returning, he told the driver of the load of wood, to drive like fury and keep out of the way of that carriage. When we got to town, he jumped from off the wood and walked among the houses. I gave him an invitation to go home with me and take supper, which he accepted. I then took him to Marshal Dotson's." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., November entries, 1858, pp. 1066-7).

---
Notas:
[^1] Deseret News of March 30th; also Ibid, Aug. 17th, 1859.
[^2] Deseret News, Editorial of Aug. 17th, 1859. There was much division of feeling in relation to the incident. General Johnston, no doubt, taking Sergeant Pike's representation of the matter, wrote Governor Cumming that Spencer had "resisted an officer in the discharge of his duty with a pitchfork, and the officer broke his head in self-defense." The general denied having given Spencer permission to occupy the premises at the Spencer ranch, "although Spencer," says the chronicle here followed, "holds Johnston's letter giving that permission." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for March 30th, 1859, pp. 293-4).
[^3] The above was reported to President Young by letter from Bishop Weeks of Cedar Fort, (see History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 16th Aug., 1859, pp. 633-4). "The officers [of Camp Floyd] assert that they could hardly prevent their men from rising and personally revenging the foul murder of a comrade." (Captain Burton's City of the Saints, p. 341. In a note he gives the account of the assault upon Cedar Fort where he states that the damage finally claimed from congress for destruction of property amounted to $10,000).
[^4] The officer was Colonel Crossman, see letter of Wilford Woodruff to George A. Smith, date of July 12th, 1859, copied in History of Brigham Young, Ms., p. 581.
[^5] See Note end of chapter where this statement is made by General Wells to Governor Cumming.
[^6] "Such was the story told by Governor Cumming to the author a few years later," writes Stenhouse, "and as he related it all the fire of his nature was depicted on his countenance, and told unmistakably that he would have made good every word with his life." (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 411).
[^7] See statement of Utah correspondent—undoubtedly a "Mormon"—to the New York Herald, under date of 23rd April, 1859: "An express from Camp Floyd arrived here on Sunday night with the intelligence that two regiments were coming to the city to make arrests, and it was expected that they would have orders for forced marches, to come in upon us unawares. Immediately on Governor Cumming being made acquainted with the report and circumstances, which leave no room to doubt of the plans of the judges, he notified General D. H. Wells to hold the militia in readiness to act on orders. By two o'clock on Monday morning five thousand men were under arms. Had the United States' troops attempted to enter the city, the struggle must have commenced, for the governor is determined to carry out his instructions. What has deferred their arrival here we know not; but now that this plan is known, a watchful eye is kept on the camp, and the shedding of blood seems inevitable. We have confidence in the overruling care of our heavenly Father; and whatever does take place, will eventually turn out for good. Major ——— told me yesterday that General Johnston was resolved to carry out his orders, and he affirms that they are to use the military on the requisition of the judges, and not on the requisition of the governor only. I have just learned that 500 soldiers were on the march to San Pete settlements to arrest persons there whom the judges are seeking after. The judicial-military-inquisitorial farce played at Provo satisfies everybody that it is not violated justice that seeks satiety in blood. There is not an official in any settlement outside this city but what expects to be handled as were those at Provo; and the only safety they have from judicial vengeance—not personal, but vengeance against the community—is in flight to the mountains. In the south, where the weather has been excellent for early agricultural operations this spring, the fields have been left uncultivated, and the seed that should be fructifying in the soil is still lying in the barn, the end of which must be famine; for unless the governor has power to restrain the judges from calling the military to act as a posse comitatus, no man of any influence will trust himself at home. We fear no judge of the United States. * * * Governor Cumming has no disposition, nor has this community any, to screen any man or men from the punishment due for any crime or misdemeanor they may be accused of; but he will not suffer military terrorism to reign in the territory over which he is governor, and we are to a man ready to sustain him. We appeal to the American nation, and ask any man whose soul is not absorbed with the acquisition of perishable pelf only, what can we do more than we have done to preserve peace? And what course is open to us but to defend our rights as citizens of the Union?" (The New York Herald of May 25th, 1859).
[^8] Governor Cumming did not announce his final attitude with reference to the army, pending the arrival of the decision of the federal administration on the points raised, without some vigorous urging by the church leaders in proof of which I give in large part, as a Note at the end of this chapter, a notable interview between Brigham Young et al with Governor Cumming. It has not before been published, and is important as showing the brave and patriotic spirit in which these heroic men, the church leaders, fought back those who were bent upon the invasion of their liberties and rights as American citizens. (See Note end of chapter). "This pompous parading of soldiers around the territory, recalls one's mind to youthful visions and dreams of theatrical representations of royal cavalcades, fairy tales, and the processional manners and customs of oriental princes; and appears more in harmony with such scenes, than with the sober revellings of an American judiciary in the latter half of the nineteenth century." (Letter of John Jaques, assistant church historian to Stenhouse, date of April 22nd, 1849, copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., of above date, pp. 370-1).
[^9] Peter K. Dotson was a native of Virginia, who came to Utah in 1851, where he became an express and mail agent. In 1855 he was appointed United States marshal for Utah, and in 1857 proceeded to Washington, returning with the army that same year. (See Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 573 and note, where he quotes Dotson's Doings, Ms., for above facts of the marshal's life). Dotson sent in his resignation on the 1st of August, taking occasion to tell the administration that its policy towards Utah would be fatal to federal supremacy in the territory; "and can only tend to build up, consolidate, and perpetuate the political and ecclesiastical power of Brigham Young and his successor." (The resignation is published in full in Deseret News of Nov. 9th, 1859, p. 285).
[^10] Deseret News, of Sept. 14, 1859.
[^11] House Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 78, pp. 33-40.
[^12] Ibid. Letter of Secretary Cass to Governor Cumming, date of Dec. 3>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>, 1859.
[^13] Judge Eckles had said in his communication to Secretary Cass: "I have long been satisfied that the population of the territory already exceeds its capacity to produce the necessary support of the people. * * * The lands under cultivation are already on the decline, and very little is capable of being added to its quantity"—hence the above question in relation to the land capacity for sustaining population.
[^14] House Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 78, pp. 41-46.
[^15] Ibid, p. 46.
[^16] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for April 24th, 1859, pp. 373-380.
[^17] See Blair's letter to United States Senator Sam Houston of Texas. Also Deseret News of March 16th, 1859; and letter of George A. Smith to Colonel Thomas L. Kane, date of Jan. 14, 1859, copied in History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for January, 1859, p. 132, et seq.
[^18] The court sat thirty-eight days altogether, as per former statement in the text, but only twenty-three days up to the time of the date of this letter, 24th Dec., 1858; while court continued until 18th of January following. (See Deseret News of Jan. 18th, 1859).
[^19] Letter of John L. Smith to Stenhouse, date of Dec. 24th, 1858, copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for Dec., 1858, p. 1194.
[^20] Letter to the president of the European Mission, Asa Calkings, copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries of Dec., 1858, pp. 1187-8.
[^21] Letter copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for Jan., 1859, pp. 133-5.
[^22] Letter of John Jaques, assistant church historian, to Stenhouse, date of April 22nd, 1859, copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for April, pp. 370-1.
[^23] See New York Herald of 25th May, 1859.
[^24] Ante, chapter ci, this History.
[^25] Deseret News impression of March 30th, 1859. "Some United States troops are here. Perhaps it is an unusual thing for them to be here. I knew that there were those who were guilty, out by the camp, and also that there were many guilty around here, of numerous offenses. I was informed that there was no prison here, and those troops were sent by the commanding general, at my request, to take care of the prisoners now in custody, and not to interfere with any one. They are here to take care of and preserve the peace. If prisoners are brought they will be taken care of, and the whole authority of the troops is to detain those persons in custody that may be taken prisoners, until they are called for by the court, and they have no power beyond that." (Court Record, 2nd District, judge's remarks to the grand jury, Deseret News, March 16th, 1859).
[^26] Judge Cradlebaugh remarked: "I wish to call the attention of the public to a letter which I received yesterday from the commanding general. He has seen cause to send an additional number of troops here (nine hundred), and he desires that I shall state to the court that they are not here to interfere with the citizens of the territory, unless the conduct of the citizens should make it necessary that such interference should take place in self-defense. The commands sent over are not sent with a pretense to make an attack upon citizens, therefore none need entertain those views. The desire of the commanding general is to aid the court in the discharge of its duty, and to bring offenders to justice. The troops come here to be within reaching distance, for the purpose of enforcing the law, and not for the purpose of violating it in any way." (Second Judicial District, Court Record, March 21st, Deseret News of March 30th, 1859).
[^27] Governor Cumming's proclamation of 27th March, 1859. Deseret News of 30th March, 1859. Judge Black, attorney-general in Buchanan's administration, reviewing and condemning the course of Judge Cradlebaugh and General Johnston, says that "ten companies" in addition to the first, "made their appearance in sight and remained there during the whole term of the court." (Senate Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 32, p. 2).
[^28] The petition in extenso, will be found in Deseret News, impression of March 30th, 1859.
[^29] These petitions, protests and answers will be found in the Court Record of the 2nd Judicial District, Deseret News, impression of March, 1859, 16th, 23rd and 30th, respectively.
[^30] Memorial and Petition to Governor Cumming, see Deseret News of March 30th, 1859.
[^31] The letters of both the governor and the general will be found in House Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 78, pp. 18-21.
[^32] See letter of General Johnston to Governor Cumming, of March 22nd, House Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 78, p. 20.
[^33] House Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 78, pp. 23-34. Also the Proclamation was published in Deseret News of March 30, 1859.
[^34] House Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 78, p. 22.
[^35] The Memorial in extenso will be found in Deseret News, impression of 30th of March. Also House Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 78, pp. 14-17.
[^36] See charge of Judge Cradlebaugh to grand jury, published in Desert News of March 16th, 1859.
[^37] Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 560.
[^38] See ante, ch. ci, note 16.
[^39] Deseret News of 30th March, 1859.
[^40] See Stenhouse, Tullidge, et al.
[^41] See copy of remarks as revised by him in Deseret News of March 30th, 1859, p. 26. But the evidence that he addressed these words to the grand jury admit of no doubt, though deleted from his published address as when corrected for publication.
[^42] Quoted in the Deseret News of June 1st, 1859. The New York Tribune was also pronounced in its condemnation of the Utah judges. See the Tribune excerpt copied in Deseret News of May 25th, 1859.
[^43] Letter of George A. Smith, church historian to Stenhouse, date of March 30th. History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for March, 1859. To make the arrest of these two Indians it became necessary to resort to a military posse; "and an Indian, not one of those charged with the offense, was unfortunately killed." (Governor Cumming's message, Deseret News of Dec. 22nd, 1858).
[^44] Deseret News of March 30th, 1859, p. 32.
[^45] Senate Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 32, p. 37. Mr. Wilson made his report to the president, instead of to the attorney-general, because he had been assailed before the chief executive by two associate justices, Sinclair and Cradlebaugh. (See document cited at the beginning of this note).
[^46] Ibid, p. 29.
[^47] These parties were A. F. McDonald and Hamilton H. Kerns, charged with complicity in the Springville homicides. They were arrested by Marshal P. K. Dotson just on the eve of going before the grand jury on this case, and are the parties referred to in the protest of the grand jury above, of whose evidence said jury was deprived because of their arrest. (See Court Record in Deseret News, 30th March, 1859, p. 19).
[^48] Report of the United States attorney for the territory of Utah, Alex, Wilson, Nov. 15th, 1859. Senate Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 32, p. 28. Also Deseret News of April the 6th, 1859.
[^49] See Linn's Story of the Mormons, pp. 448-50. "This particular case," says Stenhouse, "is probably the best illustration of how men are 'killed to save them.'" Rocky Mountain Saints, chapter xliv, where the case is treated at length, including the alleged confessions of some who were implicated in the assassinations or were accessories before the fact.
[^50] Deseret News of April 6th, 1859.
[^51] His signed statement certified by Lucius N. Scovil, clerk of the court, will be found in Deseret News of April 6th, p. 40. By reference to the "civil authorities" he could only have reference to Governor Cumming and United States attorney for Utah, Mr. Alex, Wilson. The most charitable view to take of Judge Cradlebaugh and his course is to charge it, as Church Historian George A. Smith does, to insanity. "The judge has but one eye, and it occasionally manifests signs of insanity. In every address to the juries, he has made an attack on the religion of the Mormons; and it will be doubted whether his Mormomania is not the result of his hatred to the Mormon enthusiasm; it does not seem possible that a judge, entirely sane, would turn such desperadoes as 'Moze' and 'Looking Glass' loose [the two Indians charged with rape] to prey on the community, were not this the case. The effects of this military despotism has already reached the extreme that has caused hundreds in Utah country to leave their homes, and it is not at all probable that they will return while this reign of terror exists. By the governor's proclamation, we are given to understand that this whole matter has been brought to pass without his knowledge, and in violation of his instructions. Angry feelings exist in the breasts of many of the officers of the army, who burn for revenge upon the people for their detention in the mountains in the winter of 1857." (Letter to Stenhouse, copied in History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for March, 1859, pp. 297-8).
[^52] Deseret News of April 6th, 1859, p. 36.
[^53] Jacques' letter is dated April 22nd. It is copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 22nd of April, p. 370, see also p. 374.
[^54] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry of April 19, 1859, p. 361.
[^55] Senate Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 32, pp. 5-9.
[^57] Ibid, pp. 9, 10.
[^58] House Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 78, p. 24.
[^59] House Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 78, p. 31.
[^60] The command comprised "two companies of infantry, one hundred dragoons, and one hundred discharged teamsters, amounting to three hundred men." Affidavit of Jacob Hamblin before Judge Elias Smith, 3rd June, 1859. Not satisfied with this military force Judge Cradlebaugh in his encampment on the Santa Clara, sought to employ through Hamblin, the Indian interpreter, a force of Indians to capture John D. Lee. (See Hamblin's affidavit, in History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for June, 1859, pp. 471-2).
[^61] 61. See ante chapter ci this History.
[^62] 62. See Deseret News of 6th of July, 1859.
[^63] 63. See History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1854, p. 97; also Letter Folio, 722, 734.
[^64] 64. See Deseret News of July 6th, 1860; and July 27th, 1859.
[^65] 65. Baltimore Republican, copied into Deseret News of 8th Feb., 1859.
