B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

503CHAPTER CXVIII

503CAMP FLOYD INCIDENTS—GOVERNOR CUMMING'S DEFENSE OF THE PEOPLE OF UTAH

503TWO incidents happened in the troublesome fall of 1859 that threatened for a time to bring on a conflict between the citizens of Utah and the army at Camp Floyd. One of these is known in Utah annals as the Spencer-Pike affair; the other was a plot to arrest Brigham Young in connection with a case of alleged counterfeiting of government drafts.

SPENCER-PIKE KILLING AFFAIR

Briefly stated the Spencer affair was as follows: General Johnston had taken possession of Rush valley as a government reserve for pasture and hay supply for government stock. Near the line of the reserve in the north part of Rush valley a stock company—Spencer-Little & Co.—owned a ranch; and on the 22nd of March young Howard Spencer, son of Orson Spencer, with one or two other men in the employ of the aforesaid company, was at the ranch to make the spring round up of the stock. Here they met a company of soldiers, and a dispute arose about the right of Spencer and his companions to stay at the ranchhouse over night. Spencer declared his intention to remain at the house, since he was one of the owners of it. In the dispute the young officer in charge of the troops struck Spencer on the side of the head with his gun barrel, fracturing the skull. Conflicting statements confuse the facts in the case. On the part of the officer it is said that he was seeking to remove Spencer from a government reserve, and that the latter assailed the officer with a pitchfork; on the other side it is insisted that the pitchfork was used by Spencer only in an attempt to ward off the blow which so nearly resulted in his death.

A surgeon from Camp Floyd skillfully adjusted the fracture and Spencer during the summer slowly recovered. Sergeant Ralph Pike of Company I, 10th Infantry, who committed the assault, was indicted by the grand jury for "assault with intent to kill;" and in August came to Salt Lake City for trial in the district court then in session. While walking down Main street with three companions from Camp Floyd—fellow officers—and when there was a large number of men on the street, including the soldiers of the guard that came from Camp Floyd with Pike, Howard Spencer approached the sergeant, and asked if his name was Pike. Being answered in the affirmative, Spencer drew his pistol, shot him down, and walked away before the officer friends of Pike or the crowd sufficiently recovered from their amazement to attempt the arrest of the assailant; and though about forty went in pursuit of Spencer he made good his escape. Pike's wound was mortal, and three or four days later he died. [^1]

504The killing was a most unhappy circumstance, an unjustifiable crime; but reviewed in the spirit which unfortunately prevailed in the west at that time, and accepting the view, as very many did, that Pike's attack upon Spencer in March was unprovoked, it is not matter of surprise that there were those in the community who justified the deed and even lauded the cool bravery of a mere lad who avenged the wrong that had been so dastardly committed upon him over so small a matter.

504"We do not approve of the act," said the Deseret News, editorially. "In our opinion it is far better at all times, under ordinary circumstances, to let the law take its course, than for the injured to avenge their own wrongs by whomsoever committed." [^2]

505Very naturally the killing of Sergeant Pike created great excitement at Camp Floyd. On the night following Pike's death a party of about a score of soldiers left Camp Floyd and went to the "Mormon" settlement of Cedar Fort, six miles north of the camp, and set on fire a stack of hay, and when several citizens undertook to put it out they were fired upon by the soldiers, who then "shot up the town" indiscriminately. In all about sixty shots were fired, the haystack with stock sheds and corrals adjacent were burned to the ground but fortunately no one was hurt. The next day, when this matter was reported to General Johnston, by a committee of citizens, he replied that he would send a guard to protect Cedar Fort, but declared "that he could not control the soldiers while Spencer was at large." [^3] Nothing further came of the matter. The most unfortunate thing about the whole incident is that such a case of homicide for personal vengeance has to be recorded as happening in the streets of Salt Lake City.

THE GOVERNMENT DRAFT "COUNTERFEITING" INCIDENT

The facts in the counterfeiting case referred to in the opening paragraph of this chapter, in which it was sought to involve President Young, are as follows: a party of men in Camp Floyd, prominent among whom were M. Brewer, and J. M. Wallace, conspired to counterfeit United States quartermaster orders on St. Louis and New York. In pursuance of this purpose they employed a young "Mormon" engraver of Salt Lake City to duplicate the quartermaster's plate at Camp Floyd. This was skilfully accomplished and the counterfeit bills printed upon it. The forgery was soon discovered and the principal in the crime, Brewer, was arrested at Camp Floyd. He promptly turned state's evidence by confessing and threw responsibility for the crime upon the young "Mormon" engraver; and implicated a person in Brigham Young's office for having furnished the paper for the counterfeit notes. The engraver's tools and engraving paraphernalia were all seized by Mr. Dotson, the United States marshal, and the young engraver was arrested. Afterwards, when visiting the engraver's regular workshop, where he had done work for Brigham Young on the "Deseret currency plates," these plates were also seized by Mr. Dotson and carried to Camp Floyd.

506The confession and allegation of Brewer seemed to bring this crime so close to the premises at least of President Young that it was hoped at Camp Floyd that he could be implicated in it. One officer when he heard Brewer's confession, jumped up and down like one bereft of his senses, saying "By G— —! we will make this stick on Brigham Young this time." [^4]

In pursuance of this purpose to make the crime "stick" on Brigham Young, a plan for his arrest was arranged, to which it was hoped Governor Cumming would give his assent. It was to be another case where Herod and Pilate—Alias Governor Cumming, of the one party, and the army and the United States judiciary of the other—would be made friends by the sacrifice of the innocent. The plan was to issue a writ for the arrest of Brigham Young as well as the young "Mormon" engraver, and apprehending that there would be resistance to the arrest of the former, the army was to be ordered into Salt Lake City; Johnston's artillery was to make a breach in the wall surrounding the ex-governor's premises, then the troops would sally forth, seize Brigham Young by force and hurry him to Camp Floyd. And this plan was gravely set forth in detail to Governor Cumming. Several days before, engineers of the army had been seen suspiciously moving about the heights overlooking the residence of President Young. They were selecting strategic points on which to plant their cannon. [^5] "I listened to them, sir," said Governor Cumming when relating the circumstance to Stenhouse—

INTERPOSITION OF GOVERNOR CUMMING AGAINST THE CAMP FLOYD PLOT

"I listened to them, sir, as gravely as I could, and examined their papers. They rubbed their hands and were jubilant; they 'had got the dead wood on Brigham Young.' I was indignant, sir, and told them, 'By G—d, gentlemen, you can't do it! When you have a right to take Brigham Young, gentlemen, you shall have him without creeping through walls. You shall enter by his door with heads erect as becomes representatives of your government. But till that time, gentlemen, you can't touch Brigham Young while I live, by G—d!'" [^6]

The coterie of plotters for the apprehension of Brigham Young on this, so groundless a charge, returned to Camp Floyd crestfallen; and in the bitterness of their disappointment there were mutterings that the army would act without the cooperation of the territorial executive. It must be remembered that this incident happened at a time when General Johnston was interpreting his instructions in such a manner that would lead him to use the army on the requisition of the judiciary as well as upon the requisition of the executive; and his judgment as yet, on that point, had not been corrected by the national administration. So that the danger of his ordering out the army to make the threatened arrest was a real one. Word indeed was brought from Camp Floyd on the night of 17th of April by an express rider from Camp Floyd that two regiments would be ordered that night on a forced march to Salt Lake City to make arrests. Whereupon Governor Cumming, it is said, gave orders to General D. H. Wells of the Utah militia, to be ready with a force to repulse the federal troops. And this General Wells so promptly responded to that "by two o'clock on Monday morning, five thousand men were under arms." [^7] Will it be said that the community had lived in a state of preparedness to meet such an emergency? Undoubtedly; and they would have been either dullards or cowards, or both, had it been otherwise under the circumstances—with the likelihood of an assault upon their liberties always imminent.

A group of men were stationed at the point of a mountain thirty miles south of Salt Lake which overlooked the Jordan ford and the road leading over the low hills to Camp Floyd. They were to keep watch day and night for the movement of any detachment of troops towards Salt Lake City. If the movement was made in the daytime, a signal smoke from the point of the mountain, was to announce the fact; if at night, a bonfire from the same point of the mountain would announce it. A group of watchers stationed on Ensign Peak was to respond to these signals and give the alarm to the city, where companies of militia were within easy call.

509It was a brave stand that Governor Cumming took in this issue, but in it he was loyally sustained by the Latter-day Saint community, who asked only for the establishment of the regular order of things as promised in the settlement of their difficulties with the federal administration through the mediation of Colonel Kane, the Peace Commissioners, Powell and McCulloch, and as assured by President Buchanan in his proclamation of pardon, and reaffirmed in the proclamation of Governor Cumming. Happily the instructions came soon afterwards from Washington which corrected the error of General Johnston and the judges respecting the employment of the army in the civil affairs of the territory, [^8] and peace once more was restored to the community life of the Latter-day Saints.

The young "Mormon" engraver of the counterfeit plates of the foregoing incident was put on trial, found guilty, and sentenced to prison for two years. His was but a subordinate factor in the crime; and it may be of passing interest to the reader to know that he fought his way out of the shadows of this unhappy incident of his early career, and lived a long and useful life, trusted in positions of great responsibility, a general favorite in a large social circle, honored in public life, and respected in the community as an honorable man and a sincere and active Christian gentleman.

510Marshal Dotson in taking forceful possession of the "currency" plates belonging to Brigham Young exceeded his duties as an officer; while in his charge they were marred to the point of ruining them. In this condition the marshal sought to return them to their owner, but President Young refused to receive them, and brought suit against Marshal Dotson for the illegal seizure and injury of the currency plates. After a long and tedious trial President Young obtained judgment of damages to the extent of $2,600, for which property in Salt Lake City was sold to satisfy. It was this circumstance which finally led to Marshal Dotson's resignation and removal from Utah. [^9]

RETURN AND ACTIVITY OF JUDGE ECKLES

Sometime after the foregoing events Judge Eckles sought to revive the controversy between the administration at Washington and the people of Utah. The judge had returned from his "vacation" in the east in mid-June, and opened his court two months later in the southern district, at Nephi. After a session which ran to the 4th of September, the court adjourned to sit at Camp Floyd for three days, beginning on the 13th of September, for the purpose of naturalizing citizens, after which the court would adjourn sine die. [^10] After this adjournment the judge addressed a long communication to the secretary of state, Lewis Cass, in which he reiterated practically all the old charges against the Latter-day Saints of Utah. The state department sent the essential parts of Judge Eckles' communication to Governor Cumming, [^11] with instructions from the president to furnish the state department at the earliest practical moment "with an official report upon the present condition of the territory, stating the causes, if any, which operate to retard the due administration of the laws, and to prevent the maintenance of peace and order;" by what means, in his judgment, "those causes can be most promptly and advantageously removed; to what extent any troubles that may now exist have been produced by a failure of the territorial legislature to provide suitable measures for their prevention, and how far they are owing to an unwillingness on the part of the people of the territory to aid in the execution of the laws." [^12] This discloses some of the specifications in Judge Eckles' communication. Governor Cumming was also requested to embody in his report the most reliable statistical information in his possession upon the following points: the present number of inhabitants in Utah and the proportion of "Mormons" against them; the number of persons arriving in the territory and departing from it; the capacity of its available lands to sustain the present or a larger population. [^13]

GOVERNOR CUMMING'S BRAVE DEFENSE OF THE PEOPLE OF UTAH

The reply to these inquiries afforded Governor Cumming an opportunity to vindicate both his own administration and the character of the Latter-day Saints of Utah from the base fulminations of Judge Eckles, and of the false charges made in the address formulated at Camp Floyd in July. Referring to the general character of the people of Utah, the governor said:

"Persons unbiased by prejudice who have visited this territory will, I think, agree in the opinion that a community is seldom seen more marked by quiet and peaceable diligence than that of the Mormons.

512After the passage of the army, hundreds of adventurers were attracted to these valleys, and met here some congenial spirits. Banded together for rapine and acts of violence, they have stolen large herds of horses and mules. Many of these men, maddened by intemperance, or rendered desperate by losses at the gaming table, or by various other causes, have shed each other's blood in frequent conflicts, and secret assassinations. These lawless and bloody deeds are committed by them almost daily with impunity, and when their atrocity and frequency shock the public mind, it has become the custom with a certain set of people to exclaim against the people of Utah; but it is an injustice to impute the acts of these desperadoes to the community in general. With an equal show of justice might they be attributed to the inhabitants of the states and territories whence these men have so recently emigrated."

512Relative to the "causes which operate to retard the due administration of the law, and to prevent the maintenance of peace and order in the territory," the governor said they consisted in—

512"First. The infrequency of and distance between the sessions of the United States courts. These sessions, by law, are held annually. The maintenance of prisoners and witnesses during the interval between the sessions, which interval is often longer than the time indicated by law, must, under existing circumstances, subject the territory to a very great expense.

512Second. The United States marshal has declined making arrests of offenders against territorial laws, because, as he asserts, the legislature have not made such provisions for the payment of necessary expenses of arrest and maintenance of prisoners as are by him deemed necessary, and he has had no assurances that the United States will defray such expenses.

512In answer to the above assertion of the marshal, I would here refer to a pamphlet, which I send, entitled 'Acts and Resolutions of the Legislative Assembly of Utah for 1858 and 1859.' For jury fees, see page 8, chapter 3, section 18. For general fee bill of Utah territory, see page 11, chapter 9, section 1. For contingent fund for the use of territorial marshal or sheriff, see page 13, chapter 9, section 3.

512In all cases of appeal costs must be paid or secured by the appellant,— (See 'Revised Laws of Utah,' a copy of which I send, page 136, chapter 3, section 25.)

512Witnesses' fees in criminal cases are paid by the county court; in civil cases, by the parties.— (See 'Revised Laws.').

512The fees in this territory, as will be perceived, are not sufficiently large to encourage litigation, and there is an evident dislike on the part of the community to resort to courts, preferring arbitration to appeals to juries.

512Third. Continued immunity from punishment has so emboldened certain bands of lawless and desperate men that they have been enabled to hold in a state of intimidation both civil officers and witnesses.

512Fourth. The refusal of the judges of the United States courts to recognize the authority of the territorial marshal in the United States district courts. The authority of this marshal is conferred on him in accordance with section 3, chapter 7, page 140, of 'Revised Laws of Utah.'

512Fifth. The refusal of the judges of the United States district courts to recognize the authority of the probate courts in their respective counties 'to exercise original jurisdiction, both civil and criminal, in chancery as well as at common law.' The probate courts base their claim to exercise this jurisdiction upon the act contained in page 124, chapter 1, section 29, of 'Revised Laws of Utah.'

513The inhabitants of the territory of Utah urge, in defense of the claim of the probate court to the exercise of the powers above recited, the following passage: 'The jurisdiction of the several courts herein provided for, both appellate and original, and that of the probate courts and of justices of the peace, shall be as limited by law.'— (See 'Statutes at Large,' Vol. 9, page 455, chapter 51, section 9, Organic Act, entitled, 'An Act to Establish a Territorial Government for Utah,' approved 1850.).

513Sixth. Another and perhaps one of the strongest reasons which prevents the administration of law in Utah is a conviction generally held by the people of this territory that the minds of the United States judges are so blinded by prejudice against them that Mormons can hardly expect a fair and impartial decision in any case where they are concerned. Many even believe that there is a strong desire on the part of the United States judges to convict a prisoner of crime if that prisoner be a Mormon, and especially if he should happen to be a person of importance in the community.

513They give several plausible reasons for holding this opinion. Among several, I will mention these:

5131st. The unnecessary assemblage of a military force at Provo during the session of the United States court at that place in March, 1859, and the imprisonment of citizens in military guard-tents at that and other times.

5132d. The residence of the chief justice at the headquarters of the army, evidencing, they maintain, both dislike and distrust of the people towards whom it is the duty of a judge to maintain an impartial and unbiased attitude.

5133d. The frequent expressions of opinions by several of the United States judges, that the entire community have forfeited their right to self-government, and that martial law is not only desirable but necessary.

513The community also complains of vexatious adjournments of court during term time; of the precipitate discharge of grand jurors, that the judges may sit as committing magistrates instead of pursuing the ordinary course of business."

Judge Eckles had alleged in his communication to Secretary Cass, that on his approach to Nephi, in Juab county, where he was to hold court, that more "than two-thirds of the male population fled from it, including all the officers, civil and ecclesiastical, as they did from Judge Cradlebaugh at Provo last spring, although there were no 'soldiers' with me for a pretext. Some alleged that they did so for fear of being summoned on juries, and others that they feared being apprehended for crime. Which version of the matter is true, it is not now my purpose to decide. It is the fact I state; and their flight caused me to have to send the deputy marshal to Cedar county [city, Iron county] for talesmen before I could complete my juries, and by it I lost a day of the term."

514To this allegation the governor replied:

514"Now it has been publicly asserted, without contradiction that I know of, in the 'Deseret News, September 7, 1859,' that the judge, in addition to the marshal and bailiffs, was accompanied by fifteen grand jurors and ten petit jurors, all from Cedar county. In Cedar county is Camp Floyd and Frog Town, which adjoins the camp. At Camp Floyd Judge Eckles resides; at Frog Town is a large proportion of the itinerant population, dependent on the army for support. But the judge could, doubtless, explain this circumstance quite as well as the sending for talesmen to the same county, when he was in the immediate vicinity of Utah county, one of the most populous, whilst Cedar county is the least so of any organized in the territory, after deducting the army, its employees, and dependents. But, unexplained, it does seem remarkable." [^14]

Relative to the population of the territory Governor Cumming estimated it at from 50>,000 to 53,000; "of which number at least 50,000 are Mormons." This, of course, did not include the army at Camp Floyd. The bulk of the non-"Mormon" population resided on the extreme west side of the territory, afterwards Nevada. The governor admitted that the "Mormon" estimation of the population was much larger than his own. He had no data on which to form an estimate of persons who annually arrived or departed from the territory; but he inclosed a statement from John T. Caine, who at the time, Feb. 1st, 1860, was secretary of the Perpetual Emigration Fund Society, relative to the number of persons emigrated by that society—furnished at the governor's request—from the time of its inauguration up to and including 1859.

515"In the year 1850 there were emigrated by the Perpetual Emigration Fund Company, 432 persons; in the year 1852, 298 persons; in the year 1853, 400 persons; in the year 1856, 1,273 persons; in the year 1857, 1 person; in the year 1858, (owing to Utah difficulties), none; and in the year 1859, 54 persons; making a total of 4,769 persons, at a cost of about three hundred thousand dollars. Your excellency will please notice that this forms but a small portion of the yearly 'Mormon immigration,' no record of which, so far as I am acquainted, has ever been [kept], nor could there be, [kept such record], as persons emigrating on their own means have come and gone at pleasure." [^15]

515The governor's report is a clear vindication of the Latter-day Saint community up to that time of many false charges made against them.

NOTE

INTERVIEW BETWEEN ALFRED CUMMING, GOVERNOR OF UTAH, PRESIDENT BRIGHAM YOUNG, AND GENERAL DANIEL H. WELLS, APRIL 24TH, 1859

"At fifteen minutes past 10 a. m. President Young, Daniel H. Wells and George A. Smith walked down North Temple street to the mansion formerly owned by A. W. Babbit and called on Governor Cumming.

515His excellency received them very courteously and soon he began to make inquiries in relation to the progress of events and the probability that the army would come to Salt Lake City and said he had understood some time since that that was their intention, but he was in hopes they had given it up.

515President Young told Governor Cumming that if he was governor he would not allow that army to interfere with civil affairs, he would require them to attend to their legitimate duties instead of interfering with the civil.

515The governor [Cumming] inquired if they had any late news of their movements.

515General Wells said that some 'gentlemen in stripes' had been examining the points above President Young's house, apparently looking out positions for artillery encampments.

515Governor Cumming said he had understood that some civil engineers were making observations to obtain the longitude of the city.

516General Wells replied that if that was their business they seemed very much interested in the high grounds that commanded President Young's mansion and the city and the paths and roads that led to them. President Young said that when Kerns and McDonald were taken into Camp Floyd there was a general hue and cry to hang them, and he had no doubt that if he had been there he would not have lasted five minutes, and he did not believe they wanted anything of him only to lynch him. He requested the governor, provided the army came here, to protect his buildings and family; 'for,' said he, 'I shall not be there;' but if there is a shot fired into my house I'll prove not to be far away. * * *

516Governor Cumming said that he did not feel free to act and firmly require the army to remain where it was for fear it would be taken as a challenge, and in a defiant spirit they would rush over it. General Wells asked the governor by what law prisoners for civil offenses were detained in military custody by the army. The governor replied, 'violence.'

516President Young said, [addressing Cumming] 'You have acquired an honorable name by your firm course in administering in your executive capacity among this people; but, if you suffer that army to head down the civil power and walk over you, it will be the cause of your losing your influence; and governor, you will yet learn that the Lord gives nations, communities and individuals character and influence and takes them away at his pleasure. That army will obey you if you step forward and require them to keep still, which is what the law requires of you as chief executive of this territory; even if you were to exceed your powers in preserving peace you would be sustained in it; but I do not want you to do a thing only what the law and your instructions will sustain you in, and clearly authorize you to carry out; and nothing more is necessary at the present time.'

516The governor read his report to the [federal] state department in which he testified of the good order and peaceful disposition of the people and of the unnecessary use of the military at Provo, and that the use of the military in his opinion was more from hatred to 'Mormons' than the love of justice, and if continued would result in much bloodshed.

516President Young told him that the course pursued was driving hundreds of men into the mountains and was laying a foundation for a famine; that we raised next to nothing last year and that thousands of acres would lie idle because of the interference of the military with the people in seed time. But I do not know but it is the design to prevent the people from raising grain, so as to favor contractors in freighting it here for the use of the army. Governor Cumming said he should have thought the contract of transportation of Messrs. Russell, Waddell and Company could have opened the eyes of congress as the contract had been awarded them until 1861. * * *

President Young told him [Cumming] that this was the best government in the world, but at the present time was the worst government. It was perfectly astonishing, surprising, and heartrending to see almost every man in office swindle the nation for his own pecuniary interest, and referred to the remarks of — —, of Georgia, and Hales, of New Hampshire, in the senate, in which they declared that at the present time the government was the most corrupt in existence.

517Governor Cumming said such has been the natural tendency of all forms of government.

517The president told Governor Cumming that if we had burned our houses as we had designed last spring, we would have been saved this annoyance; but the firm course that he [Cumming] pursued, and his assurance that civil law should have its course without military interference, had inspired confidence; but if he [Young] could not live in peace he would burn all the property that he had and give them the territory as barren and desolate as we found it. 'We have no intention of going to any other country; for if we cannot live in peace here we cannot live anywhere else in peace. If there was any other place that was worse than this we might go there, but there is none in the world, that I know of, and here in these mountains I intend to stay as long as I please.

517We kept the army out until you and the Peace Commissioners induced us to consent for them to come in. We could have cut them in pieces if we had chosen, and all that they could have sent; but we desired peace above all things else; but if we cannot have peace, we can at least preserve ourselves in these mountains until we waste away those that oppress us. * * * I care nothing about property. I am perfectly willing to go before any court of justice or any other civil tribunal and have every act of my life scanned, and all the men in the world [be] examined as witnesses, as to whether I committed any crime or sanctioned any criminal act. I will not be nosed about by the military, and I will not go into their camp alive. It is in your power to put a stop to this difficulty and if you do not do it, an action of the people will have to do it. My faith and determination are that we will avoid a collision, at any rate we will do it if possible.'

517Governor Cumming said, 'I presume General Wells, you have arrangements so made that if any army starts from Camp Floyd, that you will soon know of it.'

517The general replied: 'I presume I should learn about it in a short time.' Governor Cumming said: 'In case such a thing takes place I wish you would let me know.' General Wells replied, 'I will do so, and make you acquainted with our movements immediately.' * * *

517Governor Cumming said he did not know what to do or to advise under the circumstances. Said there was a difference of construction upon their instructions. The judiciary are a coordinate branch of the government, their calling on the military seemed a very difficult matter for him to interfere with. He had no doubt but that in a few weeks he should get from Washington the instructions that he wished; but if Judge Sinclair should force the issue before that time he should not know what to advise.

President Young told him, that it was in his power with instructions he had to hold the army still; 'but as for advice, with all due respect to your excellency, I do not wish any. I do not calculate to take the advice of any man that lives, in relation to my affairs. I shall follow the council of my heavenly Father, and I have faith to follow it, and risk the consequences. I told Colonel Kane, when he undertook to counsel us, what I should do last spring; that he did not know me; that I would take no man's council upon the face of the earth; but would follow the council of God. You may think strange of it, but you will yet see that I am right.'" [^16]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] HORACE GREELEY ON "MORMONISM, MORMONS, AND UTAH" See Forney's Report to the commissioner of Indian affairs at Washington, under date of Sept. 6th, 1858, House Executive Documents, 2nd Session, 35th Congress, No. 78, pp. 561-65. "Dr. Forney * * * has no influence over the Indians, and has succeeded by his picayunery to bring himself into supreme contempt among them, by promising them a great deal, and doing but little; and if his reports to the government show a very great expenditure, it must be for traveling fees, graybills, pickings, etc., as very little has been actually furnished to the Indians. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Jan., 1859, p. 73). Both Indian Agent Hurt and Dr. Forney were dismissed from the service finally, the former at the instance of Dr. Forney. Forney himself was charged by Judge Cradlebaugh with returning false vouchers which led to an investigation that ran through many months, involving several trips back and forth of both the doctor and government agents between Salt Lake City and Washington. The faults of Forney's administration seem to have arisen from loose and careless methods of business. (See History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 7th of May, 1860; also Deseret News, 1860 passim, but especially the conclusion of the matter in impression of Nov. 14th, 1860).
[^2] CAPTAIN BURTON'S REPORT OF THINGS "MORMON" History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Oct., 1858, pp. 1056-7. Hatch also reported Arapeen as saying that Doctor Forney, the new superintendent, had "a little heart, and it is as dark as night. President Young had a big heart, and it is white and clean as the sun," (Ibid). Arapeen also complained of the interpreters Forney employed, and asked why he did not use interpreters that the Indians knew and could feel at home with. The chief told Forney that "his talk was like bawling, it would go in one ear and out at the other; but Brigham's went into his ear, and sank into his heart, and stopped there. This enraged the doctor." (Ibid, p. 1209).
[^3] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for Dec., 1858, pp. 1176-7.
[^4] Ibid, p. 1177.
[^5] History of Brigham Young, Ms., Dec., 1858, pp. 1176-7.
[^6] Ibid, p. 1057.
[^7] "Valley Tan," among the first Utah manufactured products, was a local tanned leather that was called "valley tan," to distinguish it from the imported article. The phrase became a colloquial descriptive name for very nearly every other article as well as leather manufactured in the territory, especially for a wretched sort of whiskey made in the territory.
[^8] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for September, 1858, p. 956.
[^9] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for January, 1859, pp. 86-7. The paper was published in Theodore Johnston's building, just south of the Historian's Office, on South Temple street; one thousand was the edition, the price $8.00 per year. (History of Brigham Young, October, 1858, p. 1061).
[^10] It "expired," says Captain Burton, "after a slow and lingering dysthesis, induced by overindulgence in Gentile tendencies. It was established in 1858; the proprietor was Mr. Hartnett, the late federal secretary: the editor was Mr. Kirk Anderson, followed by Mr. De Wolf and others." (City of the Saints, p. 255).
[^11] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for Aug., 1859, p. 645.
[^12] Ibid, 662, 671, et seq.
[^13] See Burton's City of the Saints, pp. 255-7.
[^14] Overland Journey, chapter xxi.
[^15] Overland Journey, p. 216.
[^16] Mr. Greeley professed to believe that every preacher should be a worker; and he liked "to see one mowing or pitching hay in his shirt-sleeves," and could hear "with edification, an unlettered but devout evangelist" who worked part of the week for the subsistence of his family and devoted the rest of it to preaching the gospel to small schoolhouse or wayside gatherings of hearers." "Let him only be sure to talk good sense," said the great editor of the Tribune, "and I will excuse some bad grammar." Then the censure:
