B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

519CHAPTER CXIX

519INDIAN DIFFICULTIES—PERIODICALS, "VALLEY TAN" AND "MOUNTAINEER"—NOTABLE VISITORS—HORACE GREELEY—CAPTAIN RICHARD F. BURTON—THEIR BOOKS ON UTAH AND THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS

519AMONG the interesting incidents of this period was a threatened uprising of the Indians in the territory, chiefly of the tribes in the south, the Utes, Pahvantes, and Piedes. Superintendent Forney, who was sometimes loud in his complaints of the policy of his predecessor, Brigham Young, and big in his promises to the Indians, but lax in carrying them out, lost prestige with some of the southern chiefs who were not backward in giving manifestations of their displeasure. [^1]

AN UPRISING OF INDIAN TRIBES THREATENED

Indian AffairsHCIn October, 1858, Jeremiah Hatch, Indian farmer for the tribes in San Pete county, reported that the Indians in San Pete county had driven off all the stock from the Indian farm; Chief Arapeen, brother of and successor in leadership to Walker, had been among the Navajoes, who had promised to join him in his proposed war against the "Americats."

Indian AffairsHCThis chief was gathering the Indian tribes at Fish Lake, about sixty miles south of Manti. He had opened communication with the Snakes, Shoshones, and Bannocks in the north, who were also ready to join him—"sixteen nations in all." "And if," reported Hatch, as being the view of Arapeen—"if the Mormons will join them, seventeen nations can wipe out the Americats. Arapeen is determined on war unless Brigham says no; and he will obey him. If the Mormons will not fight now they will pretty soon, for the Americats told them that as soon as snow covers the mountains the blood of the Mormon captains will flow." [^2]

Indian AffairsHC520President Young wrote the chief that there must be no war on the Americans.

Indian AffairsHC520Bishop Warren Snow, reporting by letter to President Young, in December, represented Arapeen as saying that he was willing to obey Brigham's counsel,—which was "let the soldiers alone"—but he could not understand why Brigham should give him such counsel; he would have pitched into them if he had not received a letter from Brigham telling him not to. Many of his Indians were "mad" at him because he would not let them go and kill the Americans. [^3]

Indian AffairsHCThis threatened uprising resulted in the Indian farm going to wreck, the grain was wasted, the settlers had to herd and corral their stock to prevent the Indians from stealing it, and the Indians had to be fed by the settlers. [^4] In October two citizens, Josiah Call and Samuel Brown, were killed by the Indians. This on Chicken Creek, about twenty miles south of Nephi. Arapeen reported to Bishop Snow that a party of six Indians had attacked the brethren, believing they were Americans; [^5] but Indian Farmer Hatch, who knew the Indians that did the killing—Tamock, son of the Chief Uintah being the leader, and "a bad Indian"—thinks they knew that Call and Brown were "Mormons." [^6] The two men fought their assailants bravely, and succeeding in killing Tamock.

ADDITIONS TO THE UTAH PRESS: "THE VALLEY TAN"—"THE MOUNTAINEER"

Publishing in UtahHCThe period under consideration witnessed the birth of two weekly periodicals in Utah, the Valley Tan and the Mountaineer. The former was a bitter anti-"Mormon" sheet, circulating chiefly at Camp Floyd. Its first number came from the press November 6th, 1858. The leading article was copied from the National Intelligence, against polygamy in Utah. The Valley Tan [^7] was edited by Kirk Anderson, formerly of the Missouri Republican, who arrived at Salt Lake City in September, 1858. "Some hinted that President Buchanan had a hand in sending him here"—i. e. to Utah. [^8]

Publishing in UtahHCIt finally developed, through statements by Governor Cumming, that Secretary Hartnett was the principal owner of the Valley Tan, and he soon became aware of the fact that its non-"Mormon" patronage was not sufficient to sustain it; and sought "Mormon" patronage. In conversation with D. H. Wells upon this subject, that gentleman told the secretary, "that if the Valley Tan would sustain Governor Cumming in his course, it would be approved here [i. e. Utah] and by the government at Washington." "Wells said: 'You know Mr. Hartnett, it is the wish of the administration that the difficulty that has existed should remain settled; that is also our wish. We are not afraid of a collision if it should come; we are just as ready for it as you are, but we should like matters to pass off quietly, as they should do, and as the administration desires they should do.' Hartnett acknowledged this was true, and said he intended to do it."

Publishing in UtahHC522This conversation incidentally disclosed the character of the periodical in question. "Wells said the Valley Tan charges the people of this territory with being murderers, of being guilty of the highest crimes known to the government, and with every thing disgraceful. Hartnett said he did not approve of the course the paper had taken; but that some of the officers of the army had sent word to the editor, that if he did not 'pitch in like hell,' they would not patronize him." [^9]

Publishing in UtahHC522The Valley Tan was short lived, dying in the winter of 1860, after an existence of about eighteen months. [^10]

Publishing in UtahHC522The Mountaineer was published by a group of Salt Lake lawyers, Seth M. Blair, James Ferguson, and Hosea Stout. [^11] Its first number appeared on the 27th of August, 1859. It was a vigorous opponent of the regime inaugurated by the federal judges. It was intended to be a strictly secular periodical, standing for the rights of the people, and announcing that the day "had gone by when lying scoundrels can palm off their rascality upon the citizens of Utah." [^12]

Publishing in UtahHC522Its motto was: "Do What Is Right, Let the Consequence Follow." It took a brave and vigorous stand on this platform, but did not endure long, the sparse population of the territory not being equal to supporting two papers of the Latter-day Saints' interest, and the Deseret News, already long in the field, was meeting practically all the needs of that people. [^13]

TWO NOTABLE UTAH VISITORS—HORACE GREELEY, CAPTAIN BURTON

Two notable gentlemen visited Utah about this time, Mr. Horace Greeley and Captain Richard F. Burton. The former the founder and editor of the New York Tribune, a noted anti-slavery leader, and then—1859—at the height of his power and popularity. The latter was an officer of the British army, but a gentleman who had traveled extensively, the author of a number of books, among them The Lake Regions of Central Africa.

523Mr. Greeley arrived in Salt Lake City on the 10th of July, 1859. On the 13th he had a two hours interview with Brigham Young, chiefly upon "Mormonism." The editor's questions covered a great variety of subjects from infant baptism to belief in a personal devil and plurality of wives, but failed to reach the really fundamental things of the New Dispensation of the Christian religion. The substance of his questions and the answers to them he gives in his Overland Journey from New York to San Francisco, published a year later. [^14]

HORACE GREELEY'S VIEWS OF "MORMONISM," AND GOVERNMENT ARMY CONTRACTS

Of merely surface things with which he came in contact, Mr. Greeley gives an interesting account, among them a pen picture of Brigham Young that is worthy a place here:

"As President Young is the first minister of the Mormon church, and bore the principal part in the conversation, I have reported his answers alone to my questions and observations. The others appeared uniformly to defer to his views, and to acquiesce fully in his responses and explanations. He spoke readily, not always with grammatical accuracy, but with no appearance of hesitation or reserve, and with no apparent desire to conceal anything; nor did he repel any of my questions as impertinent. He was very plainly dressed in thin, summer clothing, and with no air of sanctimony or fanaticism. In appearance, he is a portly, frank, good-natured, rather thick-set man of fifty-five, seeming to enjoy life, and to be in no particular hurry to get to heaven. His associates are plain men, evidently born and reared to a life of labor, and looking as little like crafty hypocrites or swindlers as any body of men I ever met. The absence of cant or snuffle from their manner was marked and general; yet I think I may fairly say, that their Mormonism has not impoverished them—that they were generally poor men when they embraced it, and are now in very comfortable circumstances." [^15]

Mr. Greeley attended the tabernacle service where he listened to "Mormon" discourses on the one Sunday—17th of July—which he spent in Salt Lake City; one delivered by Orson Pratt in the morning, and the other by Elder John Taylor in the afternoon. The sermons, he thought, "adapted to tastes or needs different" from his own. The prayers were "pertinent and full of unction;" the music rather better than is to be heard "in an average worshiping assemblage in the states." The extemporaneous method of speaking followed in the tabernacle he censured severely. [^16] Mr. Greeley also came in contact somewhat with the people in their homes and in social gatherings, so that he felt quite competent at the end of his ten days sojourn in Salt Lake City, after the fashion of men of his profession, to write to the New York Tribune quite dogmatically on all things pertaining to the religion of the Latter-day Saints, social life in Utah, polygamy, etc. Seriously, of course, what he wrote could be no thorough analysis of "Mormonism," but merely passing impression after a cursory survey of surface topics. But however disappointing Mr. Greeley's chapters on "Mormonism" may be, he evidently intended no injustice, and placed upon record concerning the people and conditions in Utah some passages that are valuable as the report of a brief sojourner among the saints, who was a keen observer, and a man of unusual intelligence, and one who intended to be fair. [^17]

525Mr. Greeley also visited Camp Floyd, where about three thousand troops were stationed at the time, with some small detachments engaged in surveying or opening roads, guarding herds, etc., in different parts of the territory. He gives a brief historical sketch of how the army came to be located in Utah; and its utter uselessness in Utah at the time of his visit. The climax of Mr. Greeley's historical sketch is:

525"News came that the whole affair [i. e. Utah difficulties] had been somehow arranged—that Colonel Kane, Brigham Young and Governor Cumming had fixed matters so that there would be no more fighting. * * * They [the army] were somehow required to encamp as far from the Mormon settlements as possible; and they have ever since been treated by the federal executive as though they had volunteered to come here in defiance of, rather than in obedience to, that executive's orders." [^18]

525Mr. Greeley, it will be remembered, arrived in Utah shortly after the administration at Washington had subordinated the military to the civil authority in the territory: "Very general, then, is the inquiry in the army," he remarks,

525"Why were we sent here? and why are we kept here? What good can our remaining do? What mischief can it prevent? A fettered, suspected, watched, distrusted army—an army which must do nothing—must not even be asked to do anything in any probable contingency—what purpose does it subserve beyond enriching contractors and Mormon magnates at its own cost and that of the federal treasury." [^19]

526And then he proceeds to give such criticism of army contract management that, to say the least of it, is not flattering to the Washington administration at that time.

526Following are several instances Mr. Greeley gives of contract manipulation:

526"A suspicion that the army is kept here to answer private pecuniary ends is widely entertained. It is known that vast sums have been made out of its transportation by favored contractors. Take a single instance already quite notorious; twenty-two cents per pound is paid for the transportation of all provisions, munitions, etc., from Leavenworth to this point. The great contractors were allowed this for transporting this years' supply of flour. By a little dexterous management at Washington, they were next allowed to furnish the flour here—Utah flour—being paid their twenty-two cents per pound for transportation, in addition to the prime cost on the Missouri. As Utah has a better soil for growing wheat than almost anything else, they had no difficulty in subletting this contract at seven cents per pound net, making a clear profit of one hundred and seventy thousand dollars on the contract, without risking a dollar, or lifting a finger. Of course, I expect contractors to bargain for themselves, not for the government, but somebody is well paid for taking care of the public's interest in such matters. Has he done his duty?"

526Another instance is given as to corn shipments:

526"There have recently been received here thirty thousand bushels of corn from the states at a net cost, including transportation, of three hundred and forty thousand dollars, or over eleven dollars per bushel. No requisition was ever made for this corn, which could have been bought here, delivered, for two dollars per bushel, or sixty thousand dollars in all. The dead loss to the treasury on this corn is two hundred and eighty thousand dollars, even supposing that the service required it at all. Somebody makes a good thing of wagoning this corn from the Missouri at over ten dollars a bushel. Who believes that said somebody has not influential and thrifty connections inside of the war department?"

526As a sample of attempted retrenchment in the government public service he cites the following:

"The mail from Missouri to Salt Lake has hitherto been carried weekly in good six-mule wagons: the contract time being twenty-two days. The importance of frequent and regular communication with headquarters, at least so long as a large army is retained here at a heavy extra cost, and because of some presumed public necessity, is evident. Yet the new postmaster-general has cut down the mail service on this important central route from weekly to semi-monthly. But the contractors, who are obliged to run their stages weekly because of their passenger business, and because they have to keep their stock and pay their men, whether they work or play, find that they cannot carry the mail every other week so cheaply as they can every week. For instance, a mail from the states now often consists of twelve to sixteen heavy sacks (most of them filled with franked documents), weighing as many hundred pounds. Double this, and no six-mule team would draw it at the requisite pace, and no mail wagon stand the jerks and jolts of an unmade road. So they say, 'please let us carry the mail weekly, though you only pay us for carrying it semi-weekly.' But no! this is strictly forbidden! The postmaster at Salt Lake has expressed written orders to refuse it, and of course he at St. Joseph also. And thus all this central region, embracing at least a dozen important military posts, and countless Indian agencies, is reduced to a semi-monthly mail service, though the contractor would gladly make it weekly at the same price!" [^20]

CAPTAIN BURTON ON THE "MORMONS" AND THEIR RELIGION

Captain Richard F. Burton arrived in Salt Lake City on the 24th of August, 1860; and remained there and at Camp Floyd until the 20th of September—one month. The importance of his visit to Utah arises from the book he published of his journey "Across the Rocky Mountains to California," to which he gave the title, The City of the Saints, as was indeed proper since an account of "Mormon" life in Utah and the religion of the Latter-day Saints occupies eight of its thirteen chapters, besides several Appendixes, covering nearly fifty additional pages, [^21] that make up the volume of nearly six hundred pages.

The part of the work which Captain Burton devoted to "Mormonism" is much more pretentious than the part in Mr. Greeley's book, devoted to the same subject. This might reasonably be expected, since thirty days' contact with a religious system, and a community life, regarded as more or less of a modern problem, gives greater opportunity for mastering the literature pro et con that has sprung up about it; [^22] more time for analysis; and a larger chance for generalizing concerning it, than ten days gives—the time of Mr. Greeley's stay in Utah.

528But while such a stay as Captain Burton made in Utah, and such other time elapsed before the publication of the City of the Saints—1862—delayed as he was by many months of travel before sitting down to the task—scarcely admits of the necessary study of such a theme as "Mormonism" is in order to a thorough analysis of it, followed by constructive opinion about it, still, it must be confessed, that Burton's work furnishes the best non-"Mormon" treatis on the "Mormon" religion and philosophy, and the fairest if not the profoundest criticism of it, [^23] not only up to the time of the publication of his book, but until now—1930. [^24]

529It must not be thought, however, that what is here said of the evident intention of Captain Burton to be fair and somewhat exhaustive, that therefore his treatis is a satisfactory non-"Mormon" treatis of the "Mormon" religion. In addition to the fact already noted—that this brilliant author did not allow himself sufficient time to master the literature, and become sufficiently familiar with the subject to write authoritatively upon it, [^25] there is the spirit in which he wrote to be considered and—regretted. [^26] That spirit he both confess and attempts to justify. "In commenting upon what was seen and heard," he remarks in his preface, "I have endeavored to assume—whether successfully or not the public will decide—the cosmopolitan character."

529And again:

"If in parts of this volume there appear a tendency to look upon things generally in their ludicrous or absurd aspects—from which nothing sublunary is wholly exempt—my excuse must be sic me natura fecit. Democritus was not, I believe, a whit the worse philosopher than Heraclitus. The 'Procreation of Mirth' should be a theme far more sympathetic than the 'Anatomy of Melancholy.'" [^27]

530And yet no one will, I think, agree now that Democritus is a proper model to follow in the discussion of such a problem as that which the religion of the Latter-day Saints presents. Their faith has not succumbed to the most violent persecution inflicted upon any people in modern times (save only the Jews in Russia); it has survived all the misrepresentations and the abuse heaped upon it by its enemies; it has established, to endure, the most remarkable and effective ecclesiastical organization of modern times; and by these and many other achievements—among them the bringing within its communion several hundred thousands of earnest, intelligent people—it has won the right to be treated seriously by its opponents. It is not a theme for the mirth or laughter of its critics; it has won too strong a position in the world of thought and achievement for that.

530As an example of Captain Burton's flippant style the brief paragraph with which he opens his formal treatis "Of the Mormon Religion," will suffice:

530"No less an authority than Alexander von Humbolt has characterized positive religions in general as consisting of an historical novelette, more or less interesting; a system of cosmogony more or less improbable; and a code of morals, mostly pure. Two-thirds of this description apply to the faith of the Latter-day Saints: they have, however, escaped palaeological criticism by adopting Genesitic history, and by 'swallowing Eve's apple' in the infancy of their spiritual life." [^28]

530As a sample of the errors and misapprehensions into which he falls, taken from his second paragraph, the following will answer every purpose:

"Before proceeding to comment upon the New Dispensation—for such, though not claiming or owning to be, it is—I may compare the two leading interpretations of the word 'Mormon,' which, as has been well remarked, truly convey the widely diverging opinions of the opposers and supporters of 'Mormonism.'" [^29]

531Our author then proceeds to render the two versions of the word "Mormon;" the anti-"Mormon" version "a monster;" Joseph Smith's definition, "more good." But it is with the statement that "Mormonism" is a New Dispensation without claiming, or even owning itself to be such, that we have to deal. If there has been one fact of its existence that "Mormonsm" has been more especially conscious of than another, one that it has emphasized more than another, it has been this fact that it is a New Dispensation—not a new religion, but a New Dispensation of the old religion—of the Christian religion; and that Captain Burton should have missed that point is one evidence among many others that might be cited that due care was not observed by him in his treatis on "Mormonism." [^30]

THE BOOK OF JULES REMY

Of Jules Remy's two large volumes—A Journey to Great Salt Lake City—Captain Burton said: "The two volumes are more valuable for the observations on the natural history of the (then) little known basin, than for the generalisms, more or less sound, with which the subject of the new faith is discussed." Though he himself is unconscious of it, Captain Burton's book is open to a similar criticism, only varying the point of it from the "natural history of the (then) little known basin," to the then but little known, yet viciously misrepresented people of Utah. That is wherein Captain Burton's contribution to the literature of "Mormonism" is of value, not in his analysis of, and his well-meant but erroneous generalizations regarding, the "Mormon" religion, but in the downright honest report he makes—from his cosmopolitan viewpoint, of course,—of the people and conditions as he found them in Utah in the year of grace one thousand eight hundred and sixty; and for that the Latter-day Saints and all who would know the truth about conditions in Utah at the time of the captain's visit are much beholden to him. [^31]

NOTES

The spirit of the "Mormon" religion Mr. Greeley regarded as Judaic rather than Christian. At the religious meetings he attended at the tabernacle Sunday, July 17, 1859, he declared he had never "seen a more devout and intent assemblage." "I had been told," he writes, "that the Mormons were remarkably ignorant, superstitious, and brutalized; but the aspect of these congregations did not sustain that assertion. Very few rural congregations would exhibit more heads evincing decided ability; and I doubt whether any assemblage, so largely European in its composition, would make a better appearance."

532"Do I regard the great body of these Mormons," he asks, "as knaves and hypocrites? Assuredly not. I do not believe there was ever a religion whereof the great mass of the adherents were not honest and sincere. Hypocrites and knaves there are in all sects; it is quite possible that some of the magnates of the Mormon church regard this so-called religion (with all others) as a contrivance for the enslavement and fleecing of the many, and the aggrandizement of the few; but I cannot believe that a sect, so considerable and so vigorous as the Mormon, was ever founded in conscious imposture, or built up on any other basis than that of earnest conviction." [^32]

Neither did Mr. Greeley accept the current gentile "presumption" that "the Mormons were an organized banditti, a horde of robbers and assassins." Nor did he altogether discredit the tales of some "Mormon" outrages. "These Mormons," he said, are in the main an industrious, frugal, hard-working people. Few of them are habitual idlers; few live by professions or pursuits that require no physical exertion. They make work for but few lawyers—I know but four among them—their differences and disputes are usually settled in and by the church: they have no female outcasts, few doctors, and pay no salaries to their preachers—at least, the leaders say so. But a small portion of them use tea and coffee. Formerly they drank little or no liquor; but, since the army came in last year, money and whisky have both been more abundant, and now they drink considerably. * * * As yet, I believe, they have few or no drunkards; but there is nothing more deceitful than the appetite for liquor." [^33]

533Of the industrial disadvantages the people of Utah labor under, he said: "The average life in Utah is a hard one. Many more days faithful labor are required to support a family here than in Kansas, or in any of the states. The climate is severe and capricious—now intensely hot and dry; in winter cold and stormy; and, though cattle are usually allowed to shirk for themselves in the valleys, they are apt to resent the insult by dying. Crickets and grasshoppers swarm in myriads, and often devour all before them. Wood is scarce and poor. Irrigation is laborious and expensive; as yet, it has not been found practicable to irrigate one-fourth of the arable land at all. Ultimately, the valleys will be generally irrigated, so far as water for the purpose can be obtained; but this will require very costly dams and canals. Frost is very destructive here; Indian corn rarely escapes it wholly, and wheat often suffers from it. Wheat, oats, corn barley, rye, are grown at about equal cost per bushel—two dollars may be taken as their average price; the wheat crop is usually heavy, though this year it threatens to be relatively light. I estimate that one hundred and fifty days' faithful labor in Kansas will produce as large an aggregate of the necessaries of life—food, clothing, fuel—as three hundred just such days' work in Utah. Hence, the adults here generally wear a toil-worn, anxious look, and many of them are older in frame than in years. I ardently hope it may not always be thus." [^34]

533Mr. Greeley was disappointed in the lack of abolition sentiment in Salt Lake City, which he resented by saying at a banquet given in his honor: "I have not heard tonight, and I think I never heard, from the lips of the journals of any of your people, one word in reprehension of that national crime and scandal, American chattel slavery. * * * This obstinate silence, this seeming indifference on your part, reflects no credit on your faith and morals, and I trust they will not be persisted in." This harsh, not to say dictatorial language, was softened somewhat by Elder John Taylor—master of ceremonies at the reception and banquet tendered Mr. Greeley—saying: "The subject of slavery is one on which Mr. Greeley is known to be enthusiastic, as we are on the subject of our religion. We cannot help speaking of our religion at every opportunity as he cannot help speaking of slavery. Those who do not relish this or that topic, must excuse its introduction."

533Mr. Greeley was of opinion that polygamy, from his viewpoint not necessarily an essential of Mormonism, would be abandoned. On taking his leave of Salt Lake City, he said: "I bid adieu to Salt Lake City, the great mass of whose people, I am sure, have an unfeigned 'zeal for God,' though I must deem it 'not according to knowledge.' Long may they live to unlearn their errors, and enjoy the rich fruits of their industry, frugality, and sincere though misguided piety." [^35]

(a) Description of Salt Lake Valley: "This valley—this lovely panorama of green, and azure, and gold—this land, fresh, as it were, from the hands of God, is apparently girt on all sides by hills: the highest peaks, raised 7,000 to 8,000 feet above the plain of their bases, show by gulches veined with lines of snow that even in this season winter frowns upon the last smile of summer. * * * Northward, curls of vapor ascending from a gleaming sheet—the Lake of the Hot Springs—set in a bezel of emerald green, and bordered by another lake-bench upon which the glooms of evening were rapidly gathering, hung like a veil of gauze around the waist of the mountains. Southward for twenty-five miles stretched the length of the valley, with the little river winding its way like a silver thread in a brocade of green and gold. The view in this direction was closed by 'Mountain Point,' another formation of terraced range, which forms the water-gate of 'Jordan,' and which conceals and separates the fresh water that feeds the Salt Lake—the 'Sea of Tiberias'—from the Dead Sea.

534As we descend the Wasatch Mountains, we could look back and enjoy the view of the eastern wall of the 'Happy Valley.' A little to the north of Emigration canon, and about one mile nearer the settlement, is the Red Butte, a deep ravine, whose quarried sides show mottlings of the light ferruginous sandstone which was chosen for building the temple wall. A little beyond it lies the single 'City of the Dead,' decently removed three miles from the habitations of the living, and farther to the north is City Creek canon, which supplies the saints with water for drinking and for irrigation. Southeast of Emigration canon, are other ravines, Parley's, Mill Creek, Great Cottonwood, and Little Cottonwood, deep lines winding down the timbered flanks of the mountains, and thrown into relief by the darker and more misty shading of the farther flank-wall." [^36]

534(b) Security of Person in Salt Lake City: "Long after dark I walked home alone. There were no lamps in any but Main street, yet the city is as safe as at St. James' Square, London. There are perhaps not more than twenty-five or thirty constables or policemen in the whole place, under their captain, a Scotchman, Mr. Sharp, 'by name as well as nature so;' * * * and the guard on public works if merely nominal. * * * During my residence at the Mormon city not a single murder was, to the best of my belief, committed: the three days which I spent at Christian Carson City witnessed three."

(c) Relations of the Saints and the Indian Tribes: "The humanity of the prophet's followers to the Lamanite has been distorted by Gentiles into a deep and dangerous project for 'training the Indians' to assassinate individual enemies, and, if necessary, to act as guerrillas against the eastern invaders. That the Yutas [Utahs]—they divide the white world into two great classes, Mormon and Shwop, or American generally—would, in case of war, 'stand by' their patrons, I do not doubt; but this would only be the effect of kindness, which it is unfair to attribute to no worthier cause."

535(d) The Mormon Children: "It will be necessary to notice certain statements relating to the ingenuous youth of Utah territory. It is generally asserted that juvenile mortality here ranks second only to Louisiana, and the fault is, of course, charged upon polygamy. A French author talks of the mortalite effrayante among the newly-born, while owning, anomalously, that the survivors sent braves et robustes. I 'doubt the fact,' Mr. Ferris, moreover, declares that there is 'nowhere out of the Five Points of New York City a more filthy, miserable, and disorderly rabble of children than can be found in the streets of Great Salt Lake City.' As far as my experience goes, it is the reverse. I was surprised by their numbers, cleanliness, and health, their hardihood and general good looks. They are bold and spirited. The Mormon father, like the Indian brave, will not allow the barbarous use of the stick; but this is perhaps a general feeling throughout the states, where the English traveler first observes the docility of the horses and the indocility of the children. But, as regards rudeness, let a man 'with whiskers under his snout,' (i. e., mustaches), ride through a village in Essex or Warwickshire, and he will suffer more contumely at the hands of the infant population in half an hour than in half a year in the United States or in Utah."

(e) General Misapprehension and Untrustworthiness of Anti-Mormon Literature: "The Mormons have been represented, and are generally believed to be, an intolerant race; I found the reverse far nearer the fact. The best proof of this is that there is hardly one anti-Mormon publication, however untruthful, violent, or scandalous, which I did not find in Great Salt Lake City. The extent of the subjoined bibliographical list [referred to in note 22, this chapter] would deter me from a theme so used up by friend and foe, were it not for these considerations. In the first place, I have found, since my return to England, a prodigious general ignorance of the 'Mormon rule;' the mass of the public has heard of the saints, but even well educated men hold theirs to be a kind of socialistic or communist concern, where, as in the world to come, there is no marrying nor giving in marriage. Even where this is not the case, the reader of travels, will not dislike to peruse something more of a theme with which he is already perhaps familiar; for in this department of literature, as in history and biography, the more we know of a subject, the more we want to know. Moreover, since 1857, no book of general interest has appeared, and the Mormons are a progressive people, whose 'go-a-headitiveness' in social growth is only to be compared with their obstinate conservatism in adhering to institutions that date from the days of Abraham. Secondly, the natural history of the new faith—for such it is—through the several periods of conception, birth, and growth to vigorous youth, with fair promise of stalwart manhood, is a subject of general and no small importance. It interests the religionist, who looks upon it as the 'scourge of corrupted Christianity,' as much as the skeptic, that admires how, in these days of steam traveling, printing, and telegraming, when 'many run to and fro,' and when 'knowledge' has been 'increased,' human credulity will display itself in the same glaring colors which it wore ere the diffusion of knowledge became a part of social labor. The philosophic observer will detect in it a notable example of how men's agitat molem, the 'powerful personal influence of personal character,' and the 'effect that may be produced by a single mind inflexibly applied to the pursuit of a single object;' and another proof that 'It is easier to extend the belief of the multitude than to contract it'—a circumstance which proceeds from the false but prevalent notion that too much belief is atleast an error on the right side. * * * I hope to make it appear that the highly-colored social peculiarities of the new faith have been used as a tool by designing men to raise up enmity against a peaceful, industrious, and law-abiding people, whose whole history has been a course of cruel persecution, which, if man really believed in his own improvement, would be a disgrace to a self-styled enlightened age." [^37]

(f) Burton's Character Sketch of Brigham Young: "Altogether the prophet's appearance was that of a gentleman farmer in New England—in fact, such as he is: his father was an agriculturist and revolutionary soldier, who settled Down East. He is a well preserved man: a fact * * * attributed to his habit of sleeping, as the Citizen Proudhon so strongly advises, in solitude. His manner is at once affable and impressive, simple and courteous: his want of pretension contrasts favorably with certain pseudo-prophets that I have seen, each and every one of whom holds himself to be a 'Logos' without other claim save a semi-maniacal self-esteem. He shows no signs of dogmatism, bigotry, or fanaticism, and never once entered—with me at least—upon the subject of religion. He impresses a stranger with a certain sense of power; his followers are, of course, wholly fascinated by his superior strength of brain. It is commonly said there is only one chief in Great Salt Lake City, and that is 'Brigham.' His temper is even and placid; his manner is cold—in fact, like his face, somewhat bloodless; but he is neither morose nor methodistic, and, where occasion requires, he can use all the weapons of ridicule to direful effect, and 'speak a bit of his mind' in a style which no one forgets. He often reproves his erring followers in purposely violent language, for a stolen horse or cow. His powers of observation are intuitively strong, and his friends declare him to be gifted with an excellent memory and a perfect judgment of character. If he dislikes a stranger at the first interview, he never sees him again. Of his temperance and sobriety there is but one opinion. His life is ascetic: his favorite food is baked potatoes with a little buttermilk, and his drink, water: he disapproves, as do all strict Mormons, of spirituous liquors, and never touches anything stronger than a glass of thin lager beer; moreover, he abstains from tobacco. Mr. Hyde has accused him of habitual intemperance, he is, as his appearance shows, rather disposed to abstinence, than to the reverse. Of his education I cannot speak: 'Men, not books—deeds, not words,' has ever been his motto; he probably has, as Mr. Randolph said of Mr. Johnston, 'a mind uncorrupted by books.' In the only discourse which I heard him deliver, he pronounced impet'us, imp'etus. Yet he converses with ease and correctness, has neither snuffle nor pompousness, and speaks as an authority upon certain subjects; such as agriculture and stock breeding. He assumes no airs of extra sanctimoniousness, and has the plain, simple manners of honesty. His followers deem him an angel of light, his foes a goblin damned: he is, I presume, neither one nor the other. I cannot pronounce about his scrupulousness; all the world over, the sincerest religious belief and the practice of devotion are sometimes compatible not only with the most disorderly life, but with the most terrible crimes; for mankind mostly believe that

'Il est avec le ciel des accommodements.'

537He has been called hypocrite, swindler, forger, murderer. No one looks it less. The best authorities—from those who accuse Mr. Joseph Smith of the most heartless deception, to those who believe that he began as an imposter and ended as a prophet—find in Mr. Brigham Young 'an earnest, obstinate egotistic enthusiasm, fanned by persecution and inflamed by bloodshed.' He is the St. Paul of the New Dispensation: true and sincere, he gave point, and energy, and consistency to the somewhat disjointed, turbulent, and unforeseeing fanaticism of Mr. Joseph Smith; and if he has not been able to create, he has shown himself great in controlling circumstances. Finally, there is a total absence of pretension in his manner, and he has been so long used to power that he cares nothing for its display. The arts by which he rules the heterogeneous mass of conflicting elements are indomitable will, profound secrecy, and uncommon astuteness." [^38]

537At the close of his description of his interview with President Young, Captain Burton gives his impression of the prophet in this passage: "When conversation began to flag, we rose up, shook hands, as is the custom here, all round, and took leave. The first impression left upon my mind by this short seance, and it was subsequently confirmed, was, that the 'prophet' is no common man, and that he has none of the weakness and vanity which characterize the common uncommon man. A desultory conversation cannot be expected to draw out a master spirit, but a truly distinguished character exercises most often an instinctive—some would call it a mesmeric—effect upon those who come in contact with it; and as we hate or despise at first sight, and love or like at first sight, so nature teaches us at first sight what to respect. It is observable that, although every Gentile writer has represented Mr. Joseph Smith as a heartless impostor, few have ventured to apply the term to Mr. Brigham Young." [^39]

Footnotes

"But when a preacher is to address a congregation of one to three thousand persons, like that which assembles twice each Sabbath in the Salt Lake City tabernacle, I insist that a due regard for the economy of time requires that he should prepare himself, by study and reflection, if not by writing, to speak directly to the point. This mortal life is too short and precious to be wasted in listening to rambling, loose-jointed harangues, or even to those which severally consume an hour in the utterance, when they might be boiled down and clarified until they were brought within the compass of half an hour each. A thousand half hours, reverend sir! have you ever pondered their value? Suppose your time to be worth ten times that of an average hearer; still, to take an extra half hour from a thousand hearers in order to save yourself ten or fifteen hours' labor in the due and careful preparation of a sermon, is a scandalous waste, which I see not how to justify. Be entreated to repent and amend!" (Overland Journey, p. 220). It will go without saying that whether merited in this particular instance or not—I find only a brief synopsis of the two discourses in the Deseret News,—Mr. Greeley points out a common defect of the extemporaneous discourse—diffusiveness. Orson Pratt's theme was the Book of Mormon, as the History of America; Elder John Taylor's Communism as Attempted by Owen in England, Fourier in France, and Cabet in Nauvoo, in Contrast with Mormon Achievements Under its Spirit of Brotherhood. (Deseret News of July 20th, 1859).

Of Burton's work and of non-"Mormon" books on "Mormonism" generally, Mr. Phil Robinson, the London Telegraph correspondent in Africa during the first Boer War, said: "Whence have the public derived their opinions about Mormonism? From anti-Mormons only. I have ransacked the literature of the subject, and yet I really could not tell any one where to go for an impartial book about Mormonism later in date than Burton's City of the Saints, published in 1862. Burton, it is well known, wrote as a man of wide travel and liberal education—Catholic, therefore, on all matters religious, and generous in his views of ethical and social obliquities, sympathetic, consistent, and judicial. It is no wonder, then, that Mormons remember the distinguished traveler, in spite of his candor, with the utmost kindness. But put Burton on one side, and I think I can defy any one to name another book about the Mormons worthy of honest respect. From that truly awful book, The History of the Saints, published by one Bennett (even an anti-Mormon has styled him 'the greatest rascal that ever came to the west') in 1842, down to Stenhouse's in 1873, there is not, to my knowledge, a single Gentile work before the public that is not utterly unreliable from its distortion of facts. Yet it is from these books—for there are no others—that the American public has acquired nearly all its ideas about the people of Utah. (Sinners and Saints—1883, p. 245). Mr. Robinson came to Utah in 1882 as the special correspondent of the New York World, and wrote a series of articles for that journal which at the time produced a widespread interest in Utah and Latter-day Saint affairs. These letters were reproduced in book form the following year under the title Sinners and Saints, Roberts Brothers, Boston, 1883.

---
Notas:
[^1] THE ASSAULT UPON THE HENNIFER BROTHERS IN THE UNITED STATES ARMY CAMP ON YELLOW CREEK See letters of the war department and Johnston's letter to the adjutant general, Senate Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 78, pp. 50-1.
[^2] SCHEDULE OF THE UNITED STATES CAMPAIGN EXPENSES AGAINST THE "MORMONS", 1857-8 "Those who have made the general's acquaintance since his arrival in the valley," said the Deseret News in its notice of his departure, "speak highly of him as an officer and a gentleman. For some cause he never visited Salt Lake City after he passed through it with his army on the 26th of June, 1858, consequently he never had the opportunity of seeing the 'Lion,'"—[i. e. meaning Brigham Young]. (Deseret News of March 7th, 1860).
[^3] "Moving Off: Since the scarcity of money in this territory began to be felt by the riff-raff, that followed the army to Utah, they have been leaving slowly, and before it was generally known that a large portion of the troops were to be removed, the number of that class of beings had been greatly reduced in this and other cities in this part of the country, to the great joy of the citizens. The recent marching of troops has given a new impetus to their emigrating inclinations, and they have, during the last few weeks, been leaving the territory by scores; and gamblers, black-legs, thieves and murderers are not so plenty hereabouts by half as they were two weeks ago, with a fair and increasing prospect that their numbers will continue to grow less, till there will be but few, or none of them, left in the land." (Deseret News of May 23rd, 1860).
[^4] See chapter cxvi footnote 27.
[^5] See Deseret News of June 6th, 1860. For details of the incident see Note 1 end of this chapter.
[^6] See Johnston's letter to adjutant general U. S. A., Feb. 22nd, 1869. Senate Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 78, p. 51.
[^7] This much against his desire; for in conversation with George Q. Cannon in April, while yet in the east, Colonel Cooke "hoped he would not be under the necessity of starting for Utah to take charge of the army, as he hoped the whole of the army would be withdrawn." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for April, 1860, p. 105).
[^8] Deseret News of Feb. 13th, 1861.
[^9] See article in Millennial Star, vol. xxiii, p. 613. Also affidavit of George Goddard. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for July, 1861, p. 379, et seq). Goddard tried to purchase two or three tons of powder for blasting purposes, but the officers at the fort though quite willing personally to grant the request, could not do so because of the orders of the war department. Goddard tried to purchase a few hundred thousand gun caps, but these the officers could not sell, and as they were light and easy of transportation Captain Clark, of the ordnance department, declared his intention to take them to the states (Ibid). Respecting this destruction of arms and other munitions of war, the Millennial Star had a strong editorial, in the course of which it was said: "Before leaving, everything they could not take with them, excepting the guns and ammunition they could not carry, was sold out. These latter, consisting of guns, powder, lead, and shells, they destroyed. An action of this kind requires no comment. After the army had been detained in the mountains by the threatened resistance of the people of Utah, it was asserted that one of the principal objects the government had in view in sending them there was to protect the settlers in that country and the emigrants who might be passing through from the attacks of the Indians. They tried to persuade the people of the territory that they, in preventing them from entering into the valley, were interfering with the generous intentions of their true friends. This was the view, also, they gave to the world. Of course, upon their being called away, it might have been expected that, as they could not be there themselves to assist in the defense of the people and country, they would at least have left what arms and ammunition they could spare. But no, they would neither sell nor leave to be used, munitions of this kind." (Millennial Star, vol. xxiii, p. 613). This criticism should be leveled at the federal administration, however, not at the army commanders, as they could do no other than obey the orders of the war department. And after all was it not a true "war policy" than otherwise, since the government did not wholly trust the people of Utah in the matter of their loyalty to that government with which they had been so recently in conflict.
[^10] History of Brigham Young, Ms., July, 1861, p. 332.
[^11] Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 575.
[^12] See Editorial in Millennial Star, vol. xxiii, p. 613; also Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 575; and Stenhouse Rocky Mountain Saints—1873, pp. 421-3. Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 248.
[^13] Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, pp. 248-9. For some time the soldiers at Camp Floyd—or by then Fort Crittenden—were permitted in the evening to amuse themselves in firing shells from the mortars as one of the means of destroying them. From fifty to seventy-five shells would be fired each night, the shells exploding usually before striking the hills at which they were fired. (Goddard affidavit, History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for July, 1861, pp. 379-80).
[^14] The letter bears date of July 16th, 1861, the day the auction sales began at Fort Crittenden.
[^15] The flag staff was 90 feet long from the ground to the truck; the first mast was about 45 feet long from the ground to the cross trees; 9 feet in the ground, circumference at the base 4 feet 4 inches. It was well made and a good piece of timber. The post flag unfurled on the 9th of November, 1858, measured 40 by 28 feet. No breeze greeting it when first drawn to the top of the flag pole, it hung listless in its folds. In that form it was beautifully emblematical of peace. But about an hour after the celebration of raising it was over, a light wind arose and unfurled it in all its glory. "As it stretched its ample folds in the breeze," said the Deseret News account of the ceremonies, "the mind could not but reflect that now, when nobly waving, it was like the sons of America, though mild in peace [symboled in the furled flag in the absence of the breeze an hour before] can, when roused by commotion, display a willingness to exert a fearless power; and exclaim—
[^16] "And, singularly enough," remarks Stenhouse, "that flag staff on which were hoisted the 'Stars and Stripes' to rally the troops that had come to overthrow 'the kingdom,' was subsequently used to assemble the Mormons for the defense of Brigham against the California volunteers, who for months were expected to arrest him." (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 422).
[^17] Commenting on the passing of Camp Floyd Gilbert Clements, in a letter to W. G. Mills—then in England upon a mission—under date of Aug. 25th, 1861, said: "The troops are gone. Camp Floyd, which for three years past has resounded with the orgies of the ungodly and become a nest for every unclean thing, has reverted to its wonted quietude and simplicity. Sometimes I regret that I never visited it; yet at other times I feel grateful that I have kept myself entirely aloof from Gentile influences and associations. I did not even attend the sale, though many have made fortunes by so doing. The vast stores of groceries, provisions, and the vast material of the gallant army, were sold for a mere song." (Millennial Star, vol. xxiii, p. 694).
[^18] See article by Mr. Isaac K. Russell, Improvement Era for April, 1926.
[^19] The incident rests upon the narrative of Edward Tullidge, Life of Brigham Young, chapter xix; and is quoted by Whitney in his Popular History of Utah, p. 158.
[^20] Speaking of the embarrassing financial condition of the government at the close of the Buchanan administration, to which the expense of the "Utah Expedition" during that administration had contributed so much, and the perplexities which confronted the new secretary of the treasury in Mr. Lincoln's cabinet—Mr. Salmon P. Chase— (Bryant-Gray-Brooks, History of the United States) says: "On taking office he found the credit of the government impaired at home and almost destroyed abroad. Revenue had been permitted to shrink without alarm, and apparently without creating concern. The public debt had been increased, although at the date of Mr. Lincoln's election it stood at what now seems the very moderate figure of less than $65,000,000. Expenditures had for some time exceeded revenue. The treasury was empty—there was not money enough to pay members of congress. Such was our financial condition when congress assembled in extra session on July 4th, 1861." (vol. v, p. 487).
[^21] Stenhouse puts the cost at fourteen million dollars. (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 421); Tullidge twenty million, (History of Salt Lake City, p. 248); the contracts for sending supplies to the army in Utah and those that were to go to reinforce them in the spring of 1858 alone amounted to more than six millions (Atlantic Monthly, April, 1859); United States Senator Broderick, of California, in conversation with President Young, put the cost of the "Utah Expedition" at forty millions. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for Oct., 1858, p. 1017). In the History of Brigham Young, Ms., under date of Dec. 13th, 1858, is a tabulated statement of the expenses of the government's "campaign against the Mormons" up to that time, giving what is evidently a careful statement of the respective divisions of the army marched into Utah and their subsequent distribution up to that time. It is the most carefully itemized statement of the forces and the probable expenses up to that time extant; and for that reason will be found as Note 2 at the end of this chapter.
[^22] See Acts and Resolutions of the First Annual and Special Sessions of the Legislative Assembly of the Territory of Utah, 1851-2, pp. 226-7o this History, ch. xcv.
[^23] Deseret News of Oct. 23rd, 1861. Unhappily it has gotten into minor phases of our Utah literature that this dispatch was sent by Brigham Young to President Lincoln.
[^24] Ibid.
[^25] Deseret News of 23rd Oct., 1861.
[^26] History of Brigham Young, Oct. 23rd, 1861, pp. 467-8).
[^27] Deseret News, April 30th, 1862.
[^28] Dispatch of L. Thomas, adjutant general, war department, Washington, D. C., of 28th April, 1862.
[^29] Deseret News, May 7th, 1862.
[^30] See Deseret News of April 23rd, 1862. The News strongly suspected that the raids upon mail stations were instigated by renegade whites, and did not consider the trouble as bad as reported. Still such was the apprehension of danger that when Captain Wm. H. Hooper was starting east to present Utah's claims for admission into the Union, it was considered prudent to send a special company of twenty mounted men under command of Colonel R. T. Burton to escort him beyond the danger zone. This party left on the 26th of April. (See Deseret News of 30th of April, 1862). It was in the instructions of General Wells to Colonel Burton that he offer his services to the mail company for the protection of the mails along the line, "until relieved by the troops said to be coming up from the east, or so long as it may be necessary to quiet the Indians who are said to be hostile;" (See Wells' Instructions to Burton, date of April 25th, 1862. Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 254). Acting governor Frank Fuller also gave some official standing to this company by giving it instructions and authorizing it to extend some protection to the United States overland mail.
[^31] Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 252.
[^32] Deseret News of Aug. 13th, 1862, where the story of this expedition is given in great detail.
[^33] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry of Aug. 15th, 1861, p. 304; also letter of Brigham Young to George Q. Cannon, Millennial Star, vol. xxiii, p. 822. Another item of interest connected with the telegraph line construction is the following incident: President Young at a private meeting of leading church authorities in the Historian's Office, on the evening of Dec. 15th, 1861, "said he had received over $11,000 in gold for the telegraph poles which he had set up or delivered on the lines. He said, 'I did not touch that gold with my fingers or flesh until it was all paid in. I then put it in a vessel of water, cleaned it, and said what words I wished over it [doubtless words of consecration]. I then delivered every dime of it over for tithing. I have not used one farthing of it for my own use. No one knows anything about it, excepting my clerks, and I don't want you to say anything about it.'" (From Woodruff's Journal, Ms., of 15th of Dec., 1861, also copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., date of entry, p. 535).
[^34] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for December, 1858, pp. 1149-50-51.
[^35] Ibid, p. 242.
[^36] Burton's City of the Saints, pp. 194-195.
[^37] City of the Saints, pp. 203-214.
[^38] City of the Saints, pp. 239-240.
[^39] Burton's City of the Saints, chapter iv, p. 245.
