B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 4 ( 1930)

538CHAPTER CXX

538CLOSE OF THE CAMP FLOYD PERIOD—COMPLETION OF THE OVERLAND TELEGRAPH LINE—REQUISITION FOR UTAH MEN FOR FEDERAL SERVICE

538THE approaching outbreak of the war between the states brought to a close the Camp Floyd period in Utah. On the 22nd of February, 1860, General Johnston, acting upon his discretionary orders from the secretary of war, announced to the adjutant general United States Army of America, at Washington, that the service in Utah did not require his special presence, and he had therefore turned over the command, on the above date, to Brevet Colonel Chas. F. Smith, 10th Infantry, and that on the next day he intended to start for Washington by the southern route to California, [^1] thence across the isthmus for the east.

DEPARTURE OF ALBERT SIDNEY JOHNSTON FROM UTAH

His departure was very quietly effected. No mention of it being made in the Deseret News, until the 7th of March. The general never visited Salt Lake City after passing through it in June, 1858; just why is left wholly to conjecture, as he himself deigned to give no explanation. The general and Brigham Young never met each other. Of the strict discipline General Johnston maintained in the army, which contributed so much to keeping down to a minimum the evils that the presence of an armed camp of soldiers introduced into the territory, I have already spoken; and also of the appreciation that was felt on the part of the civil community for that service. One can only regret that so excellent a soldier and gentleman could not have so far overcome his prejudices as to have made at least a better and a more extended acquaintance among the civilians of the city and of the territory. [^2]

Camp Floyd was still further reduced by the departure of a number of companies for New Mexico in May. They went by way of the Timpanogos (i. e. Provo canon), Echo canon, Fort Bridger, and Fort Laramie. The companies marched in two subcolumns under the command of Colonel Morrison and Major Isaac Lynde, respectively. A very large contingent of the camp followers—including women and gamblers that had infested Camp Floyd—left with these detachments, much to the relief and satisfaction of the people of Utah. [^3] On Yellow Creek, near the head of Echo canon, the retiring companies—officers and men—disgraced the army by permitting and participating in a most brutal assault upon William and James Hennifer. The former was stripped of his clothing and then whipped and beaten nearly to death at the instance of Assistant Surgeon, Dr. Edward Covey and Lieutenant Ebenezer N. Gay. The assault was an act of revenge. William Hennifer was on the police force in Salt Lake City at the time Dr. Covey was arrested for riot and an assault upon the police, in November, 1858, [^4] and participated in Covey's arrest. Finding Hennifer in the army camp, afforded Covey the opportunity for his cowardly revenge, which was executed in the presence of a large concourse of officers and troops of the army, and within fifty and one hundred yards respectively, of Colonel Morrison and Major Lynde's tents. [^5]

SUCCESSIVE COMMANDERS AT CAMP FLOYD

Colonel Charles F. Smith, as already observed, was left in command at Camp Floyd on the departure of General Johnston. [^6] He was later superseded by Colonel P. St. George Cooke who had been in the east on leave of absence, but had been assigned meanwhile to the command of the post. [^7] Some time after Colonel Cooke was placed in command, the name of Camp Floyd was changed to Fort Crittenden. The Deseret News states that the change was made by Colonel Cooke and his officers in February, 1861, subject to the approval of the war department. [^8] The change was no doubt suggested on account of the manifest treason of Secretary of War John B. Floyd to the government.

THE ARMY CAMP ABANDONED—DESTRUCTION OF THE MUNITIONS OF WAR

The "fort," however, scarcely became accustomed to its new name before the orders arrived for its abandonment. This was effected late in the summer of 1861. The government property at Fort Crittenden, that the retiring army could not conveniently take with it, was ordered to be sold at public auction, excepting arms and munitions of war, all which, in excess of what could be conveniently carried by the returning troops, was to be destroyed. [^9] The government property, consisting of the houses and other buildings, wheat, flour, bacon, groceries, harness, tents, mules, wagons, all kinds of tools, etc., sold at ridiculously low prices: flour at 52 cents per 100 lbs. in double sacks. Brigham Young bought 25 tons of flour for the church at even less than that, paying but $10 per ton. [^10] This flour had cost the government $28.40 per sack, or about $570 per ton, delivered in Salt Lake City. [^11] The other government property sold at a like ratio of loss to the government. It was estimated that $4,000,000 worth of property was sold for $100,000; less than three per cent of its cost value to the government; and of this purchase price Brigham Young is said to have supplied $40,000 through his business agent Mr. Hiram B. Clawson. [^12] The foundations of the fortunes of a number of Utah men, who afterwards became prosperous merchants in Salt Lake City, were laid in the advantageously low prices at this government sale.

The sales of the property ended, the arms that could not be taken back to the states with the retiring troops, were carried some distance from the camp, piled up in pyramids, then buried in powder and the pyramids connected by a fuse. This, at a given signal, was lighted, and the destruction completed save for a few pieces of ordnance that could not be wrecked by explosion, and these were thrown into deep wells, only afterwards to be recovered by the citizens and used in the armament of the Nauvoo Legion—the name under which was organized, it will be remembered, the territorial militia. [^13]

542Thus was destroyed, in large part, the munitions of war that equipped the best furnished, and the most distinguished officered "Expedition" ever sent out by the United States government in a time of peace. The army came to Utah—under certain contingencies, at least—to destroy; what it really did was to enrich the Latter-day Saint community of Utah. "They [the army] will move away for the states within two weeks," wrote William Clayton to George Q. Cannon; "and thus ends the great Buchanan 'Utah Expedition,' costing the government millions, and accomplishing nothing except making many of the saints comparatively rich, and improving the circumstances of the people of Utah. You may well believe that merchants and speculators [i. e. connected with the army] look blue and feel gloomy enough, and the true saints feel well in proportion." [^14] Was there not something prophetic in the hymn "Zion," by Elder Penrose, and sung at the close of the Peace Commission conference at the request of President Young—

542"And their silver and gold

542As the prophets have told

542Shall be brought to adorn thy fair head."

542GOOD-FELLOWSHIP WROUGHT BY TRADE

The approaching departure of the last remnants of the army from Fort Crittenden, together with the necessary mingling of the officers and leading civilians of Salt Lake City in the transaction of the necessary business of conducting the sales of government property, softened the asperities that had hitherto existed between the military authorities of the camp and the citizens of the territorial capital, and made it possible for them to separate with something that had the appearance of amity. Mr. Hiram B. Clawson, who had acted as President Young's business agent in the matter of making purchases at Fort Crittenden, invited the officers of the camp to call upon President Young, an invitation they readily accepted; and Colonel Cooke with his associated officers presented to Brigham Young the flag staff of Camp Floyd-Fort Crittenden, which had been erected at the army post early in November, 1858; and upon which, on the 9th of that month, the national flag was unfurled in the presence of the general commanding and amid great military display—the playing of national airs by the bands, the cheering of the army, and the firing of the national salute, then thirty-two guns, one for each of the states of the Union. [^15]

543After the remnant of the army was departed, the flag staff was removed from Fort Crittenden, and planted on the hillcrest immediately east of the Beehive House, where it stood for many years. [^16]

544Thus passed Camp Floyd-Fort Crittenden out of existence [^17]—save for its history. The only thing that remains to remind the visitor to Cedar valley that it was once the site of a considerable military encampment—numbering with its attaches above five thousand souls—is the light, iron-fenced graveyard, and the granite stone monument which marks the last resting place of the officers, soldiers, and civilian employees who died during the three years that the army was stationed there.

THE DEPARTURE OF GOVERNOR CUMMING FOR THE EAST

As part of the breaking up of Camp Floyd and the closing of the period which naturally bears its name, there should be noted the departure of Governor Cumming from the territory. His term of office came to a close in the spring of 1861; and on the 17th of May he quietly took his departure from the city, going via Emigration canon. Near the foot of Little Mountain one of his baggage wagons upset and the contents of it rolled into the creek. Some workmen passing at the time assisted in getting the wagon righted up and replacing the wetted freight; for which the governor insisted, after his own fashion, on making liberal compensation. Brigham Young was absent from the city at the time visiting settlements in the south, and did not have the opportunity of saying good-bye to his generous-hearted friend. The governor seems to have been determined to keep his departure from the city a secret. "It seemed to be his wish," said the Deseret News, five days after his departure, "to avoid any demonstration of his friends on the occasion of his departure, carefully concealing from them, as far as possible, the time when it might be expected to take place, and few, if any knew when he went, as he was moving about briskly from place to place during the day closing up his business affairs, and late in the afternoon started out so unceremoniously, that it was not generally known that he had gone until the next morning.

545Commenting upon his administration the Deseret News also said:

545"Of the official acts of Governor Cumming as the chief magistrate of Utah, we do not wish to speak particularly at this time, further than to say that his straightforward course pursued in the discharge of his executive duties, and the independence he has manifested and maintained in the midst of the difficulties which have surrounded him at times have secured for him many friends, by whom he will not soon be forgotten whatever the future may bring forth. We wish him and his lady a prosperous trip across the plains, and a safe arrival at their dwelling place on the banks of the Savannah."

545Thus passed from the community life of Utah one of the kindliest-hearted gentlemen, and one of the truest and bravest friends the people of Utah ever had.

545We may obtain but one more glimpse of Governor Cumming, and that, too, a sad one. Returning to his beloved state of Georgia, he identified himself with the southern cause in the war between the states, and shared the fortunes of the "lost cause." Just what all his fortunes were in the war we may not know, since what we get of him is merely a glimpse, not a full view. This in 1864, about one year before the surrender of Lee and the end of the war. The view comes from A Diary From Dixie, published in 1905, (402 pages) by Mary Boykin Chestnut, the wife of a brigadier general of the south, residing at Richmond, and a familiar of the first families of the south gathered at Richmond, including the family of Jefferson Davis. An arrangement had been made for an exchange of northern for southern prisoners on the 24th of March, 1864, and this is Mrs. Chestnut's diary entry, in part, for that day:

546"Maggie Howell and I went down to the river to see an exchange of prisoners. Our party were the Lees, Mallorys, Mrs. Buck Allan, Mrs. Ould. * * * Governor Cumming, a Georgian, late governor of Utah, was among the returned prisoners. He had been in prison two years. His wife was with him. He was a striking looking person, huge in size, and with snow-white hair, fat as a prize ox, with no sign of Yankee starvation or barbarity about him." [^18]

546We are happy to learn that his term of two years' imprisonment had left no traces of physical evil effects upon him. "His wife was with him!" This was the accomplished daughter of the prominent Boston physician whom he had married in his early manhood; who had shared his rough journey to the west in the "Utah Expedition;" and the rougher experiences at Camp Scott, near Fort Bridger, in the winter of 1857-8. She was with him during the years of his life and perplexing experiences in Salt Lake City and Utah where she witnessed the thrilling scenes of a people en trek to an unknown wilderness to escape the terrors of what was believed to be a military invasion of their homes, and wept over their fallen fortunes, and in tears pleaded that something might be done to relieve their seemingly hopeless fortunes. [^19] She shared, too, that long and perilous journey from Utah to the state of Georgia only to enter with her people into the throes of, to them, a disastrous war, with its two years of imprisonment for Utah's former governor and its long separation of the devoted pair. And now, at the end of two years of imprisonment, and nearing the close of the war, "his wife was with him!" Let us hope that the closing years of their life was kindlier for them than some of their middle life experiences.

Mrs. Chestnut in this same connection mentions at this exchange of prisoners the presence of another prominent Utah historical character, our good Colonel Thomas L. Kane,—no less—who in the fortunes of war had been taken prisoner by General "Stonewall Jackson" and now was booked to be an exchange prisoner of war. How strange the fortunes of war, that these famous Utah characters should meet (if they did meet) at such a time and place and under such circumstances, so similar for them, yet so different! Working together in Utah; on opposite sides at Richmond, both prisoners of war; both up for exchange; and within five little years of time!

547Secretary Francis H. Wooton succeeded as acting governor, after the departure of Cumming, but his "reign" was a brief one, since as a Marylander of strong southern sympathies, he soon resigned, to return home and cast in his lot with the cause of the Confederacy.

LOSS AND GAIN OF "BUCHANAN'S FOLLY"—I. E., THE "UTAH EXPEDITION"

The "Utah Expedition," now come to its inglorious close, will be well named in history "Buchanan's Folly;" for while it achieved neither practical nor sentimental ends in Utah—unless to intensify the feeling of many of the Latter-day Saints that the federal administration of that period was indeed their enemy, and bent upon their destruction, could be regarded as sentimental ends—and at the same time it cost government through years when its treasury was depleted, [^20] and at a most inopportune time—on the eve of the war between the states—a great amount of treasure, variously estimated but usually put at about forty millions of dollars. [^21]

548The close of the Camp Floyd period of this History brings us over into the Civil War period, and here is the proper place to deal with the "Mormon" attitude—as expressed through Utah's attitude—towards that very great national event.

THE ADVENT OF THE TELEGRAPH LINE IN SALT LAKE CITY

On the afternoon of October 18th, 1861, the Overland Telegraph Line was completed to Salt Lake City, thus realizing, in part, the desires expressed by the Latter-day Saints through the territorial legislature of Utah, as early as March, 1852, when congress was memorialized by that body to provide for the construction of a telegraph line from some point on the Mississippi or the Missouri to the Pacific coast, via Salt Lake City. [^22]

548The first use of the electric messenger being courteously extended to President Brigham Young, he sent the following message to the president of the telegraph company:

548"Sir: Permit me to congratulate you upon the completion of the overland telegraph line west to this city, to commend the energy displayed by yourself and associates in the rapid and successful prosecution of a work so beneficial; and to express the wish that its use may ever tend to promote the true interests of the dwellers upon both the Atlantic and Pacific slopes of our continent. Utah has not seceded, but is firm for the Constitution and laws of our happy country, and is warmly interested in such useful enterprises as the one so far completed." [^23]

549In his reply Mr. Wade said to President Young that he was gratified that the "first message to pass over the line, should express so unmistakably the patriotism and Union-loving sentiments of yourself and people." [^24] The full text of the telegram was as follows:

549"Cleveland, Oct. 19th, 1861.

549Hon. Brigham Young, Prest.

549Great Salt Lake City.

549Sir:—I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your message of last evening, which was in every way gratifying, not only in the announcement of the completion of the Pacific telegraph to your enterprising and prosperous city, but that yours, the first message to pass over the line, should express so unmistakably the patriotism and Union-loving sentiments of yourself and people.

549I join with you in the hope that this enterprise may tend to promote the welfare and happiness of all concerned, and that the annihilation of time in our means of communication may also tend to annihilate prejudice, cultivate brotherly love, facilitate commerce, and strengthen the bonds of our once and again to be happy Union.

549With just consideration for your high position, and due respect for you personally, I am your obedient servant,

549J. H. WADE,

549President Pacific Telegraph Co."

549On the same date of President Young's dispatch to Mr. Wade, Hon. Frank Fuller, secretary of the territory, and then acting governor of Utah, sent the following salutation over the wire to President Lincoln:

549"Great Salt Lake City, Oct. 18, 1861.

549To the President of the United States:

549Utah, whose citizens strenuously resist all imputations of disloyalty, congratulates the president upon the completion of an enterprise which spans a continent, unites two oceans, and connects with nerve of iron the remote extremities of the body politic with the great governmental heart. May the whole system speedily thrill with the quickened pulsations of that heart, as the parricide hand is palsied, treason is punished, and the entire sisterhood of states join hands in glad reunion around the national fireside. Frank Fuller,

549Acting Governor of Utah Territory."

549To this President Lincoln replied in the following message:

550"Washington, D. C., Oct. 20, 1861.

550Hon. Frank Fuller, Acting Governor of Utah.

550Sir:—The completion of the telegraph to Great Salt Lake City is auspicious of the stability and union of the republic. The government reciprocates your congratulations.

550Abraham Lincoln." [^25]

550A little later, namely on the 23rd of October, when the line west of Salt Lake City to San Francisco was opened, the courtesy of sending the first message to the Pacific coast was also accorded to Brigham Young. The entry in his office journal is as follows: "President B. Young accompanied by Brothers Wells, Smith, Clawson, Ellerbeck and others, went to the telegraph office, Mr. Street having proffered to Brigham Young the honor of sending the first dispatch, although he [Mr. Street] had been requested to let President Lincoln send the first dispatch; but in consequence of feeling under obligations for the courtesy and help of President Young, he [Young] received the preference. President Young sent the first message to H. M. Carpentier, president of the Overland Telegraph Company, at 10 minutes to 7 p. m.; and at 10 minutes past 7, he received a reply from Mr. Carpentier, dated 6 p. .m, San Francisco, California." [^26]

PRESIDENT LINCOLN'S CALL FOR UTAH MEN TO GUARD THE MAIL LINE

All this, it will be observed, has a strong flavor of patriotism. Also about six months later, when President Lincoln through the war department wired Brigham Young to raise ninety men for three months' service "to protect the property of the telegraph and overland mail service, between Forts Bridger and Laramie, to continue in service until the United States troops shall reach the point where their services are needed" (chiefly in the vicinity of Independence Rock), there was commendable dispatch in responding to President Lincoln's call—the only one of the kind made upon the territory —for in two days the company of cavalry was mustered into government service, and on the fourth day, May 1st, was on the march. The Deseret News, however, commenting upon the unexpected requisition remarked that—"the company will not, according to the specifications of the order, be required to perform any other service than that required for the protection of the mail and telegraph, which may not be expected to be very arduous; but the life of a soldier on the plains cannot be very desirable, whether there be much or little to be done." [^27]

551The official call for this company, on which the comment above is made respecting the limitations of the service, said:

551"It will not be employed for any offensive operations other than may grow out of the duty herein assigned to it," namely, guarding the mail route and the telegraph line in the region designated. [^28]

551The company called out consisted of one captain—Lot Smith, of "Echo Canon War" fame—two lieutenants, one first sergeant, one quartermaster sergeant, four sergeants, eight corporals, two musicians, two farriers, one saddler, one wagoner, and seventy-two privates—ninety-three all told. [^29] The personnel of the officers was as follows:

551"Captain, Lot Smith; First Lieutenant, J. S. Rawlins; Second Lieutenant, J. Q. Knowlton; Orderly Sergeant, R. H. Attwood; Quartermaster Sergeant, J. M. Barlow; Sergeants, S. H. W. Riter, John P. Weimer, H. O. Spencer, Moses Thurston; Corporals, Seymour B. Young, Newton Myrick, Wm. A. Bringhurst, John Hoagland, Jos. H. Felt, Jno. Neff, Andrew Bigler, Hyrum B. Clemons; Farriers, Ira N. Hinckley, John Helm; Saddler, Francis Platt; Wagoner, Solomon Hale; Musicians, Josiah Eardley, Charles Evans. The company was provided with ten baggage wagons and took with them rations for thirty days. On Monday [several days later] three or four other heavy mule wagons followed, with rations for thirty days more. The balance that will be required will probably be taken out by the trains going to the Missouri river, which are expected to start in about ten days." [^30]

The mountain Indians during the months of March and April had manifested an ugly disposition by making attacks upon the mail stations, burning some of them, murdering the employees and running off the stock. So extensive and persistent were their operations that there was a suspension of the mail service ordered by the contracting company. [^31] At this juncture Acting Territorial Governor, Frank Fuller, Chief Justice Kinney, and several prominent gentlemen connected with the mail service and telegraph companies united in recommending to the secretary of war, at Washington, that the superintendent of Indian affairs for Utah—then James Duane Doty—be authorized to raise a regiment of mounted rangers from the inhabitants of Utah, with officers to be appointed by him, to guard the mail routes and telegraph lines. But three days later Brigham Young, according to Tullidge, wired Utah's delegate in congress to the effect that the militia of the territory were ready and able to take care of all the Indians, and were able and willing to protect the mail route—"if called upon to do so." [^32] It was evidently upon this hint that President Lincoln acted and made the call directly upon Brigham Young, as the most expeditious way of getting the needed thing done; and so official red tape was ignored, and the man who could do the thing was called upon to do it by the then very practical president of the United States.

The very specific and limited service which this company of men were called upon to render may not be regarded as connected with the Civil War service; national service it was, of course, and very necessary, and it was creditably, and patriotically rendered, since while the command guarded the mail route and telegraph line between Fort Bridger and the Sweetwater, there were no further depredations upon either.

553Near the closing days of the term of their enlistment, namely, on the 19th of July, an Indian raid was made upon the ranch of "Jack" Robinson, one of the oldest mountaineers of the Wasatch range, living about six miles north of Fort Bridger, in which two hundred head of horses and mules were run off by a band of renegade Indians from the north. Captain Smith's command then being in the vicinity of Fort Bridger was appealed to on the day following the raid; and in less than two hours from receiving the word, sixty-two men were in the saddle and on the trail of the thieves. They followed the trail for eight days, going as far north as the head of Snake river valley, near the Three Tetons, about one hundred and thirty-five miles northeast of Fort Hall; but they were not able to overtake the Indians. The chase was a most exciting and trying one, and constituted the chief adventure of the command while in the service. The food supply gave out several days before the trail was abandoned. High waters in many streams had to be contended with; and Donald McNichol, in crossing one of these, a fork of Snake river, was lost, man and horse, in the turbulent stream, the only fatality which occurred in the command while on duty. This detachment of the command returned to Salt Lake City on the 9th of August—other divisions of the force had preceded it—and the Deseret News announced that the company would be mustered out of service on August 14th. [^33]

It must also be conceded that there was a large local interest in keeping open and safe both the mail route and the telegraph line. It was as much to the interest of Utah to do so as it was to the interest of the general government. Besides, Brigham Young had been given $10,000 by Mr. H. M. Carpentier, president of the California division, to secure his interest in the protection of said line." [^34]

NOTES

These Hennifer brothers were en route to some point between Bridger and Green river where they proposed to erect a blacksmith shop to accommodate passing emigrant trains. Overtaking the retiring United States troops from Camp Floyd at their encampment on Yellow Creek, the Hennifers asked permission of the commanding officers to camp within the lines, as they had extra provisions of ranch butter and eggs they desired an opportunity to dispose of to those of the camp who might want to buy. The privilege was granted the Hennifers, and a place designated by an officer where they might set their wagon. Soon after nightfall Assistant Surgeon Edward Covey and Lieutenant Ebenezer N. Gay, and others of the camp, went to the Hennifer wagon, and a squad of twelve soldiers seizing upon William Hennifer, by order of Dr. Covey, stripped him of his clothing and tied him to the wheel of his wagon, fastening his feet at the bottom and his hands at the top of the wheel. Dr. Covey then with a heavy riding whip—such as was used in the west at that time,—the handle of braided raw hide strips with four strands two feet in length and knotted—proceeded to inflict a hundred or more lashes upon the bare flesh of his victim, "each stroke with all the force he could exercise—the suffering man all the while uttering loud cries of anguish and pleading for mercy."—Hennifer fainted after about seventy lashes had been administered, but the brutal whipping went on just the same, varied only by beating him over the head with the butt of the whip.

Lieutenant Gay several times suggested during the whipping that their victim be shot. But no one being willing, apparently, to act upon what would have been, under the circumstances a merciful act, he called upon two army mule teamsters standing in the crowd with their long, heavy mule whips, "to give him two for me." Which order was obeyed, the brutes giving the victim two blows each according to the most approved style of whipping mules, burying the ends of the lashes each time in the flesh. "Gay's command was repeated several times and obeyed by the muleteers, while Hennifer remained in an unconscious state." An assault was also made by the crowd upon James Hennifer by order of Dr. Covey, but rolling down the steep embankment of Yellow Creek with several of his assailants into the stream, he escaped without great injury. Two other "Mormons" in the camp, William P. Appleby and William Ward, witnesses to this cruelty, were denounced as "Mormons," and as being worthy of like treatment, but mingling with the crowd they soon afterwards escaped from the camp.

555William Hennifer after his beating was untied from the wheel and left to shift for himself—no one in all the crowd that witnessed the affair daring to manifest any pity for him, or render him any assistance. Finally, at his own request, he was conducted outside the lines, a sergeant and three or four soldiers being his guard. The soldiers while marching him out of camp began to strike and abuse him until the sergeant threatened them with violence if they did not desist. Once outside the lines Hennifer made his way to the Woodward mail station, where he was cared for until his brother and friends arrived to take him in charge. His shop-plant and tools and the goods left in the wagon—valued at from twelve to fifteen hundred dollars—were all destroyed by the soldiers and teamsters of the camp. At the conclusion of the whipping, Dr. Covey said to his suffering victim, with an accompaniment of oaths—

555"Go and tell Brigham Young that it was I who whipped you, and that if he had been here I would have whipped him also."

555The reason for this assault was as stated in the text of this History, viz., that William Hennifer was a member of the Salt Lake police force when Dr. Covey and some petty officers from Camp Floyd were arrested for riot and assault upon the police in Salt Lake City. The incident as related by William P. Appleby and William Ward, eye witnesses to the affair,—is detailed at length in Deseret News of 6th June, 1860.

"Soldiers marched into the territory——————— 4,600

555Quartermaster's men, teamsters and other gov-

555ernment employees————————————————- 3,200

555Contractors, teamsters and employees——————— 4,930 12,730

555 ———- ———-

555Brigadier General Harney's Brigade placed en

555route for Utah, but recalled after the peace—- 2,000

555Employees of General Harney's brigade——————— 700 2,700

555 ———— ———

555Number of men in pay of the government——————- 15,430

555Suttlers, liquor dealers and merchants, their

555agents, teamsters and employees—————————— 1,500

555Professional gamblers ——————————————- 170 1,670

555 ———— ———

555Aggregate of men employed————————————— 17,100

556Regular troops employed in the campaign—————— 6,600

556Other employees of the government and camp

556followers————————————————————— 10,500 17,100

556 ———- ———-

556Number of contractors' wagons——————————— 4,006

55612 oxen to each wagon——————————————— 48,072

556Extra work oxen, one to each wagon————————- 4,006 52,078

556Suttlers, whiskey dealers and merchants' wa-

556gons ——————————————————————— 1,200

55612 oxen to the wagon———————————————- 14,400

556 ———— ———-

556Number of mules employed by the government 19,200

556Number of baggage wagons—————————————- 2,400

556Amount of Russell & Co.'s freight bills————-$5,408,100

556Cost of wagons, mules, harness, etc., for 2,400

556wagons —————————————————————-$3,600,000

556 ————— ———-

556 $9,008,100

556The other expenses of this campaign must be immense, when we take into account the purchase money for provisions, groceries, arms, ammunition, hospital stoves, dragoon and officers' horses and equipages: clothing, shoes, steamboat and other freightage, pay for officers, men and other employees, building huts and quarters at Camp Floyd; picking and stealing, waste and stealings of agents and contractors, paymasters, quartermasters, etc., etc.

556It is very singular that the whole of this useless expenditure, was made too, * * * when the national treasury was empty; and the government under the necessity of borrowing this money at a high per cent to sustain this unholy war; the receipts of the treasury being insufficient during the whole time to pay the current expenses of the government.

556The Mormon war debt is variously estimated at from twenty to forty millions.

556The ten thousand five hundred employees and camp followers were armed with rifles, revolvers and knives, and drilled to protect their trains, and would be much more effective in an engagement than the regulars, being generally American citizens and used to the rifles; whereas a great portion of the regular army, are foreigners who were enlisted soon after landing, when intoxicated or in a state of destitution; and unaccustomed to the use of fire arms, and notwithstanding having been drilled, handle their arms imperfectly compared with western men." [^35]

556DISTRIBUTION OF THE FORCES AGAINST UTAH

556"Colonel Hoffman's regiment ordered to Oregon via Cali-

fornia ——————————————————————————— 800 men Colonel Loring's mounted rifles, ordered to New Mexico, by

557way of the Elk Mountains——————————————————- 400 men

557Colonel Bee's volunteers or starred battalion marched to

557Leavenworth and discharged—————————————————- 400 men

557Brigadier General Harney's brigade recalled————————— 2,000 do.

557Supposed to have deserted or time expired—————————— 700 do.

557 —————

557 4,300 men

557Which leaves two thousand three hundred regular soldiers with about two hundred recruits enlisted from among the teamsters and employees, since winter set in; which make about 2,500 soldiers in the service of the United States in this territory. [Dec., 1858].

557There has been a steady stream of teamsters and employees leaving the territory this fall, towards the east, west, north and south, and probably 3,000 remain from necessity and all of these are anxious to get away." [^36]

Footnotes

Hurrah! for the stripes and stars,

That float over land and sea;

A terror to tyrants in wars,

And the pride of the sons of the free."

(Deseret News, impression of Nov. 10th, 1858).

---
Notas:
[^1] THE ASSAULT UPON THE HENNIFER BROTHERS IN THE UNITED STATES ARMY CAMP ON YELLOW CREEK See letters of the war department and Johnston's letter to the adjutant general, Senate Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 78, pp. 50-1.
[^2] SCHEDULE OF THE UNITED STATES CAMPAIGN EXPENSES AGAINST THE "MORMONS", 1857-8 "Those who have made the general's acquaintance since his arrival in the valley," said the Deseret News in its notice of his departure, "speak highly of him as an officer and a gentleman. For some cause he never visited Salt Lake City after he passed through it with his army on the 26th of June, 1858, consequently he never had the opportunity of seeing the 'Lion,'"—[i. e. meaning Brigham Young]. (Deseret News of March 7th, 1860).
[^3] "Moving Off: Since the scarcity of money in this territory began to be felt by the riff-raff, that followed the army to Utah, they have been leaving slowly, and before it was generally known that a large portion of the troops were to be removed, the number of that class of beings had been greatly reduced in this and other cities in this part of the country, to the great joy of the citizens. The recent marching of troops has given a new impetus to their emigrating inclinations, and they have, during the last few weeks, been leaving the territory by scores; and gamblers, black-legs, thieves and murderers are not so plenty hereabouts by half as they were two weeks ago, with a fair and increasing prospect that their numbers will continue to grow less, till there will be but few, or none of them, left in the land." (Deseret News of May 23rd, 1860).
[^4] See chapter cxvi footnote 27.
[^5] See Deseret News of June 6th, 1860. For details of the incident see Note 1 end of this chapter.
[^6] See Johnston's letter to adjutant general U. S. A., Feb. 22nd, 1869. Senate Executive Documents, 36th Congress, 1st Session, No. 78, p. 51.
[^7] This much against his desire; for in conversation with George Q. Cannon in April, while yet in the east, Colonel Cooke "hoped he would not be under the necessity of starting for Utah to take charge of the army, as he hoped the whole of the army would be withdrawn." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for April, 1860, p. 105).
[^8] Deseret News of Feb. 13th, 1861.
[^9] See article in Millennial Star, vol. xxiii, p. 613. Also affidavit of George Goddard. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for July, 1861, p. 379, et seq). Goddard tried to purchase two or three tons of powder for blasting purposes, but the officers at the fort though quite willing personally to grant the request, could not do so because of the orders of the war department. Goddard tried to purchase a few hundred thousand gun caps, but these the officers could not sell, and as they were light and easy of transportation Captain Clark, of the ordnance department, declared his intention to take them to the states (Ibid). Respecting this destruction of arms and other munitions of war, the Millennial Star had a strong editorial, in the course of which it was said: "Before leaving, everything they could not take with them, excepting the guns and ammunition they could not carry, was sold out. These latter, consisting of guns, powder, lead, and shells, they destroyed. An action of this kind requires no comment. After the army had been detained in the mountains by the threatened resistance of the people of Utah, it was asserted that one of the principal objects the government had in view in sending them there was to protect the settlers in that country and the emigrants who might be passing through from the attacks of the Indians. They tried to persuade the people of the territory that they, in preventing them from entering into the valley, were interfering with the generous intentions of their true friends. This was the view, also, they gave to the world. Of course, upon their being called away, it might have been expected that, as they could not be there themselves to assist in the defense of the people and country, they would at least have left what arms and ammunition they could spare. But no, they would neither sell nor leave to be used, munitions of this kind." (Millennial Star, vol. xxiii, p. 613). This criticism should be leveled at the federal administration, however, not at the army commanders, as they could do no other than obey the orders of the war department. And after all was it not a true "war policy" than otherwise, since the government did not wholly trust the people of Utah in the matter of their loyalty to that government with which they had been so recently in conflict.
[^10] History of Brigham Young, Ms., July, 1861, p. 332.
[^11] Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 575.
[^12] See Editorial in Millennial Star, vol. xxiii, p. 613; also Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 575; and Stenhouse Rocky Mountain Saints—1873, pp. 421-3. Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 248.
[^13] Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, pp. 248-9. For some time the soldiers at Camp Floyd—or by then Fort Crittenden—were permitted in the evening to amuse themselves in firing shells from the mortars as one of the means of destroying them. From fifty to seventy-five shells would be fired each night, the shells exploding usually before striking the hills at which they were fired. (Goddard affidavit, History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for July, 1861, pp. 379-80).
[^14] The letter bears date of July 16th, 1861, the day the auction sales began at Fort Crittenden.
[^15] The flag staff was 90 feet long from the ground to the truck; the first mast was about 45 feet long from the ground to the cross trees; 9 feet in the ground, circumference at the base 4 feet 4 inches. It was well made and a good piece of timber. The post flag unfurled on the 9th of November, 1858, measured 40 by 28 feet. No breeze greeting it when first drawn to the top of the flag pole, it hung listless in its folds. In that form it was beautifully emblematical of peace. But about an hour after the celebration of raising it was over, a light wind arose and unfurled it in all its glory. "As it stretched its ample folds in the breeze," said the Deseret News account of the ceremonies, "the mind could not but reflect that now, when nobly waving, it was like the sons of America, though mild in peace [symboled in the furled flag in the absence of the breeze an hour before] can, when roused by commotion, display a willingness to exert a fearless power; and exclaim—
[^16] "And, singularly enough," remarks Stenhouse, "that flag staff on which were hoisted the 'Stars and Stripes' to rally the troops that had come to overthrow 'the kingdom,' was subsequently used to assemble the Mormons for the defense of Brigham against the California volunteers, who for months were expected to arrest him." (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 422).
[^17] Commenting on the passing of Camp Floyd Gilbert Clements, in a letter to W. G. Mills—then in England upon a mission—under date of Aug. 25th, 1861, said: "The troops are gone. Camp Floyd, which for three years past has resounded with the orgies of the ungodly and become a nest for every unclean thing, has reverted to its wonted quietude and simplicity. Sometimes I regret that I never visited it; yet at other times I feel grateful that I have kept myself entirely aloof from Gentile influences and associations. I did not even attend the sale, though many have made fortunes by so doing. The vast stores of groceries, provisions, and the vast material of the gallant army, were sold for a mere song." (Millennial Star, vol. xxiii, p. 694).
[^18] See article by Mr. Isaac K. Russell, Improvement Era for April, 1926.
[^19] The incident rests upon the narrative of Edward Tullidge, Life of Brigham Young, chapter xix; and is quoted by Whitney in his Popular History of Utah, p. 158.
[^20] Speaking of the embarrassing financial condition of the government at the close of the Buchanan administration, to which the expense of the "Utah Expedition" during that administration had contributed so much, and the perplexities which confronted the new secretary of the treasury in Mr. Lincoln's cabinet—Mr. Salmon P. Chase— (Bryant-Gray-Brooks, History of the United States) says: "On taking office he found the credit of the government impaired at home and almost destroyed abroad. Revenue had been permitted to shrink without alarm, and apparently without creating concern. The public debt had been increased, although at the date of Mr. Lincoln's election it stood at what now seems the very moderate figure of less than $65,000,000. Expenditures had for some time exceeded revenue. The treasury was empty—there was not money enough to pay members of congress. Such was our financial condition when congress assembled in extra session on July 4th, 1861." (vol. v, p. 487).
[^21] Stenhouse puts the cost at fourteen million dollars. (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 421); Tullidge twenty million, (History of Salt Lake City, p. 248); the contracts for sending supplies to the army in Utah and those that were to go to reinforce them in the spring of 1858 alone amounted to more than six millions (Atlantic Monthly, April, 1859); United States Senator Broderick, of California, in conversation with President Young, put the cost of the "Utah Expedition" at forty millions. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entries for Oct., 1858, p. 1017). In the History of Brigham Young, Ms., under date of Dec. 13th, 1858, is a tabulated statement of the expenses of the government's "campaign against the Mormons" up to that time, giving what is evidently a careful statement of the respective divisions of the army marched into Utah and their subsequent distribution up to that time. It is the most carefully itemized statement of the forces and the probable expenses up to that time extant; and for that reason will be found as Note 2 at the end of this chapter.
[^22] See Acts and Resolutions of the First Annual and Special Sessions of the Legislative Assembly of the Territory of Utah, 1851-2, pp. 226-7o this History, ch. xcv.
[^23] Deseret News of Oct. 23rd, 1861. Unhappily it has gotten into minor phases of our Utah literature that this dispatch was sent by Brigham Young to President Lincoln.
[^24] Ibid.
[^25] Deseret News of 23rd Oct., 1861.
[^26] History of Brigham Young, Oct. 23rd, 1861, pp. 467-8).
[^27] Deseret News, April 30th, 1862.
[^28] Dispatch of L. Thomas, adjutant general, war department, Washington, D. C., of 28th April, 1862.
[^29] Deseret News, May 7th, 1862.
[^30] See Deseret News of April 23rd, 1862. The News strongly suspected that the raids upon mail stations were instigated by renegade whites, and did not consider the trouble as bad as reported. Still such was the apprehension of danger that when Captain Wm. H. Hooper was starting east to present Utah's claims for admission into the Union, it was considered prudent to send a special company of twenty mounted men under command of Colonel R. T. Burton to escort him beyond the danger zone. This party left on the 26th of April. (See Deseret News of 30th of April, 1862). It was in the instructions of General Wells to Colonel Burton that he offer his services to the mail company for the protection of the mails along the line, "until relieved by the troops said to be coming up from the east, or so long as it may be necessary to quiet the Indians who are said to be hostile;" (See Wells' Instructions to Burton, date of April 25th, 1862. Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 254). Acting governor Frank Fuller also gave some official standing to this company by giving it instructions and authorizing it to extend some protection to the United States overland mail.
[^31] Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 252.
[^32] Deseret News of Aug. 13th, 1862, where the story of this expedition is given in great detail.
[^33] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry of Aug. 15th, 1861, p. 304; also letter of Brigham Young to George Q. Cannon, Millennial Star, vol. xxiii, p. 822. Another item of interest connected with the telegraph line construction is the following incident: President Young at a private meeting of leading church authorities in the Historian's Office, on the evening of Dec. 15th, 1861, "said he had received over $11,000 in gold for the telegraph poles which he had set up or delivered on the lines. He said, 'I did not touch that gold with my fingers or flesh until it was all paid in. I then put it in a vessel of water, cleaned it, and said what words I wished over it [doubtless words of consecration]. I then delivered every dime of it over for tithing. I have not used one farthing of it for my own use. No one knows anything about it, excepting my clerks, and I don't want you to say anything about it.'" (From Woodruff's Journal, Ms., of 15th of Dec., 1861, also copied into History of Brigham Young, Ms., date of entry, p. 535).
[^34] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for December, 1858, pp. 1149-50-51.
[^35] Ibid, p. 242.
[^36] Burton's City of the Saints, pp. 194-195.
