Church leaders deliver gospel messages to people all around the world. This section highlights a few devotional addresses Church leaders have recently given in North America.

In a broadcast from Temple Square, President Russell M. Nelson spoke to approximately 750,000 members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in California on February 27.

He invited listeners to (1) seek truth, (2) make and keep covenants, and (3) help gather Israel. “Many of your friends are seeking to understand why they are here on earth,” he said. “They want to know if life has any meaning. They want to make a difference in the world but they don’t know who they can trust. Do you realize that you have the answers your friends are seeking? … This gathering is all about giving every human soul the chance to hear and accept the gospel of Jesus Christ. It is all about saving souls.”

On the day before Valentine’s Day, Elder Ronald A. Rasband gave a devotional address titled “What’s Not to Love?” at Brigham Young University–Idaho.

He taught that “love of God embraces both the Father and the Son” and motivates us to become true disciples: “To love God with all your heart, soul, mind, and strength is life’s curriculum in becoming a true disciple. It is no lukewarm, casual effort with spotty results. … When your love of God consumes your service, interests, priorities, and affections, you are blessed, and joy attends those blessings.”

During the Mexican-American War in 1846, about 500 members of the Church marched 2,000 miles from Council Bluffs, Iowa, to San Diego, California. The group was known as the Mormon Battalion.

On January 29, 2022, the same number of missionaries and volunteers marched near the Mormon Battalion Historic Site in San Diego during the 175th anniversary program to honor the faith and courage of the battalion.

Elder D. Todd Christofferson spoke at the event, telling members that we can draw strength and inspiration from the courageous, faithful example of the Mormon Battalion: “Their legacy is one of exceptional faith and sacrifice and service as they accepted the call to serve God and their country. … As you stand here in their place, you are heirs of that great legacy. You too are capable of that kind of faith and sacrifice and service. You too are capable of doing hard things. You too have great things to do. Now, go forth and make a difference.”

In a devotional address given at Brigham Young University on January 11, Camille N. Johnson, then serving as Primary General President, taught that our relationship with the Savior Jesus Christ provides safety and stability as we navigate life: “As I trust more and resist less, I feel bound more securely to the Savior. My faith and confidence in the Savior increase as I place my faith and confidence in Him. Because He knows my potential perfectly, He has taken me to places I never had imagined myself.”

President Johnson has since been called as Relief Society General President.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="151106783" id="aside1_p1">Longer reports of these devotionals are available at <a href="https://newsroom.churchofjesuschrist.org">newsroom.ChurchofJesusChrist.org</a>.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
