Ardeth Greene Kapp, Joy of the Journey ( 1992)

Preface

We live in a time when we can do more, have more, see more, accumulate more, and want more than at any time we have ever known. I believe that if possible, the adversary would keep us busily engaged in a multitude of trivial things in an effort to keep us distracted from the few vital things that make all the difference.

Many of us live in expectation of better days ahead, next week, next month, or next year. We will feel joy when we reach this goal, accomplish that project, or acquire some possession. The anticipation of joy is often hoped for just around the next corner, when health improves, financial resources increase, or some promotion or position becomes ours. While it is important to plan for and look ahead to the future, it is quite possible that we shall miss the joy of the journey unless we are awakened to experience the good things in life that are often crowded out by the seeming demands and distractions of life. We may feel the need to schedule, program, and calendar good times when what we really need is to be awakened to the unprogrammed, unexpected, and beautiful things that take place each day.

The joy of the journey comes not only in the anticipation of our ultimate destination, but also when our eyes are opened and we learn to experience the wonders of life and the goodness of life even while we are faced with the challenges.

The journey through this mortal life is laced with joy and also afflictions. The scriptures teach us, "Men are, that they might have joy." (2 Nephi 2:25.) The Lord told Nephi, "Behold, I have refined thee, I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction." (1 Nephi 20:10.) The Lord will come to us in our afflictions. He has covenanted with us to never desert us or leave us, and there is great joy in the knowledge that we can trust him. For us, it is just as he told the people in Alma's time: "I will also ease the burdens which are put upon your shoulders, that even you cannot feel them upon your backs, . . . and this I will do that ye may stand as witnesses for me hereafter, and that ye may know of a surety that I, the Lord God, do visit my people in their afflictions." (Mosiah 24:14.)

In these writings I share experiences found in the joy of the journey, with a desire that the readers might increase in their ability to find joy in their personal and daily lives.

There is joy in friendship, and the promises of friendship and friends now and forever. (See D&C 130:2.) There is joy in not having things always our way, but our Father's way, because of our trust in God and faith in his eternal plan. There is joy in repentance and forgiveness, and in knowing that our sins can be washed away and remembered no more. There is joy in the whisperings of the Spirit at times when the voices of the world would otherwise destroy our peace.

These stories tell of the joy experienced through a woman's righteous influence, the joy that comes from the light within, the joy in traveling together, the joy in keeping in touch with our heavenly home and in following the path provided by our Savior.

We are away from home, and on occasion we have feelings of homesickness. The way may seem long, but however steep the path, Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior, will be with us. He set the pattern and invites us to follow him.

As we seek to do the will of our Father in heaven and strive to walk in his steps each day, we will come to understand the purpose of life and experience the joy of the journey.
