Ardeth Greene Kapp, Joy of the Journey ( 1992)

CHAPTER 2

Love Makes the World Go Around

Some time ago I received a letter from a young woman who wrote, "Dear Sister Kapp: I have a problem. Could you please advise me on how to encourage the boys I like and discourage the boys I don't like? I'm anxious to know."

In my response I warned her to be very careful, because the boy she doesn't like this week might be the one she will like next. That's called falling in and out of love, romantic love. I suggested she try to like all of the boys and all of the girls all of the time, in every season. As I consider that counsel, I'd like to recommend it for each of us.

We've all seen the familiar symbol that communicates the idea of love without any words. We see it on bumper stickers and T-shirts. It is simply the word "I" followed by the shape of a heart and then the word of something someone loves. For example, we read "I love [represented by a heart] snow," or chocolate, or whatever. Hearts signify love in nearly every language.

Early one morning I awakened and walked out on my front porch to look at my flowers. To my surprise I discovered paper hearts stuck all over the front of our house—little hearts, big hearts, red hearts, pink hearts, placed high and low, all over, from one side of the porch to the other. I counted them. There were one hundred in all. On the front door was a very large heart with bold lettering that read, "You're having a heart attack." On the porch was a small basket filled with heart-shaped cookies and a little note with this message: "We love you, Sister Kapp."

I sat down on the porch, in my bathrobe, in my bare feet, and wondered, "Who did this? Why? What's the occasion? What have I done to deserve such attention?" It wasn't my birthday or Valentine's Day, just an ordinary day—that is, until I became invaded with hearts. I can assure you, I did not remove the hearts quickly. The cookies, yes, but not the hearts. They remained until the setting sun turned the red hearts to pink and the pink to almost white. Neighbors called across the street, "What's the special occasion?" I called back, "Someone loves me," and it felt good just to say that. I didn't discover until several days later that the Laurels from a ward in another stake had come clear across town very early that morning with their hands full of hearts, masking tape, cookies, and love. Love does make the world go around. It certainly made my world go around that day, and each time I think about it.

Eventually I decided to remove the hearts that had created so much attention and happy feelings in our neighborhood. By then they were faded and some slightly torn, but I could not bring myself to throw them away. They lay stacked on a shelf in the garage for several months. One day these faded hearts were called into service once again to perpetuate their message of love. At our family reunion that summer, Uncle Jack and Aunt Nina, the eldest members of the clan, parked their motor home not far from the cabin housing most of the people and all the commotion. In the silence of the night, family members of all ages, with one hundred faded hearts in hand, crept over to the camper and quietly covered the motor home. One large heart on the door said, "You're having a heart attack," and another one said, "We love you."

We all watched excitedly the following morning while Aunt Nina helped Uncle Jack, who had suffered a serious heart attack just months before, step down from the motor home. Then, getting their bearings, they turned around and saw their motor home covered with hearts. "We love you!" everyone shouted. Those hearts had done it again. Tears filled the eyes of many, and we all experienced that tender, wonderful feeling of love.

On one occasion, after a rather large Young Women conference where I think I must have hugged over five hundred young women, I received a letter in the mail that read, "After you spoke to us, I waited in line, and when it was my turn, you hugged me and said something wonderful to me. I forgot what it was. Could you please write and tell me so I can put it in my journal and read it when I feel low?" I couldn't remember exactly what I whispered to her as I hugged her, but often I will say something like, "I love you very much, and I'll take you home with me in my heart." Was it the words she wanted to remember—or the feeling of being loved?

What is this thing called love, which is so essential to our well-being, our happiness, our growth, and our spirituality? The greatest of all the commandments our Father in heaven has given us deals with love. We read in the scriptures that a lawyer, one of the Pharisees, asked the Savior, "Master, which is the great commandment in the law? Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matthew 22:36-40.)

Love forms our foundation, our anchor, our mainstay, our security, and our defense. It should be the focal point for our life, at the top of every New Year's resolution and in the heart of every soul.

In a lecture at Brigham Young University, author Raymond Moody stated that he had interviewed one hundred people who had died and returned to life. They all responded that they followed a bright light and then were asked, "How have you loved and how have you served?" What would our answer be if we were asked to give an accounting of how we have loved and how we have served this past year? Will it read any differently for the coming year?

As Latter-day Saints, we are a covenant people. We have covenanted to take upon us the name of Christ and "to come into the fold of God, and to be called his people." (See Mosiah 18:8-10.)

In that upper room at the time of the Last Supper, the Savior of the world, knowing what was imminent—and at a time when he might have been concerned for his own welfare—spoke to the apostles gathered there (and through the scriptures, to each of us) of love. "A new commandment I give unto you," he said, "that ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another." (John 13:34.) Can we in any possible way comprehend even in part the way the Savior loves us? He loves us unconditionally, the sinner and the saint. He gave his life for us. "He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed." (Mosiah 14:5.) Through his atonement, a sinner can become a saint.

I struggle with how far I am from approaching that goal or even in some small way being able to comprehend the magnitude and magnificence of that divine, unconditional, unreserved, constant love of God. Even when I make resolves and fall short, I know he will never give up on me or you. Never, ever. The love that God has for us cries out for us to prove our love for him so he can bless us and help us and enlarge our spirit within. Love is of such importance that it becomes a distinguishing feature of those who profess to be disciples of Christ. He said, "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." (John 13:35.) This is not just for us and our closest friends, but for all of our brothers and sisters, everywhere, always.

Most clubs, organizations, societies, fraternities, and sororities have some distinguishing features that set them apart from the rest. We take pride in our identity, especially if our group is exclusive. A favorite book of mine is Adventures in Friendship by David Grayson. I'd like to share with you a few excerpts from a chapter entitled "An Adventure in Fraternity":

This, I am firmly convinced, is a strange world, as strange a one as I was ever in. Looking about me I perceive that the simplest things are the most difficult, the plainest things, the darkest, the commonest things, the rarest.

I have had an amusing adventure—and made a friend.

This morning when I went to town for my marketing I met a man who was a Mason, an Oddfellow and an Elk, and who wore the evidences of his various memberships upon his coat. He asked me what lodge I belonged to, and he slapped me on the back in the heartiest manner, as though he had known me intimately for a long time. . . . I could not help feeling complimented—both complimented and abashed. For I am not a Mason, or an Oddfellow, or an Elk. When I told him so he seemed . . . surprised and disappointed.

"You ought to belong to one of our lodges," he said. "You'd be sure of having loyal friends wherever you go. . . . "You're just the sort of man," he said, "that we'd like to have in our lodge. I'd enjoy giving you the grip of fellowship." . . .

As I drove homeward this afternoon I could not help thinking of the Masons, the Oddfellows and the Elks—and curiously not without a sense of depression. I wondered if my friend . . . had found the pearl of great price that I have been looking for so long. For is not friendliness the thing of all things that is most pleasant in this world? Sometimes it has seemed to me that the faculty of reaching out and touching one's neighbour where he really lives is the greatest of human achievements. And it was with an indescribable depression that I wondered if these Masons and Oddfellows and Elks had in reality caught the Elusive Secret and confined it within the insurmountable and impenetrable walls of their mysteries, secrets, grips, passes, benefits.

"It must, indeed," I said to myself, "be a precious sort of fraternity that they choose to protect so sedulously."

I felt as though life contained something that I was not permitted to live. . . . So I jogged along feeling rather blue, marveling that those things which often seem so simple should be in reality so difficult.

The moment I passed the straggling outskirts of the town and came to the open road, the light and glow of the countryside came in upon me with a newness and sweetness impossible to describe. . . . I straightened up in my buggy and drew in a good breath. . . . "Why!" I exclaimed to myself, "I need not envy my friend's lodges. I myself belong to the greatest of all fraternal orders. I am a member of the Universal Brotherhood of Men." . . .

As I drove onward, . . . I saw a man walking in the road ahead of me. He was much bent over, and carried on his back a bag. When he heard me coming he stepped out of the road and stood silent, saving every unnecessary motion, as a weary man will. He neither looked around nor spoke, but waited for me to go by. He was weary past expectation. I stopped the mare.

"Get in, Brother," I said; "I am going your way."

He looked at me doubtfully; then, as I moved to one side, he let his bag roll off his back into his arms. I could see the swollen veins of his neck; his face had the drawn look of the man who bears burdens.

"Pretty heavy for your buggy," he remarked.

"Heavier for you," I replied.

So he put the bag in the back of my buggy and stepped in beside me diffidently.

"Pull up the lap robe," I said, "and be comfortable. . . . Aren't you the man who has taken the old Rucker farm?" I asked.

"I'm that man."

"I've been intending to drop in and see you," I said.

"Have you?" he asked eagerly.

"Yes," I said. "I live just across the hills from you, and I had a notion that we ought to be neighbourly—seeing that we belong to the same society."

His face, which had worn a look of set discouragement . . . had brightened up, but when I spoke of the society it clouded again.

"You must be mistaken," he said. "I'm not a Mason."

"No more am I," I said.

"Nor an Oddfellow."

"Nor I."

As I looked at the man I seemed to know all about him. . . . A man who in his time had seen many an open door, but who had found them all closed when he attempted to enter! If anyone ever needed the benefits of my fraternity, he was that man.

"What Society did you think I belonged to?" he asked. . . . "I haven't any money to pay into lodges and it don't seem's if a man could get acquainted and friendly without."

"Farming is rather lonely work sometimes, isn't it?" I observed.

"You bet it is," he responded. "You've been there yourself, haven't you?"

There may be such a thing as the friendship of prosperity; but surely it cannot be compared with the friendship of adversity. Men, stooping, come close together.

"But when I got to thinking it over," I said, "it suddenly occurred to me that I belonged to the greatest of all fraternities. And I recognized you instantly as a charter member."

He looked around at me expectantly, half laughing. I don't suppose he had so far forgotten his miseries for many a day.

"What's that?" he asked.

"The Universal Brotherhood of Men."

Well, we both laughed—and understood. After that, what a story he told me!—the story of a misplaced man on an unproductive farm. Is it not marvellous how full people are—all people—of humour, tragedy, passionate human longings, hopes, fears—if only you can unloosen the floodgates! (David Grayson, Adventures in Friendship, New York: Doubleday, Page & Company, 1922, pp. 1-16.)

Can the organization to which we belong, the one in which we claim membership, be recognized by our actions? Can we be identified as brothers and sisters, sons and daughters, in God's kingdom? Do our clubs ever separate us from our covenants?

It is easy to treat certain people kindly because we like them, for they are part of our group. But as true disciples of the Lord, we will endeavor to treat everyone kindly. As we do, we will find more and more people we like, including those whom we thought we might never like in the beginning. We will not experience in this mortal sphere the capacity to love as Christ loved, but in our feeble effort to make daily progress, the Lord will hear our earnest prayers, our desire to be a true disciple, and with his help we can participate in life-changing experiences for ourselves and for others.

Love has been defined as "the will to extend one's self for the purpose of nurturing one's own and another's spiritual growth." (M. Scott Peck, The Road Less Traveled, New York: Touchtone, 1978, p. 81.)

One time when I was speaking to an adult fireside, I felt impressed to share something concerning my love and appreciation for an individual struggling to overcome the devastating problem of alcoholism. Upon my return home, I received a letter from someone in that audience, a stranger until that night, and now a friend. A woman suffering from the effects of alcoholism in her own life wrote, "Since that Saturday night that I met you, I've been so filled with the Spirit, I have walked around for days now with a lump in my throat. For the first time in years I have prayed to my Father in Heaven, and I feel hope. I'm longing to come 'home.' I feel such an urgency to change. I've always felt like the last leaf on the tree, clinging for all it's worth, not courageous enough to let go and fall, afraid the fall will hurt. I hang on all alone. It's as though you reached out your hand and said, 'It's okay, let go. I'll be here. You're not alone.' This fall as I watch the golden leaves break loose and drift from their branches, I will think of you. Maybe someone else will regain their testimony because of your love and concern. Maybe they, like me, have found the courage to let go because a hand was there to hold."

If love can be expressed and felt between two people in an entire congregation, think what can happen when you express love to one another in small groups or just one to another. We need each other.

What will you do this year about love? Will this year be a retread, same old habits, liking some people, disliking others, ignoring or rejecting others? It is said that to ignore or to reject is even more devastating to people than to dislike them. Could you raise your voice to express a friendly hello to a fellow traveler who might be carrying a load on his back?

Each year since 1967, I have taken from my file a little statement to refresh my mind concerning the opportunities of a new year. May I share it with you:

January . . . will this year be a retread—same old habits, same old ways, same old weaknesses, same old mistakes, same old heartaches, same old procrastinations? Or will this new year for you be a fresh and wonderful beginning-to-be-better kind of experience? . . . A little more like thee, Lord. A little more like thee! I would have . . . a heart more open to feel thy Spirit, to warm my brothers' needs, and sensitive enough to help fill them . . . a mind more receptive to know thy will, thy ways, thy purposes for all, and keen enough to respond . . . a self more ready to help in thy cause, to ease the burdens of my fellows, to calm the confusions in minds muddled by a world gone wrong, and pure enough to be the temple of my eternal spirit. (Marion D. Hanks and Elaine Cannon, "A Little More Like Thee, Lord," Improvement Era, January 1967, p. 34.)

How would it be and what would happen if we were to never withhold our love from our roommate, our neighbor, a parent, a brother, a sister, or a friend? Christ described how we should act: "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you." (Matthew 5:44.)

This year reach beyond your in-group and invite everyone in. And if you don't like someone now, act as if you do. This matter of loving others is not a manufactured feeling. If we love God, we ask what he would have us do and then we do it. We love others as he has loved us.

C. S. Lewis has given us great insight into what a Christian society is like. He said that it "is not going to arrive until most of us really want it: and we are not going to want it until we become fully Christian. I may repeat, 'Do as you would be done by' till I am black in the face, but I cannot really carry it out till I love my neighbour as myself: and I cannot learn to love my neighbour as myself till I learn to love God: and I cannot learn to love God except by learning to obey Him. And so, as I warned you, we are driven on to something more inward—driven on from social matters to religious matters. For the longest way round is the shortest way home." (Mere Christianity, New York: Macmillan, 1960, pp. 82-83.)

Love and friendship are not a social matter. They are a deeply religious matter. Love does make the world go around. When we are striving to exert ourselves in the cause of spiritual growth for another, we discover that genuine love is self-replenishing and, in turn, nurtures our own spiritual growth.

Three-year-old Natalie and her little brother were in a quiet conversation. Their mother observed a tender moment between them as Natalie took her brother's hand and placed it over her heart, then asked, "Can you feel Jesus in there? You know Jesus is in your heart." Natalie expressed what Alma taught: "And this I know, because the Lord hath said he dwelleth not in unholy temples, but in the hearts of the righteous doth he dwell." (Alma 34:36.)

When the Lima Temple in Peru was nearing completion in 1985, I watched a handful of true disciples, many of them childlike in their faith, feeling the Spirit of Jesus in their hearts as they sacrificed much, living in poverty, in a spirit of love of one another, sharing all that they had in full anticipation of the blessings promised in the temple. Free from pride and undistracted by the material things of the world, they reached out in love one to another as brothers and sisters, as Latter-day Saints.

As I prepared to leave these people, amid hugs and tears and love, they presented me with a small pillow about four inches square that they had made from rather worn material, filled with sawdust gathered from the temple site. It was a gift of love, more precious to me than many expensive items I have in my possession. Often it is the little things that become most precious in expressing love. Emily Dickinson wrote, "Sometimes when I consider the tremendous consequences from little things . . . a chance word . . . a tap on the shoulder or a wink of an eye, I am tempted to think there are no little things."

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught, "Nothing is so much calculated to lead people to forsake sin as to take them by the hand, and watch over them with tenderness. When persons manifest the least kindness and love to me, O what power it has over my mind, while the opposite course has a tendency to harrow up all the harsh feelings and depress the human mind." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 240.)

Mother Teresa has said, "We wait impatiently for the paradise where God is, but we have it in our power to be in paradise with Him, right now; being happy with Him means: To love as He loves. To help as He helps. To give as He gives. To serve as He serves." (Love: A Fruit Always in Season, San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1987, p. 110.)

Can we—will we—reach out and extend our love? What would happen if each of us were to strive to feel and express greater love in our families this year than ever before? What can we do to bring greater feelings of love into our circle of influence? Mother Teresa said, "It is not how much we do but the love we give that really matters." The Lord, through the Prophet Joseph Smith, taught us, "No one can assist in this work except he shall be humble and full of love." (D&C 12:8.)

What would happen if each of us were to give up selfish, petty, uncharitable feelings and attitudes, criticism, and negative comments, and replace them with sincere concern, kindness, and love? What would happen if each of us had the courage and the love required to take Jesus at his word? What if, as we plan our activities, rather than asking "What shall we do?" we were to ask "What do we want to have happen?" And if, into our minds, we heard the words "Bring souls unto Christ," what do you think might happen? Some people are doing this, and others of us are talking and thinking about it and thinking that someday we will.

I have a friend I would like to tell you about. This woman, who never married, has many friends but few family members—no parents, brothers, or sisters. On the little piece of property that she purchased through her hard labors some years ago, she built a small home.

Not long ago I extended an invitation for Christmas to this dear sister. She responded, "Thank you. I appreciate your invitation, but I think I'll go where I did last year, down to the homeless-shelter soup kitchen where I can do some good. That experience brings me such joy. I do so little, and yet I always come home with a soft, warm glow and feel His presence in my home. I'm not alone." Then she explained, "It is a grand feeling. Nothing else makes me feel quite this way."

There was a light in her eye and a smile on her face as she spoke of giving hope. How exciting life could become if we were to lose ourselves and in turn find our real selves by extending love beyond our immediate circle of friends.

Love is the foundation for righteousness, salvation, and peace. President Spencer W. Kimball taught, "The Lord does hear and answer our prayers, but He usually answers them through someone else." ("Small Acts of Service," Ensign, December 1974, p. 5.) Will you or I be that someone else? One of the sure signs that a person has accepted the gift of the Savior's atonement is that person's ability to love. An acknowledgment of his love for us makes us more sensitive, more gracious, more anxious to reach out. The Savior describes the blessings that come to those who catch this message:

Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world:

For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in:

Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?

When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee?

Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?

And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. (Matthew 25:34-40.)

We need not wait for Valentine's Day or any other special day to show love. We can experience a bit of heaven every day when our hearts reach out in love to one another. God help us to make the world go around and do our part as we pray, "Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven." (Matthew 6:10.)
