Ardeth Greene Kapp, Joy of the Journey ( 1992)

CHAPTER 3

With Faith, Hope, and Charity

In my family room by the old-fashioned rocker is a large knitting basket. It has been there for several years. In the basket are some bright balls of yarn along with several balls of black yarn. Some unused knitting needles poking through the yarn appear to be in the same position they were the day they were taken from the packages and placed there with eagerness and great anticipation. Today the basket of yarn serves as a decorator piece and gives a homey look to the room.

When I purchased the yarn many years ago, I had a different purpose in mind. I was going to make a beautiful afghan like one I had seen in a friend's home. I borrowed the pattern from her, then purchased the needles and the yarn with good intentions, but as yet I do not have an afghan. While there are great possibilities awaiting in that basket, the probability of making an afghan decreases each year. My enthusiasm and vision for what I once planned to do has diminished, faded into the background, pushed aside by other interests. What I see now is just a colorful basket of yarn that makes a nice accent piece beside a rocker. An afghan would be nice, but it certainly isn't essential, and the fact that other things have crowded in to take my attention and interest is of little concern. However, there are some things that are a concern, some things that must not be left in the basket unattended, if I am to experience the rewards and the marvelous possibilities of what can be.

Afghans are made, goals are reached, dreams are realized, and victories are won by diligence, determination, and persistent desire—not as a single event, but through a steady, forward movement with our eye ever on the goal. We each have within our basket, so to speak, within our souls, threads of faith, threads of hope, threads of charity.

We did not come to this earth to gain faith, hope, or charity. We brought these characteristics of a divine nature with us to be developed through our daily experiences. But until these eternal principles become a part of our daily lives, they will lie dormant within, unused, undeveloped, and no more valuable than the bright balls of yarn in my sewing basket.

With the divine attributes of faith, hope, and charity nurtured daily, we not only witness miracles, but we also participate in them. The miracle takes place as we reach out to others; and then, in turn, a change takes place within us—a miracle within us, the mighty change of heart of which Alma spoke, in describing what happened when Abinadi preached to the Nephites: "A mighty change was also wrought in their hearts, and they humbled themselves and put their trust in the true and living God." (Alma 5:13.)

Once we begin to weave these great eternal principles into our daily lives, we realize we no longer yearn to have faith. We have faith, and we desire to increase in faith from day to day. We no longer yearn for hope; we have hope, and we desire to increase in hope from day to day. We no longer yearn for charity; we have charity, and we desire to increase in charity from day to day. This miracle from within begins to be revealed in our countenances. We learn to view this life from the perspective of eternity and imagine we can hear the voice of the Lord, saying, "Come unto me ye blessed, for behold, your works have been the works of righteousness upon the face of the earth." (Alma 5:16.) Just as a ball of yarn does not make an afghan, so faith without works is dead. We must do our part.

In The Miracle of Forgiveness, President Spencer W. Kimball quoted Oliver Wendell Holmes, who said, "Many people die with their music still in them. Why is this so? Too often it is because they are always getting ready to live. Before they know it, time runs out." He noted also that Tagore expressed a similar thought: "I have spent my days stringing and unstringing my instrument, while the song I came to sing remains unsung." After quoting these two thoughts, President Kimball commented, "Let us get our instruments tightly strung and our melodies sweetly sung." (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969, pp. 16-17.)

On those occasions when faith wanes, hope wavers, and charity seems like something for another day, perhaps an increased awareness of what encumbers the weaving, slows the progress, and inhibits our growth can serve as a warning to us. It has to do with time—our limited time and our sense of pressure to do it all, all at once.

William James, sometimes referred to as the father of psychology, said, "Neither the nature nor the amount of our work is accountable for the frequency and severity of our breakdowns, but their cause lies rather in those observed feelings of hurry and having no time, breathless tension and anxiety, the lack of inner harmony and ease."

One might thoughtlessly say, "If I just had enough faith, I would take time for spiritual things." The result of that thinking does not increase one's faith or one's time. On the other hand, if we set priorities that require setting, and set aside some things for a season, we will find that in the process we will once again hear the squeaks in the swing and the whisperings of the Spirit.

When I was a child growing up on the prairie in Alberta, Canada, we had some rather severe winters. My mother had a little grocery store, and early each morning I would go out with my father to kindle a fire in the old coal stove and try to get the place warm before customers began to come. One morning while sitting on a bench watching my father lay the kindling for the fire, I learned a great lesson that I reflect on frequently. He explained, as he carefully put paper and kindling wood and larger pieces of wood into the stove, "Ardie, my dear, you can stand in front of this stove for a long time waiting for heat, and it will never come. You must put the wood in first and then the heat will come. Some people are like a coal stove. They want to have the heat first, and then they'll put in the wood. They want the blessings, and then they will have faith. You must place the wood in with faith and then the heat will come."

I have discovered over the years that when we do our part, we not only experience the warmth, the heat, the security, and the peace, but we are also privileged to witness miracles and even participate in them. We witness miracles that are performed not by our own strength or resources, but—like the heat from the old coal stove—by the power of God added to our own meager efforts, diligence, persistence, and faith. We are reminded in Ether, "Dispute not because ye see not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith." (Ether 12:6.)

And how long must we sustain the trial of our faith before the miracle occurs? That trial may last days or months or even years. The weaving occurs ever so carefully, day by day, but only if we make time. Our time is our life, and whatever it is we are doing with our time, we are paying for it with our life. The challenge of mortality is to manage our time in such a way that what we spend it on is worth our life. It is the threads of faith, of hope, and of charity that are worthy of giving our time to, our life to. And in the process, over a period of time, a miracle takes place.

You remember the story of the man blind from birth who waited in darkness until the Savior ministered unto him. We read that the Savior "spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay." He then commanded the man to "go, wash in the pool of Siloam." As quickly as the blind man washed his eyes with the water as commanded, he could see. He was brought out of darkness into the light—the light given him by the Lord Jesus Christ.

It was a miracle, the people said. Some might have referred to it as an instant miracle, but others would recognize it as the final act of the miracle a long time in the making. Who can measure the spiritual growth that might have taken place in the blind man during the days, the months, and the years of darkness while he was waiting upon the Lord? The recorded account does not indicate how long he suffered. We do know that when the Lord reached out to bless him, the man was ready to receive and bear testimony of the miracle. He said, "A man that is called Jesus made clay, and anointed mine eyes, and said unto me, Go to the pool of Siloam, and wash: and I went and washed, and I received sight." A transformation had taken place. His faith was tried and tested, and one day he came out of the darkness into the light. (John 9:6-7, 11.)

Dr. Truman G. Madsen has written: "Again and again we participate in programs designed to change behavior. Within limits they have wholesome and lasting effects, but the announced intent of Christ in the transformation of man and family is far more inclusive. It is to change behavior, to change our souls in nature, in inclination, in desire. That is like replacing the tissues and bones of a person while he is still alive. It is like rebuilding a ship at sea. But again and again, we see the process at work. Personality is illuminated and purified through the renovating powers of the gospel. We see hopeless problems diminished." (Marriage and Family: Gospel Insights, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1983, p. 75.)

The first of the Young Women Values is Faith. There is great power in this statement: "I am a daughter of a Heavenly Father who loves me, and I will have faith in his eternal plan, which centers in Jesus Christ, my Savior."

It is with faith in that eternal plan and knowing of our identity, knowing that God is our Father and we are indeed his children, that our faith is strong and hope removes from our path obstacles that otherwise seem insurmountable.

Hope is like a bridge that links faith and charity. It is an outgrowth of faith. Hope is just not a wish. It is the expectation of the fulfillment of a promise. It comes from a sacred covenant made with the Lord.

The development of hope is a process, not an event. Just as the bright colors of the yarn taken from my basket, when gradually woven together according to the pattern, can become an afghan, so the experiences in our daily lives can evolve in a miraculous way according to the pattern, the plan of salvation. Like the blind man, we are touched by the hand of God, and in due time we begin to see. We see with an eye of faith full of hope. Faith is to hope for things which are not seen, but which are true.

Hope comes from the sure conviction that when we have done our very best, the Savior, by the grace of God, will do the rest. That is an expectation that we can depend on. One of the biggest obstacles to acquiring and maintaining hope is that we must deal with the reality of mortality. While struggling with that distance between where we are and where we desire to be as we move toward our ultimate goal of exaltation, we so often fall short. Our hope can be shattered until we begin to understand that life is a journey, and our progress comes as we learn to understand the very purpose of life, including the need for suffering, setbacks, trials, and tests. The Prophet Joseph Smith had one of his greatest experiences at one of the darkest times of his life. While he was confined, in anguish and sorrow, within the walls of the jail in Liberty, Missouri, there came a great light and an abiding revelation: "Fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you forever and ever." (D&C 122:9.)

God, our Eternal Father, lives. He is kind; he is loving; he is our Eternal Parent; he is perfect. We are not perfect. We are in this life to be tried and to be tested.

Life on this sphere is what we call mortality and represents the second phase of our life's experiences. One day we will leave this mortal life and live in a world with other spirit beings, eagerly anticipating our resurrection. We live, we die, we move on, but we do not all progress at the same rate, and often the most readily apparent progress is not the most significant. Time-consuming detours can slow progress and eventually destroy hope. Our hope increases as we learn to select some things and leave other, less important, things behind. We each have our own basket of things we treasure. In our immaturity, we may go after those things that give us immediate and temporary pleasure, but gradually we begin to value many things in a much different light.

Hope comes as we learn to look at the struggles and even the suffering of this life as a time of learning and progress. We read of our Savior: "Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered." (Hebrews 5:8.) Often faith wavers and weakens when we are focusing on our weaknesses and our inadequacies, or, while reviewing the accomplishments and seeming success of others, we evaluate ourselves and come up short. It would be wise for us to follow the counsel of the old farmer who, when asked how he was doing, simply responded, "I am better than I was, but I ain't as good as I'm going to be." That, I believe, reflects an attitude of hope.

Each day of our life, each week, our hope will increase as we learn to focus on the positives and get rid of the thoughts and feelings that destroy our faith and our hope.

In many locales throughout the world, municipal workers come to our homes each week to collect the garbage we have accumulated during the preceding seven days. Every Sunday we can also get rid of the mental and emotional garbage that may have accumulated during the week. President Marion G. Romney explained: "There is a doctrine abroad in the world today which teaches that the physical emblems of the sacrament are transformed into the flesh and blood of Jesus. We do not teach such a doctrine, for we know that any transformation which comes from the administration of the sacrament takes place in the souls of those who understandingly partake of it. It is the participating individuals who are affected, and they are affected in a most marvelous way, for they are given the Spirit of the Lord to be with them." (Conference Report, April 1946, p. 40.) Every Sunday starts a new week. Every hour starts a new set of minutes. Our God, our Father, is in the heavens, but that's not far away. He's near us.

We must not let our weaknesses weaken our hope. The Savior has told us, "If men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." (Ether 12:27.)

I don't believe the Lord gives us our weaknesses. He gives us our weakness, and a better understanding of that gives us hope. We read in Jacob, "Nevertheless, the Lord God showeth us our weakness that we may know that it is by his grace, and his great condescensions unto the children of men, that we have power to do these things." (Jacob 4:7.) Our weakness is that we are mortal, and with God's help we can become immortal and have eternal life.

The gift of hope is illustrated by the Lord's blessings to Alma and his followers when they were in bondage and were carrying heavy burdens. Alma and his people pled with the Lord with enough hope and enough faith that "the burdens which were laid upon [them] were made light; yea, the Lord did strengthen them that they could bear up their burdens with ease, and that they did submit cheerfully and with patience to all the will of the Lord. And it came to pass that so great was their faith and their patience that the voice of the Lord came unto them again, saying: Be of good comfort, for on the morrow I will deliver you out of bondage." (Mosiah 24:15-16.)

When we diligently strive to do our very best, withholding nothing, we come to better understand that through the grace of God we have reason to hope.

In the Bible Dictionary we read that grace "is an enabling power that allows men and women to lay hold on eternal life and exaltation." Paul, speaking to the Romans, helps us understand this process: "Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: by whom also we have access by faith into this grace [enabling power] wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also: knowing that tribulation worketh patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope: and hope maketh not ashamed; because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us." (Romans 5:1-5.)

It is not God's plan that we should be perfect before we can experience hope. It is in our imperfections and our dependency upon God that we seek and find our hope. "God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us." (Romans 5:8.)

Early one rainy morning, I walked along the boulevard on my regular path before the day began. In thoughtful meditation, with a multitude of responsibilities that seemed to extend far beyond my ability, I began enumerating in my mind a list of my inadequacies and weaknesses. That activity, by the way, is like priming a pump. If you can get started with just a little water and keep pumping, the flow of water will continue with hardly any effort and will fill bucket after bucket. And so it was. I soon began focusing on all the things that I don't know that I would like to know. I don't know how to use the computer very well, I don't know mathematics, I don't know how to sing, I can't spell, and on and on. The list is endless and even ridiculous once one begins such a useless, unsettling activity. Finally, in the quiet of that early morning, as the gentle rain washed the sidewalk, it was as though the windows of heaven opened and poured out living water upon my head in one brief message. Like a separation of the clouds with the sun coming through, my whole soul was cleansed of the worries for the things I don't know and filled with this sure conviction: "I know that my Redeemer lives." And then like a whisper came the words into my mind, "That is enough."

We read in Ether, "I also remember that thou hast said that thou hast prepared a house for man, yea, even among the mansions of thy Father, in which man might have a more excellent hope; wherefore man must hope, or he cannot receive an inheritance in the place which thou hast prepared. . . . And now I know that this love which thou hast had for the children of men is charity; wherefore, except men shall have charity they cannot inherit that place which thou hast prepared in the mansions of thy Father." (Ether 12:32, 34.)

The pure love of Christ, that charity of which we speak, is a golden thread woven through the tapestry of our daily lives. It is the outgrowth of faith and hope. It is the thread that ties us, binds us, and seals us to our Father. The Lord gave us an example of this golden thread in his illustration of the Good Samaritan. We read of a lawyer who asked the Master what he should do to inherit eternal life. And the Lord answered, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbour as thyself." (Luke 10:27.)

At the conclusion of Mormon's sermon on faith, hope, and charity, we read, "Charity is the pure love of Christ, and it endureth forever; and whoso is found possessed of it at the last day, it shall be well with him. Wherefore, my beloved brethren, pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that ye may become the sons of God; that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is; that we may have this hope; that we may be purified even as he is pure." (Moroni 7:47-48.)

We cannot develop charity on our own. When we do our very best, our Savior, through the grace of God, his enabling power, will do the rest.

What hope can come to us when we remember that God is our Father and we are his children! As Ether explains, "Whoso believeth in God might with surety hope for a better world, yea, even a place at the right hand of God, which hope cometh of faith, maketh an anchor to the souls of men, which would make them sure and steadfast, always abounding in good works, being led to glorify God." (Ether 12:4.)

Should I determine to pick up the needles and the colorful yarn from my knitting basket and carefully follow the pattern written in detail with illustrations, one day I would have an afghan. But left unattended with only good intentions set aside indefinitely, the potential of what might be will never be realized. The pattern has been provided for us in the Book of Mormon:

And again, my beloved brethren, I would speak unto you concerning hope. How is it that ye can attain unto faith, save ye shall have hope? And what is it that ye shall hope for? Behold I say unto you that ye shall have hope through the atonement of Christ and the power of his resurrection, to be raised unto life eternal, and this because of your faith in him according to the promise.

Wherefore, if a man have faith he must needs have hope; for without faith there cannot be any hope.

And again, behold I say unto you that he cannot have faith and hope, save he shall be meek, and lowly of heart. If so, his faith and hope is vain, for none is acceptable before God, save the meek and lowly in heart; and if a man be meek and lowly in heart, and confesses by the power of the Holy Ghost that Jesus is the Christ, he must needs have charity; for if he have not charity he is nothing; wherefore he must needs have charity.

And charity suffereth long, and is kind, and envieth not, and is not puffed up, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil, and rejoiceth not in iniquity but rejoiceth in the truth, beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. (Moroni 7:40-45.)

I bear testimony that as we strive to weave threads of faith, hope, and charity into our lives, there will be times when the process is slow. We will be tried and tested. But when we come offering a broken heart and a contrite spirit, we will be conscious of the nearness of our Father in heaven, and we will feel charity for all our Father's children.

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "The nearer we get to our Heavenly Father, the more we are disposed to look with compassion on perishing souls: we feel that we want to take them upon our shoulders, and cast their sins behind our backs." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 241.)

My niece Shelly, while serving a mission in New Zealand, expressed it this way in a letter: "I want to be worthy of the Spirit to help these people have the best chance of hearing the gospel. I have never worked harder or cared more about people. I have never prayed so hard for investigators. The Lord truly performs miracles. I love having FAITH! We love our investigators and want to obey all the rules so that when we pray for them, it will work."

When we do our part, the pure love of Christ will fill our souls and we will come rejoicing.
