Ardeth Greene Kapp, Joy of the Journey ( 1992)

CHAPTER 4

You Can Do It If You Have a Mind To

It was like turning a page in a favorite old picture book with a story that began "Once upon a time . . . " Sister Verna Hill, seventy-seven years of age, stood in the driveway of her home wearing a bright red dress with white polka dots and her arm outstretched in welcome. Her white hair framed a truly radiant countenance.

"Do come in and sit down," Sister Hill said, motioning toward one of her two front rooms. As I walked in, I glanced around in an attempt to see and feel, at least in part, the charm of this humble home where Sister Hill lived alone. I observed a magnificent display of handiwork: colorful afghans, delicate and intricate designs captured through the art of tatting, and cutwork of the finest quality. A multitude of pictures of loved ones, placed here and there, added to the warmth and love that filled the old home. I sat on the carpet by her footstool while she leaned back in her big chair and, like turning the pages in a book, permitted me to peek inside her life.

"Well, it was like this," she began, reaching back over the years in time, yet with the vividness of just yesterday. "I had the misfortune of losing my parents when I was only twelve years of age. My mother died just before Christmas, and the following Thanksgiving my father had a heart attack and died in his chair." She was reflective a moment, then continued her story. "I called a Brother Blood, who was our closest neighbor. He and his dear wife, Minnie, were so good to me. They treated me like their very own."

Verna Hill was the youngest of eleven children and was the only one left at home at the time of her parents' death. She wanted to finish the eighth grade before going to Nevada to live with a brother, so she found work to support herself. "I worked for a lady who had a new baby, and I did housework for my room and board," she explained.

After the eighth grade, Sister Hill did not have the benefit of any additional formal education. She moved to a ranch in Nevada with her brother, whose wife was in the hospital, and for the next three months she cooked for eighteen men who worked in the hay fields.

"Well, I got very, very homesick," she recalled, "so I decided to move to another ranch at Winnemucca, where I could be with my older brother. He said, 'I want you to come and stay with me.' " He agreed to meet her at the hotel in Winnemucca. When this young girl, now only thirteen, got out of the stagecoach after her long ride, the hotel manager met her and said, "Your brother has been called to Elko for a few days, but your room and board are paid for."

After a brief stay in Winnemucca, she decided to move on. "I could have gone and lived with my sisters," she told me, "but they had their families, and I knew the time had come I was going to have to support myself."

This woman, in the face of great difficulties, learned to make the best of every situation. She developed the will to win, to take life as it comes and to make something beautiful out of it. "You can't always choose or change circumstances," she said now, reaching over and patting my hand as if to make sure I understood. "But how you accept them and how you feel about them is up to you."

While doing housework for others and learning to cook and sew, she took every opportunity to develop her skills. "You know," she said, smiling confidently, "there isn't any kind of handwork I can't do."

"I understand that you have won prizes for your cooking and that you are always cooking special dishes for your neighbors and family and give your handwork away," I commented.

With a twinkle in her eyes, she responded, "Well, I don't like bragging, you know, but I just love to give service. I've done it all my life and I enjoy it. So I cook and I sew, and I do whatever I can."

This seemed like a good opportunity to inquire about the piano and organ in her modest home. "Do you play?" I asked.

"Oh, I'm no professional," she admitted. "I only had six lessons before my mother died, but I can figure it out. It just comes to me because I have determined that I'm going to do it. I've been a ward organist for years."

Returning to her story, Sister Hill admitted that she married very young. She and her husband, Leo, worked side by side. Together they mowed and hauled hay and raked it. They dug up potatoes, picked tomatoes, and hoed beets and corn. Sister Hill also drove the tractor and the truck. She told of coming in dead tired, but after a bath and supper, she would pick up some handwork. "And you know," she said, "before long I would forget about being tired. Just because your body is tired that's no need for your mind and hands to have to rest. If I sit down to rest without my handwork, I'd go to sleep when I could be doing something."

Just three days after her second daughter was born, the bishop and his counselors came to visit. "I thought they'd come to see me and the baby, but they didn't," she told me. "They came to see Leo. They wanted him to go on a mission. Leo and I talked about it and decided if that was what the Lord wanted, I'd get along."

While her young husband was away, Sister Hill opened up a dress shop in Layton, Utah, where they had settled. She bought two machines, a regular one and a hemstitcher. "I bought this hemstitching machine and then I learned how to use it—and I'm still using it," she said. "I never had a formal education, but ladies still come for me to teach them."

She pointed to a collection of pictures nearby. "See that young man's picture on the TV? I'm real proud of him." Her voice was tender and a little emotional as she recalled, "That boy's mother lost her life when she was seven months pregnant with him. Her husband was serving his country in Germany. After forty-one days I brought that baby home from the hospital. He was an awful sight. His skin was just like paper. He was so sick, I cried and cried all night. My husband said, 'Mama, you can't keep that baby if you're going to be so upset.' We called the doctor and he said, 'You'll never raise that baby.' I said, 'Well, I'm going to give him the best care I can.' I just oiled that baby three or four times a day for six months. You wouldn't believe how well he is now." Looking again at his picture on the TV, she repeated, "I'm really proud of him."

She drew my attention to a picture on the wall, of a little home where her husband was born, located just behind her present home. "There was a man came to work for my husband years ago," she explained. "He had no folks so we took him in and he worked for us. We treated him like he was ours. He meant a lot to us. He lived in that little house for fifty-three years, and when he died we saw to it that he had a proper burial."

She got up from her chair, and I followed her to view her precious treasures more closely. Picking up one picture, she said, "When I was president of the Relief Society, a young mother was left with seven children. I took them under my wing and became their adopted grandmother. Those kids are married now and come to visit me with their children. One of them was here last night. He came by to fix my cooler."

She picked up another picture. "This boy came to live with me for a time," she said. "I made him acquainted with a young girl in our ward and they got married. They wanted me to stand in their reception line. I said, 'Oh, no,' but they insisted." Putting his picture back in its special place, she commented with pride, "He's a fine musician."

Sister Hill returned to her chair. Without words to express the love that poured from the heart of this saintly woman, I asked, "How did you get this great spirit of wanting to give and serve and care so much and so deeply about people?"

Almost as if waiting for that question, she replied, "I'm going to tell you just how we learn to help others. My daddy used to always say, 'You can't take anything with you—only what you give away.' And that has stayed with me."

"Now that you're alone without your companion, how do you keep up your radiant and enthusiastic attitude of serving and caring?" I asked.

Leaning forward in her chair she pondered a moment, then said quietly, "I've missed Daddy. You have hard times." Tears filled her eyes. "But I've learned to make the best of things." Her smile returned with her determination, and she continued, "Well, dear, I'm going to tell you how I do it. I made up my mind you can't do any good staying home grieving. My husband was always active, and I know he is progressing now, and he wouldn't be very happy with me if he knew I was just staying home, 'cause it doesn't do you any good. You've got to look ahead to tomorrow instead of just for today and keep going."

Inspired by her energy I inquired further, "But where do you get your strength?"

As if surprised by this question, she responded very matter-of-factly. "From the Lord. You just have to depend on Him. Some nights when I get ready for bed and I think I can't stand it alone, after I kneel down and have my prayers, that comforting influence comes over me and I'm not nervous anymore because I know somebody is watching over me and guiding me."

"Do you ever get tired?"

"Oh, yes, I get tired," she confessed, "but then I don't let it get the best of me. You know what I mean. I got up at five o'clock this morning and I went out to water my garden. I can work and work and be so tired I can't go another minute; then I'll sit down and pick up some handwork, and the first thing you know I forget about being tired."

I asked her about her philosophy of life. With this she giggled in a delightfully girlish manner. "Well," she said, "just work, work, work. I'm proud of my life. I haven't wasted any time. You gotta keep goin', haven't you?" Then, as if turning to the last page of a wonderful story, she closed with these penetrating words: "You can do it if you have a mind to."

Leaving her home, I carried with me the secrets to happiness and a beautiful handmade pillow under my arm.
