Ardeth Greene Kapp, Joy of the Journey ( 1992)

THE LIGHT WITHIN

CHAPTER 6

Who Lights the "Y"?

The crowds were gathering on the quad at Brigham Young University on October 8, 1991. The occasion was a Founder's Day celebration, held at the beginning of the annual homecoming festivities. People from far and wide were returning home for this special event. The air was filled with music as the band played familiar songs, awakening treasured memories for the older guests and generating excitement and enthusiasm for the current student body, while anxious hopes welled up in the hearts of those not yet college age.

Hovering over the entire assemblage like a sentinel keeping watch over the activities, the large block Y lay strong and secure on the side of the majestic mountain. That block Y had been there for as long as any of us could remember. It served as a marker whether one approached the campus by air or on the highway, and for the students walking to and from classes in summer, fall, winter, and spring. Either consciously or subconsciously, the marker on the mountain was always there.

Amy Baird Miner, a president of the BYU Student Association, told me on one occasion that the question most frequently asked by freshmen on this campus isn't "Where is the Cougareat?" or "Where do I cash a check?" Rather, it is "Who lights the Y?" I was informed that each year someone goes up there on the mountain in a helicopter and pushes the switch to light it up. It sounds easy enough, but it wasn't always done like that. Beginning in 1923, when the Y was lit for the first time, it was often lit when cotton bales or mattress stuffing dipped in pitch were set afire. It is currently lit by electricity with one thousand 25-watt bulbs. The Y, 380 feet tall and 130 feet wide, covers an area of 32,847 square feet and is said to be the largest school emblem in the world.

To understand what it means to light the Y today, we need to go back to some of the traditions of the past. In the early 1900s, freshmen students climbed to the letter each fall and removed brush from the area as part of their initiation activities. On Y Day in the spring, the students met early in the morning. After faculty members cleared the trail, the freshmen hauled water from a spring while sophomores carried up lime and salt and mixed it with the water in wooden troughs to make limestone. Then juniors and seniors poured the whitewash on the large letter. To keep up the workers' spirits, the school band played music all day.

A light on the mountain has much symbolism. Moses climbed Mount Sinai. There he saw God. There God spoke to him. There he received the Ten Commandments.

What does it mean to light the Y? It means that there are many mountains for each of us to climb. And when we find our Sinai and climb it, climb it to the top, there we will find God. He will speak to us, in our minds and in our hearts, by the spirit of revelation.

"For God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us." (2 Corinthians 4:6-7.)

Every individual has the right to and can have the Light of Christ in his life as an abiding influence, a personal guide. The Lord has promised, "I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life." (John 8:12.) Truth, light, and spirit have a meaning linked to latter-day scripture: "The word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ." (D&C 84:45.)

Some years ago, a faithful father gathered his children around on the occasion of family home evening. They were all in their places—mother, father, and each child, young and older. Together they sang a favorite song:

Teach me to walk in the light of his love; Teach me to pray to my Father above; Teach me to know of the things that are right; Teach me, teach me to walk in the light. —Hymns, no. 304

After a prayer inviting the Spirit of the Lord to be in that sacred setting, the father, looking into the eyes of each one present, said, "Tonight we're going to learn about the importance of walking in the light." Immediately the youngest child—too young, some may say, to be a teacher—spoke up with conviction: "Daddy, don't worry about me. I'll always walk in the light 'cause I'm scared of the dark." What a profound lesson taught in few words from a child. Do we know how to always walk in the light—and are we aware of the danger of the darkness?

The Savior taught the Nephites, "Behold, I am the law, and the light." (3 Nephi 15:9.) That, I believe, suggests a close and direct correlation between obedience to the law and the light available to us.

Lighting the Y on your mountain and mine means that we as individuals—every father, every mother, every son and daughter, brother and sister, friend, neighbor, and associate—bring light where there is darkness when we strive to live worthy of the blessings of the Lord, when we abide the law. Our obedience to law invades the darkness, dispels the darkness in the world, and thwarts the powers of the prince of darkness. Our duty is not only to walk in the light, but in so doing, to also dispel darkness. Light is the power of God. The scriptures state, "That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day." (D&C 50:24.)

On one occasion President Harold B. Lee spoke concerning the lamp we each carry: "The Lord gives us, each one, a lamp to carry, but whether or not we shall have oil in our lamps depends solely upon each one of us. Whether or not we keep the commandments and supply the needed oil to light our way and to guide us on our way depends upon each of us individually. We cannot borrow from our Church membership. We cannot borrow from an illustrious ancestry. Whether or not we have oil in our lamps, I repeat, depends solely upon each one of us, it is determined by our faithfulness in keeping the commandments of the Living God. We must buy from the only source from which we can obtain this kind of oil referred to by the Master—from the fountain of eternal supply." (Conference Report, October 1951, p. 30.)

As Latter-day Saints who have taken upon us the name of Jesus Christ, we know of our responsibilities. We are called to "arise and shine forth, that [our] light may be a standard for the nations." (D&C 115:5.)

As we follow the light, share the light, become the light, and radiate the light, as a lighthouse in times of storm, we can help others navigate safely through troubled waters and guide them safely home.

The lighting of a nation begins in the heart and soul of each individual. I have visited many nations. I have looked into the faces and eyes of many young women. I have felt the strength and maturity of their spirits. I am aware of one young woman who, through the light within her, brought her father and sister back into activity in the Church. A twelve-year-old's testimony of faith was instrumental in touching the spirit of one who joined the Church in South America and later became a General Authority.

On one occasion I asked for a few noteworthy examples of students on BYU campus whose light has made a difference. I received impressive and heartwarming reports of many inspiring examples. One person wrote:

"There are literally hundreds of experiences of service rendered by the students here at BYU, but the ones I like the most are the little ones: the student helping the young mother with a stroller up the stairs from the bookstore to the Cougareat, a student pushing another in a wheelchair through the snow and ice, students opening doors for another who has books and packages in hand, students who clear off other students' car windows after the snowstorm has dumped inches of snow, a student helping other students learn mathematics, Chinese, and psychology, and students helping others to get their lives in order. All these acts of service are done on a daily basis practically without any thought at all."

Surely it is the little acts of service that help light the Y.

Someone has said, "Our agency is expressed in choosing or rejecting light." Every time we do right, we increase the light. Going contrary to the light within affects our power of concentration, our ability to learn, our access to light, and our ultimate success intellectually and spiritually. Every right choice, every good thought, every act of kindness, every commitment to obedience, every earnest prayer, every sacrifice in defense of truth, every ounce of self-discipline in response to the whisperings of the Spirit, every extra effort in diligent study and preparation, every honest act—these all add to the light. And when even one light gets dim or goes out as a result of wrong choices, the world is a little darker.

When we live with the Light of Christ in our lives, through our preparation and works of righteousness, we will contribute in a very real way to the dawning of a brighter day in a dark and troubled world. Today, with rapidly accelerated missionary work, thousands of people are accepting the gospel of Jesus Christ. He is the Light and the Life of the world. It is the Light of Jesus Christ that through us will burn brighter.
