Ardeth Greene Kapp, Joy of the Journey ( 1992)

CHAPTER 7

The Night We Bounced the Glo-Balls

What are we going to do?" shouted Bryce, tripping over Spencer's sleeping bag. The narrow doorway did not allow three enthusiastic boys with all their gear to enter at once. "One thing for sure," Kent chuckled, remembering his aunt's promise, "we're going to McDonald's for breakfast in the morning, and we get to order anything we want. Egg McMuffin, french fries, an apple turnover, and a Sprite for me." "Me too," came Spencer's quick response. And Bryce increased the order to include scrambled eggs, sausage, and milk.

There was excitement in the air. It was the last Thursday before school was to begin, and the warm summer sun, taking its last peek of the day, was slipping behind the skyline and out of sight beyond the lake. This day had been marked on the calendar months before, at the end of the school year, which had also marked the end of elementary school for these boys. What had been referred to in the springtime as the long, hot summer seemed now to have disappeared as quickly as cotton candy melting in your mouth. Only a few days remained before Kent, Bryce, and Spencer, in new blue jeans and shirts, would assume an air of complete confidence, or so they hoped it would appear, for their first day of junior high. There is security in numbers, and loyal friends together can muster confidence even while approaching the uncertain challenges of junior high. The ninth graders always gave the impression of being big and brave, the boys thought, and they must look no less the part, if possible. But school was still a few days away, and any concerns could be postponed, at least for tonight.

A sleepover to be held at Kent's aunt's home had been a frequent topic of conversation between Kent and his friends during the hot summer months. Bryce's question, "What are we going to do?" was about to be answered.

It is impossible, I had thought the night before while cleaning up the house following a wedding reception at our home. I cannot have those boys come tomorrow night. Maybe Saturday or, better still, next week. With a good explanation, I was sure Kent would understand and the boys could come another time, since they seldom had conflicts in their schedules, and it would certainly be better for me.

There was no way of knowing when the promise was made in the springtime how impossible it would seem to me to crowd in one more event this week, even for Kent, and especially this day. Surely it wouldn't matter that much, my mind told me. I'll call Kent early in the morning, I thought, as I lay relaxed, the lights out and my eyes closed. Then I began to wonder. How did my Mom ever accomplish all she did?

In the darkness, my mind drifted back to years and years before. I remembered the day in the fall, just at harvest time, before school began. My mother was going to close our small country store in the late afternoon, a thing she had never done before. All summer long I had waited in anticipation of the promise she had made to take Colleen and me to Waterton Park to stay overnight. I had dreamed of the warm water in the swimming pool (quite different from swimming in the river), the playground, and the movie theater, none of which we had in our small town. Then the day we were to leave, the woman Mom had arranged to take care of the store called to say she had an emergency and could not come until the following day.

My disappointment was so intense that I felt a pain in the pit of my stomach. I thought I might throw up. I knew Mom wouldn't close the store now. I had heard her say a hundred times, "People expect us to be open until six o'clock, and we must be responsible and dependable." In a strange sort of way, I could feel that sick feeling all over my body as I stood at her side, too disappointed to even cry. And then I witnessed something I had never seen before. Mom took the money from the cash register, counted it out as she did at the close of every day, and placed the paper bills in a small metal box, leaving the coins in the till. As she carried the box to a room in the back, I followed her with hope awakening in my heart. She placed the tin box in the safe, turned the handle securely to lock it, and walked back to the front of the store. There she took the key from the little drawer beside the scale where we weighed things. She then took my hand and announced, "Like Dad says, 'a promise made is a debt unpaid.' We're going to go."

As she turned the key in the front door of our store, I knew as I had never known before how important I was. I was more important than all the customers who might come. I was more important than all the sales that might be made. My mother had always said I was special, but it was that afternoon so long ago that I understood.

"Yes," I told myself as I drifted off to sleep, "I'll call Kent in the morning to assure him everything is ready." There is anticipation that comes with waiting, but too much waiting can kill the spirit, the hope, the fun. I had promised the boys we'd do something fun to celebrate their readiness for junior high.

"Come in, come in. You're just in time," I greeted the boys at the door the next evening. "Just drop your things where they are." They waited for further instructions. "Get in my car," I directed. "We're heading for the planetarium."

"The planetarium!" they exclaimed. "Wow!" said Kent, giving his approval for the plan.

"The show for tonight is 'Cosmic Catastrophes,' " I explained, beginning to feel some excitement myself for this promise I had determined to keep.

The boys climbed in the back seat of my car, and I chauffeured them to town, listening to their chatter all the way. "It will be a blast," Kent told his friends. Having visited the planetarium before, he assumed a leadership position for this important event. He explained how, with a small keyboard in front of each seat, you could make a difference in what would appear on the dome-shaped ceiling that looks like the night sky. As the lights went down and the show began, I observed that the boys responded to the questions on the screen with great enthusiasm, as if they were in effect controlling some aspect of the universe and maybe even the galaxies. Observing their excitement was even more enjoyable for me than watching the show—until I dozed off to sleep.

When the show was over and the lights came up, I had had a little rest. There were several hours left before the day would be over for these eager young boys, and I was ready.

Immediately they became interested in the items available for purchase in the lobby of the planetarium. As they examined several items with longing, I invited them to each select one item as a reminder of our evening together and I would buy it for them. It takes a long time to choose when so many things appear of equal interest. After vacillating back and forth and consulting with each other, all three boys agreed on the same purchase. They each selected a Glo-ball—a bright pink ball about the size of a large button on their father's overcoat.

While I paid for the purchase, the boys ran ahead, down the stairs, out onto the sidewalk, bouncing their Glo-balls all the way. The sky was dark now except for the stars, which appeared very much like those in the simulated sky in the cosmic show. But the street lights provided ample light for bouncing and chasing balls. Would this be an experience they would remember? I wondered, as I watched them run back and forth, in and out, bumping into each other, laughing, and competing in their attempts to bounce their balls higher and higher.

"Mine goes the highest," was Spencer's claim. "Yeah, but mine goes farther," Bryce called out as he chased his out-of-control Glo-ball down the steps and past the fountain.

After some time, I suggested to the boys that we stroll over to Temple Square. They looked at each other to get a consensus and halfheartedly agreed.

As they approached the large iron gates on the south side of Temple Square, bouncing the Glo-balls all the way, the boys came to an abrupt stop. On the street in front of the gates were a police car, two policemen, and three young men dressed in old and tattered black clothing. Walking a little closer, we observed that one of the young men was wearing handcuffs and the other two were being pushed into the car. The boys pocketed their Glo-balls in their palms and stood and watched silently. A few minutes later the car drove away with the young men and the police officers.

Spencer finally broke the silence. "Those guys must really have messed up," he said. Bryce and Kent responded in unison, "Yeah."

Just inside the gate an elderly gentleman in a dark suit, white shirt, and tie greeted the boys with such warmth and kindness that it was as though he had been expecting them. "Come in, boys. Please come in," he said, extending both arms. It was quiet on the grounds. Only a few visitors could be seen strolling through the gardens. Indirect lighting placed at regular intervals along the garden paths cast a glow over the entire block.

"I wonder where those guys will sleep tonight," Kent said. "In jail," was Spencer's quick reply. "Do you think their parents know where they are?" asked Bryce. Their concern for the three young men was evident.

The spectacular array of flowers in a profusion of fall colors captured my full attention. For the boys, those Glo-balls held tightly in their hands demanded release. It was as though they could be contained no longer. All three balls escaped at once, and the boys were soon laughing and enjoying their activity as before. I wondered about the propriety of their conduct in this setting and glanced over at the gentleman at the gate. Judging from his smile, I regretted that I had not purchased a Glo-ball for him. As he watched those energetic young boys, I sensed he might have liked to join them, or maybe he was just thinking back on a time when he was a boy, perhaps a time when someone took him and his friends to play ball.

In a short time the fun of bouncing the Glo-balls took on an added challenge. Kent, in his usual inquisitive way, made a quick discovery. "Look, you guys," he said, holding his ball next to one of the lights along the path, "it really does glow." Bryce immediately tested his. "Mine does too," he announced. And so it did, as did each of the balls when held next to one of the lights along the path.

The boys' concern was no longer how high the balls would go, but how long could they bounce a ball after holding it next to the source of light before it would begin to lose its light. Spencer launched the experiment. As the glow from his ball diminished, the boys began trying to locate the next closest source of light. The competition between them was no longer apparent. Bryce was not trying to outdo Spencer; Kent no longer showed any concern that Bryce's ball went higher than his; and Spencer was totally consumed with the light he was trying to collect and keep for his own ball. The distance between each source of light and how quickly each boy could run from one to the next became the obvious challenge.

I watched Kent on his knees, rolling the little Glo-ball between his stubby fingers, holding it close to the source of light along the path. He then cupped the ball tightly between his hands, jumped to his feet, and ran quickly to the next closest light. Opening his hands, he shouted triumphantly, "I did it! I did it!" Kent explained, holding up his ball with obvious delight, "I can go so fast from one light to the next that this ball stays bright. If you can go fast enough, it can always glow." Bryce and Spencer dropped to their knees next to him to verify his claim. Bryce made the same discovery and added, "But you gotta have lights and they gotta be close." Spencer agreed. "If they turned off the lights, it wouldn't work."

The boys continued testing their theory and became convinced. "There's got to be a source of light. You can't store it up. You have to go after it, and you'd better run fast."

The boys had made a great discovery, and so had I. Yes, I thought, if you boys have learned this lesson, you're ready for junior high and much, much more.

I was surprised when I looked at my watch to see how late it was. We should be leaving for home, I thought, but junior high was only a few days away, and there would be structured lessons outlined on the pages of the various textbooks. Lessons would be followed by the pressure of examinations to determine the level of understanding and supposedly measure one's learning ability. Tonight there were lessons but no formal tests—lessons to learn and hopefully remember.

"Boys," I said, "would you tuck your Glo-balls in your pocket and come with me?" We did not head toward the gate, as they supposed. Instead we found a bench between the visitors' center and the Salt Lake Temple with its softly lighted spires reaching heavenward, illuminating the night sky. Kent, assuming some responsibility for the interest of his friends, asked, "What are we going to do now?"

I sat on the bench and motioned to the boys. They joined me, Bryce on one side, Kent and Spencer on the other. "We're going to talk," I said. I looked toward the spires of the temple and they did the same. There was silence. In a moment Kent asked, "About what?"

"About Glo-balls," I said. "Real Glo-balls."

I pondered the possibility, the potential, the gifts and talents, eagerness and youthfulness, of these young boys and continued, "Kent, Spencer, and Bryce, you are the real Glo-balls. You have the light within. You can shine in darkness. You can light up the world. You can help dispel the darkness. You can make a difference." I paused, then added, "If you want to."

Bryce's response was quick. "How?" he asked. I disregarded his question for a moment, hoping to provide a more complete answer a little later. Instead I commented, "I've been thinking about those boys who were taken away in the police car. I wonder what will happen to them."

"They'll go to jail," was a quick response. "They're bad."

I nodded in agreement. "I wonder when they became bad." I waited and then asked my next question: "Were they born bad?" The boys shook their heads. Kent insisted, "You're not born bad."

"Then when did it happen, and where were their friends who might have helped them? Do you think those young men are saying their prayers?" All three boys shook their heads. "Or reading their scriptures?" Again they shook their heads. "Or going to church? Or keeping the commandments?"

A verbal response was given this time. "No, they're not."

"Do you think they're serving others or care much about others?"

Again there was an audible response. "I don't think so," Kent said. "Me either," echoed Bryce.

We sat in silence for a few moments. Each boy was quiet with his own thoughts, maybe reflecting on his feelings and habits concerning prayer, scripture study, obedience, and service. Coming back to the point of the lesson, I looked first at Bryce on my left and then Kent and Spencer on my right. "Boys," I said, with all the conviction I could convey in my voice, "you are the real Glo-balls—and whether you just bounce along in the dark trying to get higher and higher than the next or whether you decide to run from one source of light to the next and always be bright is something you might want to think about."

As if it were a moment for a public declaration of personal commitment, the boys stood up. Spencer didn't need time to think. "We're not gonna be in the dark," he said. "We'll glow in the dark," came Kent's response.

"How?" I asked.

The answer was obvious. Bryce put it into words. "Stay near the light," he said.

"Boys," I said, "Jesus has taught us about light. In the Sermon on the Mount he tells us, 'Ye are the light of the world. . . . Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.' It's a spiritual light," I explained, "a light within you that comes from your Father in heaven. You can keep your light bright always."

The boys sat on the little bench again, and they were quiet for a few moments. Kent finally broke the silence. "But what about those guys the police took?" he asked.

I remembered a scripture about light and shared it with the boys. "Jesus said, 'I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.' " (John 8:12.) I waited, wondering if this was a lesson better taught at another time. Spencer spoke up. "How does the light get in us?"

As I searched for some way to help them understand and remember, a thought came into my mind. I asked them what must have seemed to be a totally unrelated question. "What does it mean when someone says, 'Give 'em five' and then raises his hand high in the air to be slapped by a friend's hand?" The boys jumped from the bench and slapped each other's hands, while all three attempted to explain at once. "It means everything's good. It means we won the game. It means we're great."

"Okay, boys," I went on, "together we're going to discover how your fingers and your thumb can remind you of how to get the light inside, the spiritual light, so you won't ever forget. Okay?"

"Okay," they responded, wide-eyed and curious.

Holding the thumb on my left hand straight up, I asked the boys to do the same. They did. "When you kneel down," I said, "what does it remind you of?"

"To say your prayers," was Kent's response.

I then bent my thumb and asked, "Don't you think this looks like a praying thumb?" The boys bent their own thumbs to check. "When you bend your thumb, it will remind you of the importance of prayer," I explained. "Prayer is an important source of spiritual light." The boys practiced bending their thumbs, first on the left hand and then the right.

Next I extended my finger and asked, "What do we call this finger?"

"The pointer finger," was Spencer's response. All three boys extended their pointer fingers and waited for an explanation.

I wanted them to provide the explanation, so I introduced the next question. "What do we have that points the way, that gives us direction, that tells us what to do, like reading instructions, like a map?"

This time Spencer responded first. "The scriptures. They point the way."

I agreed, explaining that I like to think of my scriptures as letters from home, messages from our Father in heaven to guide us day by day. And then I emphasized the fact that our scriptures are another important source of light.

With my hand wide open and held straight up, I suggested that our tallest finger could be a reminder of the tallest spire on the temple, like the one located just in front of us. "What can the temple finger remind you of?" was my next question as the boys held their hands straight up and examined their tallest finger. "What must you do if you want the blessings of the temple?" I asked.

Kent responded quickly and without any hesitation. "You keep the commandments," he said.

"Another source of light," I added.

As I raised the fourth finger on my left hand, the answer came before I asked. "That's the ring finger, the marriage finger," Spencer said.

"And what does marriage remind you of?"

The idea of his finger reminding him of marriage caused Kent to respond in a joking tone. "Love," he said.

"And service," I added. "That's another source of light."

Inviting a quick review, I raised my thumb once again and bent it. Without any coaching, the boys did the same and, in unison, raising first their thumbs and then each finger in turn, repeated, "Prayer, scripture study, keep the commandments, and love and service."

One finger was left, and they waited for an explanation.

"Do you remember when you were very young and your mom taught you about where the little pig went?" I asked.

The answer came at once. "All the way home." They giggled as they wiggled their little fingers.

With my hand held out and my fingers spread wide, I asked the boys the question Bryce had asked: "How can you get the light inside?"

Without coaching, the boys, holding their hands high as in a "high-five," repeated in unison: "Prayer, scripture study, keeping the commandments, love and service, and all the way home."

I rehearsed for them once again the lesson, adding the importance of daily prayer, daily scripture study, daily keeping the commandments, and daily giving love and service. "These are all sources of light, boys, that will help you get the light inside, and one day they take you all the way home, safely, to your Father in heaven."

As I stood up, the boys jumped to their feet, spontaneously giving each other a "high-five," and including me as we slapped our hands together promising to remember. Then we returned to the car and headed for home.

It was two o'clock before the boys finished their treats, rolled out their sleeping bags, silenced their talking, and finally drifted off to sleep. Morning came early, and junior high was one day closer. Kent's first comment was a reminder of my promise to take them to McDonald's for breakfast. There was time to keep my promise, time to build memories, time to learn lessons, time to show Kent and his friends they are important, and time for breakfast.

The boys climbed into the car, a little quieter than the night before, perhaps from lack of sleep. We drove north to McDonald's. I pulled into the parking lot and suddenly, as if a fire alarm had sounded, they were wide awake. "Come on, you guys," Kent called out, leading the way. Inside the restaurant, he placed his order without hesitation: "One Egg McMuffin, french fries, an apple turnover, and a Sprite." And then he added, "A small order of Chicken McNuggets." He confidently reminded Spencer and Bryce they could order anything they wanted. Hash browns, hot cakes, scrambled eggs, and sausage, along with milk and hot chocolate, were included in their combined menu.

Following breakfast, with only a few french fries left on one of the plates and their stomachs full, Kent raised his hand high in the air. Bryce and Spencer responded, slapping his hand, then each other's. They stood in the corner by the table at McDonald's and, beginning with the kneeling thumb and followed by each finger, reviewed in unison their lesson of the night before: "Prayer, scripture study, keep the commandments, love and service." Then they slapped their hands together again in a "high-five," confirming the conviction that it would take them "all the way home."

The boys are now halfway through junior high, and many lessons have been learned, with many more left to master. But often when I see them, they volunteer a "high-five" and slap my hand in remembrance of the night we bounced Glo-balls. And then I remember the day my mom kept her promise and took me and my friend to Waterton Park.

One day when Kent, Bryce, and Spencer are serving as missionaries, maybe in some faraway land, they will share their light from within. They will stand as special witnesses for Jesus Christ. They will teach others how to seek the light, find the light, and follow the light. They will teach them that the light of Christ is within. Maybe when they place their hands on someone's head to pronounce a blessing, they will look at their fingers and remember the source of light and how you get the light inside. And they will remember the night they bounced the Glo-balls on Temple Square.
