Ardeth Greene Kapp, Joy of the Journey ( 1992)

CHAPTER 8

Will We Return Home Safely?

Not long ago I sat in the large assembly room at the Missionary Training Center surrounded by newly arriving missionaries and anxious parents and other family members. As the final instructions were being given to the missionaries, I became aware of the man sitting next to me. His hands indicated that he was probably a laborer; his clothing was well worn. His head was bowed, perhaps to hide what may have been a tear as he took his handkerchief from his pocket. Then I glanced at the young man sitting next to him, apparently his missionary son. He was looking straight ahead, with a sober expression on his face, and appeared to be ignoring his father. I wondered if perhaps he was embarrassed by his father's appearance, or maybe they didn't have a good relationship.

At soon as the instructions were completed and the meeting was dismissed, it was as though the young man could not control his emotions one moment longer. It didn't matter that he was surrounded by people. It didn't matter that he was nineteen years old. It didn't matter that others might be watching. Try as he might, he could no longer control his emotions. While his tears flowed freely, he wrapped his arms around his father like parentheses, closed his eyes, and held him very close. The older man, also with tears in his eyes, returned his son's embrace. As I watched this tender scene, I wondered about the sacrifice that was being made and if the young man was going on his mission because his father was sending him. Would there be difficult times when he would like to turn back? Would people accept him and his message? Would he return home safely? Would it be worth it?

Those who have raised a missionary son or daughter from the time that a Band-Aid bandage and a kiss could cure all ills, until that little boy or girl, suddenly older, is ready to be sent forth as a representative of the Lord Jesus Christ, can relate to these feelings. Even a close relative is not too far removed to sense a yearning, to be assured that the missionary will be cared for and will return home safely at the appointed time.

But can any of us, in any possible way, begin to comprehend even in the smallest part what it meant for God the Father to send his Son on his mission to earth, knowing what must come to pass if he were to finish the work he volunteered to do? And how could the Son, even the Son of God, say to the Father, "Thy will be done," knowing what would be required?

May I share with you an account given by Elder Melvin J. Ballard many years ago relating to this singular event in all of history.

What father and mother could stand by and listen to the cry of their children in distress . . . and not render assistance? I have heard of mothers throwing themselves into raging streams when they could not swim a stroke to save their drowning children, [of fathers] rushing into burning buildings to rescue those whom they loved. We cannot stand by and listen to those cries without it touching our hearts. . . .

[God] had the power to save and He loved His Son, and He could have saved Him. He might have rescued Him from the insult of the crowds. He might have rescued Him when the crown of thorns was placed upon His head. He might have rescued Him when the Son, hanging between two thieves, was mocked with, "Save thyself, and come down from the cross. He saved others; himself he cannot save." He listened to all this. He saw that Son condemned; He saw Him drag the cross through the streets of Jerusalem and faint under its load. He saw the Son finally upon Calvary; He saw His body stretched out upon the wooden cross; He saw the cruel nails driven through hands and feet, and the blows that broke the skin, tore the flesh, and let out the life's blood of His [Only Begotten] Son. . . .

[God] looked on [all that] with great grief and agony over His Beloved [Son], until there seems to have come a moment when even our Saviour cried out in despair: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?"

In that hour I think I can see our dear Father behind the veil looking upon these dying struggles, . . . His great heart almost breaking for the love that He had for His Son. Oh, in that moment when He might have saved His Son, I thank Him and praise Him that He did not fail us. . . . I rejoice that He did not interfere, and that His love for us made it possible for Him to endure to look upon the sufferings of His [Only Begotten] and give Him finally to us, our Saviour and our Redeemer. Without Him, without His sacrifice, we would have remained, and we would never have come glorified into His presence. . . . This is what it cost, in part, for our Father in heaven to give the gift of His Son, unto men . . . his greatest gift unto us. (Melvin J. Ballard, Crusader for Righteousness, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966, pp. 136-38.)

Some years ago my husband and I, with a small group of friends, stood silently in the Garden of Gethsemane in the Holy City, each pondering our own thoughts and feelings. We walked where Jesus had walked and felt his presence there. The old, gnarled olive trees were bent and reaching toward the ground, the same trees, I suppose, that were there the very night the Savior of the world went into the Garden of Gethsemane and willingly took upon himself the sins of the world. His suffering was beyond human power to endure. He was the Son of God, and yet he willingly "suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto him." (D&C 18:11.)

In the quiet moments in the Garden of Gethsemane, I wondered how in this world could we ever express gratitude for the Savior and his sacrifice for us. The thought came: We express our gratitude by the choices and decisions we make each day of our lives. The Lord said, "If ye love me, keep my commandments." (John 14:15.)

In the premortal existence, the Savior had determined his course and, even knowing what would be required, was willing to pay the price for our sins and our souls. He said in the council, "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever." (Moses 4:2.) He came to earth—the Son of God, our Savior, our Redeemer, our Brother—to do the will of the Father.

At the close of his earthly ministry, he was taken to the place called Calvary, and there he was crucified. The terrifying events of that Friday hung heavily over the land that day and the next, and then a faint streak of dawn broke through the darkness of the first great Easter morning. On Sunday morning, while it was still dark, an angel of the Lord descended from the heavens and rolled back the massive stone, thus opening the tomb. The tomb now stood open—and empty.

In the early dawn, Mary Magdalene, whose love and devotion had caused her to linger at the cross, now came to the tomb. Burdened with grief, she stooped again to look into the empty tomb. There she beheld two angels in white, one sitting at the head and one at the foot where the body of Jesus had lain. One of the angels spoke to her in gentle tones and said, "Woman, why weepest thou?" Her troubled soul responded to the haunting thought: "They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him." With her whole heart consumed by the anxiety of the moment, Mary did not recognize the person standing close by. That person asked her with compassion, "Woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest thou?" Thinking him the gardener, she pleaded, "Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away." She desired even yet to care for her Lord.

In the quiet of that garden setting, in the springtime of the year and the freshness of a new day, he spoke her name: "Mary." One word turned her grief to joy. She recognized the tone of his voice. She recognized him. Uttering the title "Rabboni," which is to say, "Master," she reached out to him. Jesus gently restrained her, explaining, "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God." (John 20:13-17.)

Until now no mortal person had ever beheld a resurrected being. Mary Magdalene was the first to witness this glorious event. The joy in her heart carried her away in great haste, eager to share the remarkable news with the others that there was no need for mourning and weeping. She delivered her message, the most significant of all recorded history: "He is risen." (Mark 16:6.)

Jesus was alive! He was resurrected from the dead! She had seen him! Though her joy was great, however, it could not be shared, for we read, "They . . . believed not." (Mark 16:11.) This event was so extraordinary that even the apostles, who had been carefully taught, could not yet grasp the reality of it. Millions of individuals had lived and died during the course of earth's history to that day, "but until that first Easter morning not one had risen from the grave." (See Marion G. Romney, "The Resurrection of Jesus," Ensign, May 1982, p. 6.)

When time stands still and the veil seems very thin, questions flood into our minds. "He did all of that for me, though he didn't have to? But he did! Whatever he asks of us, is it too much? Maybe it is not enough. Surely it is not enough." In the silence of our hearts, we feel a burning conviction, a personal testimony that he did that for us. And then the awesome thought, "What if, just what if, he paid that awesome price for me, to redeem me, to save me, to be my personal Savior, and that price was paid in vain in my behalf because in my daily life I choose not to do my part?"

What is our part? How do we express our gratitude? How do we always remember and never forget? It is the sacrament, the holy priesthood ordinance, that helps remind us of the Savior's atonement and our sacred covenants. It is a precious and sacred reminder, not just on Sunday, but on Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, spring, summer, and fall, when we are on the mountain peaks of our lives but maybe even more so in the valleys. It is often in the valleys with our afflictions that we are truly humbled and better prepared to remember the gift of eternal life for which he paid the price—those times when we feel least worthy, least comfortable about carrying his holy name, and have a keener sense of our imperfections, those moments when the flesh is weak and our spirits suffer disappointment for our errors and our sins. We might feel a sense of withdrawal, a pulling away, a feeling of needing to set aside for a time at least that divine relationship with the Savior until we are more worthy. But at that very moment, even in our unworthiness, the offer is again given to us to accept the great gift of the Atonement—even before we change. When we feel the need to pull away, let us reach out to him. Instead of feeling the need to resist, let us submit to his will. Let us bend our will as well as our knees in humble supplication.

May I share with you the words of Elder David B. Haight concerning the sacrament:

Jesus gave Himself—His body and His blood—as a ransom for our sins. He sacrificed His life so that we might live again. We eat in remembrance of His body. We remember the Passover, the Last Supper, Gethsemane, Calvary, and the Resurrection. His blood represents a new testament—a new covenant with Israel. We drink in remembrance of His suffering—a suffering so excruciating that He said it "caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men" (D&C 19:18-19). ("Remembering the Savior's Atonement," Ensign, April 1988, p. 9.)

We are to partake of the sacrament worthily. And what constitutes worthiness? I believe it requires that we take a little inventory of ourselves, a personal interview, on a daily basis. Are our hearts pure? Do we hear the whisperings of the Holy Ghost? Do we listen to our conscience?

C. S. Lewis has written, "The more you obey your conscience, the more your conscience will demand of you. And your natural self, which is thus being starved and hampered and worried at every turn, will get angrier and angrier." According to Lewis, it is as though Jesus were saying to each of us: "Give me All. I don't want so much of your time and so much of your money and so much of your work: I want You. I have not come to torment your natural self, but to kill it. . . . Hand over the whole natural self. . . . I will give you a new self instead. In fact, I will give you Myself: my own will shall become yours." (Mere Christianity, New York: Macmillan, 1960, p. 167.)

When we want what Jesus wants, we will get all that we want and much, much more. We will become joint-heirs with him and receive all of the blessings the Father has promised. If these eternal truths seem almost beyond comprehension and faith falters, be not discouraged. Alma teaches us:

"Faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things; therefore if ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true.

"And now, behold, I say unto you, and I would that ye should remember, that God is merciful unto all who believe on his name; therefore he desireth, in the first place, that ye should believe, yea, even on his word. . . .

"But behold, if ye will awake and arouse your faculties, even to an experiment upon my words, and exercise a particle of faith, yea, even if ye can no more than desire to believe, let this desire work in you, even until ye believe in a manner that ye can give place for a portion of my words.

"Now, we will compare the word unto a seed. Now, if ye give place, that a seed may be planted in your heart, behold, if it be a true seed, or a good seed, if ye do not cast it out by your unbelief, that ye will resist the Spirit of the Lord, behold, it will begin to swell within your breasts." (Alma 32:21-22; 27-28.)

Wherever we find ourselves at this time in our life's experiences, may God bless us with unwavering faith to know that the mission of the Savior—his death, followed by his resurrection on that first Easter morning—is as efficacious today as it was two thousand years ago. With our limited perspective, and with the sobering reality of our imperfections and that turbulence in our hearts caused by that distance between where we are and where we want to be, let us remember that it is by the grace of God that we are made whole.

There is no doubt in my mind that the father I saw at the Missionary Training Center will count the days, the weeks, and the months until his son returns home. And in that great reunion, the father will humbly say, "This is my boy, my son, in whom I am well pleased."

May we too hear in our minds the words of the Savior speaking to each of us: "If ye will come unto me ye shall have eternal life. Behold, mine arm of mercy is extended towards you, and whosoever will come, him will I receive; and blessed are those who come unto me. . . .

"Behold, I have come unto the world to bring redemption unto the world, to save the world from sin. Therefore, whoso repenteth and cometh unto me as a little child, him will I receive, for of such is the kingdom of God. Behold, for such I have laid down my life, and have taken it up again; therefore repent, and come unto me ye ends of the earth, and be saved." (3 Nephi 9:14, 21-22.)

One day at the close of our earthly mission, because of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, our Redeemer, we too will return home to our Father. Let us live with the anticipation of that glorious day. I believe we will come running, and with outstretched arms our Father will greet us, and we will respond, "Oh, my Father, I am home again." Then if we have done our part, by his grace we will receive our inheritance as his sons and daughters, his heirs, and joint-heirs with our Elder Brother, Jesus Christ.
