Ardeth Greene Kapp, Joy of the Journey ( 1992)

CHAPTER 9

Doubt Not, Fear Not

The other day a friend of mine approaching her fortieth birthday asked me in all seriousness, "How did you handle the middle-age crisis?" I told her, "I don't. I haven't reached it yet." Somewhat surprised and curious, she asked, "Well, how old are you?" I told her this was my big year, sixty. She smiled and said, "Oh, you've reached it all right. You just don't remember."

Maybe that is a case of forgetfulness or denial or being out of touch with reality. It has been said that with each passing year one is found dealing more and more frequently with the hereafter. You go from one room to the next and wonder, "Now what was it I came here after?"

In all seriousness I believe it is, in fact, an awareness of the hereafter that provides the spiritual dimension for our lives today. As we learn to view our experiences in this life with the perspective of eternity, we tend to draw away from the things of the world that pull us apart and to feel closer to the things of the Spirit that keep us whole. When the reality of eternity presses upon our minds and we are guided by the Spirit, we begin to view life differently. The Apostle Paul expressed this thought: "We look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal." (2 Corinthians 4:18.)

He also reminds us: "For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh; but they that are after the Spirit the things of the Spirit. For to be carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually minded is life and peace." (Romans 8:5-6.)

Looking back over the years, I realize that one's spiritual dimension comes as a gradual process. We don't ordinarily remember the specific time we learned to read or to walk, nor do we remember the day we gained our faith, although we may well remember those occasions when it has been tried and tested. Elder Neal A. Maxwell reminded us that "adversity can increase faith." ("Lest Ye Be Wearied and Faint in Your Minds," Ensign, May 1991, p. 88.) Moroni taught us about the need for our faith to be tried: "Wherefore, dispute not because ye see not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith." (Ether 12:6.) President Brigham Young addressed our need for challenges when he said, "The men and women who desire to obtain seats in the celestial kingdom will find that they must battle every day." (Discourses of Brigham Young, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1954, p. 392.)

From the pivotal point where I now stand looking back threescore years and forward to eternity, I would like to share a brief brushstroke from my own experience that may be a pattern for others as we all strive to nourish the seed and partake of the fruits of faith.

At an early age, I had the faith of a little child. I believed anything was possible. I knew what I wanted and when I wanted it. Perhaps you are familiar with the thought, "Please, Lord, teach me patience, right now."

In time, with more experience, I became more patient and willing to wait with faith in a loving Father, hoping that it wouldn't be too long before my prayers were answered—"a few weeks or even months maybe, but please, Father, not years." I learned that often it is during the waiting, when we are in the valleys and not on the mountain peaks, that the greatest progress is made. Eventually we no longer need to have things our way. Experience teaches us that our Heavenly Father knows what is best and that all we need or want to know is his will. We learn to bend our will as well as our knees, and to yield our hearts with only one desire in mind: "What, Father, would you have me do? I want to know your will and I want to carry it out. Please, will you reveal it to me?"

Is there any one who has not had occasion to cry out at some time and plead with a burning desire to reach and stretch far enough to connect with God? He tells us, "Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you." (D&C 88:63.) After extended periods of fasting and prayer, have we not asked, "But, Father, what more can I do? What should I understand about working by faith?"

Then one day in our progress we gain a new and wonderful dimension. We learn to hang on and we learn to let go. We learn to differentiate between the things we must hold to tenaciously and those we must let go of if our faith is to grow. This is a mighty step in our spiritual development. We no longer need to have things our way, not now, not ever. We don't need all of the answers and we don't need additional promises. We begin to understand more fully the scripture, "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths." (Proverbs 3:5-6.)

Our faith will be tried and tested with each generation, and how we respond will have a tremendous impact on future generations. We catch this message in a familiar hymn: "Faith of our fathers, holy faith, / We will be true to thee till death!" (Hymns, no. 84.)

An abiding faith in the Lord Jesus Christ—his birth, his life, his resurrection, and the atonement—gives direction and brings light where there is darkness, hope where there is despair, and peace in place of torment. At times when the challenges of this life press down upon me, I think of my faithful, noble mother, of her strength and indomitable spirit. I think of my beloved grandmother who left England and my great-grandmother who stayed behind, and I feel a connection, a heritage of faith.

Many other great women helped nourish the seeds of faith in my tender years. I think of dear old Sister Bertha Buck, who often stood by her white picket fence covered with gooseberry bushes when I was on my way to school each day and raised her hand and called, "God bless you, my child." And because she asked God to bless me, I knew he would. I think of Sister Myrtle Dudley, my Primary teacher, who wore the same maroon dress to Primary every week. I remember her tired eyes, her thin gray hair, and her big smile. I thought she was beautiful. She taught me songs of faith. And Martha Shipley, who never married and had no posterity. She came to our home day after day to help my mother when I was young, and while there she taught me by her example about service and sacrifice and faith. I sense a powerful and very real heritage of faith transmitted by these good women from one generation to the next.

Paul, speaking to Timothy, tells his young friend to look to his mother and his grandmother in consideration of his own faith: "When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in thee also. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God, which is in thee by the putting on of my hands. For God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind." (2 Timothy 1:5-7.)

Two thousand young men known as the stripling warriors knew, because of the teachings of their mothers, that God would deliver them. "We do not doubt our mothers knew it," they said. (See Alma 56:47-48.) Is it any wonder that President Gordon B. Hinckley has said, "When a girl is saved, a generation is saved"? ("Youth Is the Season," New Era, September 1988, p. 47.)

Some good women may be the first in their line to establish a strong heritage of faith. Others may inherit faith from past generations. In either case, the spiritual dimensions of a woman's faith weave themselves through the tapestry of eternity from one generation to the next.

President Spencer W. Kimball, speaking to the women of the Church, said, "To be a righteous woman is a glorious thing in any age. To be a righteous woman during the winding-up scene on this earth, before the second coming of our Savior, is an especially noble calling. The righteous woman's strength and influence today can be tenfold what it might be in more tranquil times." ("Privileges and Responsibilities of Sisters," Ensign, November 1978, p. 103.)

In the rededicatory prayer of the St. George Temple in November 1975, President Kimball prayed: "We again ask thy blessing on the women in all the land that they may accomplish the measure of their creation as daughters of God, thy offspring. Let the blessings of Sarah, Hulda, Hannah, Anna, and Mary the mother of the Son of God, bless these women to fulfill their duties as did Mary, our beloved mother of Thy Son, and let the power and satisfactions of the prophetesses and all holy women rest upon these mothers as they have moved forward to fulfill their destinies."

And now, looking back over the years with a much different perspective, I am glad God allows us to struggle, to cry, and to feel pain, else how could we comfort others in their tribulation?

I am glad we know about hurt and healing, else how would we know the Healer, the Great Physician, who invites us to come unto him and be healed?

I am glad we know about fear and faith, else how would we recognize the light of faith after the dark night of fear?

I am glad we know about offenses and forgiveness, else how could we ever begin to appreciate the Atonement?

I am glad we know about discouragement and encouragement, else how could we reach out and take another's hand in empathy, understanding, and love?

I am grateful to know about the grace of God and his infinite love for each of us.

It is with faith in God's eternal plan that our spiritual dimension is expanded, enlarged, magnified. He is our Father; we are indeed his children.

Oh, if only it could be said of every woman what Joseph F. Smith said of Eliza R. Snow: "She walked not in the borrowed light of others but faced the morning unafraid and invincible."

My niece Shelly Larsen, a young woman of faith who carried the message of the gospel of Jesus Christ to the people in New Zealand, wrote the following in a letter home: "I love the gospel and know it is true because the Spirit has let me know by touching my heart. The Spirit of the Lord enriches my life daily, and I am so excited to share this happiness with my brothers and sisters in New Zealand. I love my Savior, and I am so amazed and grateful for the love He has for me. I am thankful for His Atonement and for the blessings His sacrifice brings into my life. I am grateful for the power of prayer and that I can talk to my Father in Heaven, and I know He hears and answers my prayers. The power of prayer and the Holy Ghost, which powers I am so humble and grateful to be able to receive, bless my life every day. I know that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God and that he actually saw God the Father and Jesus Christ. I love the Book of Mormon and love the spirit it brings into my life."

I too bear testimony of the things that Shelly knows to be true. These are the fruits of faith to be passed on to generations yet to come. My faith has not moved mountains. My faith has not parted the Red Sea. My faith has not brought desired answers to all my prayers, although I have prayed fervently and tried to live faithfully. But of this I bear testimony: I have witnessed many, many miracles, especially during the years I have worked with and for the young women of the Church.

Through my faith and prayers and fasting, mingled with that of my sisters and other family members, I have witnessed a miracle in the life of a loved one who was lost and spiritually dead. After many years, by the grace of God this loved one lives again. God bless us to walk by faith, and in so doing, to leave a legacy of faith, a rich heritage of faith for generations of young women and young men yet to come. Remember the words of our Savior, "Look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not." (D&C 6:36.)
