Ardeth Greene Kapp, Joy of the Journey ( 1992)

TRAVELING TOGETHER

CHAPTER 10

Take Hold of Hands and Hang On Tight

The Salt Lake City airport was unusually crowded that morning. A mass of humanity moving along the concourse formed an irregular pattern of coming and going. The "crossroads of the West" was evident as planes circled overhead waiting for the signal indicating each pilot's turn to deposit passengers, some for connecting flights and others returning home to the valley of the Great Salt Lake.

Inside the airport, small clusters of people gathered, forming a microcosm in a world all their own. Emotions were high, and tears filled the eyes of some. A father in a warm jacket and well-worn trousers gave his son a last embrace as the young man, in white shirt and new dark suit, tried to hold back his tears. While some people were hanging on to the minutes ticking away too fast, hoping to prolong the time before departure as long as possible, others impatiently waited for the time to pass more quickly. Standing by the window and anxiously observing the planes coming in, a woman in a small group struggled to keep back the tears as time for her seemed to have slowed down, if not actually stopped. Here and there were people who were alone—some walking with a clear sense of direction and purpose, others strolling along while drinking in the scenes of the airport drama. Occasionally a lone traveler, unkempt and with a troubled countenance, wandered through, seemingly undirected, going anywhere and maybe nowhere.

These scenes I had become accustomed to in my travels in many parts of the world. I routinely smiled at the joy of those awaiting the return of a loved one and felt some emotion for those bidding farewell and also some concern for the lone and troubled traveler.

One morning, having said my good-byes with little emotion since the separation would be very brief, I began the familiar walk down the concourse to Gate B-6. With ticket in hand and holding the strap attached to my small suitcase on wheels, I maneuvered into the crowd, seemingly carried forward without any effort on my part. It was a rather strange sensation, but since the crowd was moving in the direction I wanted to go, I felt no resistance as I was drawn into the flow.

Just a few steps ahead of me I noticed a young mother with a baby tucked securely under one arm and a heavy bag weighing her down on the other shoulder. I pushed forward, thinking I might be able to offer some assistance. When I got next to her, I observed her concern. Hidden down between the passengers were three little children, all hanging onto their mother's skirt, crowding against her legs, and making it difficult for her to walk and maintain her balance in the crowd. She bent over in an effort to communicate with her little flock. By now I was within hearing distance of this anxious traveler, and between the loud voice over the intercom giving directions and announcing departing flights, I heard this mother say, in an anxious tone, "Listen to me. We must take hold of hands and hang on tight."

At that very moment I felt a small hand slip into mine. I held it gently for only a second or two, and then it was quickly withdrawn. The little child had responded. It was my hand that happened to be close, and she took hold. For just a moment I felt an overwhelming sense of responsibility for this little child I didn't even know and concern for a mother I had never met.

I wondered, What does it mean to take hold of hands and hang on tight? If a child or an adult, a fellow traveler, were to take my hand, would I lead them to board the plane that would take them safely home? How much assistance can one traveler give in helping another along the journey, especially a young and inexperienced traveler?

In nature's miracles we see a community spirit, concern for one another, played out in a most remarkable way. Animals helping one another overcome great odds, driving off enemies, surviving seasonal changes, and protecting their young. Animals, like people, exhibit competitive instincts, but they are also balanced by another inherent drive. There is the natural instinct to take care of self, but there is also a second instinct: to get together. It has been said that the idea of community is as vital as the breath of life. Zoologists have found that even tadpoles are deeply influenced by social needs. A solitary tadpole can regenerate an injured part of its body very slowly, but if it is given the dimly sensed comradeship of fellow tadpoles, its healing powers speed up almost miraculously.

The care and concern and righteous influence of faithful Saints will overcome the odds for us and for others in this challenging, threatening, and otherwise unsettling time.

President Spencer W. Kimball taught that the influence of righteous women would be critical during the winding-up scenes on this earth before the second coming of the Savior. ("Privileges and Responsibilities of Sisters," Ensign, November 1978, p. 103.) This is our time to be a righteous influence. There are righteous women throughout the world with whom we need to unite. We need not wait for a calling but can be anxiously engaged of our own free will.

I do not wish to make anyone feel encumbered or burdened, but to point out that little things can mean so very much. Doctrine and Covenants 64:33 says simply, "Wherefore, be not weary in well-doing, for ye are laying the foundation of a great work. And out of small things proceedeth that which is great."

In the April 1990 general conference, President Thomas S. Monson, quoted our prophet, President Ezra Taft Benson, who said, "We must dedicate our strength to serving the needs, rather than the fears, of the world." Then President Monson added, "Perhaps never in history has the need for cooperation, understanding and goodwill among all people—and nations and individuals alike—been so urgent as today." (Ensign, May 1990, pp. 4-5.)

Others who spoke in the same session reminded us of the importance of caring for one another. "Service helps us overcome selfishness and sin," said Elder Derek A. Cuthbert. "[It] helps us cleanse ourselves and become purified and sanctified." Elder Hans B. Ringger reminded us that we must "live the example of the good Samaritan, who was free of prejudice and excuses and therefore truly loved his neighbor." And Elder Neal A. Maxwell stated, "When, for the moment, we ourselves are not being stretched on a particular cross, we ought to be at the foot of someone else's—full of empathy and proffering spiritual refreshment."

The hymn "As Sisters in Zion" includes the line, "How vast is our purpose, how broad is our mission." (Hymns, no. 309.) What is our responsibility to bring relief within our own homes, our neighborhood, our community, our country, our world? Do we confine ourselves to our own comfort zones? Can we offer relief from rejection and abuse, relief from loneliness and isolation? Do we see service when it is close to home, across the street, down the aisle in the marketplace? Can we unite to bring relief from the devastation of drugs and alcohol and the addicting power of pornography? Can we bring relief from illiteracy and poverty and extend relief not only to the homeless but also to those in spiritual darkness, depression, despair? Our opportunity and responsibility to cheer and to bless in humanity's name beckons us to service.

To cheer and to bless in humanity's name takes us beyond our immediate neighborhood. We must tear down fences and walls and build bridges. Recently I was invited to participate in a meeting of the National Women's Leadership Task Force, a coalition of thirty women working to stamp out pornography. As you read the following from my notes of that meeting, ask yourself if you would be willing to participate with these women in that cause.

"We must have a theological and ethical base. The New Testament refers to the beloved community where each one has dignity, value, and worth."

"This is a calling," one woman commented. "Yes, because we are Christian women, but also because we are citizens. This problem erodes that covenant base which is the fiber of our republic. This problem unleashes and distorts human passion."

Another woman admitted to having misjudged someone. "I saw her as being different," she said. "I had an ally and I mistook her."

"Broaden the base," a woman urged. "One woman can be helpful, ten women influential, one hundred women powerful, one thousand women invincible. Train women to interact in the process, to work with excellence and respect, integrity and balance."

Then another woman said quietly, "I've been praying to get out of it. God is keeping us in it to do something about it."

"I feel the Lord put this all together," the leader of the group said. "If you let in the light, he will bring in what else is needed."

Alexis de Tocqueville was quoted: "Righteous women in their circle of influence beginning in the home can turn the world around."

"When committed women are singing off the same song sheet," one woman said, "we can make a difference. We need to promote virtue. That is the bottom line. The Lord impressed upon my spirit that God will give voice to women who are standing for righteousness. I believe we are here, placed at a point in human history, by God's design. My heart longs for the day when all women everywhere will stand up and speak out for righteousness that affects our homes, our communities, our nation, but most of all our families." Then she emphasized, "Before we do anything, however, we must have prayer support. This evil is out of the pits of hell. When the women of this nation become mobilized in righteous causes and converted into votes, when we put our heads together, pray together, put our shoulders to the wheel, we can turn this thing around. We have been called to be righteous women. Think of all you have accomplished and then ask yourself, what does God want me to do now?"

The chairman closed the meeting with this thought: "The Lord bless you and keep you and use you all for his glory. Amen."

It is not enough to strive only to promote what is good. Must we not also accept responsibility to unite our efforts and extend our influence to eradicate the bad? I would like to tell you of a Relief Society in Las Vegas that determined to break with tradition. Rather than the usual Relief Society birthday social, nine wards united to research their community. They identified twenty major projects that could affect, protect, and guard the homes in their community. Each of the nine wards chose one activity. The sisters from one ward participated in projects leading to the dedication of the temple in that area. Another group focused their concern on the telephone directory, which contained twenty-five pages advertising escort services (that is, women for hire); the pornographic language and pictures in the ads defiled the homes they were placed in. While some sisters blessed their community by participating in the completion of a temple in their midst, others blessed their community by uniting their forces to remove pornographic material from their homes.

Our labors are needed on both fronts, to promote the good and eradicate the bad. Often we hesitate, concerned that if we take a stand we will be criticized. But we need to take that risk; we need to articulate our values. There is a proper framework for voicing our opinion. When I went to Washington, D. C.., to present a paper to the Meese Commission Against Pornography, I confess it was not comfortable. I was there with representatives from many organizations, including Playboy and other magazines. Sometimes taking a stand simply is not comfortable. But I think we can be a righteous influence with dignity, with propriety, with clarity, and in support of constitutional procedures, though not with tolerance for things we know to be wrong.

Sometimes Mormon women fear that it may not be appropriate for them to enter a political arena even in issues that endanger the home; however, the assignments that I have received from our priesthood leaders tell me that we may not have the luxury to sit on the sidelines and hope that someone else will stand up and speak out for what we believe.

"Out of small things proceedeth that which is great." In a stake in Draper, Utah, the stake Relief Society president gathered women together and, with quilting frames border to border in the entire cultural hall, they made two hundred quilts to cover the beds in the Primary Children's Medical Center. Each sister may have felt that her small contribution would not make much difference, but I think of the words of Mother Teresa: "I always say I'm a little pencil in the hands of God. He does the thinking. He does the writing. He does everything—and it's really hard—sometimes it's a broken pencil. He has to sharpen it a little more. But be a little instrument in His hands so that He can use you any time, anywhere. . . . We have only to say Yes to Him." (Love: A Fruit Always in Season, San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1987, p. 243.)

When are the seeds for that kind of ministering planted and in what settings are they nourished? Among the Young Women Values is Good Works, which states, "We will nurture others and build the kingdom through righteous service." A letter from one young woman provides a prescription for all of us. It describes the steps and displays the fruits of service, which blesses both the server and the one being served. She writes: "Last year in my junior high school year I set a goal in Good Works: to try to help someone in some little way every day, whether it was something that I did or just said or an example that I set. I decided to do this prayerfully, so every day before I went to school I prayed and I asked Heavenly Father, let me have the influence of the Spirit to know what I should do or say."

She reports that these small acts of service changed not only her attitude about herself but also her attitude toward others. "I began to see how everything we do affects others. . . . I began to feel better about myself and at the same time more humble. . . . Through my actions I began to have a different outlook on all my brothers and sisters. Everyone should be treated with respect. Through my daily efforts I feel as though I am beginning to understand what love can really be."

A feeling of wanting to reach out beyond ourselves falls like gentle rain on parched soil on those days when we may feel useless or worthless or unfulfilled or maybe even bored or lonely. It answers our deeper spiritual needs. With charity in our hearts, we can go out beyond the borders of our own comfort zone; we can let our influence be felt for righteousness in circles where we may not initially be familiar or at ease. Charity is the key. A prayerful heart gives the direction.

When we learn to listen to the Spirit in answer to our prayers, our service becomes customized by the Spirit, and we will do things that we might not otherwise have known to do. At Christmastime one year I talked to a widow on her doorstep. "My freezer is full of goodies," she said. "And obviously I don't need them," she added with a laugh, as she looked down at her expanding waistline. Then she commented wistfully, "But you don't really see the lights on Temple square unless you go there with a family." She would have traded all of the cakes and cookies for such an invitation. When we seek direction of the Spirit, our labors will be more meaningful—and maybe even require less effort.

The value and far-reaching effects of our service, however small, have nothing to do with our age or material wealth. They have to do with our willingness to give of our time and be led by the Spirit. Many lives will be healed and blessed when we reach out in a spirit of love and concern. I think of a little girl who visited a neighbor's house where her little friend had died. "Why did you go?" asked her father. "To comfort her mother," she said. "What could you do to comfort her?" "I climbed into her lap and cried with her," she said.

Our "Jericho Roads" may be just across the street, but they are there for each of us as we travel toward home.

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that life is like a huge wagon wheel. Like the revolving wheel, all of us at some time will find ourselves on the bottom, needing someone literally to pull us up. But as life evolves, there will be times when we are on top of the wheel and can reach down and help lift others up.

As the children of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, Moses provided the leadership and direction while Joshua fought with Amalek. "Joshua did as Moses had said, and fought with Amalek: and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill. And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed: and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed. But Moses' hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat thereon; and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun." (Exodus 17:10-12).

May we remember always the counsel given by the young mother to her little children in the busy airport with crowds of people going many different directions: "We must take hold of hands and hang on tight." Let us become a community of saints bound together by our common goals and our eternal relationship as brothers and sisters in the gospel of Jesus Christ.
