Ardeth Greene Kapp, Joy of the Journey ( 1992)

CHAPTER 11

Finding Joy in Service

Do you remember the story of the Little Red Hen, and how industrious, ambitious, independent, and self-reliant she was? Do you recall how she had a wonderful plan in mind that began by trying to get her friends to help her plant a few grains of wheat? As the story goes, she clucked around the barnyard asking, "Who will help me plant these grains of wheat?" And each of her friends responded the same way. "Not I," said the goose. "Not I," said the pig. "Not I," said the dog. "Then I will plant them myself," said the Little Red Hen. And she did.

She asked for help each step of the way. She asked for help with watering the wheat, tending and caring for it, cutting it, and finally grinding it into flour. Always the answer was the same: "Not I."

One fall morning the Little Red Hen got up early to make the flour into bread. She decided to give her friends one last chance to help, but the answer was still the same. "Not I," said the goose. "Not I," said the pig. "Not I," said the dog.

By now she must have been quite upset at having done all the work by herself, but she went ahead and baked a loaf of bread without their help. While she was laboring alone, she may have been thinking about her friends. Were they really friends after all? Why didn't they help? Didn't they know she needed them? Weren't they interested in her plan? Didn't they care about her? To offset her disappointment, perhaps she said, "I don't care. I don't need them anyway. I can do it by myself."

As delicious aromas from the baking bread filled the air, she anticipated that moment of taking it from the oven and eating it by herself, maybe with peanut butter and jam. Can't you just see her anticipating each animal's answer to her question, "Who will help me eat the bread"? Each one enthusiastically responded, "Oh, I will, I will." By now the Little Red Hen had her chance to get even with them. "You will?" she said indignantly. "I did all the work by myself. Now I'm going to eat it all by myself." And according to the story, that is exactly what she did. "It was only fair," she must have told herself. After all, she had done all the work.

How might it have been if, in the very beginning, the Little Red Hen had explained to her friends what she wanted to have happen? What if she had told them she had a plan for a wonderful event in just a few months, a celebration to which they were all invited? And what if she had called it a celebration of friendship, a time of breaking bread and eating it with jam and jelly? And that in addition, there would be several times before the party when they would be able to get together as friends and work together and contribute to this great celebration? Suppose, because of her enthusiasm, so many wanted to participate in the planting that she had to get more grain to plant because no one would want to be left out. As a result of everyone's help, there would be so much bread baked that they could write notes of love and deliver bread to everyone, not only in the barnyard but also down the lane and across the field.

In the beginning, maybe the Little Red Hen really couldn't get anyone to help with the project until it was time to eat the bread. But even then, what if she had shared the bread she had worked so hard to make? When it was all eaten, think of the friendships that would have been made. Wouldn't that have been more fun than eating the bread alone and muttering to herself, "It serves them right"?

The Little Red Hen knew what she wanted to do—she wanted to make bread. She knew the steps and the processes needed to complete the project. But she did not fully consider what she wanted to have happen as a result of her work. What if she had thought more about how to reach out to her friends and to involve them in ways that would bring them together, where they might discover the talents and uniqueness of each other's contribution? And what if, in the process, they came to value each other's differences and rely on each other, learn from each other, respect each other, build closer friendships, and have fun together?

Another familiar story also takes place in the barnyard, but this one is quite different. In Charlotte's Web by E. B. White, poor Wilbur the Pig had no friends at all. According to the story, he felt so "friendless, dejected, and hungry, he threw himself down in the manure and sobbed." Have you ever had a Wilbur day? It can hurt a lot inside if you feel you don't have even one friend. But in the story, Charlotte the Spider came to Wilbur's rescue. She asked, "Do you want a friend, Wilbur? I'll be a friend to you. I've watched you all day and I like you." Not only did Charlotte express her feelings for Wilbur, which must have given him some hope, but far into the night while the other animals slept, she also worked on a web that would literally save his life. She worked many nights to rescue him from the danger of being sold and ending up as bacon in the local meat market. Finally, just before Charlotte was going to die, as spiders do, Wilbur shared his feelings for her. "Oh, Charlotte," he said. "To think that when I first met you I thought you were cruel and bloodthirsty! Why did you do all this for me? I don't deserve it. I've never done anything for you."

"You have been my friend," replied Charlotte. "That in itself is a tremendous thing."

"Well," said Wilbur, "I'm no good at making speeches. I haven't got your gift for words. But you have saved me, Charlotte, and I would gladly give my life for you. I really would." Through her good works, Charlotte had become Wilbur's best friend. She cared enough for him that she used her special skills to serve him and eventually save his life.

Just think of the lessons that Charlotte could have taught the Little Red Hen and the other animals about service, friendship, and caring for one another, and about good works, even working through the night to accomplish an important project, maybe even to save someone's life. Doing good works means to nurture others, to care about others, to serve others, and to build friendships that bring joy and rewards and great happiness. When we are seeking only for our own interests, it is quite possible to become rather selfish, but when we follow the Golden Rule and do unto others as we would have them do unto us, we learn to put aside our own desires and reach out to others. And in the end, we discover that we have gained all that we really wanted and even more.

When Jesus lived on the earth, he taught the people things that would help them eventually become like him. One of his messages was, "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." (Matthew 5:16.) This instruction tells us not only what we should do to follow Christ but also why: to bring glory and honor to our Father in heaven.

When we, as members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, went into the waters of baptism, we covenanted or promised our Heavenly Father that we would help one another. Each time we partake of the sacred emblems of the sacrament, we renew our baptismal covenant with him that we will always remember him and that we will keep his commandments. When we do this, we have the promise that we can always have his Spirit to be with us. During the Last Supper, just before Jesus died on the cross so that each one of us could return to our Father, he gave a very important commandment to his apostles, one that was for all of us, for all time. He said, "This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you." (John 15:12.)

Consider the far-reaching effects of the service performed by a young woman in Arizona who was working on her Laurel project. Robyn decided she wanted to help organize a reunion for members of her father's family, many of whom were not LDS. She prayed about it and received a good feeling that this was what she was supposed to do.

Robyn decided the best place to have the reunion would be Southern California, since many of the family members lived in California. She called long-distance to her father's cousin in Palos Verdes Estates, south of Los Angeles, and asked if they could have the reunion at his home. He agreed, and together they set the date and worked out some of the details. Then she called another relative to get the names and addresses of family members.

Using her family's home computer, Robyn prepared a letter announcing the reunion and asking family members to cut off a coupon at the bottom and mail it back if they were interested in such a function. The response was overwhelming—letters and phone calls flooded in. Every single person responded and was excited about the reunion.

During the next four months, Robyn busily planned the reunion. She communicated with all fifty-three family members every month, giving them details of the reunion, giving them food assignments, and even sending them a list of all the names and addresses and a map showing them how to get to the reunion. She paid for the mailings with her own wages from a part-time job.

The reunion was very successful. Sixty-five family members came, some from great distances, and the spirit of love flowed through all the activities. Before dinner, everyone gathered for the first time as a complete family and had family prayer together, offered by an uncle who is a minister in another faith.

Robyn's mother wrote, "There was a very special bonding that occurred the day of the reunion, and everyone recognized that Robyn had been the catalyst. In fact, before everyone left to go home, they assembled and presented Robyn with a poster they had worked on during the day. On the poster was drawn a family tree showing how everyone at the reunion fit in, and alongside their names, each person had written a special note to Robyn, thanking her for all her efforts. Since the reunion, we have received many warm notes and phone calls expressing love and saying how wonderful the reunion was. Many wonderful seeds of the gospel were planted that day."

But that isn't all. A few months later Robyn's grandfather passed away. At ninety, he was the eldest member of the family and lived next door to Robyn and her family. Because of the list Robyn had gathered for the reunion, her parents were able to contact relatives in a matter of hours. They decided to have just a graveside service, since few members of the family lived in that area. Though the grandfather was not a member of the Church, they asked their bishop to conduct.

Imagine their surprise when, the night before the services, family members from several states began arriving. There were so many that the simple graveside service quickly turned into a funeral service with speakers and musical numbers. The relatives, none of them LDS, were deeply touched by the service, and some wonderful missionary moments occurred as a result.

Perhaps the most wonderful spin-off, her mother wrote, is the changes that have occurred in Robyn as a result of this experience. "She is confident, outgoing, and we have discovered a hidden talent—an amazing gift of organization."

I wonder how Robyn felt as the result of her Laurel project. I wonder how each member of her family felt about Robyn's efforts to bring them all together. I wonder how Heavenly Father felt about the part Robyn played in helping to build, strengthen, and bond her family together, not only now but hopefully in the eternities.

Good Works, one of the Young Women values, states, "I will nurture others and build the kingdom through righteous service." Good works may not always be a major project. It might be accomplished with what President Spencer W. Kimball called small acts of service. He taught us that "when we concern ourselves more with others, there is less time to be concerned with ourselves. In the midst of the miracle of serving, there is the promise of Jesus, that by losing ourselves, we find ourselves. (See Matt. 10:39.) Not only do we 'find' ourselves in terms of acknowledging guidance in our lives, but the more we serve our fellowmen in appropriate ways, the more substance there is to our souls. We become more significant individuals as we serve others. We become more substantive as we serve others—indeed, it is easier to 'find' ourselves because there is so much more of us to find!" ("Small Acts of Service," Ensign, December 1974, p. 2.)

Sometimes because of circumstances it may seem that there is very little that we can do to help others. This is not the case at all. Young Erika Monson teaches us something about letting our light shine under any circumstance. Erika learned that a two-year-old girl, Kirstin, was fighting for her life. Every effort was being made to locate bone marrow compatible with Kirstin's in the desperate hope that a transplant could be made to save this little girl's life. Responding to a concern not only for the little girl but also for her family, Erika wrote the following letter to Kirstin's parents:

"Dear Brother and Sister Doxey: How is your family doing? My name is Erika Monson. I am from Ely, Nevada. I am in Primary Children's Hospital and getting better. I know how hard things are for you and your family even though I'm thirteen. I hope that your daughter Kirstin is lucky and finds the right donor so she can hopefully live to be a young woman. If I was old enough to donate and wasn't on medicine for my liver, I would see if I matched your daughter's type. If so, I would do everything to make it so she would be able to live. I hope and pray for the best for your family. Love, Erika Monson."

While Erika Monson faced her own struggles for life and health, she reached outside herself to empathize with someone else. Elder Neal A. Maxwell tells us that when we can have concern for the welfare of another, even while we are suffering with our own problems, we are true disciples of Christ. We are following in his path and responding to his invitation, "Come, follow me." When we learn to listen to the promptings of the Spirit, we discover a natural desire, a yearning, to reach out to other people.

Heather, a young woman, writes about her desire to serve: "I want to be the one little light in the darkness so that not only I will survive, but maybe my friends will too. My friends are mostly nonmembers because of the small number of Mormons who go to my high school. The thing I really want to commit to doing is the very most good I can. Although there are times when I am not off the strait and narrow, I may not be dead center on that path either. Then I'll get upset with myself because I know I can do better. Starting right now, I'd like to commit to be the best I can be—not to just not be bad, but to reach out and help others all that I can. I feel really inspired to straighten out my life. I really promise the Lord that I'll keep these commitments I've made."

Karen, Robyn, Erika, and Heather are just a few examples of hundreds of young women throughout the world who are "nurturing others and building the kingdom through righteous service," as stated in the Young Women Values.

In the Book of Mormon the writings of King Benjamin help us understand the sacredness of service, the privilege and blessing of service, and the magnitude of even our smallest efforts: "When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.)

Most good works that are performed daily come as the result of an individual responding to the desire to serve, but there are also groups, classes, and teams of young people who perform major tasks through well-planned service projects. Some time ago I read with excitement a newspaper report about a group of young men and women who, while participating in a youth conference, converged on the little community of Wales, Utah. There they erected a chain-link fence around the town cemetery, painted picnic tables and playground equipment at the town park, cleared vacant lots, tore down old buildings, hauled away debris, and even laid down a cement sidewalk and patio for an elderly couple. The youths invited the townspeople to be their special guests at a watermelon bust around a huge bonfire one evening, and a talent show, barbecued turkey dinner, and dance another evening. "It was one grand get-together," a resident said. (Deseret News, June 25, 1987.)

A group in Glendora, California, participated in a service project during their spring break the week before Easter. Every day that week two groups of young men and young women, accompanied by their leaders, traveled to downtown Los Angeles, some twenty-five miles from their homes, to spend three hours helping to set up, serve, and clean up for the meals served at a skid-row mission. They also sorted clothing, wrapped five thousand plastic utensils in napkins for the Easter meal, and prepared more than 150 Easter baskets filled with donated items, such as toothbrushes, toothpaste, combs, soap, and Easter candies. On Easter they helped serve a special meal to five thousand needy people on a downtown street.

According to a newspaper report of the project, "A high point for many was singing to the homeless at the Sunday street meal. Strains of 'I Am a Child of God,' 'Because I Have Been Given Much,' and 'Love One Another' brought a quiet hush to the otherwise noisy street scene and tears to the eyes of singers and audience alike." (Church News, April 28, 1990.)

Our acts of service may be large or small, lengthy or brief, public or private, but when we serve in a spirit of love and sincere concern for the welfare and happiness of another, the Spirit of the Lord is felt and the Lord can work through us to bless others. Love expressed through service can bring light where there is darkness, hope where there is despair, and repentance where there is transgression.

To young women of the Church, I say: Make a commitment today to do some small act of service for someone every day. In days and years to come, precious memories will return again and again as you think of the wonderful feelings you had as a result of your Good Works experience. On those occasions words similar to these might come to your mind:

"Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: for you let your light so shine that others were blessed by your good works, and you glorified your Father in heaven."

You may ask, "But when did I help glorify my Father in heaven? What did I do that was so important?"

The answer will come to your mind: "When you reached out to help another, when you had the moral courage to stand for truth and righteousness even when it was very difficult, when you comforted the lonely, when you tended a child, when you helped strengthen a testimony . . . "

And then you will remember the words of the Savior, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (See Matthew 5:16; 25:34-40.)
