Ardeth Greene Kapp, Joy of the Journey ( 1992)

KEEPING IN TOUCH

CHAPTER 14

Calling Home

Hello! Hello! I'm sorry I can't hear you!" I shouted into the telephone. Hanging up the phone, I searched anxiously for another one somewhere away from the noise and commotion of the people from many lands, speaking different languages, going in every direction, at the Heathrow Airport in London, England. That tower of Babel incident really caused a problem, I thought, as I observed one traveler unsuccessfully seeking information in a language foreign to another, followed by a gesture they both could translate: a shrug of the shoulders meaning, "I don't understand." They could hear each other all right, but it was obvious the message was not getting through.

Mine was a different problem. I couldn't hear. Trying to hold back the tears and feeling so far away from home, I located another telephone down the concourse. I had been in the British Isles on an assignment for over three weeks. I had planned to take the train from Stoke-on-Trent to London for my 4:15 p. m.. flight to Los Angeles. If I could just get that far, I thought, I could even walk the rest of the way to Utah if necessary. Due to a difference in the train schedules from weekday to Sunday, however, I missed my connection for the 4:15 flight by twenty minutes. The plane headed for home was in the air but I was on the ground. I needed to call home. I wanted to be home. An emptiness crowded in, and I felt sick—homesick.

Locating another telephone, I read the instructions carefully, then once again dialed the international number printed on my telephone credit card. First a number, followed by the letter M, then three more numbers grouped together, plus three more, then four numbers, and finally the number eight. Twelve numbers in all, plus the letter M. I waited anxiously, hoping for a clear connection as I heard the call going through. How does this magic of communication across continents, under the ocean, in outer space, take place?

In my state of homesickness, I returned in my mind to my home when I was a child. I could see the calendar on the wall with our telephone number clearly printed at the bottom. My mother owned and operated a little country store, and each year she gave her customers and friends a calendar with a different picture for each season. But the information printed on the bottom was always the same. It could hardly be considered advertising since there was no competitor, but the information was important and seemed to lend prestige to our small business. It read in black letters:

Greene's General Store Groceries, Dry Goods, Novelties Glenwood, Alberta, Phone #3.

I didn't need a telephone calling card to remember #3.

The phone, like a large box, hung on the wall with a silver-colored receiver you held to your ear. We could pick up the receiver almost any time of the day and hear any one of ten people whom we knew and loved exchanging valuable information. A party line, we called it. Sister Woodruff would be giving a recipe for baked beans or some other dish to Sister Glines, who missed Relief Society the week when the recipe was shared. And if you didn't get in on the beginning of the conversation, it was never a problem for Sister Woodruff to repeat it. Communication was wonderful in those days until after six o'clock, when the switchboard, located in my grandmother's house, was closed for the day and the operator did not come on duty again until eight o'clock the following morning. In the case of an emergency, a loud siren-like sound could be heard anywhere in the house and would bring someone running to take the call.

Surely this was an emergency, I thought as I waited in the phone booth in London. Someone will answer. I anxiously waited as the telephone rang six, seven, eight times. Oh, if I could just get through to one of those old-time operators of long ago who answered "Information please" with such feeling and concern, I knew I'd feel better. She could always report on where you might locate any person in the town, what they were doing, and when they might be home if they didn't answer their phone.

Our operator could always answer our questions and was the source of all the important information for our little village. Someone who was going to Cardston and had room for an extra passenger in the car would call Operator and leave word. On the other hand, anyone who needed a ride to Cardston and did not have a way would also call Operator. She was the source of all the information that kept our town connected. On some occasions, information flowed so freely there were more connections than you might want. But that's the way with a small town, and we wouldn't have changed it.

The twentieth century has brought with it unbelievable technology, providing communication through the most sophisticated procedures. It has been described as a period of time that has taken us from "muttering machines to laser beams." With all of the advancement that has been made for many, however, the communication lines remain down with no connection. Not across the ocean or the continent, but across the room, across the table, in our own homes. There are times for many when no one calls and no one answers; and if they do, it is like foreigners at Heathrow Airport—a shrug of the shoulders meaning, "I don't understand you. It doesn't make sense to me. I can hear you, but your message is not getting through."

Some time ago, a young woman traveling from one distant state to another stopped in Salt Lake City. She was en route to her grandmother's home, where she was planning to live for a while. I met her when she visited my office, having called in advance for an appointment. She was an attractive young woman about sixteen years of age. We sat together on the couch in my office, and through the west window, we could see the Salt Lake Temple. She was obviously nervous. At first she responded only to my questions, as I attempted to become acquainted with her. Getting nowhere at all, I finally asked Jennifer (not her real name), "How are things with you at home? Tell me about your family, your brothers and sisters, your parents."

There was silence. She fidgeted with something in her hands, then shook her head and whispered, "It's not good, not good at all." I waited for her to explain further. "You see," she said, tears filling her eyes, "my mom won't ever talk to me, and she won't listen." Biting her lower lip to control her tears, she continued, "She listens to others but not to me. I'm the youngest one in our family, and my mom won't ever listen to me."

"That must be hard," I responded quietly.

"Yes," she said, "because I love my mom. Why won't she talk to me?" she sobbed. "I'm going to live with my grandmother for a while because Mom and I just can't get along."

"Don't get along?"

"Yes, we don't ever talk to each other. It's so hard . . . because"—she hesitated and wiped her eyes—"because I love her."

"Have you ever told her so?" I asked. She shook her head. "Do you think she would like to know? Could you write your feelings and express your love for her in a letter?"

"Maybe."

"Will you?" I asked. She agreed she would. "Would you like to get a letter of love from your mom? And if you did, would you bother to read it?" I asked.

"Yes, oh yes," she whispered.

"And would you answer?"

She nodded.

After listening to Jennifer for some time and allowing her to discuss her concerns, I asked if it would be acceptable with her if I were to call her mother and tell her that we had talked and that she had expressed love for her mother. Without hesitation she agreed, and she gave me the area code and the telephone number for her parents' home.

As Jennifer left my office, I gave her a warm hug and expressed my love. "Thanks, thanks for listening," she said. "I'll write to my mom."

I watched her as she waited at the elevator. The doors opened and she got in and waved good-bye. Then the doors closed and she was gone. Returning to my desk, I asked over and over in my mind, What kind of a mother must this beautiful and sensitive young woman have? I would find out. I dialed the number she had given me.

"Hello," a cheery voice answered. I identified myself and then verified that I was speaking to Jennifer's mother. She certainly sounded pleasant enough, although a bit surprised that I would be calling her.

"I'm calling," I explained, "to tell you of my visit with your daughter."

"Really?"

"I've enjoyed visiting with your daughter. I'm impressed with her," I said. "She tells me she is going to live with her grandmother."

"Yes," her mother responded. "It seems like it might be better that way. But it's very hard." Her voice filled with emotion. "You see, Sister Kapp, the problem is, Jenny won't ever talk to me, and she just won't listen. We can't communicate." Like an echo from a familiar phrase, I heard again, "She won't talk to me, and she won't listen." The woman hesitated, then explained, "I love her so much, but a barrier, like a wall, has grown up between us, and it seems like I can't get through to her."

We talked for some time. I told her of the love her daughter had expressed for her. "I think she would like to get a letter from you," I said, "and maybe you could write about your tender feelings for her."

"I will. I will today," she promised.

Many times since that conversation the familiar phrase plays on the memory of my mind, "She won't talk to me, and she won't listen." I hear the hurt in Jennifer's voice and the anxiety in her mother's. The lines were down. There was no operator to help get the message through, and the distance between them was increasing.

We are all away from home in the sense that we cannot talk to our Father in heaven face to face, and we long to call home, but many times it seems that we can't get through. The fact is that a veil separates us from our heavenly home for a time, but that need never ever keep us from communicating, talking, listening, being in touch, expressing love, and feeling the love our Father has for us. There are times when we may feel far away from home and out of touch, when we've missed our plane connection, so to speak, and the lines are temporarily down. We begin to yearn for that close contact with home, yet feel so far away. We may think, My Father doesn't talk to me and he doesn't listen. My prayers don't get through.

And what of the times when we struggle up steep and rocky slopes in times of trials and tests? Is it possible our Father watches tenderly and is willing and anxious to give help and comfort, guidance and warnings, but he can't get through to us because we don't talk to him, and we don't listen even though we have been warned?

"Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, ye must watch and pray always lest ye enter into temptation; for Satan desireth to have you, that he may sift you as wheat," Jesus taught the Nephites. "Therefore ye must always pray unto the Father in my name." (3 Nephi 18:18-19.)

Too often we fail to ask and we do not listen with full anticipation of receiving an answer. Maybe we really don't even expect an answer.

For some time I have had a little sign on my file cabinet at home that was given to me at a Young Women conference. It says simply, "Remember, you are a child of God. Call home." I've often pondered that simple admonition. What does it mean to call home? Would I use number three as I did as a child, or the international number of twelve digits that I used in the airport? Is there an area code that must precede the number for me to get through in prayer? And is there a charge? Would I get a bill, and how much might it be? How long could I talk?

Nephi understood how to talk and listen to the Lord. He explained, "I . . . did go into the mount oft, and I did pray oft unto the Lord; wherefore the Lord showed unto me great things." (1 Nephi 18:3.)

First we must desire to talk to our Heavenly Father and to listen to him, knowing that he in turn will talk to us in our minds and in our hearts (D&C 8:2) and will listen to us. There is no question about his promise to us. He has said, "Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you; seek me diligently and ye shall find me; ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name it shall be given unto you, that is expedient for you." (D&C 88:63-64.)

In time and when our hearts are full and we know not that for which we should pray, the Spirit will make intercession for us even without the words. (See Romans 8:26.) Our feelings, our desires are heard through our prayers.

"If ye would hearken unto the Spirit which teacheth a man to pray ye would know that ye must pray; for the evil spirit teacheth not a man to pray, but teacheth him that he must not pray. But behold, I say unto you that ye must pray always, and not faint; that ye must not perform any thing unto the Lord save in the first place ye shall pray unto the Father in the name of Christ, that he will consecrate thy performance unto thee, that thy performance may be for the welfare of thy soul." (2 Nephi 32:8-9.)

The scriptures become personal messages to us when we liken them unto ourselves. (1 Nephi 19:23.) Our Savior becomes our advocate and prays to the Father in our behalf, even pleading our cause. He has said, "Wherefore, Father, spare these my brethren [and we can put our own name here] that believe on my name, that they may come unto me and have everlasting life." (D&C 45:5.)

God is our Father. We are his children. We were together in his presence at one time. Jesus, our elder Brother, has made possible an eternal family relationship when we do our part. Think of it! When we understand that relationship, our prayers become natural and instinctive, personal and very real. If we don't remember this relationship between us and our Father, we experience difficulties with prayer. They become routine and mechanical.

In the Bible Dictionary we read: "Prayer is the act by which the will of the Father and the will of the child are brought into correspondence with each other. The object of prayer is not to change the will of God, but to secure for ourselves and for others blessings that God is already willing to grant, but that are made conditional on our asking for them. Blessings require some work or effort on our part before we can obtain them. Prayer is a form of work, and is an appointed means for obtaining the highest of all blessings." (LDS Edition of the King James Version, 1979, pp. 752-53 of Appendix.)

This form of work requires some important preparation on our part if it is to be effective. In a talk to Church Education teachers in 1956, President Harold B. Lee, who was then a member of the Council of the Twelve, talked about a lesson he had learned from President David O. McKay: "The President made the statement that . . . when we are relaxed in a private room, we are more susceptible [to the promptings of the Spirit]; and that so far as he is concerned, his best thoughts come after he gets up in the morning and is relaxed and thinking about the duties of the day; that impressions come more clearly, as if it were a voice." Then President Lee commented, "Those impressions are right. If we are worried about something and upset in our feelings, the inspiration does not come. If we so live that our minds are free from worry and our conscience is clear and our feelings are right toward one another, the operation of the Spirit of the Lord upon our spirit is as real as when we pick up the telephone; but when they come, we must be brave enough to take the suggested actions." (Talk to seminary and institute of religion teachers, July 6, 1956.)

We learn to talk and we learn to listen, and often while reading the scriptures, we will hear the voice of the Lord in our mind and in our heart by the promptings of the Holy Ghost. (D&C 8:2.) We come to know the Lord's will concerning us as we ponder the direction given in our patriarchal blessings when he speaks to us in a very personal way through his appointed servant, the patriarch.

You will remember the story of Hannah, who prayed for a son and vowed to give him to the Lord. Then Samuel was born, and as a youth he went to live with Eli the priest. One night he had a very personal experience. The Lord called him, and the young boy, thinking it was Eli, ran to Eli and responded, "Here am I. Did you call me?"

Eli explained that he had not called him and counseled the child to lie down again and go back to sleep. The Lord called again. Samuel arose and went to Eli and repeated, "Here am I." Eli responded, "I called not, my son; lie down again."

The Lord called a third time, and Samuel once again said, "Here am I, for thou didst call me." This time Eli perceived that the Lord had called the child, and he counseled him that if he were called again, he was to say, "Speak, Lord; for thy servant heareth."

Once again the Lord called, "Samuel, Samuel." This time Samuel answered, "Speak; for thy servant heareth." (1 Samuel 3:1-10.)

Our Father talks to us as surely as he spoke to Samuel, although perhaps not in the same way, and he listens. We can talk to him and we can listen. When we do, we are never far from home. Our call home allows us to talk as long as we want and to listen as long as we will. The price we pay is simply to always remember him and keep his commandments so that we can have his Spirit with us always.
