Ardeth Greene Kapp, Joy of the Journey ( 1992)

CHAPTER 15

Of Infinite Worth

It was early morning, and my thoughts were about young women as I went through some correspondence on my desk. I opened one letter, which began, "Dear Sister Kapp: First of all, let me tell you who I am." I expected a name to follow, but that was not the case. The writer continued, "I am of infinite worth!"

Infinite worth. Oh, how I wish that each young woman could feel that confidence, that assurance, that eternal truth. If only that knowledge could be firmly established in her heart and mind, and she would have the assurance that she, too, is precious in the sight of God, what a great blessing that would be.

Yes, I thought as I read the letter, you are of infinite worth, and so is every other young woman I know and all the ones I don't know. How wonderful it is to know that each one has her own divine mission, a mission that is significant in God's eternal plan. This knowledge can give us peace and purpose even in troubled times. Unfortunately, however, not everyone believes this great truth, and that is sad indeed.

I like the attitude of Charlie Brown, the comic strip character, even when friends makes disparaging remarks. Once Lucy asked her friend Violet, "Do you really think that Charlie Brown is as hopeless as you make him out to be?" Violet responded, "He's worse! He has no redeeming features whatsoever!" And Lucy agreed. "I just can't think of enough bad things to say about him," she said. But Charlie Brown knew better. He stood tall, even against their insults, and made a profound statement: "I'm infinite!" I say, good for Charlie Brown and for everyone else who has come to recognize this great truth.

Often in my travels people will recognize me and comment, "You're Sister Kapp, aren't you?" And I will reply, "Yes, I am." Then, with sincere interest, I will ask, "And who are you?" Too often the answer is, "Oh, I'm nobody." Right then I feel an intense desire to correct the error, to recall the thought, and to introduce the speaker to his or her own magnificent self.

How I wish I could visit with each person individually. First I would listen and then we would talk. I would learn from you and you would learn from me. We would share our thoughts and feelings about important things. I would want you to know that it doesn't matter who we aren't when we know who we are.

To know who we are is essential to our feelings of self-worth. Within every human soul is a natural longing, bone-marrow deep, to know this. On one occasion when I was visiting the Gilbert family in Arizona, I was invited to join in family prayer. Six-year-old Emily was asked by her father to offer the prayer. After expressing gratitude and asking for blessings for family members, especially her mother, who had an important speaking assignment, Emily closed with these words: "Help us always to remember that we are Gilberts." Then she added, "and to know what that means."

To know who we are and what that means gives a sense of destiny, a feeling of belonging, a tie to an eternal family forever.

Some young people I know are concerned about their heritage because they are aware their parents aren't yet perfect, and they allow feelings of uncertainty about their heritage to creep into their minds. Such concern is shortsighted and foolish. None of us is perfect yet. Our identity extends far beyond this immediate generation and links us to a divine inheritance in which we are to become joint-heirs with Jesus Christ. We lived with him before this earth life, and we will, if we choose to follow him, live with him again in a glorious family relationship.

If we don't know where we came from, it is impossible for us to know where we are to go. And without this knowledge, we are left to drift along, unable to decide what to do and what not to do, where to go and where not to go. The risk of making wrong decisions is magnified a hundredfold. To consider this life only is like viewing just the second act of a three-act play. If we didn't know what preceded this life or what will follow, nothing would make much sense and nothing would really matter.

One day in the early spring, my little niece Shelly and I walked for hours, carefully picking our way from one rock to the next along the creek bed behind our house. Before long we were drawn to an open field, where we noticed tender green shoots forcing their way through the earthy floor, and the winter snow receding toward the mountain peaks. It seemed as though all of nature bore evidence of God's creations and his great love for us. At the close of this memorable day, we knelt together while she expressed thanks for the creek, the slippery rocks, the meadow, and me. I then gently tucked the covers around her and bent down for a goodnight kiss. Reaching up with both arms around my neck and pulling me close, Shelly whispered, "I wish we were in the same family."

"Shelly, my dear," I quickly explained, "we are in the same family."

"I mean the very same family. My last name is Larsen and your last name is Kapp, and that isn't the same. I mean, I wish you were my sister and we had the very same last name."

"Shelly, we really are in the very same family," I replied. "You see, we are all Heavenly Father's children, every one of us. That makes us members of one great family. We are brothers and sisters, and Jesus is our brother too, our Elder Brother."

"Then what is Jesus' last name?" she asked.

"We know our Savior as Jesus the Christ," I said.

With the pure innocence of youth, she began to make us all one family and to secure this relationship by linking my first name with the surname "the Christ."

"Oh no, my dear, we don't put our names together like that," I said.

"Why not?" she asked.

Wanting her to be aware of the sacredness of our relationship with the Savior, I tried to explain. "Maybe it's because sometimes we are not good enough. I don't feel worthy yet."

Suddenly she raised up on her elbow. "What do you do that's wrong? Why don't you stop doing it, and then we can all be in the same family? We can all use his name."

As I pondered the answer to her question, in my mind I heard, as though for the first time, words that I had heard often before, but now it seemed as though I was hearing them with my whole heart and soul: "That they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him and keep his commandments which he has given them." (D&C 20:77.)

I realized more fully the reality of our relationship with our Elder Brother, Jesus Christ, and a new thought came into my mind. Not only is he my brother, but I am his sister. Imagine such a family relationship! All members of the same family—his family. Could we possibly want more?

When I hear people make comments of self-depreciation, I want to open the Book of Mormon and read the words of King Benjamin:

"And now, because of the covenant which ye have made ye shall be called the children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters; for behold, this day he hath spiritually begotten you; for ye say that your hearts are changed through faith on his name; therefore, ye are born of him and have become his sons and his daughters.

"And under this head ye are made free, and there is no other head whereby ye can be made free. There is no other name given whereby salvation cometh; therefore, I would that ye should take upon you the name of Christ, all you that have entered into the covenant with God that ye should be obedient unto the end of your lives. . . .

"Therefore, I would that ye should be steadfast and immovable, always abounding in good works, that Christ, the Lord God Omnipotent, may seal you his, that you may be brought to heaven, that ye may have everlasting salvation and eternal life, through the wisdom, and power, and justice, and mercy of him who created all things, in heaven and in earth, who is God above all." (Mosiah 5:7-8, 15.)

In times of discouragement and self-doubt, we must try to remember who we are, or better, whose we are; and when we make a mistake, we must never give up on ourselves. When we hear a beautiful violin that is out of tune, we wouldn't throw the violin away. It has not lost its value. It just needs to be tuned by tightening a string.

And so it is as we make adjustments in our lives through daily repentance and commitment to strive each day to keep the commandments. This is best done through daily prayer, when we ask our Father in heaven what we should do or stop doing to become a better daughter, sister, or friend. And in answer to our questions, as we ponder and listen, thoughts will come into our minds that will guide us. It is that simple. This daily source of strength makes the steep and steady climb upward in this life one of adventure and hope, not of despair and discouragement. Because of the link in our pedigrees, our nature is divine and we have unlimited possibilities. We are of a noble birthright. We are of the royal house of Israel, the chosen ones.

Like a mighty chain of infinite worth, our reach extends in both directions to include all that we have inherited from the past and all that we will yet bring to the future. It is the incredible excitement of this linking of past and future that is enticing many women to become involved in searching out their ancestors through the name-extraction program. As they search the records to find their relatives, marvelous miracles are unfolding. As they find their forefathers, they discover themselves and all those relatives who have preceded them and who continue to care about them.

On one occasion, President Benson said, "The heavenly grandstands are cheering you on." I am convinced that our ancestors care about us and cheer us on. It is important for us to know of our divine nature and our infinite worth.

To know who we are is important, but to know where we are headed is essential if we are to receive all the blessings our Father in heaven has for those who love him and keep his commandments. Our eternal home is our ultimate destination, and we know the way.

One summer at a Young Women conference in Alberta, Canada, three hundred girls were camped in tents scattered among tall pines. It rained every day and was very cold and wet. Even so, there was no murmuring in the camp. The last day of the conference I addressed the young women under cloudy skies. Despite the unseasonable cold, there was a feeling of warmth among them. Maybe because of the cold, we were all drawn together and felt warm from the inside out.

I began my remarks by asking, "Where are you going following this conference?" The united chorus of three hundred young women resounded through the tall pines. "Home!" they cried out. "Where?" I asked again, and they responded with even greater conviction, "Home!" I was convinced they were not interested in any detours. They knew where they were headed and were anxious to get there.

It is essential to our happiness to know not only who we are but also where we are headed. When we know where we are going, the risk of detours because of temporary pleasures, appealing enticements, and alluring voices becomes much less of a threat to our happiness here and in the eternities.

A few years ago, after three weeks away in a faraway country and feeling homesick and lonely, I lay in my bed in a strange hotel and began thinking about home and family. I pictured myself walking up the sidewalk. I could see in my mind's eye the front door of my home. I began to feel the warmth and even the smell of our house. I imagined I felt the warm hugs of family members as they welcomed me back. My mind stretched even further, and I reached to think how it will be when I see again my mother and father. I could almost feel what it will be like when we run, with arms outstretched, into each others' arms and rejoice together and remember happy times. And then I tried to comprehend how it will be to feel the embrace once again of our Father in heaven and of our Elder Brother, and to be safely home forever.

As Latter-day Saints, we know who we are and where we are headed, but many often ask another question: "Why am I here?" That also is important to know. We are here so that we can be tried and tested and so that we can learn right from wrong. We are here with freedom to choose. While there is opposition in all things, we must learn to choose good over evil and be obedient to the laws given by our Father in heaven to help us follow the way. When we left our heavenly home, we knew Satan would be here on earth and would try in every way possible to tempt us, just as he did there. Though his plan was enticing, we chose to come to earth and to follow Jesus Christ and keep his commandments. We knew it would be difficult, that the test would not be easy—but we understood the gospel plan, and we shouted for joy as we anticipated this earthly journey.

Needed today as never before are women who will take a stand for righteousness and resist once again the enticings of the adversary. As we live the laws of the gospel, the powers of Satan are bound among us. Every soul is stronger than Satan if that soul is determined to be obedient and follow the Savior. The Lord has promised us that we will never be tested beyond our ability to withstand.

When we were baptized, we covenanted with, or promised, our Father in heaven that we would serve him and keep his commandments. He in turn covenanted with each of us that he would always be with us and never leave us. Even in times of loneliness or when we may feel worthless, we are not alone and we are not worthless. We did not come to this earth life to gain our worth. We brought it with us. Our responsibility is to grow from our experiences so that we might be prepared for greater responsibilities and opportunities along the way.

As we learn to make and keep sacred covenants, we begin our preparation to one day have the glorious experience of entering the holy temple of the Lord. There we can receive additional ordinances and covenants, promises, and blessings, providing us with information that is essential to our returning home to the presence of our Father in heaven. In no other place is this great blessing, this gift, this endowment made possible. This magnificent blessing of such eternal significance is within our reach. But for each of us, it requires reaching and stretching and extending ourselves to be more than we are now, but not more than we have the capacity to become. It was never intended that the test would be easy.

I remember a very difficult time in my life when I was having serious problems at school because I had been ill and had missed some basic lessons. School was hard, but worse than that was a feeling of being dumb and unaccepted by my friends. That really hurt. Then my father told me about the temple. He promised me that if I did my very best, learned to be obedient, and continued to be obedient, I could receive a temple recommend, which would verify I was worthy to enter through those doors—to enter that sacred place where I would learn all I needed to know to get back home safely.

I had walked around the temple many times, but that day I set a goal to qualify to go inside. I did not want to remain on the outside. I wanted to go inside. It is inside the temple that we can receive ordinances and covenants that will eventually admit us, if we remain worthy, into the presence of our Father in heaven, with the anticipation of a glorious homecoming. It was then that I began to realize the purpose of this life and that the greatest of all blessings, the blessing of exaltation, was within my reach. It is within the reach of all who strive to live worthily and keep the commandments.

As each new day begins, as sure as the sun comes up and the sun goes down, there will be ups and downs in our lives, not to make us sad, but to provide opportunities for growth that will make us glad. This is a wonderful world and a most remarkable time to live. The gospel has been restored to the earth in its fulness. As President Ezra Taft Benson has said, pointing to the special mission of this generation, "While our generation will be comparable in wickedness to the days of Noah, when the Lord cleansed the earth by flood, there is a major difference this time: God has saved for the final inning some of His stronger and most valiant children, who will help bear off the kingdom triumphantly. . . . You are the generation that must be prepared to meet your God." (Ensign, April 1987, p. 73.)

In view of this challenging time for which we have been reserved, we can expect some pain, discouragement, disappointments, trials, and temptations. When we choose to follow the Savior, we can expect some suffering, some loneliness, and some injustice. But in times such as this, it is well to remember the words of Elder Orson F. Whitney: "No pain that we suffer, no trial that we experience is wasted. It ministers to our education, to the development of such qualities as patience, faith, fortitude, and humility. All that we suffer and all we endure, especially when we endure it patiently, builds up our character, purifies our heart, expands our souls, and makes us more tender and charitable, more worthy to be called the children of God. It is through sorrow and suffering, toil and tribulation that we gain the education that we came here to acquire and which will make us more like our Father and Mother in Heaven."

The challenges we face are real. We will always face tests. They may take the form of peer pressure—the need to feel that we belong, the pressure to follow the crowd. They may include hungering for popularity, beauty, money, position, clothes, and other outward symbols that supposedly say, "Look at me. I am really somebody. I am accepted." And yet one can have all these things and still feel empty inside. It is at such times that we need to remember who we are and where we are headed. It is then that we need self-discipline and strength to avoid the detours that offer only momentary pleasure and too often leave lasting scars.

Every day and in every way, Satan uses every possible means to have us within his grasp. Sometimes his tactics call for subtle—or even not so subtle—messages in entertainment, music, and videos. Sometimes his enticements involve disobedience, dishonesty, distrust, or contention, or they may take the form of immodesty, immorality, or vulgarity. If we have a weakness, it may be at that very spot that we are tested the most. When people lack integrity—if their actions do not fit their beliefs—great destruction takes place inside them. It begins slowly. First they don't like themselves, resulting in loss of respect, self-esteem, and faith. Then they begin to dislike others, and contention crowds in. And soon, as a result of such insidious forces, the Spirit is forced to leave.

Obedience to God's commandments, which are provided only for our safety and welfare, brings feelings of self-mastery, self-confidence, self-worth, and increased faith. When we know we are striving to do God's will, our attitude can change from "I can't" to a feeling that "with God's help, I can."

Setting righteous goals and then reaching and stretching to attain them is a process that develops our ability to be in control of ourselves. It helps us to overcome temptation and develop the power to resist anger, hatred, jealousy, envy. We can overcome feelings of inferiority, inadequacy, and incompetence.

This life is not intended to be easy. But safety and protection are within our reach as we choose to be obedient to God's plan. He loves us and he wants us to return home, but he will not force us. We have to do our part too. If we have faith and pray humbly, he will encourage, strengthen, guide, and direct us, through the whisperings of the Holy Ghost. We can also turn to the scriptures, which are like letters from home—messages from our Father and his servants, the prophets, to comfort us, guide us, warn us, and teach us of his magnificent, unwavering love for us.

In the Book of Mormon, we read of the wise counsel Helaman gave to his sons. The counsel is equally good for daughters: "Remember, remember that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation; that when the devil shall send forth his mighty winds, yea, his shafts in the whirlwind, yea, when all his hail and his mighty storm shall beat upon you, it shall have no power over you to drag you down to the gulf of misery and endless wo, because of the rock upon which ye are built, which is a sure foundation, a foundation whereon if men build they cannot fall." (Helaman 5:12.)

There is no limit to our greatness, our wonderful uniqueness. Each of us is of infinite worth, and each of us has much to share. It isn't intended that we should all progress in the same way at the same speed. Someone has said, "Anyone who imagines that all fruits ripen at the same time as the strawberries knows nothing about grapes."

Our Father has told us that he will try our patience and our faith. (See Mosiah 23:21.) It is in our daily prayers, as we ask for specific help, that our burdens are eased and we are given strength to endure all things. Here are excerpts from letters of some young women who have made this discovery in their lives:

"For the past nine months I didn't go to church. I was going through a real difficult time, and I just ran away from it. Then I was asked to sing in the girls' chorus. I am so thankful that I accepted this invitation. The Spirit was so strong that I just cried. I now realize that I need the gospel in my life. I realize that Heavenly Father loves me very much. I have a strong testimony of the gospel, and I love it with all my heart."

"My family and I have gone through a lot this year, for my parents got a divorce. I have been calling this my wilderness time. One night as I was reading my scriptures, I came to Alma, chapter 34, verse 26. Many times I had known I needed to pray, but I didn't feel worthy. This scripture was just what I needed. It is during the hard times that the Lord can help us most. I could never make it alone."

"You might have called me a lost sheep. My behavior did not show the royal birthright that I had partaken of just a short time ago. My grades showed lack of interest; my language, a lack of caring. Then I got a new adviser in the Young Women program who treated me as a daughter of God. Pretty soon I found myself excited about the gospel. I found that my testimony, which had atrophied to the size of a needle point, was growing. I found my love for the Savior and his love for me increasing and bonding into one eternal friendship. I found that my self-esteem, which had been at a drastically low rate, was rising. And I found the one thing I needed most—friends. The Young Women program was full of them. I also found that the best Friend I could ever have is only a prayer away. I have been a Latter-day Saint all my life, but I have never been so excited about the gospel as I am now. I know that the Lord blesses us continually and helps us find the things we need to get back home."

"The Spirit gives me strength to keep plowing right through all the trials that Satan puts in my way. My patriarchal blessing tells me that the adversary shall have no power over me because of my testimony and obedience. I know I can be strong. My heart is so full, and there is so much I want to say. This joy is more than any joy that new clothes bring. This joy is uplifting. It fills my whole being with happiness in a time in my life when I need it the most.

"I love this gospel, and I will strive to live the commandments of God all my life. I know that I am a daughter of a Heavenly Father who loves me, and I love him. I hope that I can always be an example to others and that they might be touched by my strong testimony of the gospel. I hope that I can find the lost sheep of the Lord's flock. I will stand for truth and righteousness and hold my torch high for everyone to see that I love the Lord and his gospel."

Yes, the young women of the Church are youth of a noble birthright. They are of infinite worth. Oh, how I yearn for every one of them to know and feel the strength that comes from knowing who she is, where she is headed, and the purpose of this earth life! When we understand the reason for the tests and even the suffering, and especially when we know that our Savior knows us and has felt every pang of suffering that has ever been felt by anyone at any time, our struggle can become easier.

We learn in the Book of Mormon that Jesus Christ himself suffered "pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people; . . . and he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities." (Alma 7:11-12.)

No, we cannot tell him anything about disappointments or heartaches, loneliness or rejection, pain or heartbreak. He knows and understands it all. He suffered and died for each one of us. He also knows and understands us and stands ready to comfort us at all times. He is our Brother, our Lord and Savior, and his Father is our Father. We have inherited his divine qualities, even to become perfect as he is, although not in this lifetime. Yet at some future time, with his help, even this goal is within our reach. We are of infinite worth with infinite possibilities when we know who we are and what that means. As we learn to accept ourselves, even as we are striving for improvement, marvelous blessings open up and enormous opportunities await us.

It is often while we are facing challenges that we discover our strengths and experience deep feelings of accomplishments. I hope every woman, young and older, will come to know about the steep climbs to the mountain peaks and also the great lessons to be learned in the valleys. I am glad God allows us to struggle, to cry, and to feel pain. I am glad we know about hurt and healing, about fear and faith, about offenses and forgiveness, about discouragement and encouragement. I am grateful to know about the grace of God and his infinite love.

I know, from personal experience, that when we do our very best and give our total effort, the Lord will do the rest in matters that affect safe travel toward eternal life and exaltation. And while we travel homeward, there will be those along the way to whom we can reach out with encouragement, friendship, service, example, and righteous influence, for each person we meet is truly of infinite worth.
