Ardeth Greene Kapp, Joy of the Journey ( 1992)

CHAPTER 16

Someone Will Know

I have a drawing of the Tower of Pisa that I have kept over the years because of the message it conveys. The encyclopedia refers to this structure as the Leaning Tower of Pisa, and having been to Italy and seen it, I think there is no question that description is correct. However, the drawing I have presents the tower in absolutely perpendicular form, straight up and down, no tilt whatsoever. It towers 184.5 feet into the air. The marble walls that were once white are thirteen feet thick at the base. History records that early on, the foundation for the structure began to give way, and by the mid-twentieth century the tower was leaning more than seventeen feet. Today it continues to slip and is threatened with collapse.

My cartoon illustration of the tower includes two architects standing in front of it with blueprints in hand, obviously satisfied with their magnificent accomplishment, and one tells the other, "We skimped a little on the foundation, but no one will ever know."

Recently that cartoon came to mind again, and I thought about the consequences of faulty foundations. As I was driving my thirteen-year-old nephew Kent to a piano recital, a new billboard loomed before us on the highway. A picture of two large skis, polished and enticing, filled one-half of the sign. The other half, in bold letters, read, "Take two and call in sick." It might have added, "No one will ever know."

"What do you think about that sign?" I asked Kent.

His answer came quickly. "I'm going to own my own business when I grow up. I'll be my own boss. I won't have to ask."

"But if you weren't the boss and wanted to go skiing, then what?" A long discussion began.

What does it really mean to be honest? Someone has said, "When you begin to tell little white lies that seem harmless at first, you soon become color blind." Honesty is like the foundation of character. The foundation must be sound if the building is to stand erect. Our strength of character, our reputation, our trustworthiness, and ultimately our peace of mind rest heavily on the foundation of honesty.

We know that Satan, having rebelled against God, became the father of all lies. (See Moses 4:4.) Deception, cheating, fraud, dishonesty, and even deliberate misrepresentation are all tactics found in his bag of tools with the intent to destroy us. His tactics are subtle. He would have us begin by rationalizing, slipping just a little. Surely just a little indiscretion can't be too serious, especially if no one would ever know. It's just a marginal lie. He says, "Eat, drink, and be merry; nevertheless, fear God—he will justify [us] in committing a little sin; yea, lie a little, take the advantage of one because of his words, dig a pit for thy neighbor; there is no harm in this; and do all these things, for tomorrow we die." (2 Nephi 28:8.)

The Lord in his mercy and love provides warnings, commandments, laws, and standards to protect us. He warns, "Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, ye must watch and pray always lest ye enter into temptation; for Satan desireth to have you, that he may sift you as wheat." (3 Nephi 18:18.) When a foundation begins to slip, if it is not corrected there is a serious threat of collapse, a falling down.

Lying weakens our faith; it weakens confidence. Mark Twain knew about this process. His Huckleberry Finn described how it works: "I about made up my mind to pray, and see if I couldn't try to quit bein' the kind of a boy I was and be better. So I kneeled down. But the words wouldn't come. Why wouldn't they? It warn't no use to try and hide it from Him. . . . I knowed very well why they wouldn't come. It was because my heart warn't right; it was because I warn't square; it was because I was playing double. I was letting on to give up sin, but away inside of me I was holding on to the biggest one of all. I was trying to make my mouth say I would do the right thing and the clean thing, . . . but deep down in me I knowed it was a lie, and He knowed it. You can't pray a lie—I found that out."

A chink in a foundation, a crack or a split ever so small, can endanger the stability of the entire structure.

The greatest tests come when there seems to be so much at stake and our integrity will be tested in the fierce fire of temptation. To make our actions consistent with our knowledge of right and wrong is the test. Those times of severe temptation will be customized for our individual growth.

President David O. McKay taught, "Your greatest weakness will be the point at which Satan will try to tempt you, will try to win you; and if you made yourself weak, he will add to the weakness." (Improvement Era, July 1968, p. 3.)

The following story by a director of physical education at Sequoia Junior High in California was published many years ago, but the example is as powerful and current today as ever it was.

Today I saw truth. For a moment I lived and breathed in the great presence of truth and felt its sweetness plunge deep into my soul.

I am a coach in a junior high school. I work with 500 boys each day. This has been my occupation for over 20 years. I enjoy it. Traditionally, I am supposed to be rugged, tough, crusty; yes, even a little severe at times—and yet, underneath this exterior, feeling and understanding must exist if the job is to be done.

Today was test day in climbing the rope. We climb from a standing start to a point 15 feet high. One of my tasks these past few weeks has been to train and teach the boys to negotiate this distance in as few seconds as possible. The school record for the event is 2.1 seconds. It has stood for three years. Today this record was broken. But this is not my story. How this record was broken is the important thing here, as it so often is in many an endeavor in this life.

For three years Bobby Polacio, a fourteen-and-a-half-year-old ninth grade Mexican boy, has trained and pointed, and, I suspect, dreamed of breaking this record. It has been his consuming passion; it seemed his whole life depended upon owning this record.

In his first of three attempts Bobby climbed the rope in 2.1 seconds, tying the record. On the second try the watch stopped at 2.0 seconds flat, a record! But, as he descended the rope and the entire class gathered around to check the watch, I knew I must ask Bobby a question. There was a slight doubt in my mind whether or not the board at the 15 foot height had been touched. If he missed, it was so very, very close—not more than a fraction of an inch—and only Bobby knew this answer.

As he walked toward me, expressionless, I said, "Bobby, did you touch?" If he had said, "Yes," the record he had dreamed of since he was a skinny seventh grader and had worked for almost daily would be his, and he knew I would trust his word. With the class already cheering him for his performance, the slim brown-skinned boy shook his head negatively. And in this simple gesture, I witnessed a moment of greatness.

Coaches do not cry. Only babies cry, they say. But as I reached out to pat this boy on the shoulder, there was a small drop of water in each eye. And it was with effort through a tight throat that I told the class, "This boy has not set a record in the rope climb. No, he has set a much finer record for you and everyone to strive for. He has told the simple truth."

I turned to Bobby and said, "Bobby, I'm proud of you. You've just set a record many athletes never attain. Now, in your last try I want you to jump a few inches higher on the take-off. You're going to break this record."

After the other boys had finished their next turns and Bobby came up to the rope for his try, a strange stillness came over the gymnasium. Fifty boys and one coach were breathlessly set to help boost Bobby Polacio to a new record. He climbed the rope in 1.9 seconds! A school record, a city record, and perhaps close to a national record for a junior high school boy.

When the bell rang and I walked away, now misty-eyed, from this group of boys, I was thinking: "Bobby, little brown skin, with your clear, bright, dark eyes and your straight, trim, lithe body—Bobby, at 14 you are a better man than I. Thank you for climbing so very, very high today." (Elam Hill, "A Boy and A Rope," Teacher's Journal.)

Under such pressure, some might have wondered what difference does it really make, and said, "No one will ever know." The truth is, Bobby would know and God would know, and that is a majority.

We will each be tried and tested during our lifetime to see if we will keep the commandments of God and walk uprightly before him. Consider what Bobby Polacio learned about himself at the moment he made his decision to report the truth. Compare his feelings with what they would have been had he chosen to rationalize, justify, and deceive. What do we learn about ourselves when the pressure is on?

Erma Bombeck, in her newspaper column, discussed cheating and asked what kind of messages we are sending with the following mentality: "You can't break into a car, but it's OK to fish without a license. You can't steal a bicycle, but it's all right to filch a few office supplies. Don't lie to your mother, but you can tell the person at the box office you're big for 11." (Deseret News, January 31, 1992.)

As Latter-day Saints, we covenant to keep the commandments, not only for the reason of obedience, but also for our own blessing and benefit. We covenant to keep the commandments so that we can have the Spirit of the Lord with us. Lying, stealing, shoplifting, cheating, disobeying the laws of God—these all damage a person's spirit. When we go contrary to what we know to be right, we become less receptive to the promptings of the Holy Ghost. Lying affects not only our spiritual well-being but also our physical bodies, and we pay a severe price for such behavior. Lewis Thomas, through the eyes of science, had this to say:

As I understand it, a human being cannot tell a lie, even a small one, without setting off a kind of smoke alarm somewhere deep in a dark lobule of the brain, resulting in the sudden discharge of nerve impulses, or the sudden outpouring of neurohormones of some sort, or both. The outcome, recorded by the lie-detector gadgetry, is a highly reproducible cascade of changes in the electrical conductivity of the skin, the heart rate, and the manner of breathing, similar to the responses to various kinds of stress.

Lying, then, is stressful, even when we do it for protection, or relief, or escape, or profit, or just for the pure pleasure of lying and getting away with it. It is a strain, distressing enough to cause the emission of signals to and from the central nervous system warning that something has gone wrong. It is, in a pure physiological sense, an unnatural act. (Late Night Thoughts on Listening to Mahler's Ninth Symphony, New York: Bantam Books, 1984, p. 128.)

On Wednesday, May 22, 1974, the Salt Lake Tribune carried an article about Jeb Stewart Magruder, who had been sentenced to serve in a federal prison for his part in the Watergate scandal in Washington, D. C.. Magruder was quoted as saying, "It has been nearly impossible for me to face the disappointment I see in the eyes of my friends, the confusion I see in the eyes of my children, the heartbreak I see in the eyes of my wife, and probably more difficult the contempt I see in the eyes of others. My ambition obscured my judgment. By now I know what I have done and your honor knows what I have done," Magruder told the judge. "Somewhere between my ambition and my ideals I lost my ethical compass."

Our ethical compass comes from our conscience, our knowledge of what we know to be right. A few months ago I received a letter from a young man that reads in part: "This letter comes to you from within the walls of the Utah State Prison. Whether or not you listen is your choice—but I want you to know that what I will say comes from my heart. I write this because I don't want to see you make the same mistakes that I've made, and I testify before God that what I will say is the truth. It could be that only one basic decision is all that will separate you from someday joining me here in prison. That decision is whether or not you will choose to follow God. Please don't underestimate how critically important this choice is, for in the long run it is truly the difference between life and death, between heaven and hell, between happiness and misery."

His tragic letter goes on to explain, "I had fun at first. Nearly everyone does. I had heard about the dangers, but I thought I was too strong and smart to have any problems." And so his journey to the state prison began with only a small crack and a minor slip. The fall from integrity does not happen with a minor slip. It comes tumbling down gradually with one small decision after another, acting contrary to your knowledge of right and wrong.

In the book The Making of George Washington, we read about a rule that young George Washington learned from his father:

"Labor to keep alive in your breast that little speck of celestial fire called conscience."

"What is conscience, Father?" asked George.

His father explained:

"All of us have standards of right and wrong that we have acquired from various sources. The most important of these sources is the Bible. You have also learned from your mother and from me, many things that you should, and some things that you should not do. Some standards are quite definite. . . . For example, you know that you must tell the truth, no matter what it may cost you. There are many other laws that are just as clear. The Ten Commandments are quite precise.

"But the exact laws are only a part of our standards. There is another great field of conduct. . . . In all cases . . . your conscience tells you when you are doing wrong. It is both a guide to action, and a check on your past conduct. If we do something wrong . . . or do something that is contrary to God's laws, or the rules of our family, there is something inside us that tells us that we are not living up to those standards. That is conscience." (William H. Wilbur, The Making of George Washington DeLand, Florida: Patriotic Education, Inc., 1970, p. 85.)

Consider the message in the following essay, titled "Habit," by an unknown writer:

I am your constant companion. I am your greatest helper or heaviest burden. I will push you onward or drag you down to failure. I am completely at your command. Half the things you do you might just as well turn over to me, and I will be able to do them quickly and correctly.

I am easily managed. You must merely be firm with me. Show me exactly how you want something done and after a few lessons I will do it automatically. I am the servant of all great men; and alas, of all failures as well. Those who are great, I have made great. Those who are failures, I have made failures.

I am not a machine, though I work with all the precision of a machine plus the intelligence of a man. You may run me for profit or run me for ruin—it makes no difference to me.

Take me, train me, be firm with me, and I will place the world at your feet. Be easy with me, and I will destroy you. Who am I? I am habit!

The habit of honesty becomes the foundation of character. Every day we build that foundation by the choices we make, ever so small.

President Lorenzo Snow taught: "The Lord has determined in his heart that he will try us until he knows what he can do with us. He tried his son Jesus thousands of years before he came upon the earth. The Father had watched his course and knew he could depend upon him when the salvation of worlds should be at stake and he was not disappointed. So in regard to ourselves he will try us and continue to try us in order that he may place us in the highest positions in life and put upon us the most sacred responsibilities." (The Millennial Star, August 24, 1899, p. 532.)

There are tragic examples of individuals whose character has been destroyed because they thought that no one would ever know about their acts of willful carelessness or dishonesty. And throughout history there are those whose integrity is as inspiring today as it was at the moment it was acted out. One such man was Sir Thomas More, the clergyman who opposed King Henry VIII when the king desired to divorce his wife, Catherine of Aragon, in order to marry Anne Boleyn. The story of this struggle has been dramatized in the play and movie A Man for All Seasons. For various reasons, what Henry was asking violated More's conscience, and he would not sign an oath in support of the king. As a result, he gradually lost everything: his station, his position, his wealth, even his physical comforts, for he was imprisoned in the Tower of London. His captors used every means to tempt him and try to induce him to give in and sign the oath to the king. He wouldn't do it. He maintained silence.

Then More's daughter came to him and pleaded, "Oh, Father, do you know what it is like at home without you? We can't even afford candles there. It is a miserable life. You've taught me all my life that God regards the heart, not the words of the lips. Father, take this oath with your lips, but think otherwise in your heart."

He answered her, "Daughter, what is an oath but words you speak to God!" And, cupping his hands, he continued, "My oath is my life. I hold it in my hands like water. If I ever open my hands, I can never expect to find my life again."

And finally, a familiar yet powerful example of honesty and integrity comes to us from the story of Karl G. Maeser, a former president of Brigham Young University. He told his young friends: "I have been asked what I mean by word of honor. I will tell you. Place me behind prison walls—walls of stone ever so high, ever so thick, reaching ever so far into the ground—there is a possibility that in some way or another I may be able to escape, but stand me on that floor and draw a chalk line around me and have me give my word of honor never to cross it. Can I get out of that circle? I'd rather die first!"

In the booklet For the Strength of Youth, the First Presidency writes: "You cannot do wrong and feel right. It is impossible. Be honest with yourself. Be honest with others. Be honest with the Lord." God help us all to do so.
