Ardeth Greene Kapp, Joy of the Journey ( 1992)

CHAPTER 17

Destroying the Crickets of Our Day

This is a glorious time to live, but it is also a very threatening and frightening time, especially if we are not prepared. When we are prepared, there is no need to fear. (D&C 38:30.) We are the pioneers of today and are blazing a trail into a wilderness unlike and perhaps even more challenging than that of the pioneers of earlier days. Our courage must be equal to, if not greater than, that of pioneers like young Mary Goble Pay. From her journal we read:

We arrived in Salt Lake City 9 o'clock at night, the 9th of December, 1856. Three out of the four who were living were frozen. My mother was dead in the wagon. Early next morning Brigham Young came. When he saw our condition, our feet frozen and our mother dead, tears rolled down his cheeks. The doctor amputated my toes while the sisters were dressing Mother for her grave. When my feet were fixed, they carried us into see our mother for the last time. That afternoon she was buried. I have thought often of my mother's words before we left England. "Polly, I want to go to Zion while my children are small so they can be raised in the gospel of Jesus Christ for I know this is the true church."

Do mothers today care that much for the gospel and for their children? Of course they do. For many, it may seem easier to die in the wagon than to stand guard every day in defending and upholding standards of righteousness. It may seem easier to die for the gospel in an effort to save their children than to live for it. But live it they must, so their children will not die spiritually.

And for many young women, it may seem easier to have their toes amputated than be a pioneer today and stand on their feet in front of their peers and dare to be different if their peers' actions violate what the Holy Spirit whispers is right. We are warned in the scriptures, "Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." (2 Timothy 3:12.) Peer pressure is a form of persecution. It is one of the great tests of today.

Do you remember the story of the early pioneers and how the terrible plague of black crickets came down from the mountains to destroy the crops of grain? Men, women, and children prayed and fought these ravaging crickets in a desperate effort to save their crops. The Lord heard their earnest prayers and sent sea gulls, which devoured the crickets. The crops were saved. "It is a miracle!" the people said.

Our young women are the tender crops of today, the promise of tomorrow. President Gordon B. Hinckley has taught us that when we save one young woman, we save generations. Every single one counts so very, very much.

In all soberness I ask all women—young women, mothers, leaders—to consider the black crickets of our day that are trying to destroy our tender crops, not only our young women and young men, but many adults also. We have been warned by our prophets that the forces of evil will increase under Lucifer's leadership and the forces of good will increase under the leadership of Jesus Christ. The heat of that great confrontation is becoming more intense. Sooner or later, either privately or publicly, we will all be tested. We must be prepared to defend our values, our standards, our commitment to "stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places." (Mosiah 18:9.)

The crickets of our day are different from those of times past. They are more powerful, more dangerous, and less noticeable. Let me explain. At first things may appear to be very innocent. Thoughts, words, and pictures are placed into our minds in subtle and sophisticated ways. Thoughts come first and are then expressed through words. No one uses vulgar, crude words without first having thought of them. Can you see how damaging such innocent beginnings are? If we are not watchful, the crickets will creep into our safe places, our homes, our hearts, our minds. Through TV, radio, magazines, movies, literature, music, and fashions, these evil influences will aggressively begin their silent destruction, multiplying their forces as they go.

Many television programs and videos portray immoral behavior as exciting and acceptable ways to express love. Exposure to these messages of deception will dull one's senses until what appeared alarming at first becomes of little concern and even acceptable. If this happens, that falsehood is unmasked. The individual's dreams become nightmares, and hopes are destroyed.

Music has a beautiful and powerful influence in establishing feelings and moods that can lift and elevate our thoughts and our actions. Because it is so powerful, it is cleverly used by the adversary to stimulate thoughts, feelings, and moods, to pollute and poison minds, and to entice individuals to do things they would not otherwise consider.

Each of us wants to be well groomed, to look nice and be attractive. But we must be alert to the aggressive advertising of immodest fashions. Often the desire and practice of wearing such fashions begins innocently and early. Some unwise mothers dress their little girls in ways that unwittingly train their appetite for the immodest fashions of the world, and when they are teenagers, the pattern is set and it is hard to change.

When the counsel of our prophet to avoid dating until sixteen is disregarded, I say that is crickets. Early dating gives Satan a foothold. Single dating at an early age is an invitation for the adversary to attack while young people are away from the safety of the group. Immoral conduct, alcohol, drug abuse, the addicting and degrading effects of pornography, Satan worship, and other cult activities—these are all tools of the adversary and are carefully designed to enslave people and ultimately destroy them. The battle between good and evil is very real. We determine by the choices we make each day where we stand, what our values are, and whom we have chosen to follow.

Melinda, a young pioneer of our day, wrote about how hard it was for her to have the courage to leave her friends when they were seeing a movie that was popular but clearly against her standards. "Some may think, 'It's just a movie, what's the big deal?' " she explained. "But it's the little things that turn into big things. It's not easy to do, but the Lord will help us." When she left the movie, others followed her. That's pioneering.

I am convinced that most young people will respond when they see no faltering, wavering, or weakening on parents' and leaders' part. How older role models live can make a great difference in how their children and other youths live. We must consider carefully our standards and practices, because those who are looking up to us will follow. How will our youth know which way to go if there is no standard that is clearly taught by precept and example?

I firmly believe that activities and practices, even traditions that do not adhere to gospel standards, can be changed. Young people can unite and use positive peer influence to help bring about needed change. There is great power to change when there is unity—in families, wards and stakes, neighborhoods and schools—especially when youth are motivated by righteous principles.

The Lord sent sea gulls to help those early Saints, but sea gulls are not the answer for us today. Spirituality is. We live in a world where many voices and influences are attempting to deceive youth and adults. We might honestly wonder, "How can I know for sure? Some things that are so enticing seem so innocent at first." There is a sure way to know. Just as the Lord sent the sea gulls to destroy the crickets, he has provided safety and protection for us. Spirituality allows us to have the Lord's Spirit with us. And when we do, we will not be deceived. He promises us, "I will . . . be your light in the wilderness . . . [if] ye shall keep my commandments." (1 Nephi 17:13.)

When we were baptized and then confirmed as members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, each of us was given the gift of the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost will help us recognize good and evil, right and wrong, and will teach us and help us remember the lessons we learned even before our earth life. He will strengthen us, comfort us, and give us peace. But there is something important we must never forget. To have the companionship of the Holy Ghost, we must be clean—and to be clean, we must keep the commandments of God. Let me say it another way: When we keep the commandments, we are clean; and when we are clean in our thoughts, our words, and our actions, we can hear the whisperings of the Holy Ghost. In answer to our prayers, we will feel what is right and will be able to discern between good and evil.

Every right choice can conquer a cricket. Rebelling against the laws and standards that God has given to protect us would be like killing the seagulls to preserve the crickets. Standards of the Church have been given to protect us and help us grow spiritually.

When the pioneers ended a day's journey, each night they checked their wagons for any needed repairs. They united in prayer for continued guidance and protection and took a reading of both distance and direction to see how far they had traveled and make sure they were on the right trail. We would do well to follow the same pattern today. A good measurement to ask concerning every important decision is whether this decision will move us toward or away from making and keeping sacred covenants and preparing to receive the ordinances of the temple.

As a sister and friend, I ask you—today and in the days to come, will you think seriously about what it means to be a pioneer today? Talk these things over with your family and friends. Make a firm commitment to be guided by the Spirit concerning what you will do and what you will not do. At nightfall review your actions prayerfully, asking Heavenly Father for strength to live righteously so that you will hear and feel the whisperings of the Holy Ghost guiding you. Pray for forgiveness in those areas where you have fallen short and ask for strength to do better. When you do this, Father in heaven will hear your prayers, and you will feel added strength and will become a powerful influence for good. A real pioneer!
