Ardeth Greene Kapp, Joy of the Journey ( 1992)

FOLLOWING THE PATH

CHAPTER 18

In His Steps

One of the most soul-stretching, soul-refining, yet humbling thoughts for us to contemplate is the possibility that we, with all of our weaknesses and frailties and imperfections, could hope to walk in Jesus' steps, and that he will help us to do so, not just once in a while when we are in deep trouble, but daily, even hourly. This thought has awakened within my heart and soul a sense of our immeasurable possibilities. This point of doctrine from a Latter-day Saint perspective is expressed in a familiar couplet by President Lorenzo Snow: "As man is, God once was; and as God is, man may become."

Those who do not understand this eternal relationship between God and man consider this thought to be blasphemous, sacrilegious, and even nonsense, to say the least. One might ask, "What does it mean to walk in his steps? Surely we can't go all the way." Is it just part of the way, part of the time? Is it just a figure of speech or an intriguing but impossible reality? As Latter-day Saints, we take Jesus' words of invitation to be literal. "Come, follow me, and I will give you rest." "I am the bread of life." "I will feed you." "I am the light in the darkness." "I will guide you." "He who follows me shall never thirst." He promises, "My peace I give unto you." Is it possible that these words have become so familiar that our sensitivity to their profound meaning has become dulled, if not forgotten? The words rest, bread, water, and peace are household words, yet they become the markers along the path when we choose to follow in his steps and become joint-heirs with him. What an inheritance!

A revelation given through the Prophet Joseph Smith at Kirtland reads: "Verily, thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am." (D&C 93:1.)

With the twentieth century has come an explosion of opportunities for all of us, with ever-expanding vistas and many voices of invitation. But there has also come an invasion of our peace of mind. We wonder how we can do it all. Often there are feelings of confusion and discontent with ourselves. Some of us carry a sense of failure, of falling short of whatever we think we ought to be doing or what we think others think they ought to be doing, given all the options. Even the demands for physical well-being cause us to count calories, fat grams, pounds, and anything else that we can measure and compare.

A friend of mine told of having someone proudly reporting that she'd just finished fifty push-ups that very morning. My friend, dejected by comparison and a few pounds overweight, reported that she couldn't even do five. She felt terrible until the one reporting clarified her success: "I didn't say I did fifty push-ups this morning. I said I finished fifty. I began in 1985."

Someday I'm going to write a book called "The Least Behind That I've Ever Been." Maybe we don't have to catch up before we can rest. The Lord said: "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matthew 11:28-30.)

If we choose to accept his invitation and follow in his steps, it is essential that we learn who we are and develop a personal identity with our Savior and strive each day to follow him and his example.

A need for a sense of our own identity is, as some say, a need that is bone-marrow deep. Without having a clear sense of our identity, we become vulnerable to Satan's snares. You will remember that after Jesus had fasted forty days, Satan came to tempt him and tried to place some doubt on his identity, saying, "If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread." (Matthew 4:3.) Jesus' strength came in knowing who he was—the Son of God. As a young boy, he had said to his mother, "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" (Luke 2:49), and his last words on the cross were,"Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit" (Luke 23:46). In knowing who he was, he could withstand persecution and abuse. Though he was accused of blasphemy and treason, he felt only love for all, including his enemies. Knowing of his relationship to his Father in heaven, he never wavered. In the hour of greatest agony, he still looked to God, his Father, saying, "Not my will, but thine, be done." (Luke 22:42.)

If we are to walk in his steps, we know our relationship to God, our Father, and to his Son, Jesus Christ. Do we know who we are and, more importantly, whose we are?

I have in my file a little poem by Ora Pate Stewart, simple yet profound, about a mother teaching her child. The mother speaks:

Do you know who you are, little child of mine, So precious and dear to me? Do you know you're a part of a great design That is vast as eternity? Can you think for a moment how much depends On your holding the "Iron Rod"? Your life is forever—worlds without end. Do you know you're a child of God?

Do you know where you've been, little child of mine? It is hard to recall, I know. Do you ever remember that home divine With the Father who loves you so? Do you sometimes review how He took your hand And placed it within my own, Saying, "Here is a child from Angel Land; Not a gift, but a precious loan"?

Do you know where you're going, child of mine? Are your eyes on the road ahead? Do the spires of His castle gleam and shine Where the sun grows golden red? Are you taking enough for your journey, child? Does your lamp cast a steady glow? Can you hold your course when the storm is wild? You will make it, my child, I know.

Knowing who we are will sustain us and strengthen us when the path is steep. The story is told of a young boy who had suffered ridicule and was called names by his peers because of his family background and his questionable parentage. When the boy was twelve years of age a stranger, a preacher, approached him and asked, "Who are you, son? Whose boy are you?" "I felt the old weight of embarrassment come on me," the boy later recalled. But then the preacher looked into his face and began to smile a big smile of recognition. "Wait a minute," he said. "I know who you are. I see the family resemblance. You are a son of God. Boy, you've got a great inheritance. Go claim it."

In later years the boy, now a man, explained, "That was the most important single sentence ever said to me."

President George Q. Cannon years ago stated, "We are the children of God, and as His children there is no attribute we ascribe to Him that we do not possess, though they may be dormant or in embryo. The mission of the Gospel is to develop these powers and make us like our Heavenly Parent." (George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1987, p. 1.)

Our patriarchal blessings identify our lineage, our ancestry. That identification is revealed through an authorized servant of the Lord set apart to be a patriarch. Sometimes we don't understand the significance of this remarkable information in addition to the blessing that goes with it.

When I try to comprehend the Savior's profound, all-encompassing, perfect model, his examples seem to me to fall between two bedrock, secure, immovable pillars that even in our finite way can serve each of us. The first pillar: After he turned the water into wine in Cana, cleansed the temple, taught a woman of Samaria, and healed an invalid on the Sabbath, he faced his accusers and explained: "I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me." (John 5:30.) The second pillar is his statement given at the close of his mortal life. "Father, the hour is come," he said. Then he gave a report: "I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do." (John 17:4.)

We follow our Savior, not by filling the same mission that he filled, but by seeking to do the will of the Father who has sent us and to do it in such a way that, at the close of our ministry and our mortal life, we might be able to say, as did Jesus, "I have finished the work thou gavest me to do."

President George Q. Cannon explained: "God has chosen us out of the world and has given us a great mission. I do not entertain a doubt myself but that we were selected and foreordained for the mission before the world was, that we had our parts allotted to us in this mortal state of existence as our Savior had his assigned to him." (Gospel Truth, p. 22.)

It was Mary, the mother of the Savior, who set the pattern for all women, for all times, when she responded to the angel Gabriel, "Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word." (Luke 1:38.)

Have you on occasion, as I have, asked the question, "Father, what is my work, my mission, my purpose?" I remember a difficult time in my life when I pled with the Lord to know what he would have me do, and I learned that you don't receive a witness "until after the trial of your faith." (Ether 12:6.) One dark day years ago when the future seemed bleak and the answer to my prayers seemed, I thought, to be unheard, a little child knocked on my door and asked if my children could come out and play. When I explained to him that I didn't have any children, he put into words what I'd never dared to voice: "Well, if you're not a mother, then what are you?"

In the eternal scheme, according to God's plan, it is most desirable for a woman to be a wife and a mother and a grandmother and the mother of the bride and the mother of a missionary. But some must find fulfillment in other ways: maybe in a scientific laboratory fighting disease, or in a courtroom fighting to defend the laws. Whatever our circumstance, I have come to believe that our mission, our purpose, our work, is to be righteous men and women seeking not our own will but the will of the Father who has sent us. On each point of decision, at every crossroads, let us operate out of a desire to one day report, "Father, I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do."

We each have our own customized crosses to bear, tailored for our individual growth. For some it may be physical, spiritual, or mental illness; for others, poverty and rejection. For some, the test may be to forgive, to repent, and to believe. And most of us in one way or another are weighed down with the heavy cross of pride. We remember President Ezra Taft Benson's warning to us: "Pride is the universal sin." He explained, "Selfishness is one of the more common faces of pride. 'How everything affects me' is the center of all that matters—self-conceit, self-pity, worldly self-fulfillment, self-gratification, and self-seeking." Unless we strive to control these feelings, they will drive us from the path. We know that humility is the antidote for pride. ("Beware of Pride," Ensign, May 1989, pp. 4-6.)

Jesus taught his disciples, "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me." (Matthew 16:24.) We take up the cross when we deny ourselves the things of the world and keep the commandments.

As we face our trials and our tests, which are a necessary part of this life, there is great comfort in knowing that he understands. The scriptures tell us: "And he shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people. And he will take upon him death, that he may loose the bands of death which bind his people; and he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities." (Alma 7:11-12.)

From his example we learn how to carry our cross. Before every important action, at every stage of his work, we find him praying. He prayed with simplicity, with earnestness, and with unwavering trust. He always speaks of God as Father. Our Heavenly Father has told us to pray anytime. Have you ever thought how available he is to us? No appointments, no waiting periods, no scheduling, no callbacks. He is always available. Is it possible that any of us would think to carry our cross without prayer? Might not our load be lightened if our prayers were more frequent and more specific to our needs? Sometimes we say our prayers, but we don't really pray.

In my bathroom, on the wall just below a magnifying mirror that I use to do my makeup, is a small piece of needlework that reads "Woman, where goest thou?" I look at those words at the beginning of each day. When I return at night and stand at the same mirror to remove the makeup, I wonder if I shouldn't have another wall hanging that asks "And where have you been today?"

Maybe on our knees we should ask, "Father, this is thy servant. Guide me in thy steps this day." And at the close of the day we should report on our efforts, give thanks, and seek forgiveness and help when we have fallen short.

I have been to the Holy Land. I have walked where Jesus walked and felt his presence there. But I have also felt his presence on the little Micronesian island of Truk, where a handful of Saints came to the airport because the plane was touching down for just twenty minutes and we couldn't stay. There would not be another plane for several days. These good Saints stood in their humble attire, with little evidence of any worldly goods, holding hymnbooks, and sang from the heart, "Because I have been given much, I too must give." (Hymns, no. 219.) They placed flowers around our necks, on our heads, and in our arms.

Recently in our Relief Society class, a sister in a wheelchair was asked to tell what the Book of Mormon meant to her. A sister sitting next to her arose, pushed the wheelchair up to the front of the class, and turned her around. The sister in the wheelchair bore witness of her conversion, her spiritual manifestation, her witness of the Book of Mormon. She wept and we all wept. She didn't have a hanky, so I passed mine to her. She promised to wash it and return it. I pled with her to keep it as a small token of her great gift to all of us. I felt God's presence there.

One very special day years ago, I tucked my little niece Shelly into bed, and clutched in the bend of her elbow was Sweetie-Pie. Sweetie-Pie had all the hair worn off the back of her head, one eye missing, and one arm almost detached, yet there she was tucked protectively under the arm of a little three-year-old. Standing in the twilight with the last rays of the sun filtering through the shades, I looked long and thoughtfully at the quiet child now at rest from her play. Almost reverently I rearranged the covers and bent down to feel both her warmth and that of Sweetie-Pie. When does the preparation really begin? When do mighty souls become great mothers? What of the space between here and there? What of those attributes, skills, characteristics, and spiritual promptings that all become a part of the greatness? When do all the qualities of motherhood, the myriad of bits and pieces and combination of beauty, come together? I observed that little girl hug her dolly, and I felt His presence there.

I remember another significant time. One day when all the world seemed wide open to my younger sister and she was ready to step up and take what it served, she announced to our parents, "I want to help the world turn, and I want to help it turn sharply. I want to make a mark in life." With enough successes already to give her considerable confidence, she could have lofty goals. She was bright and capable—some would say brilliant—and very able. As she spoke of faraway places and exotic endeavors, Dad posed a simple question with a not-so-simple answer: "Shirley," he said, "why don't you become great like your grandmother?"

Like a bird interrupted in flight, she asked with some surprise, "What did she do?"

In a reflective tone with thoughts of one gone for some years now, he replied, "She kept a beautiful home and raised a fine family."

The counsel was brief, yet it seemed to weigh heavily. Being the older sister, I remember feeling that my dad was inspired. My sister now has eleven children, a remarkable family walking in His steps.

I felt God's presence in a letter received not too long ago from a young man who is an inmate in the state prison. He wrote:

I couldn't understand what interest God would have in someone like me, for I was a drug addict and convicted felon who hadn't prayed or gone to church in almost ten years. Still the feeling persisted, and even intensified, until one afternoon I finally was drawn to my knees in prayer in the privacy of my steel and concrete prison cell. For perhaps the first time ever I opened my heart to God. I said, "Heavenly Father, I know that you are there, but I don't know why. Why would you want to help someone such as me?" And the answer came softly, but so clearly and deeply felt that I've never been able to think about it without feeling it once again and having tears come to my eyes. "Mark, it is because I love you." How inexpressibly wonderful it felt to know that the God of the universe knew me and loved me. I stayed on my knees praying and crying for hours, and from that day on, I was truly a changed person. Not only was my heart changed, but my entire life was changed. With God's help, old habits can be overcome.

Yes, his presence can be felt in the most remote islands of the world, inside prison walls, in neighborhoods, in little girl's bedrooms, and in Relief Society classes.

We feel God's presence when we pray for each other and with each other. Oh, what a spiritual feast we would have if we could gather together and each share an experience when we felt his presence. It might be in the grocery store, in the parking lot, in the dormitory, in the laundry room washing the dirty clothes. Have we learned to recognize that feeling? Did we feel his presence yesterday, today, even now? Most often, it is when we are in the service of someone else that we feel we are in his steps.

I believe St. Francis of Assisi expressed the desire of all of our hearts:

Lord, make me an instrument of Your peace. Where there is hatred let me sow love; Where there is injury, pardon; Where there is doubt, faith; Where there is despair, hope. Where there is darkness, light, and Where there is sadness, joy.

O divine Master, Grant that I may not so much Seek to be consoled as to console; To be understood as to understand; To be loved as to love; For it is in giving that we receive; It is in pardoning that we are pardoned, and In dying that we are born to eternal life.

When we are following in the steps of Christ, it is more than just correct behavior. It is not only what we do—it is what we are. Our attitudes, our motives, our desires, our reasons for doing some things and not others must be driven by a desire to come unto Christ. The world is darkening in iniquity, and if we are to stay on the path, we need reminders of his divine examples.

I carry in my wallet a message that reads:

When I am hot and rebellious, bitter and cynical and sarcastic; when it seems as though evil can win in the world and the battle is to the strong; when it seems as though pride possesses all the high places, and greatness belongs to those who can grab the most; when it seems as if faith is mocked, love fails miserably and humility is trodden in the dust; when pity seems weakness and sympathy folly; when a foul egotism rises up within me and would bid me assert myself, plan for myself, serve my own interests, play for my own hand and "take care of number one"; then, O my Lord, may I hear in imagination the gentle splashing of water falling into a basin, and see the Son of God washing His disciples' feet! (Leslie D. Weatherhead, The Eternal Voice, New York: Abingdon Press, 1940, pp. 81-82.)

As we move forward on our individual paths with our common goals through our valleys and our mountains, we can expect to be refined through the furnace of affliction. (1 Nephi 20:10.) Let us remember the promise of the Lord: "I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up." (D&C 84:88.) A well-known story, titled "Footprints," seems to convey the message we're talking about:

One night I had a dream. I dreamed I was walking along the beach with the Lord, and across the sky flashed scenes from my life. For each scene I noticed two sets of footprints in the sand. One belonged to me and the other to the Lord.

When the last scene of my life flashed before me, I looked back at the footprints in the sand. I noticed that many times along the path of my life, there was only one set of footprints. I also noticed that it happened at the very lowest and saddest times in my life. This really bothered me, and I questioned the Lord about it.

"Lord, you said that once I decided to follow you, you would walk with me all the way, but I have noticed that during the most troublesome times in my life, there is only one set of footprints. I don't understand why in times when I needed you most, you should leave me."

The Lord replied, "My precious, precious child. I love you and I would never, never leave you during your times of trial and suffering. When you saw only one set of footprints, it was then that I carried you."

We are away from home, and on occasion we have feelings of homesickness. The way may seem long, but however steep the path, the Lord will be with us. Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior, set the pattern and invites us to follow him. May we walk in his steps each day of the journey as we seek to do the will of our Father who hath sent us. And on the occasions of our homecoming may we be prepared to report, "I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do."
