Ardeth Greene Kapp, Joy of the Journey ( 1992)

CHAPTER 19

The Blessings of the Temple

During a visit to the historic Kirtland Temple, which was dedicated in 1836, I stood at the door before entering and tried to comprehend, even in part, the eternal significance of all that transpired there in the early history of the Church. My great-great-grandfather John P. Greene was among those who helped build that temple. It was built through staggering and immeasurable sacrifice. It was difficult for people to obtain the basic necessities for survival, and sickness was not uncommon. Heber C. Kimball told of Sidney Rigdon's intense petitions: "He frequently used to go upon the walls of the building both by night and day and frequently wetting the walls with his tears, crying aloud to the Almighty to send means whereby we might accomplish the building." (Karl Anderson Ricks, Joseph Smith's Kirtland, Deseret Book, 1989, p. 165.)

The man who supervised the construction of the Kirtland Temple was Artemus Millet, a wealthy builder from Canada. History records that the Prophet Joseph Smith said to Brigham Young, "Brother Brigham, I give you a mission to go to Canada and baptise Brother Artemus Millet and bring him back here [to Kirtland]. Tell him to bring a thousand dollars with him." (Ibid., p. 16.)

In full faith and obedience Brigham Young went to Canada and converted Artemus Millet and his family, and they returned to Kirtland with him, bringing the thousand dollars. This new convert played a vital role in building "a house of God" where heavenly messengers visited. God the Father and the Son, Jesus Christ, appeared in the temple. The ancient prophets Moses, Elias, and Elijah came and restored the divine keys of authority so the kingdom of God could once again be established upon the earth.

In the temple Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery witnessed a sacred vision. The Prophet wrote:

The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened.

We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber. His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying: . . . For behold, I have accepted this house, and my name shall be here; and I will manifest myself to my people in mercy in this house. Yea, I will appear unto my servants, and speak unto them with mine own voice, if my people will keep my commandments, and do not pollute this holy house.

Yea the hearts of thousands and tens of thousands shall greatly rejoice in consequence of the blessings which shall be poured out, and the endowment with which my servants have been endowed in this house. And the fame of this house shall spread to foreign lands; and this is the beginning of the blessing which shall be poured out upon the heads of my people. (D&C 110:1-10.)

So intense was the feeling for days and even weeks following the dedication of the temple that many present thought that the Millennium had begun and that all tribulation and temptation were past. The Prophet had to warn them more than once that all they were experiencing was of God, but that the struggle with the adversary and with darkness would be renewed—and that they would know again all the trials that are at the core of saintliness. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 160-61.)

While the Saints were building the Kirtland Temple, the Lord was preparing others who would move this great work forward from one generation to the next until the truth of the gospel would, as the Prophet said, "go forth boldly . . . till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done." (History of the Church 4:540.)

With the dedication of the first temple in this dispensation, sacred ordinances, long withheld, were once again available. From that small and humble beginning, led by a prophet of God, Latter-day Saints have exhibited power and strength and ability to endure trying and testing according to each one's faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

What is it that impels people to sacrifice all, if necessary, to receive the blessings available only in the temple? It is their faith and a spiritual witness of the importance of our covenants with God and our immense possibilities. In the temple, the house of the Lord, we participate in ordinances and covenants that span the distance between heaven and earth and prepare us to return to God's presence and enjoy the blessings of eternal families and eternal life.

I grew up in the shadows of the Alberta Temple. I remember the stories of my grandfather, Daniel Kent Greene, a man of great faith. A family history records that "on November 5, 1913, the ground-breaking ceremony was held" for the construction of the Alberta Temple, and "Daniel K. Greene, who phoned regularly to see if his help was needed yet, plowed the first furrow for the excavation work and continued plowing for a month."

In the beautiful baptismal font in that temple, I was baptized at eight years of age and then confirmed a member of the Church, and later I performed many baptisms for the dead. It was in the temple at age fifteen that I received my patriarchal blessing, which has provided a guide and a comfort for my life. I remember well when I was sixteen years old being rushed to Calgary for a serious operation in which I was expected, according to the specialists, to lose my equilibrium and my hearing if I lived. My parents, who were faithful temple workers for many years, explained to me with great faith that they were putting my name on the prayer roll in the temple and all would be well. I remember living in anticipation of going to the temple one day and coming to understand how that worked.

We learned to depend on the Lord for good health and a rich harvest, and we also learned to lean on the Lord when there was serious illness and no harvest. Stories of faith were repeated over and over and nourished our growing faith like gentle rain nourished the crops, while severe winters helped teach us of endurance and commitment. From good people one generation ahead of me, I learned about perseverance, fortitude, and stability.

When I was a teenager, the missionaries of the Western Canadian Mission gathered at the temple for a conference, and it was then that I met Elder Heber Kapp. Eventually my fervent prayers were answered, for a few years later we were sealed in that temple for time and all eternity.

Whenever I enter the beautiful Alberta Temple after these many years, thoughts come flooding to my mind. I feel like a child once again at home in the family circle. I almost anticipate the presence of my parents and grandparents. Being there is a wonderful foretaste of the joy we will have when we return to our ultimate home.

President Brigham Young in his writings gives us a glimpse of the blessings for those who make and keep sacred covenants and receive the ordinances of the temple in preparation for our ultimate return home. He wrote: "[God] is the Father of our spirits; and if we could know, understand, and do His will, every soul would be prepared to return back into His presence. And when they get there, they would see that they had formerly lived there for ages, that they had previously been acquainted with every nook and corner, with the palaces, walks, and gardens; and they would embrace their Father, and He would embrace them and say, 'My son, my daughter, I have you again;' and the child would say, 'O my Father, my Father, I am here again.' " (Journal of Discourses 4:268.)

In many parts of the world, in many languages, I have heard young women repeating with great feeling the last part of the Young Women Theme, which states: "We will be prepared to make and keep sacred covenants, receive the ordinances of the temple, and enjoy the blessings of exaltation."

Some time ago a young woman came to my office with her mother and grandmother. While the young woman carefully unwrapped a small porcelain replica of the temple, the mother and grandmother stood close by smiling their approval. The young woman explained to me that she had made this small temple and keeps it in a prominent place on her dresser where she can see it every day. Then with a tone of happy confidence she explained, "I always knew that every boy was to go on a mission, which meant going to the temple, and that included my brothers, but now I know that every girl should also prepare to make and keep sacred covenants and receive the ordinances of the temple, so that ultimately we can enjoy the blessings of exaltation."

She had set a goal and provided a constant reminder.

In the temple we receive a review of the entire plan of salvation and realize the blessing of the sealing power that unites families forever. We learn something of our pre-earth life and the purpose of our temporary separation from our Father and his Son, Jesus Christ. During our physical separation from them, we begin to more fully realize the blessings of continuous communication through prayer and personal revelation.

In the temple we can feel the spirit of the Lord. His love and compassion for us become more of a reality when we realize that one day we can return home to our Father's presence and bring our loved ones with us. It is then that the sealing power in the temple and the related blessings become the whole purpose and focus for our life.

In the temple the reality of eternity presses upon our minds. When we learn to view our experiences in this life with the perspective of eternity, we tend to draw away from the things of the world that pull us apart, and to feel closer to the things of the Spirit that keep us whole. We begin to view life differently. We "look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal." (2 Corinthians 4:18.)

In the temple we learn to differentiate between the things we must hold to tenaciously and that which we must be willing to let go of if our faith is to grow. We realize that we don't need all of the answers and we don't need additional promises. All we need to get back home, really home, is there for us. The ordinances of the temple are available only in the temple. And are they important? According to Elder Boyd K. Packer, these ordinances "are more than advisable or desirable, or even than necessary. More even than essential or vital. They are crucial to each of us." (The Holy Temple, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980, p. 146.)

In the temple we may find peace concerning matters for which our mind has no answers. From the blessings of the temple, we learn that we may be healed spiritually as well as physically.

It is in the temple, more than in any other place, that we learn more about who we are and whose we are. God is our Father. We are his children. And he has provided a way for us to return to his presence. It is in the holy temple that we gain a better understanding of why we are here and what to expect and, more importantly, how to prepare for the return to our heavenly home.
