Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 ( 1982)

Chapter One

Introduction

"True Record . . . of Some Worth"

Mormon women are not unsung heroines. Throughout the last half of the nineteenth century they were celebrated within The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints almost as readily as they were censured by its critics. Long after they lost the rapt attention of American journalists and antipolygamy crusaders, they survived in the Mormon consciousness as sturdy and faithful foremothers. More recently, in the wake of new scholarship in LDS Church history and a concurrent surge of interest in women's studies, Mormon women have received new consideration from Mormons and non-Mormons alike. These sister Saints are not unsung, but neither are they fully understood.

"There are few lives so uneventful that a true record of them would not be of some worth," Martha Cragun Cox wrote in the preface to her 300-page autobiography. [^1] In fact, the "true records" or personal writings of Martha and dozens of other Latter-day Saint women are of critical importance to anyone who wants to understand Mormon women. Through their letters, diaries, journals, reminiscences, and autobiographies we can begin to reconstruct their experience as Mormons and as women. To those interested in that experience, the following selections from the writings of Latter-day Saint women will be of some worth.

While recent studies of Mormon women have focused primarily on women's achievements and contributions, their personal writings have not been overlooked. Excerpts from diaries, journals, and autobiographies have served to illustrate the spiritual dimension of sisters' lives, for example, or their birthing and medical practices. Women's accounts have animated discussions of women's involvement in Mormon colonization, politics, and plural marriage. [^2] Few of the studies of Mormon women published during the past decade are devoid of extracts from first-hand accounts. The sources are simply too plentiful to be ignored.

The Church's long-standing commitment to record-keeping has resulted in a rich cache of personal records produced and preserved by Latter-day Saints. The LDS Church Historical Department, Brigham Young University, the University of Utah, the Utah State Historical Society, and other local and regional archives have opened their Mormon holdings to scholars. [^3] From 1939 to the present the Daughters of Utah Pioneers have reproduced in serial publications various women's writings. And some Mormon families have privately published journals or memoirs of their foremothers. The Early Autobiography and Diary of Ellis Reynolds Shipp, M.D., edited and published in 1962 by her daughter Ellis Shipp Musser, is one of the most significant. More recently, scholarly editions of Mormon women's documents have been made widely available. The University of Utah Tanner Trust Fund's A Mormon Mother: An Autobiography of Annie Clark Tanner (1973) and Dear Ellen: Two Mormon Women and Their Letters, edited by S. George Ellsworth (1974), and the Utah State Historical Society's Not by Bread Alone: The Journal of Martha Spence Heywood, 1850-56, edited by Juanita Brooks (1978), are noteworthy examples.

As these recent documentary editions have shown, the personal writings of Mormon women are valuable studies in and of themselves. Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 is a collection of twenty-five women's documents, each with particular intrinsic value. Detailed letters, thoughtful journals, reminiscences carefully aggregating lives, events, and feelings—these begin to answer the question: What was the actual experience of Mormon women? [^4]

Shared commitment to the restored gospel of Jesus Christ was the common root of that experience. It distinguished these women as Mormons, as fellow citizens with the Latter-day Saints and part of a modern household of faith. Most of the women in this collection chose that distinction; they were first-generation Mormons who left behind the traditions of their mothers and fathers to join with others who shared the conviction that Joseph Smith, Jr., was a prophet of God raised up in the latter days to restore the gospel of Jesus Christ in its original purity. The heavenly visions Joseph Smith experienced as a youth in upstate New York resulted in the 1830 publication of the Book of Mormon, a religious history of ancient America that he had received from a heavenly messenger, Moroni, and translated by the power of God. Many, like Sarah Studevant Leavitt, confirmed Joseph's testimony through their own spiritual experiences. When she heard "the whole of Joseph's vision and what the Angel Moroni had said," she recalled, "it came to my mind in a moment that this was the message . . . for me and not for me only, but for the whole world, and I considered it of more importance than anything I had ever heard before." [^5]

It was this personal witness of truth that anchored men and women to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. While for Sarah Leavitt the witness or testimony came fast and forcefully, others labored long months or even years before deciding that Mormonism "laid a foundation that could be built upon that was permanent." Eliza R. Snow, poet and prominent leader of Mormon women, was five years in determining whether or not to be baptized a Latter-day Saint. But after extensively counting the cost, she "laid my earthly all / Upon the altar, and with purpose fix'd / Unalterably . . . am determind now to be a Saint." [^6] For Eliza, purpose once so fixed never altered in her fifty-two years as a Saint. Thousands of women likewise kept their faith intact through seemingly endless hardships that came as a result of their membership in the Church.

Few nineteenth century Mormons escaped the sting of persecution. Doctrines that challenged accepted values and peculiar economic and political practices kept Mormons in prolonged conflict with their neighbors in New York, in Ohio and Missouri, in Illinois, and later in Utah. For women this meant the frequent interruption of the home life they tried to establish and maintain. Mary Ann Weston as a young bride in Tirley, Gloucester, England, found her fondest hopes dashed when her husband died from wounds incurred during a mob attack on a gathering of Saints in their home. Even at the century's close some Mormons, such as Nancy Clement Williams, were on the run, not from mobs but from marshals who sought to convict them for their involvement in the practice of plural marriage. The times, places, and circumstances changed, but the written response of early Mormon women usually echoed that of seventeen-year-old Nancy: "Feel very much my dependence on my Heavenly Father."

Those who actively confronted the Mormon community found that Saints could be evicted from a place, but not successfully scattered. Committed to the literal gathering of Israel, they moved as families and often as a community to "Zion," where God's elect would "be gathered in unto one place upon the face of this land." [^7] Mormon missionaries declared the restored gospel first in the United States and later abroad, and those who received it were called to go to a promised land. The location of Zion changed, but those who chose to join with this "holy nation" and "peculiar people"—whether in Kirtland, Independence, Far West, Nauvoo, or the Great Basin—made a common sacrifice in leaving behind their former homes and ways of life. British convert Jean Rio Griffiths Baker observed, as she set out in 1851 "to gather with the Church of Christ, in the valley of the Great Salt Lake in North America," that she had taken "leave of every acquaintance I could gather together, in all human probability never to see them again on earth."

Gathering to Zion usually meant long and inconvenient, if not arduous, travel; most early Latter-day Saints experienced at least one trek. In 1843 Sally Randall traveled the Ohio and Mississippi rivers from Buffalo, New York, to Nauvoo, Illinois. Jean Baker's journey by water was considerably longer. She sailed the route from Liverpool to Salt Lake City via New Orleans; others went by way of New York. The Mormon Trail across the plains of Iowa and Nebraska was well worn and well documented by Mormon women, many of whom kept a diary or journal only when traveling. These records reflect a concern for the life and beauty surrounding the writers.

Writing about new sights and experiences allowed women to absorb and remember them. It also provided an outlet for frustration and grief. Mary Ann Weston Maughan graphically described how, after she was bitten by bedbugs in her riverboat cabin, her feet and legs swelled until she could not walk.

At best, nineteenth century emigration meant annoyance and discomfort. At worst it meant death. Patience Loader journeyed to Zion with the Martin Handcart Company, a group that left Iowa late enough in the season in 1856 to be caught by early winter snows. Patience later told the story of greatly reduced provisions, observing: "Our provisions would not have lasted as long as they did had all our breathren and sisters lived but nearly half the company died and caused our provisions to hold out longer."

Though the Saints anchored themselves firmly to the Great Basin in 1847, migration did not stop. Latter-day Saint efforts toward colonizing extended into the 1880s, when Saints moved into Mexico and Canada. Nancy Clement Williams's reaction to Colonia Diaz, Mexico, in 1890, with its "mud houses & mud fences; the street full of Mosqueat," was about as disappointed as that of Angelina Farley, who arrived in the Salt Lake Valley in 1850, complaining in her journal that "everything seems lifeless and tasteless. I can anticipate no rest or pleasure." [^8] For these women, the process of settlement usually meant that home was a tent or wagon until a dugout or log or adobe shanty could be built, sometime later to be replaced by a multi-roomed home with walls of lath and plaster.

Fixing up homes, however permanent or temporary, occupied a fair amount of women's thoughts and energy and provided them some pleasure. Twenty-nine-year-old Caroline Barnes Crosby had been married a year and a half when she began keeping house for the first time in Kirtland, Ohio. "I felt like a child with a new set of toys," she recalled. Mary Jane Mount Tanner remembered when Saints in Payson, Utah, "were beginning to tear down their old unsightly cabins and make themselves pleasanter homes." [^9] Even with the frontier absent as a prominent motif in their writings, women continued "settling in." Just prior to her daughter's wedding in Salt Lake City in 1874, Emmeline B. Wells recorded her pleasure with new carpets she had received: "I am pleased with them also the parlor furniture. I never expected to have been so well off in my life. . . . nothing extravagant but all in exact keeping and conformity." With years of privation as a base of comparison, women like Emmeline found themselves delighted with prosperity.

Unidentified women and children sewing carpet rags, ca. 1900. (George Edward Anderson Collection. LDS Church Archives.)

Settling new frontiers often involved women in activities beyond housekeeping. Some helped build their homes and carried on farm work. One woman hauled manure on the land, sheared the sheep, plowed, planted, and made irrigation ditches. For the most part, however, when men were absent, women hired the heavy work done, usually with money they earned on their own. Mary Fielding Smith taught school; Patty Sessions was a midwife; Eliza Partridge Lyman sold homespun candlewicking for a time; Martha Cragun Cox wove cloth. The reality of life in nineteenth century America demanded that most women supplement the family income in some way. This was particularly true in the Mormon culture, where men were frequently absent. In addition to serving missions and performing other Church work, during each period of initial settlement, men were called upon to participate in community projects such as clearing the land, constructing public buildings, and, in the Great Basin, digging ditches and canals.

Both men and women contributed to the community's economic well-being and its self-sufficiency. Through the 1870s Brigham Young stressed the importance of home industries and home manufactured goods, even attempting to establish a United Order, a society that "would never have to buy anything . . . and always have something to sell and bring money, to help increase their comfort and independence." [^10] In 1874 sisters were told by Eliza R. Snow, president of the Church's women's organizations, that those who stepped forward and assisted efficiently in home industries (including silk culture, straw weaving, tailoring, and home canning) would be "doing just as much as an Elder who went forth to preach the Gospel." [^11]

The Saints' efforts at economic cooperation would not only lessen their dependence on the "Gentile" or non-Mormon world, but would also increase community interdependence, bringing these modern Saints closer to New Testament Saints who "were of one heart and of one soul: neither said any of them that ought of the things which he possessed was his own; but they had all things common." (Acts 4:32.) Martha Cragun Cox, living in St. George, Utah, sensed that her own large household might have come close to this ideal of sharing, recalling, "We had in our home an almost perfect United Order." Largescale efforts at economic sharing ultimately proved unwieldy and unprofitable, though they seem to have strengthened the Saints' commitment to consecrate time and money to the Church and to care cooperatively for poor and distressed members. [^12]

The emphasis on economic cooperation pushed Mormon women into some unique ventures, such as forming women's cooperatives and buying, storing, and selling grain; but for the most part the sisters' economic activities were much like those of their American counterparts. However, in this as in all things the women's vision was influenced by their faith. Told in a scripture from the Doctrine and Covenants (29:34) that "all things unto [God] are spiritual," women often invested their midwifery, schoolteaching, weaving, storekeeping, farming, cooking, sewing, or nurturing with spiritual significance even though they acknowledged such activities as temporal necessities.

The Mormon community's image of itself as a "holy nation" where all things were spiritual excluded and offended many non-Mormons. Yet this covenant-people self-concept was central to Mormonism, and Saints gathered regularly to reaffirm it. "We never missed a meeting for we loved the Saints and had confidence in them," wrote Drusilla Dorris Hendricks of life in Missouri. It is apparent from Mormon writings that much social life revolved around gathering with the Saints in such meetings—stake and general conferences, Sunday School, sacrament meeting, fast and testimony meeting (held on Thursdays instead of Sundays until 1896), ward parties and picnics—and for women, meetings of the Relief Society, Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association, and Primary Association, as well as officers' meetings and conferences for women who directed these auxiliaries. The meetings became more numerous and specialized as the century progressed and the Church and its organization grew.

In addition to these things, of course, were the theater, concerts, bands, and balls typical of life in nineteenth century America. Each community seems to have had societies or clubs for music, debate, and drama. During long, cold winters, dances were popular and frequently lasted late into the evening. [^13]

Though such activities were a diversion, they were also a way of strengthening community bonds. Young people were admonished to seek amusement among Church members rather than among "outsiders," and often Latter-day Saint women penned the sorrow they felt when a son or daughter courted or married outside the faith. "O how glad I would be if he would only be one of our faith, and go down into the waters of baptism. My heart would rejoice with joy unspeakable," wrote Emmeline B. Wells of one of her daughter's non-Mormon suitors. [^14] Mormons were a community of believers, a literal household where members addressed one another as brother and sister. Those who were outside the covenant were clearly outside the family, a separation apparent to Mormons and non-Mormons alike.

Reverence for the community meant a reverence for its leaders, especially its prophets or Church presidents. That the well-being of these men was a dominant concern is shown in the frequency with which women mentioned it. Sisters noted the sermons they heard from these leaders, often showing their own thoughtful consideration of the ideas presented. Rebecca Mace was unafraid to challenge bishops and stake presidents when she believed they erred in what they preached, and she became a recognized gospel authority in Southern Utah. But even so, she supported these leaders in their positions. Most women were not blind to human failings, but they sustained priesthood leaders with the personal conviction that they had been "called of God by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands . . . to preach the gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof." [^15] Some members left the Church when they felt authorities had advocated ideas contrary to their own personal interests or convictions. Others wrestled with doctrines or situations they found difficult to understand. Caroline Barnes Crosby "felt very sorrowful, and gloomy" when friends apostatized in Kirtland, but she said she "never had the first idea of leaving the Church or forsaking the prophet."

The early nineteenth century Saints often mixed civil with ecclesiastical leadership. Joseph Smith was a candidate for the U.S. presidency when he was murdered. Even at the end of the nineteenth century, when as a part of attaining statehood for Utah the Church actively advocated the separation of church and state and the replacement of a church-sponsored party with partisan politics, the first loyalty of most remained with the Church. When Ruth May Fox undertook a position as secretary of the Republican Women's League in 1895, she commented: "I do hope they will not engender bad feelings in their division on party lines. For my part I care nothing for politics. It is Mormonism or nothing for me."

Nineteenth century Mormonism as shared by both men and women included conversion, persecution, migration and settlement, and efforts at building a community-kingdom. However, these commonalities were not the total of the Mormon experience, and they certainly were not the total of Mormon women's experience. One expert in the field has suggested that "what we call women's history may actually be the study of a separate women's culture," [^16] and indeed the writings of Latter-day Saint women indicate that the women lived much of their lives in a subculture separate from men. It was a culture whose chief occupations were nurturing and housekeeping and whose primary rituals centered around women's relationships with other women, children, and men. Nurturing was often extended beyond the home into schoolteaching, nursing, and midwifery; and there was also a ready market outside the home for such homemaking skills as weaving, sewing and tailoring, cooking, and cleaning. The visiting that consistently strengthened bonds among women had its public counterpart in the gathering of women in Relief Societies, Mutual Improvement Associations, and, at the end of the century, women's clubs. These female occupations and rituals form the basis of a cultural history long untold—a history that women's writings tell best.

"Got breakfast then made some mince meat for pies," recorded Julina Lambson Smith in 1886. Kitchen work seems to have merited frequent mention in the diary she kept during her stay in the Hawaiian Mission. If women were not often the sole providers for their families' food, clothing, and shelter, they were frequently the most immediate providers. About to leave Missouri in 1838 because of mob action against the Saints, Drusilla Hendricks gathered her cabbage and made it into sauerkraut; and Eliza Lyman noted in her diary her concern when she "cooked the last of our flour to day and have no prospect of getting any more untill after harvest." Forced to be resourceful, women fed their families with whatever was available, and likewise cleaned and clothed them.

Providing personal and family necessities seemed a sometimes insurmountable task for women, many of whom found, like Mary Jane Mount Tanner, that "one day comes and goes, and the next follows; the same routine of work is gone through, and the same remains to be done." Totally ignored in some diaries, housekeeping tasks formed the bulk of other diaries and even of some reminiscences. When Bathsheba Smith wrote to her husband in 1851 to keep him abreast of what she had been doing during the winter, she indicated she had done "nearly all Fathers folks house work, nine in the family most of the time. . . . Maid father two fine shirts, mother twoo dresses. . . . Maid her some pillow cases. . . . Helped quilt two quilts. . . . I maid my carpet, made George A a pair of pants and coat and siss some clothing. . . . Maid me a nice hearth rug, maid some nice soap, maid a cushion for my rocking chair. . . . Maid me a dress and bonnet, Bathsheba an Apron and various other things, besides cooking, washing, mending, milking, churning, feeding my cow, pigs, chickings and visiting the sick as well as the well." [^17]

Such careful accounting of domestic work reflected where women spent their time, but it may also have reflected their consciousness of the standard of "feminine domesticity" evident throughout nineteenth century America. [^18] Popular journals idealized happy homemakers, but Mormon women's personal writings show they responded variously to woman's work—some, like Bathsheba Smith, with obvious pleasure, others with ambivalence or nonchalance, and some with outright disdain.

Domestically inclined or not, women usually took delight in those for whom they provided, particularly their children. The birth of a child was an occasion of great joy. Wrote Martha Cragun Cox on January 11, 1871, in Southern Utah: "I recieved from Heaven the gift of a daughter, a mite of a creature weighing 7 lbs and 11 oz. As I looked at the waxen figure beside me on the bed I felt I had all I needed in this life to make up my sum of happiness." Babies' gaining of teeth and words and mobility merited mention in many accounts, giving a clear sense of how children and the accompanying pregnancy, birthing, nursing, and tending had impact on women's lives. In nineteenth century Mormondom the primary responsibility for nurturing children clearly rested with women. Many, like Martha Spence Heywood, expressed in quiet moments gratitude for "the rich blessing of children to give tone & exercise to the long treasured up woman's feelings." [^19]

Because of their constant contact with children, mothers seem to have felt the loss of their children most keenly. In 1874, at age forty-six, Emmeline B. Wells found her teenaged daughters spending more time away from home, and hardly knew "how to endure being deprived of the society of my children but must bear it with what grace I am capable of sustaining." Missions, military service, and marriages meant sons and daughters would leave home to provide or be provided for elsewhere. Drusilla Hendricks so dreaded sending her son away with the Mormon Battalion that at first she refused to let him go. When the final call came for more men, Drusilla remembered, "William raised his eyes and looked me in the face. I knew then that he would go as well as I know now that he has been. I could not swallow one bite of breakfast but I waited on the rest thinking I might never have my family all together again. I had no photograph of him but I took one in my mind and said to myself, If I never see you again until the morning of the resurrection I shall know you are my child." [^20]

Such goings away decidedly changed relationships, but the death Drusilla so feared suspended them. Infant mortality was high, and few nineteenth century Mormon women escaped the loss of one or more children. For Martha Cox, the death of her firstborn was "my first real sorrow and the bitterest disappointment I had ever known." Sorrow was long remembered by some mothers who marked the passing days, months, and years since the birth or death of a deceased child. Emmeline Wells noted in her diary that September 1, 1874, was the anniversary of the birth of her first and only son, Eugene. "He would have been thirty today," she wrote. "If he were living how much happiness he might bring to me." Faith in a resurrection to life after death did not eliminate the pain the women felt, but it seemed to ease it somewhat. Upon the death of her youngest son, Sally Randall reflected: "I know he is better off than the rest of us, but it seems hard to part, but I think the separation will not be long if we are faithful."

Not all Mormon women were married, nor did all those who married have children, but nurturing and strengthening of family ties seem still to have played a prominent part in the lives even of nonmothers. If they pursued work, it was usually home-related work such as weaving, sewing, cleaning, or cooking, or nurturing work such as teaching or nursing or midwifery. Almost none of the single women were financially independent, nor did they live alone. They were a family's "maiden aunt" or were otherwise assimilated into existing households. Many single Mormon women, such as Hepzibah Richards, played out their dominant familial role as sisters, providing for parents or siblings or nieces and nephews, but not for children of their own.

Not until the last quarter of the nineteenth century was the single career woman nonsuspect in American society, and the Mormon culture was not substantially different in this regard. Latter-day Saints and Americans at large had prescribed separate spheres and roles for men and women: woman's sphere was the home, and her role was that of nurturer and housekeeper or homemaker or manager. As the nineteenth century woman's movement challenged these assumptions, Latter-day Saint women, too, considered whether or not the home was their only legitimate sphere of activity. Through the 1870s and 1880s, with the active support of their church leaders, Mormon women extended their sphere to include church and community activities as well as some nontraditional trades and professions. "My sphere of usefulness is being enlarged," wrote Susa Young, a music student at the Brigham Young Academy in 1879.

Acknowledging this expansion of women's activities, Eliza R. Snow, president of Mormon women's organizations, told her sisters through the 1870s and '80s that home was "a mother's first duty, but it is not all her duty." [^21] Brigham Young also encouraged women to contribute to the larger community, but strongly emphasized the priority of women's duties at home, indicating that the woman who rose at the resurrection to find that her duty as wife and mother had been sacrificed in order to pursue any other duty would find her "whole life had been a failure." [^22] The oft-expressed desire of women to train children "in the ways of truth and righteousness" or "in the fear of God and of wrong doing" conveys the pervasiveness of what they believed to be a divinely designated responsibility to establish and maintain individual households of faith.

If Brigham Young saw eternal rewards for this commitment to child-bearing and child-rearing, he saw temporal benefits as well. Declaring that women should not worry whether their marriages met expectations for intimacy, he asked them to find comfort and satisfaction in turning their attention to rearing their children. There are not extant statistical studies on the absenteeism of Mormon husbands and fathers, but one cannot read Mormon women's personal writings without surmising that their husbands were often away with church and community responsibilities. [^23] "I well recollect the sensations with which my mind was actuated when I learned the fact that my husband had been called and ordained to the Melchisedek priesthood and would undoubtedly be required to travel and preach the gospel," wrote Caroline Crosby. For Bathsheba Smith, whose husband left Nauvoo for the fifth of a series of missions, the sensation was one of pain. She wrote her husband, George A. Smith, that she had watched his boat travel down the river "untill I could not see it any longer then I held my head for it aked [ached]."

Louisa Barnes Pratt, whose husband was sent from Nauvoo to Tahiti, found her own grief at saying goodbye compounded by that of four children: "The parting scene came. The two eldest daughters wept very sorely. We walked with him to the steamboat landing: he carried the youngest child in his arms. . . . He would be absent three years. . . . It was unfortunate at the last as he stept on to the steamboat the children saw him take his handkerchief from his eyes, they knew he was wiping away his tears, it was too much for them. They commenced weeping; the second daughter was inconsolable, the more we tried to soothe her, the more piteous were her complaints; she was sure her father would never return." [^24] Louisa reported that she wept for three days before a calmness came over her and she could smile again.

Jenetta Richards with her husband, Willard, and son Heber John, Nauvoo, 1845. (LDS Church Archives.)

Women sent husbands away on missions with faith that this was part of the Lord's work, a "high and holy calling," in the words of Caroline Crosby. Mary Haskin Parker Richards, a young bride left with her husband's family at Winter Quarters, Nebraska, told her uncle Willard Richards she would rather remain alone for even ten years than see her husband return home "before the Lord wanted him to." [^25]

While church and community service and even employment could make for painful separations between companions, some Latter-day Saint women also expressed anxiety over the physical and emotional distances that resulted from involvement in plural marriage. When Latter-day Saints first publicly acknowledged in 1852 that plural marriage was widely taught and practiced among them, the response of most non-Mormons paralleled that of Eliza R. Snow in Nauvoo, who wrote, "The subject was very repugnant to my feelings—so directly was it in opposition to my educated pre-possessions." [^26] Polygamy incurred heated public opposition until 1890, when the Church formally abandoned the practice. [^27] Women who gave husbands their permission to take additional wives, and women who agreed to become plural wives in established families, usually struggled to attain a spiritual witness that the principle was divine.

In spite of such spiritual anchors, plural marriage forced women to cope with jealousy. Jane Charters Robinson Hindley of American Fork, Utah, herself a second wife, expressed in her diary the dread she felt when Mr. Hindley "returned and brought two I cannot call them wives yet it seems so strange. Oh what my feelings are thiss moment. . . . M[a]y God help me in my weakness and forgive me if I falter in my duty and affection to him I love." [^28] Patty Sessions found that the bringing home of a second wife, Rosilla, resulted in a tense marital triangle. "I feel bad again," she wrote on September 8, 1847. "He has been and talked to Rosilla and she filed his ears full and when he came to my bed I was quite chled [chilled] he was gone so long and I was so cold I had been crying." [^29]

Many women, however, found within the plural marriage system tolerable or even good marital relations. Bathsheba W. Smith and Lucy Meserve Smith were both plural wives of George A. Smith: each rejoiced in his affection, which neither seems to have measured, and both corresponded with and often lived with other wives in the family. Martha Cragun Cox said she and her two "sister wives" "loved each other more than sisters, children of one mother love." According to Martha, "We enjoyed many privileges that single wifery never knew," including the sharing of child care and housekeeping responsibilities.

Marital relations were a major concern in the writings of nineteenth century Mormon women. Plural marriage dominates the excerpts included in this compilation, even though it was practiced by only about 15 to 20 percent of the Mormon population. Indeed, plural wives seem to be disproportionately represented among Mormon women whose writings have been preserved in archival collections. Perhaps this faithful fifth heeded the commandment to keep personal records as diligently as they heeded the commandment to enter into plural marriage. Or perhaps they or their posterity or archivists sensed the uniqueness of the experience and sought to preserve it. In any case, the variety of records well represents the variety of experience.

Individual plural wives even viewed their own experience variously. Emmeline B. Wells, who privately sorrowed that she felt "no protection or comfort in my husband," and longed for him to "love me even a little and not seem so perfectly indifferent to any sensation of that kind," publicly declared the other side of the coin: that plural marriage "gives women the highest opportunities for self-development, exercise of judgment, and arouses latent faculties, making them more truly cultivated in the actual realities of life, more independent in thought and mind, noble and unselfish." [^30] This latter statement is taken from one of Emmeline's editorials for the Woman's Exponent, a semimonthly paper published by and for Mormon women. The Exponent was, among other things, part of the public campaign in defense of polygamy in which Mormon women were actively engaged from 1870 to 1890. Mass meetings were held, testimonials published, and memorials sent to the United States Congress in hopes of countering the national opposition to plural marriage. While Mormon women played a unique role in countering attacks upon the Church, their defense, however articulate, did not prevent passage of stringent federal anti-polygamy legislation in 1882 and 1887. However, women's rallying in defense of themselves, their families, and their religion provided them, as one author has suggested, "a chance to build their own identity. . . . their own meaningful and supportive self-image." [^31]

Active defense of plural marriage was only one aspect of women's increasing public involvement during the last third of the nineteenth century. The Relief Society, established for women in Nauvoo, had flourished there for two years and seen a brief revival in Utah in the 1850s. Brigham Young's reinstitution of the society in 1867 resulted in an organized sisterhood that exists to the present day. The Relief Society's early efforts were simply a formalization of work commonly performed by women in the family or community. Within or outside the auspices of the society, women provided for the poor, comforted the bereaved, and cared for the sick, all of which figure largely in their writings.

Lucy Meserve Smith found that in providing for the poor she "never took more satisfaction and I might say pleasure in any labour I ever performed in my life." And Rebecca Mace recorded her experience with Relief Society sisters who in 1897 visited the family of a son who had committed suicide. "Oh how welcome we were," she wrote. "The poor Mother clasped me to her in her helpless grief." [^32]

After 1868 local Relief Societies, then established churchwide, rapidly added to these traditional womanly activities. They built and owned Relief Society halls, ran cooperatives, raised silk, bought, stored, and sold grain, and collectively supported the medical education of women as doctors and nurses, eventually establishing their own Deseret Hospital "with a lady M.D. as Principal." The Woman's Exponent provided jobs for women as editors, business agents, and compositors, and served as an outlet for dozens of women who wanted to write poetry and prose. It carried news of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association and the Primary Association, organizations for young women and children that the Relief Society staffed and mothered. And it featured the progress of the national suffrage movement in which Mormon women became involved. This flurry of activity meant increased opportunities for women to plan and conduct meetings, organize programs, balance budgets, and speak publicly. [^33]

In addition to expanding women's community involvement, the building of a formal sisterhood strengthened the bonds between women. The informal gathering of women to share and visit was an integral part of American life all through the nineteenth century. [^34] Some Mormon women's diaries describe days so filled with visits that one wonders how anything else was accomplished. Mary Haskin Parker Richards records that on December 6, 1846, she made separate calls on "some of my friends," including Brother Van Cott "to see his wife and mother"; Sister Noon, "to carry home a hood Which I had borrowed"; a friend, Ellen Wilding; her aunts Rhoda and Amelia; Sister Rushton "morning the loss of her child"; and in-laws Maria and Jane. Women washed, sewed, cooked, ate, and traveled together, making all such activities occasions for visiting.

Board of directors of the Deseret Hospital, founded by the Relief Society in 1882. Standing, left to right: Dr. Ellis R. Shipp, Bathsheba W. Smith, Elizabeth Howard, Dr. Romania Pratt Penrose. Seated, left to right: Phebe C. Woodruff, Mary I. Horne, Jane S. Richards, Eliza R. Snow, Emmeline B. Wells, Zina D. H. Young, Marinda N. J. Hyde. (LDS Church Archives.)

Letters between women lend a glimpse of some of the subjects they shared. "When you write to me write much news," Elizabeth Haven wrote from Missouri to her New England cousin. "[I] want to hear from old Holliston: marraiges, births and deaths." Other conversations were much more personal. Talk turned to husbands and work and children. "I want to be a good housekeeper and I just mean to be one, in due time," Martha Spence Heywood wrote her friend Emmeline Free Young in 1855. "I feel my awkwardness so keenly," she confided, confessing she "did not know how to wash my clothes till I was about thirty years old never cooked or kept house till after I came to Nephi." [^35] "Where is Miss Crawford and Miss Cook?" asked Elizabeth Haven. "If you see them tell them not to be in a hurry about getting married, for I am not. O . . . don't you think that I am very silly?"

Lighthearted or soul searching, sharing among women was serious business. It was one means whereby they reaffirmed the reality and significance of their female culture. It was also often an opportunity for reaffirming a common commitment to the restored gospel. When faith entered into the sharing, the bonds of sisterhood seem to have been not only strengthened but sanctified. "Remember the Prophet and afflicted Zion at the throne of grace and receive this letter which is full of love and affection from a sister in the everlasting gospel," Elizabeth Haven wrote a female cousin. That women gathered together to feast upon spiritual things is evident from their writings. Patty Sessions noted frequent meetings of men and women during the Saints' extended stay at Winter Quarters, making particular mention when "none but females [were] there." These were occasions when spiritual gifts were exercised to the "joy and rejoicing" of all present. "They spoke in tongues. I interpreted. Some prophesied," Patty recorded of one such meeting.

In addressing the first Relief Society in Nauvoo, Joseph Smith discussed such gifts, indicating (in reference to Mark 16:17-18) that "no matter who believeth, these signs, such as healing the sick, casting out devils, &c., should follow all that believe, whether male or female. " [^36] Women exercised all these gifts, particularly the healing of the sick. Though such dramatic manifestations of the Spirit were certainly not part of every gathering of Mormon women, they seem to have had widespread impact on sisters through the end of the nineteenth century and during the early years of the twentieth century. [^37] In 1895 Ruth May Fox recorded, between notes of more formal meetings for Relief Society, the Women's Press Club, and the Utah Woman's Suffrage Association, an informal gathering where women spoke in tongues and prophesied, describing in some detail the "glorious time."

"Diversities of gifts" within "the same Spirit" (1 Corinthians 12:4) is a phrase fittingly descriptive of the diversity of women within the latter-day household of faith. United by their conviction of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ, and sharing many common experiences, they nonetheless lived separate lives. Sarah DeArmon Pea Rich began married life as a wealthy, young bride; Emmeline B. Wells lost two husbands by the time she was twenty-four; Hepzibah Richards never married. Some of these women had their origins in the Southern States or New England; others in the British Isles or Canada. Scandinavians, who are not represented in this compilation, which consists of records originally written in English, were a significant part of the nineteenth century Mormon population. From their homelands, women came to Zion with families of various sizes, ages, and financial well-being and social status.

The Zion to which they came also varied. Mormonism was lived in different climes and at different times. The church meetings Nancy Clement Williams attended in the 1890s, even as she pioneered a new colony in Mexico, differed in number and variety from those Mary Fielding Smith attended at the Kirtland Temple in 1837, though there was continuity in content. Programs and policies were flexible. The cooperative movement so religiously stressed in the 1860s and '70s was not a major part of women's lives at the end of the century. Predictably, some of the practices of nineteenth century Mormons seem strange to modern Latter-day Saints. Emphasis on the Word of Wisdom, for example, was not as great during the nineteenth century as it is at present within the Church, and frequent mentions of wine, tea, and coffee in women's records should not bring sisters' faithfulness into question. [^38]

Beyond these external differences are the differences within the women themselves. Emmeline B. Wells was intensely introspective and prone to extended analysis of each day's experience, while Patience Loader and Lucy Meserve Smith seem to have spent a good deal more time laughing and making others laugh. Ruth May Fox's middle years were a rush of public meetings, while Rebecca Mace filled her sunset years with quiet, private meetings with family and friends in need. In Kirtland Caroline Crosby felt a sense of personal achievement in studying Hebrew with the texts from her husband's class. Susa Young expressed a sense of pride in the poem she published in the Woman's Exponent, and Julina Lambson Smith was pleased that during her stay in Hawaii she could help manage the mission kitchen, sew new bathing suits for herself, her husband, and others, and learn a little native language on the side.

Of course, the picture of these women that comes from their personal writings also varies according to the nature of the writings themselves. Bathsheba Smith wrote letters to her husband, Susa Young to her mother, Mary Fielding Smith to her sister, Hepzibah Richards to her brother, and Elizabeth Haven to her cousin. The readership was clear, and some of the information shared was not intended to go beyond the family. Daily diaries, as well as journals, which were more sporadic and more reflective than diaries, were not so clearly audience-oriented. Some women seem to have used them to vent feelings they said could not be publicly expressed, at least at the time the record was made. The journal of Jean Rio Baker, however, was originally intended for the family back home in England, and reminiscences or autobiographies were definitely written with posterity in mind. "Just think of it, my dear reader," Sarah Rich prefaced her account of crossing in a canoe a river wild with running ice when she was far advanced in her first pregnancy.

Each of the following selections is preceded by a brief introduction to the writer as well as her personal writings. If the record exists in the woman's own handwriting, the authors have attempted to reproduce the original holograph as accurately and readably as possible. For this reason the original spelling has been maintained and minimal punctuation has been added. That is, sentences have been designated by capital letter beginnings and period endings, and commas inserted, when the lack of such punctuation in the original blurred the sense or readability of the text. Crossovers and repeated words have been deleted. Common abbreviations have been let stand as abbreviations, including the ampersand (&). Paragraphs have been designated for readability. For records existing only in typescript or whose original holograph is otherwise unavailable, the authors have standardized punctuation and spelling unless otherwise indicated. This is because the accuracy of the typescript could not be determined in the absence of the original holograph. The authors have marked with brackets in all selections the addition of any clarifying material, such as family and place names and unclear words and dates. Deleted sections have been noted with ellipses. Material needing further elucidation has been footnoted or explained in the introductory notes to each chapter.

William Mulder has suggested that in the "unpretentious subliterature of Mormon journals we come close to understanding history. In them," he writes, "we find something of the daily living and dying of men and women both weak and valiant. Their story is not epic except as life and many days together give it sweep—it is the sweep of daily existence, the great movement that is the result of countless little movements, each life a tiny capillary, a vein, an artery contributing to the strong heartbeat of their collective existence." [^39] By chronologically presenting these selections from Mormon women's writings, the authors hope in some degree to chronicle the "great movement" of nineteenth century Mormonism. The history of its leaders has been written and rewritten, yet "the body is not one member, but many." Women are among the many who deserve greater recognition and understanding, and now "upon these we bestow more abundant honour." (1 Corinthians 12:14, 23.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Gordon Irving, "Numerical Strength and Geographical Distribution of the LDS Missionary Force, 1830-1974," p. 9.
[^2] See Galatians 1:8.
[^3] Clarissa Leavitt was born in January 1819.
[^4] Juanita Brooks's history of Sarah's son Dudley Leavitt explains that the Leavitt family heard about the Mormons from "a man who had attended a Mormon gathering" and "came into town carrying two books, A Voice of Warning and the Book of Mormon, which he loaned to the Leavitt family." Juanita Brooks, On the Ragged Edge: The Life and Times of Dudley Leavitt (Salt Lake City: Utah State Historical Society, 1973), p. 3. Since Sarah Leavitt was nearly eighty years old when she dictated her autobiography, she may have recalled some events inaccurately. Brooks's history is drawn from several sources and is likely more accurate.
[^5] Juanita Brooks says the company left July 20, 1837. She also describes each wagon in the train of seven. Brooks, Dudley Leavitt, pp. 4-5.
[^6] Twelve Mile Grove was near the southern point of Lake Michigan. There was free farm land for settlers there. See Brooks, Dudley Leavitt, pp. 3-4.
[^7] For a discussion of the name of Weston, Idaho, see Lars Fredrickson, History of Weston, Idaho, ed. A. J. Simmonds (Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press, 1972), p. 10.
[^8] 8. Angelina Calkins Farley diary, September 22, 1850, microfilm of holograph, Church Archives.
[^9] 9. Mary Jane Mount Tanner reminiscence and diary, microfilm of holograph, p. 102, Church Archives. The original holograph of this volume is in Special Collections, Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City. An extensive excerpt from the diary is included in chapter 9.
[^10] 10. Brigham Young sermon, October 9, 1872, Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards, 1854-86), 15:223, hereinafter cited JD, followed by volume and page numbers.
[^11] 11. Eliza R. Snow address, First Ward Relief Society Minutes, June 7, 1877, Woman's Exponent, November 15, 1877.
[^12] 12. See Leonard J. Arrington, Feramorz Y. Fox, and Dean L. May, Building the City of God: Community and Cooperation among the Mormons (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976).
[^13] 13. Cultural developments in Utah are discussed by Bruce E. Campbell and Eugene E. Campbell in "Early Intellectual and Cultural Development," Richard D. Poll et al., eds., Utah's History (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1978), which includes a good bibliography. See also Ronald W. Walker and D. Michael Quinn, "Virtuous, Lovely, or of Good Report: How the Church Has Fostered the Arts," Ensign 7 (July 1977): 81-93, a discussion of cultural achievements among Mormons.
[^14] 14. Emmeline B. Wells diary, December 10, 1874. An extensive excerpt from this diary is included in chapter 9. The original diary, more than forty volumes, is in Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^15] 15. The statement is the fifth of the Church's thirteen "Articles of Faith." See B. H. Roberts, ed., History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, by Joseph Smith, Jr., 7 vols, 2nd ed. rev. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974), 4:541.
[^16] 16. Lerner, "Placing Women in History," p. 13.
[^17] 17. B[athsheba] W. Smith to George A. Smith, April 13, 1851, George A. Smith Papers, Family Correspondence, Church Archives.
[^18] 18. Barbara Welter discussed the idealization of domesticity in "The Cult of True Womanhood, 1820-1860," American Quarterly 18 (Summer 1966): 151-74. The article was reprinted in Jean E. Friedman and William G. Shade, eds., Our American Sisters: Women in American Life and Thought (Boston: Allyn and Bacon, Inc., 1973), pp. 96-123.
[^19] 19. Martha Spence Heywood to Emmeline Free Young, December 9, [1855], holograph, Church Archives. This letter is published along with the journal in Juanita Brooks, ed., Not By Bread Alone: The Journal of Martha Spence Heywood, 1850-56 (Salt Lake City: Utah State Historical Society, 1978).
[^20] 20. Marguerite H. Allen, comp., Henry Hendricks Genealogy (Salt Lake City: Hendricks Family Organization, 1963), p. 27. An extended excerpt from Drusilla Dorris Hendricks's reminiscence appears in chapter 4.
[^21] 21. Eliza R. Snow address, Weber Stake Relief Society Minutes, June 9, 1882, in Woman's Exponent, July 1, 1882.
[^22] 22. Susa Young Gates, "Editor's Department," Young Woman's Journal 5 (June 1894):449.
[^23] 23. A study of one absentee husband is Randall Leroy Green, "The Joseph F. Smith Family: Life Without Father," MS on file in Church Archives.
[^24] 24. From the original journal of Louisa Barnes Pratt, in possession of S. George and Maria Hunt Ellsworth, Logan, Utah, p. 108, as quoted in Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, "Under the Sunbonnets: Mormon Women with Faces," BYU Studies 16 (Summer 1976): 473.
[^25] 25. Mary Haskin Parker Richards diary, April 5, 1847, microfilm of holograph, Church Archives. An extended excerpt from this diary appears in chapter 6.
[^26] 26. Eliza R. Snow, "Sketch of My Life," p. 13, microfilm of holograph, Church Archives. The original is in the Bancroft Library, University of California at Berkeley.
[^27] 27. Polygamy or plural marriage has been discussed at length by many scholars, one of the most important monographs to date still Kimball Young's Isn't One Wife Enough? (New York: Henry Holt, 1954). An impressive study incorporating more recent scholarship is Religion and Sexuality: Three American Communal Experiments of the Nineteenth Century (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981). Davis Bitton discusses the multitude of works on the subject in "Mormon Polygamy: A Review Article," Journal of Mormon History 4 (1977):101-18.
[^28] 28. Jane Charters Robinson Hindley journal, December 22, 1862, holograph, Church Archives.
[^29] 29. Patty Sessions diary, September 8, 1847, holograph, Church Archives. A more extensive excerpt from this journal appears in chapter 6.
[^30] 30. Emmeline B. Wells, "Woman Against Woman," Woman's Exponent, May 1,1879.
[^31] 31. Gail Farr Casterline, "'In the Toils' or 'Onward for Zion': Images of the Mormon Woman, 1852-1890" (Master's thesis, Utah State University, 1974), p. 100.
[^32] 32. Diary of Rebecca Mace, 9 vols., holograph, Church Archives, April 8, 1897.
[^33] 33. An excellent introduction to the period is Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, "A Decade of Mormon Women: The 1870s," New Era 8 (April 1978): 34-39. Chapter 9 treats the period in greater depth.
[^34] 34. The forming of networks among American women has been insightfully discussed by Carroll Smith-Rosenberg in "The Female World of Love and Ritual: Relations between Women in Nineteenth Century America," Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 1 (Autumn 1975): 1-29. Maureen Ursenbach Beecher presents a similar analysis of relations between Mormon women in "Sisters, Sister Wives, Sisters in the Faith: Support Systems among Nineteenth Century Mormon Women," MS in Church Archives.
[^35] 35. Heywood to Young, December 9, [1855].
[^36] 36. History of the Church 4:603.
[^37] 37. Claudia L. Bushman discusses the rise and demise of the exercise of spiritual gifts among Mormon women in "Mystics and Healers," in Claudia L. Bushman, ed., Mormon Sisters: Women in Early Utah (Cambridge, Mass.: Emmeline Press Limited, 1946), pp. 1-23. Carol Lynn Pearson, Daughters of Light (Provo, Utah: Trilogy Arts, 1973) is a collection of Mormon women's spiritual experiences. The most comprehensive study of women and healing is Linda King Newell, "A Gift Given/A Gift Taken: Washing, Anointing, and Blessing the Sick among Mormon Women," Sunstone 6 (September-October 1981):16-25.
[^38] 38. Leonard J. Arrington explains the evolution of Mormon attitudes toward the Word of Wisdom in "Have the Saints always given as much emphasis to the Word of Wisdom as they do today?" Ensign 7 (April 1977): 32. The standard work on Latter-day Saint adherence to the Word of Wisdom is Paul H. Peterson, "An Historical Analysis of the Word of Wisdom" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972).
[^39] 39. William Mulder, "Mormonism and Literature," as reprinted in A Believing People: Literature of the Latter-day Saints, ed Richard H. Cracroft and Neal E. Lambert (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1974), p. 135. This article originally appeared in Western Humanities Review 9 (Winter 1954-55): 85-89.
