Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 ( 1982)

Chapter Two

Becoming a Mormon

"Fire in My Bones"

Even before The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was officially organized April 6, 1830, disciples of this new American religious movement had been seeking converts. Such proselyting activity was intensified after June 1830 when Samuel Smith set out as a missionary from Fayette, New York, with copies of the newly published Book of Mormon. The following October four elders were called to take the gospel to the "Lamanites" or native Americans, and during 1831 some fifty-eight Mormon missionaries proselyted for converts. By 1844 there were over five hundred missionaries in the United States, Canada, and Europe. [^1] Even the Prophet Joseph Smith engaged in missionary work at various times in his life.

These Latter-day Saint elders bore witness of the restored church, citing the New Testament pattern for the gospel and the Church of Christ. They stressed the need for faith, repentance, baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, and emphasized the organization of the primitive church and the spiritual gifts bestowed upon its faithful members. They declared that the apostasy foreseen by the ancient apostles had taken place, and that the anticipated restoration had been realized in God's establishment of his church in the latter days through Joseph Smith. For some who listened to their message, "the Bible seemed an unsealed book." One woman said she could suddenly see "fields of light and intelligence in it."

Missionaries encouraged those seeking the truth to read the Book of Mormon, which evidenced Joseph Smith's prophetic calling; and thousands who believed it were baptized into the new church. By 1835 some revelations given to Joseph Smith had been published as the Doctrine and Covenants of the Latter-day Saints, and in 1837 the Church's first missionary tract appeared, Parley P. Pratt's A Voice of Warning. Latter-day Saint monthly and semimonthly periodicals were published in Missouri, Ohio, Illinois, and, by 1840, England.

The word went forth, and not without effect. In the first decade of the Church from 1830 to 1840, membership swelled from 6 persons to 30,000. But the opposition swelled also. Attempts were frequently made to disrupt meetings and to harass and confuse Latter-day Saint missionaries. And persecution was often directed against new converts, many of whom left hostile families and neighbors to join the main body of the Saints and help establish Zion.

Hearing the restored gospel preached by Mormon missionaries, being converted to their message, and changing one's life to meet the demands of the Church were experiences shared by a whole generation of Mormons. They are still being repeated as a part of the Mormon experience, but to a lesser extent since many Mormons all over the world have "grown up in the Church." This chapter appropriately focuses on women in the process of becoming Mormons. That process is outwardly simple. It involves baptism by immersion and the receiving of the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. But the individual inward process is not so easily described. Some studies have identified patterns among early Latter-day Saint converts by comparing their social and religious backgrounds and geographical origins. These lend limited understanding as to which people responded to the message of the restored gospel. But conversion is an individual process, and fortunately, individual Mormons have been eager to relate their personal conversion experiences often in the meetings of the Saints and frequently in journals, letters, and reminiscences.

The two women whose accounts of their early Church experiences comprise this chapter provide a sampling of the women the Church attracted and the thoughts and feelings involved in their conversion. Sarah Studevant Leavitt and Mary Ann Weston Maughan were introduced to the Church early in their adult lives. Each woman had been a serious student of the scriptures and had been anxious to live a good Christian life long before she became acquainted with Mormonism. Sarah believed from personal experience that the Lord could communicate with man through dreams and visions. Both were prepared for the message taught by the missionaries.

Religious courage is reflected in the autobiographical sketches that follow. Each woman believed in her own spiritual sensitivity and ability to recognize and act upon the truth. Each, in spite of painful opposition from family and friends, stood firm in her conviction of the truth. The reminiscences composed by these women living in late nineteenth century Utah stretch back to the early years of the century in Canada and England. The accounts are related by women mellowed and firm in the faith, but each account in its own way reflects the hope and enthusiasm characteristic of a new convert.

Sarah Studevant Leavitt (1798-1878)

Raised in New Hampshire by Presbyterian parents, young Sarah Studevant regularly studied the Bible and prayed on her own. Like many early Mormon converts, she was seeking a church similar to the early church described in the New Testament. Sarah married Jeremiah Leavitt (1797-1846) in 1817, and the young couple moved to Hatley, Quebec, Canada, where Leavitts had been established for some twenty or thirty years. There were Mormon elders in Canada in the 1830s, but none of them found their way to Hatley. A traveler who had attended a Mormon gathering elsewhere loaned the Leavitts a copy of the Book of Mormon and Parley P. Pratt's A Voice of Warning. "We believed them without preaching," Jeremiah Leavitt later wrote. In July 1837 the extended Leavitt family, including nine children of Jeremiah and Sarah, started as a group to gather with the Saints in Missouri. Delays kept them from joining with the Saints at Far West, but they later moved to Nauvoo, and finally to Utah, settling first in Tooele and later in Washington County.

The following extract is taken from an autobiographical sketch by Sarah Studevant Leavitt dated April 19, 1875. The sketch was edited and published by Juanita Leavitt Pulsipher (Brooks) in 1919, and an excerpt from the published version has been reprinted here with clarifying material added in brackets and spelling and punctuation standardized. The original is in private possession.

I was born in the town of Lime, County of Grafton, New Hampshire, [date torn off] and am now seventy-six years, seven months, and fifteen days old. My father was Lemuel Studevant and my mother was Priscilla Tompson. My parents were very strict with their children, being descendants of the old Pilgrims. They taught them every principle of truth and honor as they understood it themselves. They taught them to pray and read the Bible for themselves. My father had many books that treated on the principle of man's salvation and many stories that were very interesting and I took great pleasure in reading them. He was Dean of the Presbyterian Church. For years his house was open to all denominations, so his children had the privilege of hearing the interesting religious conversations, but as I had the privilege of reading the Bible for myself, I found that none of them understood the Bible as I did. I knew of no other way to understand it only as it read. The Apostle said, "Though we, or angels from heaven, preach any other gospel than that which we preach, let him be accursed," [^2] and it was very evident to my understanding that they all came short of preaching the doctrine that Paul preached, but I was confident we should have the faith.

From childhood I was seriously impressed and desired very much to be saved from that awful hell I heard so much about. I believed in the words of the Savior, that said, "Ask, and you shall receive." I prayed much and my prayers were sometimes answered immediately; this was before I made any pretentions to having any religion. When I was eighteen years old the Lord sent me a good husband. We were married at my father's house, March 6, 1817, in the town of Barton, County of Orleans, State of Vermont. The next June we moved to [Hatley] Canada, fifteen miles from the Vermont line, into a very wicked place. They would swear and drink and play cards on Sunday and steal and do any wicked act their master, the devil, would lead them to. This was very different from what I was brought up to [do]. My father would never suffer any profane language in his house. The next February I had a daughter [Ann] born. She lived only twelve days. There was some things very strange connected with the birth of this child, which I do not think best to write, but I shall never forget, which I never shall know the meaning of until the first resurrection, when I shall clasp it again in my arms.

The next January I had another daughter [Clarissa] born. When she was about six months old I had a vision of the damned spirits in hell, so that I was filled with horror more than I was able to bear, but I cried to the Lord day and night until I got an answer of peace and a promise that I should be saved in the kingdom of God that satisfied me. That promise has been with me through all the changing scenes of life ever since.

When I was getting ready for bed one night I had put my babe into the bed with its father and it was crying. I dropped down to take off my shoes and stockings, I had one stocking in my hand. There was a light dropped down on the floor before me. I stepped back and there was another under my feet. The first was in the shape of a half moon and full of little black spots. The last was about an inch long and about a quarter of an inch wide. I brushed them with the stocking that was in my hand and put my hand over one of them to see if it would shine on my hand. This I did to satisfy others; as for myself, I knew that the lights were something that could not be accounted for and for some purpose. I did not know what until I heard the gospel preached in its purity. The first was an emblem of all the religions then on the earth. The half moon that was cut off was the spiritual gifts promised after baptism. The black spots were the defects you will find in every church throughout the whole world. The last light was the gospel preached by the angel flying through the midst of heaven, and it was the same year and the same season of the year, and I don't know but the same day that the Lord brought the glad news of salvation to Joseph Smith. [^3] It must have been a stirring time among the heavenly hosts, the windows of heaven having so long been closed against all communication with the earth, being suddenly thrown open. Angels were wending their way to earth with such a glorious message—a message that concerns everyone, both in heaven and earth. I passed through all this and not a neighbor knew anything of it, although I prayed so loud that my husband was afraid they would all hear me.

After this there were two of his aunts came in and commenced talking about being slighted in not being invited to a quilting. I had no relish for any such talk and said nothing. They saw that I made no comment. Being astonished that I was so still, they asked me what I thought about it. I told them I didn't know or care anything about it, all I cared for was to know and do the will of God. This turned the conversation in the right direction. My telling my experience to these women and the effect it had on their minds was probably of much good, as they spread the news through the neighborhood. The result was, the whole neighborhood were convinced that the manner that they had spent their time was wrong, and instead of taking the name of God in vain they cried to Him for mercy. In short, the whole course of their former lives was abandoned. There were some exceptions, for the leopard cannot change his spots. How then can men do good that are accustomed to do evil, so says the prophet.

But there was a minister come from the states and formed a church, called the Baptist, which I joined because I wanted to be baptized by immersion. I had been sprinkled when an infant, but as I said before, I did not believe in any church on earth, but was looking forward to a time when the knowledge of God would cover the earth, and that glorious time is rolling, all glory to the Lord. I lived very watchful and prayerful, never neglecting my prayers, for I felt that I was entitled to no blessing unless I asked for them, and I think so yet.

We took a free-will Baptist paper that I thought always told the truth, but there was a number of columns in this paper concerning a new sect. It had a prophet that pretended he talked with God. They had built a thing they called a meetinghouse, a huge mass of rock and wood, on the shores of Lake Cryenth (I am not sure as to the spelling of this word) to make the blue waters of the lake blush for shame. In this Joe would go talk, he said, with the Lord and come out and tell them what the Lord said. But if I should go on and tell all the lies in that paper, how they healed the sick and managed their affairs, it would be too much for me. If you ever read the Arabian Night tales, you might guess of what importance they were, for I could compare them to nothing else. No person of common sense would believe a word of it, and yet they wrote it for truth, thinking that would hinder Mormonism from spreading. But in this the devil overshot himself, for they were too big lies for anyone to believe.

But I will go on with my experience. I had a place that I went every day for secret prayers. My mind would be carried away in prayer so that I knew nothing of what was going on around me. It seemed like a cloud was resting down over my head. If that cloud would break, there was an angel that had a message for me or some new light. If the cloud would break, there would be something new and strange revealed. I did not know that it concerned anyone but myself. Soon after this there was one of my husband's sisters came in, and after spending a short time in the house she asked me to take a walk with her. She had heard the gospel preached by a Mormon and believed it and been baptized. She commenced and related the whole of Joseph's vision and what the Angel Moroni had said the mission he had called him to. [^4]

It came to my mind in a moment that this was the message that was behind that cloud, for me and not for me only, but for the whole world, and I considered it of more importance than anything I had ever heard before, for it brought back the ancient order of things and laid a foundation that could be built upon that was permanent; a foundation made by Him that laid the foundation of the earth, even the Almighty God; and he commanded his people to build up the kingdom of God upon the foundation he had laid, and notwithstanding the heathen raged and Satan mustered all his forces against the work, it has gone onward and upward for more than forty years, and will continue until the work is finished.

I read the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and all the writings I could get from the Latter-day Saints. It was the book of Doctrine and Covenants that confirmed my faith in the work. I knew that no man, nor set of men, that could make such a book or would dare try from any wisdom that man possessed. I knew it was the word of God and a revelation from heaven and received it as such. I sought with my whole heart a knowledge of the truth and obtained a knowledge that never has nor never will leave me.

The next thing was to gather with the Saints. I was pondering over in my heart how it was possible for such a journey with what means we could muster. We had a good farm, but could not get much for it, but the voice of the Spirit said, "Come out of Babylon, O my people, that you be not partakers of her plagues." From the time the voice spoke so loud, clear and plain to my understanding, I knew the way would be open for us to gather with the Saints. For the Lord never gives a commandment to man but what he gives them a chance to obey. From this time we set out in earnest and was ready to start with the rest of the company July 20, 1835. [^5] The company was made up of the Leavitt family, Mother Sarah Shannon Leavitt, and her children, consisting of twenty-three souls. Franklin Chamberlain, her oldest son-in-law, took the lead. He did not belong to the Church, but his wife [Rebecca Leavitt Chamberlain] did.

We had a prosperous journey of eight hundred miles to Kirtland, Ohio. I had no chance to be baptized and join the Church until I got there. My daughter, Louisa, and myself and some others were baptized at this place and were confirmed. Louisa had been sick for a year, under the doctor's care, and had taken very much medicine, but all to no purpose. She was very feeble, could sit up but little. She had been in the states with my friends for more than a year. Her father and myself went after her with a light carriage. As she was eighteen years old, I gave her her choice to go home with us or stay with my sister. My sister told her if she would stay with her she should never want for anything, but she said she would go with her father and mother. My sister said, "Louisa, if you ever get well, don't say that Mormonism cured you." So much for her judgment on Mormonism. She was rich, high spirited, and proud, and belonged to a church that was more popular than the Latter-day Saints.

Now I will go back to my story. We stayed at Kirtland about a week and had the privilege of hearing Joseph preach in that thing the Baptists said they called a meetinghouse, which proved to be a very good house. We went into the upper rooms, saw the Egyptian mummies, the writing that was said to be written in Abraham's day, Jacob's ladder being pictured on it, and lots more wonders that I cannot write here, and that were explained to us.

But our money was all spent, we could go no further. We had to look for a place where we could sustain ourselves for the present, while the rest of our company went on to Twelve Mile Grove in Illinois. [^6] We promised them we would follow them the next year. This was the first of September. My husband found a place ten miles from Kirtland—Mayfield, a little village with mills and chair factories, and every chance for a living we could wish. Someone asked my husband why he went there. There was everything gathered out of that place that could be saved, but he was mistaken, although it was a very wicked place. There was a man by the name of Faulk, that owned almost the whole village. Of him we hired a house. It was about twenty feet from his tavern, so I could stand in my door and talk with those in the tavern. But they opposed Mormonism, so I said little about it. I thought I would first get their good will and then perhaps I could have some influence over them. Of course, so long as they thought me an enemy it would be of no use to preach over to them. I was persecuted and abused in many ways, but not by Faulk's family. But I paid no attention to vulgar expressions, for I cared nothing about them. I had something of more importance that was shut up like fire in my bones.

But it was a hard case when the children would come from school with their noses bleeding and crying, saying that they had been pounded most unmercifully. I went to the teacher very candid and told her that unless she could stop the scholars from abusing my children I should have to take them out of school, which I did not want to do. She said she would.

I wanted very much to get the good will of my neighbors, for I knew that I could have no success in preaching Mormonism unless I did, and I was so full of that spirit it was hard to hold my peace. Consequently, I mingled in the society of all, was cheerful and sociable as though I was a great friend, but kept on the side of truth and right. I would go into the tavern when they had balls and help set the table and wait on ladies and was very sociable and talkative. By and by, being free with all, I soon got the good will of some of them. If we had commenced telling them of their faults and that they were all wrong, which was the case, and they must repent or they would be damned, we could not have got along in that place but should have had to leave.

Mary Ann Weston Maughan (1817-1901)

Mary Ann Weston was born and reared a Methodist near Gloucester, England. She was the daughter of a prosperous realtor and often traveled with her father to purchase and sell houses and land. Seeking an apprenticeship as a dressmaker in 1839, Mary Ann took up residence with Mr. and Mrs. William Jenkins, through whom she heard of the Latter-day Saints. The excerpt that follows describes Mary Ann's experiences as an early Latter-day Saint in England.

Other portions of her autobiography tell something of Mary Ann's life after she left her father's family in England and married Peter Maughan in Kirtland. The Maughans eventually settled in Cache Valley in northern Utah, and Mary Ann noted with pride that Weston, Idaho, just north of Cache Valley, was named after her. [^7]

Mary Ann's autobiography was written in the 1890s when she took notes and daybooks accumulated over the years and compiled them in journal form. This explains the frequent shifts in her narrative from past to present tense. Though the autobiography was published by the Daughters of Utah Pioneers in 1959, excerpts printed here are taken from the first volume of the original three-volume holograph in the Historical Department of the Church. Minimal punctuation has been added for clarification.

In the spring of 1840, Mr Jenkins went to visit his friends in Herefordshire. Brother [Wilford] Woodruff was there preaching and Br Jenkins was Baptized into the Church of Latterday Saints. He came home and told us about [the Church]. This was the first we had heard of it. Soon Brother Woodruff came to our house. There was no one at home but me. He sat by the fire and soon comenced singing, Shall I for fear of feeble Man the Spirits course in me restrain. Br Jenkins had told us that he had left his home in America crossed the sea and come to Preach this Gospel to the people in England. While he was singing I looked at him. He looked so peaceful and happy I thought he must be a good Man and the Gospell he preached must be true.

Mary Ann Weston Maughan in later years when she wrote her autobiography. (Daughters of Utah Pioneers.)

There was a small Society of United Brethren in this place. I think they all joined the Church and emegrated to Navoo. Soon as the people were baptized the per[se]cution comenced. One sunday afternoon while some were being Bap[tized] a man threw a dog in the Pond saying he would Baptize the Dog. There was a man standing near me that had walked 8 or 10 miles that morning to be Baptized. He had a bundle of clothes in his hand. I saw a man from the other side of the pool come up to him and asked to borrow his clothes. They were willingly lent. The man went away, put them on, was Bap[tized] and returned them and Brother Rock carried them home wet. He afterwards joined the Church and we have laughed about his carrieng his clothes so many miles and not useind [using] them. Brother Woodruff Bap Mrs. Hill, Hannah Simonds now (M. Philips of Kaysville [Utah]) and myself at midnight in the pond in the centre of the village. We could [not] be Bap[tized] in the daytime on the acount of percusetion.

In the early spring my year [of apprenticeship] being up, Mrs Jenkins said I did not need to work a month on trial (as was the custom) as I was a good hand when I came to her, and another Aprentice haveing come to work on trial, I went home. I had plenty of work, but I was glad to take my old place in traveling when I could spare the time. Father would like to have me go with him. But I did not like to give up my Bissines [business].

In 1839 Uncle John Bishop died. I sat up with him the night before he died. He did not suffer much pain that night and the next day passed quietly away. This summer and winter [1840] I was at home working at my Bissiness and helping Father in his traveling. In the spring my sister Maria had a Powder Flask Burst in her hand. Her hand was very badly cut and bruised but no bones were Broken, and we were thankfull it was no worse. She was laid up this summer with her hand and I again took control of the House. I was very busy haveing much sewing to do for our family as well as others.

My relatives did not obey the gospell (but they did not opose me) and this made me sorrowfull and lonely. I attended all the meettings I could often walking many miles alone to and from them. One ship load of Saints has gone to Navoo from Glouscester and another will go soon as they can get ready. These are the first from this country. On the 18th day of May 1840 I attended a Tea Meeting at Dynnock near Ledbury with some friends. Bro Smith and Sister Smith now of Kaysville and Bro John Davis of Tirley were Bap and Bros Smith and Davis were ordained Priests on the Bank of the pond in which they were Baptized.

This summer I became Engaged to Mr John Davis. He lived at Tirley [and] was a Cooper and Carpenter by trade and a young Man of much promis. On the Joseph Smith's Birthday Dec 23d 1840 we were maried in Goucester by a Clergyman of the Church of England. My husband had a home nicely furnished in Tirley and we went there to live imeaditialy. We both had good treads [trades] and plenty of work and were very happy. The Elders soon called to see us. Brothers Willard Richards and Leivi Richards, [Wilford] Woodruff, Rushton and others that I do not remember their names. There was no Saints in that place so Brother Richards counciled us to open our house for meetings. We did so and the first held in our house a lot of Roughs led by a Apostate Methodist came and made a disturbance. They threatened the preacher with violence, but we surrounded him and sliped him through a door upstairs. When the Preacher was gone the Mob dispersd and we were left alone. Notice was given for a Meeting in two weeks and the Mob came again, but we succeeded in hiding the Preacher and one of the Brethren took him away. The Mob then turned on my husband, knocked him down and kicked him. He was bruised Internaly and was never well afterwards.

About this time he had a fall that hurt him some and he soon commenced to Bleed at the lungs. I sent for our family Physician. He gave Directions that he must remain in Bed and be kept very quiet, no noise or excitement alowed near him. We followed his advice and he soon begun to recover. Soon he had a dispute with his mother about Mormonism. This excited him and I was forced to ask her to leave the room. She did, but alase to late. He fainted. I was alone with him and could not move him, but a friend called and h[e]lped me to get him upstairs to bed. From this he took a relaps, and comenced to bleed at the lungs again. I sent for our Doctor but he gave no hopes of his recovery and quick Consumtion set in and he gradually failed from this time.

This was a very trying time for me as we were the only Saints in this place, and worse still we were surounded by per[se]cutiors who watched our house and if the Elders called would send word to his Mother. She was sure to come in, and thus we were deprived of the privilege of conversing with the Elders as we very much desired to do, or else I must ask his Mother to leave the room. There was no Saints within miles of us. We were alone most of the time, and this we prefered as it was better than having those who were not of our faith and would ridicule our Religion.

My husband did not suffer much pain but graduly grew weaker every day. He was confined to his Bed on the 14th of feb and I did not leave him by day or night or lie down to sleep during his Illness. The last few days some one or two kind friends staid with us, but he would not take anything from any hand but mine. I will pass by part of this trying time. He passed peacefully away on the 6th day of Apr 1841. That was the day on which the foundation stone of the Navoo Temple was laid. He was a good kind Husband and a faithful laterday Saint. I wished his funeral to take place on the Sunday but that being Easter Sunday his grandmother did not wish him buried on that day or on Good friday so he was laid to rest on Saturday the 10th of Apr 1841.

We lived near the Church so there was no need of a hearse. He belonged to a Club, but I do not remember the name of it. The Members all Attended his funeral. They were a fine lot of noble looking Men dressed in Black with long crape hat bands, and a Mourning Badge on their arm. Each one carried a long stafe trimed with crape. They marched two together with a very steatly step. I had not heard anything about them, and when I saw them coming I thought my heart would Break. His will was read by a lawyer by the side of his coffin. His friends disputed the will, and this made me feel worse than ever but the Lord sustained me in all my greifs and sorrows. When all had taken their last farewell of their loved one and the coffin closed, the Club then took charge of his remains and I was alone in the wide world.

He was Buried in a nice quiet corner of the grave yard of Tirley, Gloucestershire, and I have never lost sight of that place altho fifty years ago. It is the custom for the Mourners to attend the Church on the next Sunday when the funaral Sermon is preached by the Clergyman of the Church but my relative[s] were called to attend the funaral of a Cousen at Grandthackwells at Staunton so I went with the Ralatives of my late husband. I covered his grave with flowers and then attended the services in the church. My dear brother Thomas is attending the other funaral so I miss him from my side. I am worn out with greif and sorrow. Thomas has staid with me as much as he possible could through this sore Affliction, and stood nobly by me in all emergenecys. May God Bless him for his kindness to his sister who is now far away.

Our Physician a good kind man came to see me and advised me to leave that place imeaditily for my health or I would soon follow my husband. The next day I left my home a sad lonely Widow, where less than four Months before I had been taken a happy Bride. I did not go home for I felt that my Parents would try to stop me from gathering withe the Saints. I had many homes offered to me, by friends, but I went to Board with Mr & Mrs Hill of Turkey Hall. They were getting ready to go to Navoo. I prayed for strength to settle our Bissiness and then I would gather with his Saints. I had no debts to pay and the Lord Blessed me with success in collecting the Money due my husband and myself or the most of it. My health continued very poor, but I joined with a Company that was getting ready to go to Navoo.

The Co[mpany] sent a Agent to Bristol to Charter a Vessel. He found a good sailing Ship that was going to Quebeck for lumber and the Captain would have Berths put up in her for our Accommodation. This was the best he could do, and it proved a success in the end. My nice furniture was made by my husband before our marrage. I have a knife Box now that he made. It belonged to a long Dresser with three shelves. These were filled with beautifull setts of Dinner dishes of all kinds. Many of these I brought with me & some were sold, with my furniture. Carpenters and Coopers tools and other things were sold at Auction with Mr Hills goods, and I realized Money enough from my sale to pay my Passage and Board to Navoo. This was a very trying time for me. Every day I had to take leave of some dear friend that I never expected to see again in this world. The company was to start on Monday morning the fourth of May. Thus in three weeks I had settled up our Bissiness and was ready to start with them.

The last and hardest triel was to take leave of my Father, Mother, Brothers, and Sisters. My dear good Mother was most Broken hearted to see me go but Father was more calm. I wondered at this for I was his favorite child. He asked me the name of the ship and when she would sail. I told him all particulars, thinking he would come and bring Mother, to see me at the last before we set sail. I took some Books with me and in giveing them to my Sisters said here are som Books for you to read when I am far away and they never forgot those words. My two little sisters clung around my neck, sayying, we shall never see you again. I had not told them this for I knew the parting from them would be very hard. Little Jane wantd to come with me but this was impossible for she was only 8 years old. The next morning my youngest Brother, Charles, came to Turkey Hall to see me once more but we had gone and he was broken hearted.

An excerpt from Mary Ann Weston Maughan's autobiography. (Holograph. LDS Church Archives.)

Oh, the greif and sorrow of this time I can never forget, thus on the 4th of May 1841 I left all that was near and dear to me to travel some thousands [of] miles alone, and cast my lot with the people of God. We hired teames to take us to Gloucester and some of us started to walk a little way, when we came to the place where we would lose sight of Fathers House. I sat down and I might have staid there if some of the Company had not came bak for me. I was sick and quit [quite] over come with the greif and sorrow I had passed through in the last three months.

It is now forty six years since that time but to me it seems only yesterday. We were a sorry Company that traveled to Gloucester that morning. Myself and others wept all the way. I had been to Gloucester once since our Marrage, the occasion being the wedding of two of my husbands friends. John was Groomsman and I was Bridemaid. The Cermony was performed by the same Clergyman and at the same Church in which we were Married. On seeing the Church, I thought of the girl I was not six months ago. Now I had left all and was traveling alone to a land unknown to me, but I had cast my lot with the people of God and in him I put my trust.

Footnotes

Readers desiring additional information regarding the gathering of a covenant people and early Mormon converts are referred to: Gordon Irving, "Numerical Strength and Geographical Distribution of the LDS Missionary Force, 1830-1974," Task Papers in LDS History, on file in Church Archives; William Mulder, Homeward to Zion: The Mormon Migration from Scandinavia (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1957); Wallace Stegner, The Gathering of Zion: The Story of the Mormon Trail (New York: McGraw Hill, 1964; and Laurence Milton Yorgason, "Some Demographic Aspects of One Hundred Early Mormon Converts, 1830-1837" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 1974).

---
Notas:
[^1] See History of the Church 2:410-28.
[^2] D&C 57:1-3; History of the Church 1:196-99.
[^3] History of the Church 1:261-65.
[^4] Rhoda Young Greene was the third child of Abigail Howe and John Young. Brigham Young was the ninth of eleven children in this family.
[^5] The brothers of Joseph Smith, Sr., mentioned here are most likely John Smith, later Patriarch to the Church, and Asael (Asahel) Smith, a member of the high council at Kirtland.
[^6] Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, Willard Richards, and Joseph Fielding left Kirtland June 13, 1837, en route to Preston, England, to open missionary work there. They arrived in New York June 22, 1837, and set sail for Liverpool on the Garrick eight days later. See History of the Church 2:492-95.
[^7] James Fielding, brother of Joseph, Mary, and Mercy, never accepted the gospel as preached by the Latter-day Saints. Joseph Fielding Diary, 1837-1840, holograph, Church Archives; History of the Church 2:499.
