Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 ( 1982)

Chapter Three

Kirtland

"We Set Our Faces Zionward"

Life in Kirtland, Ohio, was no harder and no easier for the three women represented here than it was for the rest of the Saints. The Ohio years of Mormonism's history were tumultuous and trying for all those who, like Caroline Crosby, Mary Fielding, and Hepzibah Richards, gathered to this first Zion of the restored gospel.

This gathering took place over a six-or seven-year period during which the infant Church expanded significantly. Missionaries continued to travel to the eastern states and Canada, and finally in 1837 to England—Mary Fielding writes of her brother Joseph's call to that mission. In fact, it was their brother James whose kindness in offering the missionaries his pulpit for a time started the elders on their way to mass success in the Liverpool area.

In Kirtland itself the Mormon experience became increasingly social as members met together in singing schools, prayer circles, and worship services. The Kirtland Temple, under construction from 1833 to 1836, was dedicated in the spring of 1836 with nearly one thousand Saints participating in the services. [^1] In this "house of the Lord" members assembled regularly to pray, listen to sermons, sing, and exercise the spiritual gifts, such as speaking in tongues and prophesying, promised in the New Testament. Mary Fielding reports the times of love and refreshing "in the pentacostal outpouring of the Thursday meetings," and the "quiet, comfortable waiting upon God" of the Sunday services there.

Many Saints later recalled the Kirtland experience as a rich education in the "things of the Spirit." Joseph Smith received almost half of the revelations now included in the Doctrine and Covenants in or near Kirtland during this period. One such revelation designated Jackson County, Missouri, as the "Land of Zion," ultimately the land of inheritance to which Saints would gather, and some began to assemble there as early as 1831. [^2] While the Church was centered in Kirtland until 1838, there were significant numbers of Saints in Missouri, first in Jackson County and later in Clay and Caldwell counties, and legal and organizational difficulties required that Church leaders travel frequently to Missouri.

But this geographical separation was less disjunctive for the Church than were the anti-Mormon persecution and internal dissension that eventually drove the Saints from Kirtland in 1838. Opposition had mounted against Mormons in Ohio from the arrival of the missionaries in 1830. Many of their early converts had been Campbellites, and the leaders of that sect, Thomas and Alexander Campbell, used pulpit and press to kindle a hot campaign repudiating Mormon claims and doctrine. The apostasy of some early Church members added fuel to growing anti-Mormon sentiment. Ezra Booth, a Methodist preacher turned Mormon, then anti-Mormon, composed nine letters for the Ravenna Ohio Star to satisfy those who had "solicited an exposure of Mormonism." And Philastus Hurlburt left the Church three months after his baptism to write an exposÂ of the origin of the Book of Mormon, later published as E. D. Howe's Mormonism Unvailed. Growing resentment against Mormons erupted in a mob attack on Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon at Hiram, Ohio, in 1832. [^3] During the next six years mobs plotted and assembled; and though for the most part their attacks never materialized, their threats were a constant source of anxiety for the Saints.

The non-Mormon community at Kirtland feared that large numbers of poor Mormons would become town charges. Some non-Mormons refused to employ Mormons or sell them provisions. This situation was complicated by the steady arrival of Saints from eastern branches of the Church who had no means of support. By 1836, the year in which this section's writers arrived in Kirtland, economic conditions were improving among the Latter-day Saints, and work and housing were increasingly available. Even so, Caroline Crosby records her anxiety over having to vacate the house in which she and her husband had settled and return to a shared dwelling.

That November some Church leaders formulated articles of agreement for a new banking institution, the Kirtland Safety Society. But this budding prosperity was cut short by the failure of the bank a year later and the economic devastation wrought by the nationwide panic of 1837. Having involved themselves in land speculation and extensive credit buying, some Kirtland Mormons were particularly hard hit.

Tensions increased between faithful Latter-day Saints and dissenters in league with anti-Mormon forces, and many members lost faith and left the Church. Mormon hopes turned away from Kirtland and toward Missouri, where Latter-day Saint settlements were being established in Caldwell County. Joseph Smith and his family left Kirtland for Far West in January 1838, and small groups of Saints followed, the last, the five-hundred-member Kirtland Camp, leaving under the direction of the First Council of Seventy in July.

The reminiscence and letters that follow were composed by women who lived in Kirtland between 1836 and 1838. Hepzibah Richards went there to study and investigate the gospel, which she had heard preached in New England. "We had set our faces as flint Zionward and were ready to forsake all to gain that part," Caroline Crosby wrote, describing her and her husband's departure from Massachusetts for Kirtland. Both she and Mary Fielding were newly baptized converts who obeyed the commandment to gather to Kirtland as soon as they had sufficient means.

Each woman's writings reflect her ambivalence toward Kirtland, where "wheat and tares to such a height had grown" that Saints could hardly be distinguished from hypocrites. Each speaks with deep feeling of the spiritual manifestations to the faithful Saints and at the same time details her frustration with the scarcity of work, food, and housing, and the ever-present Mormon, anti-Mormon tensions. None of these women found her hopes in the promised Zion shattered by the Kirtland experience. All three feared for their own safety and that of their leaders, but the frettings in their accounts do not dim their courage, a combination of personal stability and faith that contrasts sharply with the fragmented Kirtland community they describe.

Caroline Barnes Crosby (1807-1884)

Caroline Barnes Crosby was baptized a Latter-day Saint in January 1835. She had been studying the Bible and the Book of Mormon for several months, and in November 1834 she had married Jonathan Crosby, who was already a Latter-day Saint. For almost a year the couple lived in Wendell, Franklin County, Massachusetts, with Jonathan's family, but in November 1835 they left the family to gather with the Saints at Kirtland, traveling first to Dunham, Quebec, Canada, to visit Caroline's parents. They stopped briefly near Fredonia, New York, where Caroline visited friends while Jonathan traveled on to Kirtland to arrange for employment and housing and then returned to complete the journey with Caroline. The excerpt that follows begins with the arrival of the Crosbys in Kirtland in January 1836.

The Crosbys and their son Alma traveled to Utah in 1848 with the main body of the Saints. Caroline began writing her memoirs early in the 1850s while she and her husband were working as Latter-day Saint missionaries in the Society Islands (Tahiti). Concurrently she began keeping a journal, a practice she continued almost to her death in Beaver, Utah, in 1884. The following excerpt from her memoirs, presented here with minimal punctuation added for clarity, is taken from a microfilm of a holograph in the Historical Department of the Church. The holograph original is in the Utah State Historical Society, a gift of S. George Ellsworth, professor of history, Utah State University, Logan, Utah.

We reached Kirtland the 7th day of January. The first person that we saw was Evan M Green, one of the young men who first brought the gospel to Mass[achusetts] at the time my husband was baptized. He assisted us in getting our wagon up the hill near the temple, which we found very difficult in ascending consequence of the ground being clayey. We went directly to Parley P Pratts, whare they had engaged to board us awhile; and were soon introduced to a score of brethren and sisters, who made us welcome among them. I ever felt myself quite at home in their society.

Caroline Barnes Crosby, center, with her husband, Jonathan; son, Alma; and a niece, Francis Pratt. Photo was taken in San Francisco ca.1854, upon the Crosbys' return from a mission to the Society Islands (Tahiti). (Daguerrotype. Mae Crosby White family collection.)

Shortly after our arrival my husband was ordained to the office of an elder, and chosen into the second quorum of seventies. I well recollect the sensations with which my mind was actuated when I learned the fact that my husband had been called and ordained to the Melchisedek priesthood and would undoubtedly be required to travel and preach the gospel to the nations of the earth. I realized in some degree the immense responsibility of the office, and besought the Lord for grace and wisdom to be given him that he might be able to magnify his high and holy calling. The brethren had meetings of some kind almost every evening in the week. Besides singing schools in which all ages took a part, from the young adult to the old gray heads. Consequently we also took a part with them, and met two[?] evenings in a week. The quoir was large. Meuriel C. Davis was our leader for a year or more.

Father Joseph Smith sen, was the first and then the only patriarch in the church. Acordingly we went to him for a blessing, and received as good, and as great promisses, as any mortal being could ask. I will therefore record them, for the perusal of my posterity, and friends. [Patriarchal blessings for Jonathan and Caroline Crosby follow.] These blessings cheered and rejoiced our hearts exceedingly. I truly felt humble before the Lord, and felt to exclaim like one of old, "Lord what am I, or what my fathers house, that Thou art thus mindful of us." They led me to search into my own heart, to see if there was any sin concealed there, and if so, to repent, and ask God to make me clean, and pure, in very deed. The Patriarch conversed with us sometime, told us we had come togather right. And when we told him our ages, and places of birth, he observed that he thought we were both born under one planet. But merely by way of merriment. Mother Smith was in the room. She also added her blessing, or confirmed what we had already received.

Our meetings were held in the printing office, or rather in a room under it. The room was not large enough to contain the people who came. It was quite a curiousity to see them coming so early, almost as soon as light in order to get a seat. And finally they decided on taking their turns in staying away, as the weather was so cold, and it was unpleasant for those who stood outside. The females usually had seats. My husband worked for three months on the temple before it was dedicated, which was nearly the first he had ever done at the business.

I enjoyed myself well with sister Thankful Pratt. She was a very sociable interesting woman, but had very delicate health. The brethren attended meetings almost every evening, which left us togather considerably. When they all left us, she would look about her and say, "well it is you and I again, Sister Crosby." She was afflicted with severe spells of sick headache which came upon her monthly.

About the middle of March we went to Harpen Riggs to board. They were a young lately married couple, near our ages. They lived in a new house, which was situated on the cross street, which led from the Boston house, to bishop [Vinson] Knights. It was quite a pleasant situation. Sister R was a Mass[achusetts] woman, and seemed very near to me. We enjoyed ourselves togather finely. Chapman Duncan also came and boarded there several weeks, before, and after, the dedication of the temple, which transpired on the 27th of March AD 1836. I believe however, it was continued several days in which time the spirit of God was manifested in healing the sick, casting out devils, speaking in tongues, interpretation &c. We had some glorious preaching, that cheered and animated our hearts.

How often while listining to the voice of the prophet have I wished, Oh that my friends, parents, brothers, and sisters, could hear the things that I have heard, and their hearts be made to rejoice in them, as mine did. And I would frequently be led to exclaim with Dr Isaac Watts, Why was I made to hear thy voice, And enter while there's room, While thousands make a wretched choice, And rather starve than come. We had some joyful times that spring and summer. Many strangers came from various parts of the country, to see the prophet, and the temple. It certainly was a very pretty building, but my powers of description are inadequate to describe so complex a structure. Immediately after the dedication, many of the elders were sent on missions, some went to Missouri with families.

My husband purchased a lot west of the temple and began to make preparations for building. I followed braiding palmleaf hats for eight months after we came to K--tl--d. Braided near a hundred the first season, which brought me 70 doll[ar]s.

Kirtland Temple reflection, East Fork of the Chagrin River, Ohio, ca. 1908. (George Edward Anderson, "Church History in Photograph." LDS Church Archives.)

We had an invitation, and attended a family blessing meeting or feast that was held at the house of John P Greene. It was appointed for Father [John] Young to bless his family, and as sister [Rhoda Young] Greene was his eldest child (as I think she was) it was held at her house. [^4] The house was crow[d]ed full. We had nice wheat bread and sweet wine all we wanted to drink, it was also called a feast, and so it was a feast of fat things. The brethren and sisters blest one another, but father Young I believe concluded to defer blessing his family untill he could have them by themselves. He seemed rather diffident in regard to speaking, or his mind so much affected by the subject, that he could not express his feelings. Brigham [Young] therefore arose and spoke in his behalf. The old gentleman wept freely, as well as many of his family, so that we had weeping, and rejoicing, nearly at the same time.

It was a general time of rejoicing for several months among the Saints. They frequently met from house, to house, to break bread, and drink wine and administer to the poor and afflicted. We also would attend a blessing at Dr Frederick G Williams. His eldest daughter had been lately married, and was about to leave for Missouri: he therefore blest her family previous to their leaving. He laid his hands upon each of their heads, and the scribe wrote them [the blessings]. The prophet Joseph was present, and had a vision of their journey, saw their wagon turn over, but no one was injured. It came to pass even as he said.

About the last of May, Elder Parley P P[ratt] went on a mission to Canada, and took his family. Mr Crosby rented his house and accordingly we went housekeeping. May the 27th, we moved our effects back again into br Pratts house and commenced providing for ourselves. We had then been married a year and a half, and had not kept house before. I fell like a child with a new set of toys. I cleaned the house from stem to stern, and arranged everything in the best of order.

Soon after we commenced housekeeping my brother Horace Barnes came to see us from [New] York state, Chatauque Co. He spent a week or more with us. We went with him to see the prophet but I think he was absent. He saw Father [Joseph] Smith [Sr.] and Emma [Smith], who showed him the records of Abraham, that were found with the mummies, and explained the characters to us as she had heard her husband explain them. We said all we could to enlighten his mind. We also invited a br[other] who had formerly been a member of the Presbyterian church to come and converse with him. He never seemed disposed to contend against it. Br H brought me the melancholy news of sister Catherine's sickness, with consumption, or liver complaint. We had a very good visit from him. It was in the month of june. He left quite undecided in his mind with regard to the truth of the work. I had some lonely hours after his departure.

Several families came in at that time from [New] Y[or]k St[ate] and as houses were very hard to be rented, every place being filled, Mr C[rosby] rented the cellar kitchen to a man, and his wife, with two small children. His name was Lewis, a blacksmith by occupation, and very poor people. But they found it rather uncomfortable, and staid only a short time. About the middle of July a co[mpany] came from Boston Mass. Among them was John Boynton's parents, brothers in law and sisters. Br Henry Herriman and Jonathan Hail [Hale]. And no house could be found for their accomodation. John was building, but could not get it ready in season. He therefore came to us and offered to give us four times the amount of rent we paid, if we would go in with sister Sabre Granger, a maiden lady near by us, who was living alone, and let him have our house for his friends. My husband left it with me to say, to which I hesitated some time, but at length consented, rather reluctantly. The remuneration I considered no object; [but] to leave my pleasant little house, and go in with another, after living by ourselves so short a time; but the idea of accomodating friends, stimulated me to make the sacrifice.

Sister Granger's house was small, only one room, besides cellar, pantry, a small closet, and chamber. She had however a stove room, outside where she cooked her food. She had many peculiarities, which in some respects were not as agreeable to us, as we could wish. Notwithstanding being kindhearted, and friendly, atoned in my estimation, for many imperfections.

My husband attended a Hebrew school that summer, and made some considerable improvement. I also learned to read, but not translate. He bought a nice set of books, consisting of bible, lexicon, and grammar. We had a small feast in co[mpany] with sis Granger while there. Father [Isaac] Morley presided. There were some great blessings pronounced upon some heads. One by father M upon Mr Crosby was that he should have a son a foot taller than himself, that he would be obliged to sit while his father blessed him. There was also a wedding there while we lived in her house. A br[other] by the name of Foster married a widow from Boston, her name I do not recollect. Shortly after we went in, Sister Mariann Sterns, came from the State of Maine. I think [she] came with Lyman Johnson, and put up at his house. She had one child, a little girl 9 years old. She soon became discontented there, and thought she was not welcome any longer. Sister Granger very kindly offered her a home, untill she could do better. Accordingly she came and stoped one month. Sis G was very kind in her own rough way. She brought home work, sewing and knitting for her, and fed her on vegetables, hard corn, and laugh [lake] string beans. We made her welcome to a share of what our table afforded, which was not very bountifully supplied at that time. I admired her very much, thought her an amiable, interesting woman. From there she went to housekeeping. Sister Granger had a sister come from Boston, who made her home there, a good share of the time.

The middle of Nov we got our house enclosed, and a loose floor, no windows, but my anxiety was so great, to get away by ourselves, that I determined to move in at all events. I truly felt rejoiced beyond measure to get into a house of our own after so long a time. My husband continued his labors incessantly untill he got the doors and windows in; and then we thought ourselves highly blessed. We had a nice cooking stove, a good cellar, and well, close to my door, which certainly were three great conveniences. But as yet we had no partition in the house. The weather continued very pleasant untill the middle of Dec, when a snow storm came on, which lasted sometime. The 19th of Dec 4 oclock PM Alma was born. That day, and night, the snow fell in profusion.

Dr W[arren] A Cowdry was my physician. Sisters Warren Smith, Sherwood, Vincent [Vinson] Knight, and sis Drury were with me. The latter staid one week, and then intended sending for her daughter, but as I did not get along as well as I could wish, we concluded to get a more experienced person. Sister John Goodson understood my situation, and very kindly offered her services, for one week. I found her to be an excellent nurse, as well as an interesting young woman. She had come from U[pper] Can[ada] a few weeks previous and had been married but a short time. We were much surprised at her offer. But I think she did it for a sort of a joke on her husband, more than anything else.

After she left, Ruth Drury came, and staid two weeks, and I then thought I could get along alone. I tried one month, took cold, which settled in my left breast, and caused me a severe sickness, with a broken breast, and all the disagreeable accompaniaments, of that distressing disease. We then hired a young woman by the name of Susannah Hidden, afterward the wife of Stephen Perry. After she left I had Lydia Chapman quite a young girl. I did not attend meeting until the next April. My babe was then 4 months old.

While I was sick I sent for Father Smith to lay hands on me. When he came he questioned us with regard to our faith and feelings towards the first Presidency. Said there were many murmurers about, and a spirit of dissensian in the church. I told him I had been confined at home, and had neither seen or heard scarcely anything of it, and I desired to continue in the truth, and keep the commandments of God. He then said he would shut the door and keep the devil out, after which he in co[mpany] with another elder laid their hands on me, and prayed. I felt that I had received a great blessing.

Times became very hard in Kirt[land]. It seemed that our enemies were determined to drive us away if they could possibly, by starving us. None of the business men would employ a mormon scarcely, on any conditions. And our prophet was continually harassed with vexatious lawsuits. Besides the great apostacy in the church, added a duble portion of distress and suffering to those who wished to abide in the faith, and keep the commandments.

We became very short of provisions, several times ate the last we had and knew not where the next meal was coming from. We then had an opportunity to try the charity of the brethren, who were many of them in the same predicament as ourselves. I recollect that Wm Cahoon called into see us one night, as he was going home with a few quarts of corn meal, and enquired if we had any breadstuff on hand, we told him we had not. He said he would divide what he had with us, and if my husband would go home with him, he would also divide his potatoes and meat which bore the same proportion to his meal. Joseph Young also divided with us several times in the same way, and we with him. We had numerous opportunities of dividing almost our last loaf with the brethren.

Mr C worked on br Joseph's house, as he was building tolerably large, but frequently got so straitened that he had nothing to give the workmen when saturday night came, and they were obliged to borrow or do without. They all left at one time, except Mr C, he worked on for several days alone. Sister Emma observing that he was laboring there alone, came in one day, and inquired of him whether or where he got his provision. He told her he was entirely without, and knew not where to look, as he had no money, and the boss who employed him had no means in his hands. She then went into her chamber, and brought him a nice ham [weighing] 20 lbs. Telling him that it was a present for his faithfulness, and that he should bring a sack, and get as much flour as he could to take home. Accordingly he came home rejoicing, considering it a perfect Godsend. It was a beautiful white flour, and the ham was very sweet. I thought nothing ever tasted half as good.

About this time the Kirtland bank failed, which caused a great deal of distress among the brethren. We had a little garden which was a great help to us, we had no cow, and were obliged to buy milk for the babe. My husband was sued once, by the men who kept the meat market, Leonard Rich and Roger Orton, and was obliged to sacrifice twice the amount of the debt in property, to raise the money. Alas thought I, the trials that I had heard the elders preach of were in reality coming upon us. As to poverty we could endure that patiently, but trials among false brethren, who can endure with patience? Many of our most intimate associates were among the apostates.

Warren Parish was a sort of leader of a party of some 30 or 40 persons, among them was John Boynton and wife, Luke and Lyman Johnson, Harpen Riggs, and others whose names I do not recollect. These were some of our nighest neighbors and friends. We had taken sweet counsel together, and walked to the house of God as friends. They came out boldly against the prophet, and signed an instrument which as I understand by W Parish and others, renouncing all their allience with the church. I met sister Riggs afterwards and asked her if it was true that she had apostatized. She said she was dissatisfied with some of the things in the church, but that she still believed in the book of Mormon and thought she always should. I felt very sorrowful, and gloomy, but never had the first idea of leaving the church or forsaking the prophet. I was feeble all through the summer but Alma grew, and was quite fleshy, began to walk when he was 10 months old. As the fall advanced I began to gain strength and felt much better.

We got our house a little more comfortable, the floor plained, and made very tight, a partition through, and floor over head. It began to seem more like living. About the first of Dec a number of elders were sent on missions. My husband was one that was appointed to go. He made what preparation he could, and the 7th of Jan 1838, in company with Warren Smith (who was afterward martyred at Hons [Haun's] Mill by the Missouri mob) he set off toward the east part of the state of Ohio, and went into Pennsylvania.

Mary Fielding Smith (1801-1852)

In 1836 Mary Fielding and her sister Mercy and brother Joseph were English emigrants, members of John Taylor's Methodist congregation in Toronto, Canada. With John Taylor they accepted the restored gospel taught them by Mormon apostle-missionary Parley P. Pratt and were baptized in May 1836. In the spring of 1837 all three Fieldings moved to Kirtland. By mid-June, however, Mary was left in Kirtland without family: Joseph Fielding had been called to serve as a missionary in England, and Mercy had married Robert B. Thompson and accompanied him on his mission to Churchville, Canada.

Mary's English education provided her with the necessary background to teach school, and when school closed she boarded with a family, caring for and tutoring several children. Through letters Mary maintained a close connection with her sister Mercy in Canada, reporting regularly on her personal living situation and feelings as well as on Church happenings. The following excerpts are taken from three of Mary's letters, which span the months between July and October 1837. In December of that year Mary married recently widowed Hyrum Smith and assumed care of his five small children. She lived with Hyrum in Far West and Nauvoo, and after his death journeyed to the Salt Lake Valley.

Original holographs of these and other letters written by Mary are located in the Historical Department of the Church. Ronald K. Esplin is preparing the complete correspondence for publication. Selections from three letters are included here. The first rather lengthy excerpt includes almost all of a letter from Mary to Mercy dated July 8, 1837. The last two pages of the holograph have not been included here because large torn sections on those pages make difficult an accurate rendering of Mary's prose.

The second letter was rather extensively edited by Susa Young Gates and published in the Relief Society Magazine, volume 2 (March 1916). Here the original holograph has been followed.

A nineteenth-century portrait of Mary Fielding Smith. Artist unknown. (LDS Church Archives.)

The final excerpt is taken from a letter of October 7, 1837, addressed to Mercy and her husband, Robert B. Thompson. Much of the letter focuses on family matters and friends. This excerpt reveals something of Mary's feelings toward the presidency of the Church. In publishing parts of three letters here, the editors have preserved the original spelling and added punctuation and bracked material for clarification.

Kirtland July 8 [18]37

My dear Sister

As I have met with paper I feel inclined to commence the proposed corrispondence, as I hope you also do. I shall begin from the time my last letter was written. You would hear what a glorious meeting we had on the Thursday before Bro. Brunell left so I need give you no account of that.

On the Sunday following we had a quiet comfortable waiting upon God in his House. President [Sidney] Rigdon deliverd a very striking discourse from Daniel Chap[ter] 2nd Vrs 44. It would be useless for me to attempt giving you an idea of the manner in which he handled the subject. You must read the text and remember that he is a Masterpiece and then you may perhaps form some idea. He told us with great warmth indeed, that the Kingdom which was set up should never be destroyed, nor be left to other People. No, said he, nor yet change Governours. I realy thought from what he said that all opposers from that time rest satisfyed that their exertions would be fruitless, but I do not expect in the least that Satan will give up the contest. No hed [he'd] work in the Children of this World, and also in the Hearts of the Children of the Kingdom w[h]ere ever he can find access to them, untill he is bound. O may the Lord preserve us from his subtle power and keep us to that day.

It was truley gratifying to see the venerabl[e] Patriarch [Joseph Smith, Sr.] with his two aged Brothers in the upper stand and in the next, four of his Sons with president Rigdon in their midst, all I believe faithful servants of the living God. [^5] Joseph & Hirum I know best and love much. While I lookd at them all my heart was drawn out in earnest prayer to our heavenly Father in their behalf and also for the Prophetice their aged Mother [Lucy Mack Smith] whose eyes are frequently baithed in tears when she looks at, or speaks of them.

Our thursday meeting was again better than any former one. The hearts of the people were melted and the Spirit & power of God rested down upon us in a remarkable manner. Many spake in tongues & others prophesied & interpreted. It has been said by many who have lived in Kirtland a great while that such a time of love & refreshing has never been known. Some of the Sisters while engaged in conversing in tounges their countenences beaming with joy, clasped each others hands & kissd in the most affectinate manner. They were describing in this way the love and felicitys of the Celestial World. Altho the House of the Lord was more than half filld during this time their were few dry faces. The Bretheren as well as the Sisters were all melted down and we wept and praised God together.

Some of the prophecies delivered in toungs and interpretd were so great that I cannot begin to describe them but I do assure you Brother Hyrum Smiths prediction that from that hour the Lord would begin to bless his people has been verily fulfild, I believe as do many others that Angles were present with us. A brite light shone across the House and rested upon some of the congreation. What I felt that day seemd to out way [weigh] all the afliction and destress of mind I have sufferd since I came here. We have a promise of a still better meeting next Thursday if we humble ourselves as in the dust before the Lord. This will be our fast day. May the promise be verifyd indeed.

On Saturday July 8 We all received Letters from our Brethren [missionaries] in New York giving an account of their journey thither and their preparations for setting sail which did not take place til the 30 of June. [^6] You will see that from various causes they were delayd 10 days in New York. They were all well and in good spirits tho much disapointed at not receiving the expected money, but they contrived to exchange some Kirtland paper [bank notes] or to get provisions for it, so as to enable them to pay their expences amongst them. The fare was 20 dollars each in one of the largest Vessels that has ever saild 9 hundred tons burden. Joseph says I must send the money when the next Elders go which will probably be in the fall. But all uncertain they expect to land at Liverpool so that poor Brother James [Fielding] will soon have to recieve or reject them. Our prayer to God must be unceasing that he may become as a little Child that he may enter in to the Kingdom. [^7] Sisters [Vilate] Kimball & [Marinda] Hyde are begining to wright to their Husbands at Preston [England]. They continue to be in good spirits.

While the Brethren were in new York they endeavourd to do all the good they could by conversing with the people and destributing the prophetic warning to all the Priests they could find. About 105 they were put into the Post Office.

Elders [Thomas B.] Marsh & [David W.] Patten have arrived from missouri. They met Elder [Parley P.?] Pratt 300 miles on his way thither and brought him back with them. Elder Marsh is a most excelent Man. He seems to be a Man of great faith. He says he believs the difficultys between the Presidency & the twelve will very shortly be settled. [^8] And then we can expect better days than ever. [The remainder of the letter is badly torn, and only parts of the sentences remain.]

[ca. September 1, 1837]

My dear Sister

I have this day received a very short note from you and am glad to learn by Brother [Almon W.] Babbit that you are well and comfortably situated. He tells me he is expecting soon to return to Canada so that it is unnecessary for me to say much as he can inform you of the state of things here verbaly better than I can by writing. But still I can hardly refrain from sending a few lines.

I am now in a school which I took for one month. The time expires tomorrow when I expect again to be at liberty or without imployment, but I feel my mind pertty much at rest on that subject. I have called upon the Lord for direction and trust He will open my way. I hope you will not fail to remember me at the throan of grace. I have no doubt but you have many trials but I am inclined to think you have not quite so much to endure as I have. Be this as it may, the Lord knows what our sutiations [situations] are and he will support us and give us grace and strength for the day if we continue to put our trust in him and devote ourselves unreservedly to his service.

I do thank my heavenly Father for the comfort and peace of mind I now enjoy in the midst of all the confusion and perplexity, and rageing of the devil against the work of God in this place. For altho here is a great number of faithful precious souls, yea the Salt of the Earth is here, yet it may be truely called a place where Satan has his seat. He is frequently stering [stirring] up some of the People to strife & conttention and dissatisfaction with things they do not understand. I often have of late been led to look back on the circumstances of Korah and his company when they roase up against Moses and Aaron. If you turn to and read 16th Chap[ter] of Numbers you will there find the feelings and conduct of many of the People and even the Elders of Israel in these days exactly described. Wheather the Lord will comeout in a similar way or not I cannot tell. I sometimes think it may be so, but I pray God to have mercy upon us all and preserve us from the power of the great enemy who knows he has but a short time to work in.

We have had a terible stir with W[arre]n Parish the particulars of which I cannot here give you at length. We are not yet able to tell where it will end. [^9] I have been made to tremble and quake before the Lord and to call upon him with all my heart almost day and night as many others have done of late. I believe the voice of prayer has sounded in the House of the Lord some days from morning till night and it has been by these means that we have hitherto prevaild and it is by this means only that I for one expect to prevaile. I feel more & more convinced that it is through suffering that we are to be made perfect and I have already found it [to] have the effect of driveing me nearer to the Lord and so has become a great blessing to me. I have sometimes of late been so filled with the love of God and fell such a sense of his favour as has made me rejoice abundantly indeed, my Heavenly Father has been very gracious unto me both temperally and spiritualy.

Since I commenced this Letter a kind Sister has proposed my going to stay for a while with her to take charge of 2 or 3 children who have been in my School. They propose giving something besides my board & I think this will suit me better than a publick School if it is but little. I expect to go there in a day or too and hope to be quite comfortable as I know the family to be on the Lords side. The Mother is a Cousin of Brother Josephs and took care of him when a child. Their name is Dort. [^10]

I fell much pleased to see Sisters Walton and Snider who arrived here on Saturday about noon, [^11] haveing left Brother Joseph S[mith] and Rigdon about 20 miles from Fareport [Ohio] to evade the Mobbers. They were to come home in Dr [Sampson] Avards carrage and expected to arrive about 10 O clock at night but to their great disappointment they were prevented in a most greavous manner. They had got within 4 miles of home after a very fatueging [fatiguing] journey, much pleased with their visit to Canada & greatly antissipateing the pleasure of seeing their homes and familys, when they were surrounded with a Mob and taken back to Painsvill[e] and secured as was supposed in a Tavern where they intended to hold a mock trial. But to the disappointment of the wretches the Housekeeper was a Member of the Church who assisted our beloved Brethren in making their escape, but as Br J[oseph] S[mith] says not by a Basket let down through a Window, but by the Kitchin Door. [^12]

No doubt the hand of the Lord was in it or it could not have been effected. The day had been extremely whet and the night was unusually dark and you may try if you can [to] conceive what their situation was. They hardly knew which way to stere [steer], as it had by that time got to be about 10 O clock. The first step they took was to find the Woods as quick as possible where they thought they should be safe. But in order [to reach] thereto they had to lay down in a swamp or by an old log just w[h]ere they happened to be so determinately were they pursued by their mad enemys in every direction. Sometimes so closely that Br J was obliged to entreat Bro Rigdon, after his exertion in running, while lying by a log to breath more softly if he meant to escape.

When they would run or walk they took each other by the hand and covenanted to live and die together. Owing to the darkness of the night their persuers had to carry lighted torches which was one means of the escape of our beloved suffers as they could see them in every direction while they were clim[b]ing over fences or travling through brush or corn fields untill about 12 O clock. When after traveling as they suppose in this manner 5 or 6 miles they found the road which led homeward and saw no more of their persuers. After traveling on foot along muddy sliperry roads till near 3 in the morning they arrived safe at home almost f[a]inting with fatuage [fatigue].

He Bro J told us that he decread in his heart when first taken that he would see home before Sun rise and thank God so it was. And notwithstanding all he had to endure he appeared in the House of the Lord throughout the Sabath in excelent spirits and spoak in a very powerful manner and blessed the Congregation in the name of the Lord and I do assure you the Saints felt the blessing and left the House rejoiceing abundently returning their blessing upon him. Brother Rigdon through his great weariness and a small hurt received from a fall did not attend the House but is now well. I suppose all these things will only add another gem to their Crown.

I did not think of takeing up so much room in relating these circumstances but I have been as brief as possible. I must now give you an account of [a very] affecting event which took place in Kirtland Sunday before last. You will of course remember a Mr. [Wycom?] Clarke, a Miller who has been a great opposer of our Church. As he and his Wife with some of their Children and other Friends were returning from the Prespeteran [Presbyterian] Meeting House in a very nice carrage, about one minuit after they passed the House of the Lord their Horses took fright and started off the side of the hill, overthrew the Carrage and hurt Mr C and one child considerably but Mrs. C so seriously as to prove fatal. She was burryd [buried] on the Wednessday following. She has left 6 weeping Children and a mourning Husband indeed. On the day preceeding the accedent she was heard to speak very unfavourabley of our Church but is now gone to prove whether it is the Church of Christ or not. I greatly desire that the visitation may be sanctified to the Family.

I believe it is not quite a year since Bro J S told Mr. C that the curse of God would be upon him for his conduct towards him and the Church. You may remember that our People wished to purchese his place, but he would not sell it on any reasonable terms and therefore kept it, and has been a trouble in the place but has prospered in buisness so much as to say he never prospered better and told a person some time ago that he was ready for another of Joseph Smiths Curses. I feel inclind to think he will never be heard to utter such words again. May the Lord forgive and save him and all others who raise their hand against the Lords anointed for I see more clearly than ever that this is no trifling sin in the sight of God. No it is as great as ever it was in any age of the world. I sincerely wish that all the members of the Church had a proper sense of their duty and privilege in this respect.

I expect to hear from you soon and also from England. I hope I shall not be disappo[int]ed. Tell [me] if you and Brother Thom[p]son have any idea of coming to Kirtland this fall, (if the Field of labour remains open there), and unless a change should take place in the state of affairs here for the better I should not advise it however much I might [like] to see you. Here are course [corps] of Men out of employ even in the summer and how it will be in the winter I cannot tell but I fear for Kirtland. O, that we as a people may be faithful this is our only hope and all we have to depend on. Give my kind love to Brother Thompson and all other Friends particularly Brother & Sis[ter] Law. I thank them for their kindness to you. I thank Brother Thompson for his last kind letter and should be pleased with [a]nother. I remain your very affectinate Sister

M. F.

[on margins]

Dadeus Sekins has marr[i]ed a widdower [with] 5 children Sister Kimble desires her love to you Both

[October 7, 1837]

My dear Sister & Brother

. . . Brother Joseph [Smith] came to see us a few days since for the last time previous to his going on a journey to Messouri. I believe I felt as much at parting with him as an own Bro. He, Brother Rigdon, Bro. Hyrum S[mith], W[illiam] S[mith] & others are all gone on a very important business and are not expected back for some months. May the Lord have mercy upon us and guide us in their absence and preserve us here from the power of the devel & them also while absent. Indeed we all need to pray much. For as the great Wheels or Stone rolls forward as it is now doing with great success the grand adversary who knows he has but a very short time, will most assuredly rage with all his might.

Some important things were shown to Bro. Joseph in vision previous to his going off relitive to the enlargement of our Borders which has indeed become indesably [indispensably?] necessary for the Inhabitants of Zion both here and in the West are crying the Citys are too strait for us give place that we may dwell. The people are crouding in from all parts and as President Rigdon said in his last discourse here, they will gather and Earth and hell combined cannot hinder them for gather they will. Hence the necessaty of planting new stakes which they received a command to do before they left and it is expected that after they have set in order the Church in the West they will fix upon 11 new Stakes before they return but this is not spoaken of in publick for reasons you will be aware of. If this were generally known it would probably make their way much more difficult.

We had a very affecting time the last Sabbath. Our dear Brethren were present and took their leave of the Church. I suppose we had not much less than 1500 persons on the Congregation. Brother Rigdon receive[d] directions from the Lord in the morning as [to] the discourse he should deliver that day before he left us and truely it was marvelous, it was gareat it was glorious far beyond my power to discribe. The tears flowd plentifully from Bro. Josph Eyes during the service. When he looked over congregation and considered what had been done and then what was still to be done he seemed to be filled with feelings indiscribable. I am truely sorry that I am so unable to give you an idea of what passt. O what feelings ran through my soul while he was pouring his blessings upon all the sincere and faithful Saints. How I longed to have a share in them all. Brother R[igdon]s address was upon the enlargement and future glory and purity of Zion when she arises and puts on her beautiful garments which must be before long.

As it is quite useless for me [to] aim an entering into any particular subject, I must just tell you how he concluded his discourse. After showing us what we have to do & what our privileges are and what our future blessedness would [be] he spoak out with a loud voice from the fulness of his heart, And let all the people say Amen & Amen. When it seem[ed] as tho all the congregation in one simultainous voice responded with a loud Amen it was the opinion of most that they had never heard the like before. . . .

Hepzibah Richards (1795-1838)

Hepzibah Richards started for Kirtland with her brothers Levi and Willard in the fall of 1836. At their home in Richmond, Massachusetts, the three Richardses had learned of the restored gospel through their Latter-day Saint missionary cousin Brigham Young, and they were en route to Kirtland to meet Joseph Smith and learn more of the Mormons. Hepzibah remained in Waterville, New York, while Levi and Willard completed the journey to Ohio, but another brother, Phinehas, called for "Hepsy" a few months later, and with Phinehas and his two sons she made the anticipated trek to Kirtland. [^13]

By the time she arrived, Levi and Willard had been baptized and Phinehas followed suit, but Hepzibah waited. By June 1837 Willard was already preparing to leave on his second mission, this one to England. The first of the letters that follow is from Hepzibah to Willard in England. The other Richardses, including Hepzibah's parents, two brothers, and two sisters, remained in Richmond, Massachusetts, skeptical about Mormonism, though by June 1838 the two sisters had been baptized Latter-day Saints and started for Missouri. The second letter from Hepzibah is addressed to her family in Richmond. Hepzibah was not baptized a Latter-day Saint until July 1838, after she had left Kirtland and traveled to Far West, Missouri. She died at Far West the following September. [^14]

The first letter published here is taken from the original holograph in the Willard Richards Papers, Historical Department of the Church. Minimal punctuation has been added.

The second letter is taken from a typescript in a collection of Richards Correspondence, Historical Department of the Church. Spelling and punctuation have been standardized.

Kirtland Jan. 18, 1838

Dear brother Willard.—

I have rec'd. a letter from home dated Dec. 17. Mother was suffering from rheumatism, sister N[ancy] with sore eyes. Other friends well. Uncles hand was gaining fast. Brother Wm. was to be married the 19th to Miss Sarah Lewis—sister to Mrs. Hinman. They had rec'd. yours of sept. & oct and were answering it. I have been watching the office for a letter from yourself. Last tuesday one arrived addressed, to cousin Brigham [Young]. He is not here to read or answer it. He left this place the 21 or 22 of Dec. in company with brother L[evi], Mr. [Daniel S.] Miles and his eldest son. They wrote us from New Portage 12 days after saying that they had concluded to go to Missouri.

Silhouette portrait of Hepzibah Richards, cut out with lace and curls sketched in ink. This and silhouettes of other Richards Family members were made by Hepzibah, probably before the family left Massachusetts.

And now brother W. I must proceed to give you some account of the present state of things in this place. Would I had more cheering intelligence to communicate. For when you are so far separated from friends and home it grieves me to write any thing that is calculated to give you pain. You had an opportunity to learn something of the spirit which was beginning to prevail here last spring. That spirit has continued to increase; or if at any time it has appeared to be quelled it now appears that it was only preparing to operate with greater virulence, until it is generally believed that this place will soon be trodden down by the enemies of that gospel which you preach.

For some days past the aspect of things has been rapidly changing, and to the view of all appears to be gathering blackness. A large number have dissented from the body of the church and are very violent in their opposition to the President[cy] and all who uphold them. They have organized a church and appointed a meeting in the house [Kirtland Temple] next sabbath. Say they will have it, if it is by the shedding of blood. They have the keys already.

The printing-office has been attached on a judgment that [Grandison] Newel held against the Presidents of K[irtland] money. [^15] Last monday it was sold at auction into the hands of Mr. Millican [Nathaniel Milliken], one of the dissenters. At one oclock the night following cousin Mary waked me, and said that Kirtland was all in flames. It proved to be the Printing-office—the fire was then in its height and in one hour it was consumed with all its contents. The Temple and other buildings badly scorched. Tuesday eve a meeting was held and a patrol consisting of 21 men 3 for each night in the week chosen to guard the city to prevent further destruction by fire. A part of these men are members of the church—a part dissenters. We feel that we are in jeopardy every hour; tho' we possess a good degree of confidence that we shall be preserved and guided to a place of safety.

I have written to Dublin, Indiana; where cousin Lorenzo [Young] resides. We think they will get it and some of them return to us immediately. Many are preparing to flee, believing that if they remain they shall be driven out by a lawless mob. Probably you will soon have no friends here to direct letters to, and where we shall be I cannot tell you. However, I am not pained at the thought of leaving K[irtland] for I have never felt at home here. Mr. [Albert P.] Rockwood, his wife and E.[?] have been baptised and some others in Holliston by Parley Pratt. Are much opposed. They and some few families from Holliston design to go to Missouri next spring. Cousin B[righam] will get his family there next spring. I know not what brother L[evi] will think best. I am pained at the idea of going so far away from eastern friends without the prospect of their following.

The presidents, Joseph [Smith] & Sidney [Rigdon] & Hiram [Smith] returned from Missouri a few weeks since. They are elected to the first presidency, or to preside over all the churches instead of this place only. [^16] Are all going to Far-West. Joseph & Sidney are on the way with their families, or a part of them. Hiram has buried his wife [Jerusha] and is married to Miss [Mary] Fielding. Elder [John] Goodson's wife's mother, Mrs. Dorson was very much injured by a fall from a waggon about the time he concluded to return home [from England]. She was a very great sufferer and without proper medical attendance until he arrived. H[?] came for brother—took supper with us. L[evi] visited her a few times—as many as he could as he was then preparing to leave. Last saturday we heard she was improving. Was able to sit up an hour or more.

The Mummies and records have been attached. Mummies sold Records missing. [^17] I will give you a sentence from a recent Revelation, published in the last paper printed in the office. After speaking of the different places which have been appointed for the gathering of the saints, the Presidents say, "Now we would recommend to the saints scattered abroad, that they make all possible exertions to gather themselves together unto those places; as peace, verily thus saith the Lord, peace shall soon be taken from the earth, and it has already began to be taken; for a lying spirit has gone out upon all the face of the earth and shall perplex the nations, and shall stir up to anger against one another, for behold saith the Lord, very fierce and very terrible war is near at hand, even at your doors, therefore make haste saith the Lord O ye my people, and gather yourselves together and be at peace among yourselves, or there shall be no safety for you." [^18] It hardly requires a prophet's eye to see that perilous times are at hand.

With such prospects before us I can not think of your being left in England alone. Our family are scattered far and wide. Perhaps there is something for you to do for the good of your friends at home. Elders [Heber C.] K[imball] & [Isaac] R[ussell] will start for America the first of april. I have heard nothing for a long time respecting any ones' going out next summer. They are too much engrossed with their own perplexities and embarrassments to think or converse about it. I write not to advise but to express my feelings.

Brother P[hinehas] left here in Nov. designing to return with his family next spring. I think certainly they will not come. George [Phinehas's son] is here with us. Has been quite contented. My health was poor through the summer. Suffered much in consequence of my journey to Ohio. For 8 weeks past I have felt very well. Am with cousin Mary [Ann Angell Young]. Kept house 3 months before brother left. You say you have not seen a word of writing from A. Brother Wm. rec'd. yours last summer and answered it. I should be glad to exchange provision with you sometimes, and to mend your clothes which you say are getting ragged were it in [my] power.—Your sister, Hepzibah R.

Cousin Lucius has the care of 2 churches in the vicinity of Oberlin. His wife is with him. Had a visit from her and Mrs. Gates last fall. Cousins here send love to you. H.R.

Friday eve. 19 Jan. I have given Mrs. [Vilate] Kimball an opportunity to write in my letter, but as [she] designs to write next week, to her husband, she declined. Cousin Fanny [Young] wished to write but was prevented by company. A letter to Mrs. Kimball and Mrs. [Marinda N.] Hyde arrived with yours; also one to Mrs. Russel. Elders [William] Marks, John Smith and Reynolds Cahoon have been elected and ordained to preside over Kirtland. Luke Johnson and John Boynton are no lo[nger] of the number of the 12. Elders John Taylor and John Page are chosen to fill their places. No good news respecting the [Kirtland] Bank. The Boston house is finished outside. Some few other buildings have been erected this summer; but in general K[irtland] wears the same aspect as when I first saw it. Mrs. [Nancy Young?] Kent is in this place about 6 miles from us with her family. Have seen her but little. Uncle [John] Young has been sick—is pretty smart now.

Joseph [Young] has another son. P[hinehas Young] and his family in Missouri. War in Canada between the republicans and those who prefer british laws. [^19] Elder [Evan M.] Green is there—he writes that the father is against the son, and the son against the father.

I will tell you a little more about Richmond friends [family] as possibly their letter may fail. They feel that brother Wm. has made a wise and happy choice [in marrying]—friends on both sides acquiesce. I do not know that [there] is any prospect of their getting away from Richmond. Brother said he did not know as there was money enough in Berkshire County to purchase his property and brother [in-law William] Peirson's. Edwin [Peirson] is teaching in Barrington—Eliza Ann [Peirson] at home. Mrs. Edward Plummer died last fall in Mississippi. Mrs. Gray (old lady) recently of fever. There was much excitement in Holliston when elder Pratt preached there, and considerable disturbance—no one seriously injured. The church and the world joined hands in persecuting E[lizabeth Haven?] after was baptized. She has since been very sick, of putrid and Typhus fever, as uncle [John] Haven stated in a letter to father, but was recovering. Mr. Rockwood said in his letter that her life was despaired for 3 days by all except herself and those of them who held her by the prayer of faith. Cousin Walter R. owns a pleasant seat in Lenox. He and his wife were expected to accompany our people to Hinsdale the 20th of Dec. A letter from cousin F. Brigham a few weeks since informed me that friends in that region were well. Little Brigham [Young] and Mary [Young] are fine children. Mary has suffered much from whooping-cough, diseased lungs &c. Is getting smart now.

I think I desire to know and acknowledge the truth but do not yet see my way clear to be baptized not viewing these things as you do. I believe there are good people in K[irtland] but [it] is not a good place to make Mormons. You see I must stop. Must omit reading over my letter lest I should fail of sending it this morning. Sat. Hope to see you in the spring. Hepsy

[on margins]

The excitement respecting the burning of the printing-office appears to have subsided in a measure.

The lives of the Presidents have been seriously threatened. We do not dare to have Cousin B[righam] return to this place.

Miss Rhoda Richards, Richmond

Berkshire County, Massachusetts Kirtland, 23rd, March, 1838

Dear Friends,

I received the letters which brought the sad news of our dear Mother's death early on Tuesday morning one week from the day it was mailed. I had worked very hard the day previous and in consequence of it had arisen with a sick headache. Was preparing to commence packing our goods for Missouri in the expectation of starting the next Monday morning for Wellsville, where I should have taken a steamboat bound for Missouri in the company with cousin [Evan M.] Greene's family who were already there. Thus situated I was obliged to proceed in business as far as my strength would allow; but I assure you it was one of the heaviest works I have ever experienced. Before Monday the traveling became so bad I was obliged to defer going. I had for months been impressed with the feeling that I should never see my parents again; and when I have been mourning this separation from all my former friends and have been told that our family were coming to me, have repeatedly said that I did not anticipate ever seeing them more.

I have never liked K[irtland] well enough to have one single desire in my heart that any of my friends should come here, but often I decided to go to Missouri and to use my influence to get our family there. I had strong hopes that I should see you all before many months. I expect to be ere long 1000 miles further from that spot which for many years I have called home, and which is still dear to me because my dearest friends are there. The greatest trial I had in view of going further was to think how my dear Mother would feel when she knew it. But she was spared that pang; and notwithstanding I rejoice with heaviness, I will endeavor to rejoice that she has gone to her rest in the grave, and I trust to a better world. How should I prize the melancholy satisfaction of visiting that sacred spot and bathing it with my tears. But even this must be denied me. Those of you who are with Father will do all in your power to console him and make the remainder of his days comfortable. I can hardly be reconciled to the idea of never seeing him again; hope it will not be so.

I shall send our goods to the river as soon as the traveling is sufficiently improved. Do not expect to leave myself before May as I know of no company now that I should like to go with on the water. I care not how soon I am away from this place. I have been wading in a sea of tribulation ever since I came here. For the last three months we as a people have been tempest tossed, and at times the waves have well nigh overwhelmed us; but we believe there will yet be a way of escape. I have been backward in speaking to my friends at home, conscious that it would give them trouble, particularly my Mother, without doing me any real good. This people have experienced nothing yet worse than I have anticipated ever since I have been here.

A dreadful spirit reigns in the breasts of those who are opposed to this Church. They are above law and beneath whatever is laudable. Their leading object seems to be to get all the property of the Church for little or nothing, and drive them out of the place. The house of our nearest neighbor has been entered by a mob and ransacked from the top to the bottom under pretense of finding goods which it is thought they had stolen themselves. An attempt has since been made to set the same house on fire while the family were sleeping in bed. We suffer from fear, but we hope these days of suffering will not always last. For myself I have been less unhappy through all these disquieting scenes than I was last summer. Then I carried a steady burden which seemed almost too heavy to be borne. I cannot particularize on a sheet of paper; neither can I begin to say one half I wish.

I desire not my friends to make themselves unhappy on my account. I had learned before I came here to anticipate affliction and sorrow, knowing that it would surely come, and I am confident that nothing will be laid upon me which I shall not be enabled to endure. I would give up all the enjoyments I have had here for a long time for the happiness of seeing my friends at home for one short day, and the only hope I have that I shall ever see you rests on the probability that you will come to me. Still I wish none of you to come unless it is best on the whole.

Elder [Heber C.] Kimball's friends think he is on his way home [from England] hastened by the prospect of war. There is a cessation of arms in Canada; but in all probability it is only to prepare for a general combat. It has been reported here that American vessels were all detained in England; if so, our friends could get on board a French ship. I am not anxious that Brother [Willard] should hear of Mother's death until he gets among his friends who will be prepared to sympathize with him. My friends here are friends indeed as far as they can be; but they are so engrossed with their own cares and perplexities at present that they can do little for others. Brother L[evi] left Dublin [Indiana] the 14th of Feb. for Missouri, in company with our cousins and numbers who had gone from this place, all good company. He then designed to visit K[irtland] this spring, but it is my desire that he should not return, and I have written discouragingly to him about it. He could accomplish nothing desirable by coming. There is no business to be done here.

Brother William asks what he has done that L[evi] should neglect to write him? Nothing, I presume. He is not as much in the habit of writing as the rest of us. While in K[irtland] he had no leisure. I endeavored to persuade him that he must write to Father and Mother before he left but he did not.

I must give you some account of the plans and prospects of this Church relative to emigration. Many families have already left. Those that remain are going up in camp. They design to start the first of May, but may not before the 10th or later. Probably an hundred and 25 families or more remain. They will go in large wagons covered square on the top with canvas or something that will turn water. Will take their clothing, beds, and cooking utensils and tent by the way. Fifty yds. of common sheeting will make a tent that will accommodate eighteen persons. Women and children will sleep in the wagons. Some will take along light crick bedsteads, and other measures will be taken to prevent sleeping on the ground as much as possible. They will have runners to go before and lay up provisions, that the inhabitants may not take advantage of their necessities to increase their prices. They will travel five days in a week; stop on Saturdays to bake and wash. Sabbath hold meetings. Will be eight or ten weeks on the road. They design to take along the poor and the lame, deeming it wrong to leave those who have a desire to go but have no means. It will be required of them to refund it as fast as they are able. This will probably be accomplished, but it must be by mighty effort. Duck will be prefered for tent cloth—will turn rain better. The camp will move but slowly. The men will walk much of the way.

Cousin Joseph [Young] has given me the offer of going with them, and unless Brother L[evi] returns so that I can go with him by water, I shall probably improve it. They will have as good company and as few children in their tent as any. A Miss Millsam from the State of Maine—a fine girl—will probably be one of our number. How I should rejoice to have the company of some of our home friends if this is best. I fear to urge you lest you should be dissatisfied. I think if Father was here to go with the camp that he would be made comfortable. We shall have to suffer privations and inconveniences in so new a place. No fruit—small houses etc. But for our encouragement we shall have the prospect of better days, I hope. I have always desired that Rhoda [a sister] should stay there until Mother should come to accompany her. Now I want she should be company for Nancy [another sister], for I expect you will all come.

I think you will not see such days as you have seen if you remain in the Eastern States. They will ere long be involved in great calamities, we think. I think so much of Edwin [Peirson] in regard to the prospect of war. I cannot think of his being called into service young as he is, and subject to ill turns which would be likely to be brought on him by exposures. Wish he was here to go with me. Cousin Joseph [Young] thinks if he was here with twenty dollars it would be all sufficient to carry him through. I do not like to have him come here alone there is so much wickedness in these days. I mail a letter with this to Mr. [Albert P.] Rockwood that they may have an opportunity to come if they choose and go with us. They will drive cows enough to supply them with milk.

Did you save your keg of sprouts or scions? Save all the pieplant seed this season and dry as much of the plant as you can. Dried fruit [would] be a treasure in Missouri. I am taxing you heavily with postage; but I have much to say and shall ere long be where you will not hear from me so often. If I think of any errands in future, I shall send a paper with dotted letters for you to spell out. . . .

What are Phinehas's family going to do? I feel interested for them. The probability is that cousin's property and the Doctor's [Levi's] together, which has been considered worth perhaps 2000 dollars, cannot be sold for enough to furnish a team for us. I have run till I have felt that I could run no more, to collect enough on all the Doctor's accounts to enable to send our goods to the river, without succeeding; but think I shall. Brother's coat that was left in our house will be sent to Missouri. Whatever is left here will be common plunder. . . .

Hepsy Richards

G[eorge] is well and thankful, is anxious to be in Missouri. I mailed a letter to Brother L[evi] the second of March. Am told the mail between this and Missouri is slow and uncertain. Shall write the first opportunity by private conveyance; but unless he returns, he will not hear of Mother's death for some weeks. . . .

Footnotes

Additional background and insight into the Kirtland era of the Church's history can be gained by reading the following: Max H. Parkin, "A Study of the Nature and Causes of External and Internal Conflict of the Mormon in Ohio between 1830 and 1838" (M.A. thesis, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 1966); Robert Kent Fielding, "The Growth of the Mormon Church in Kirtland, Ohio," (Ph.D. dissertation, Indiana University, Bloomington, Ind., 1957); Scott H. Partridge, "The Failure of the Kirtland Safety Society," BYU Studies 12 (Summer 1972); and Marvin S. Hill, C. Keith Rooker, and Larry T. Wimmer, The Kirtland Economy Revisited: A Market Critique of Sectarian Economics (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1977).

---
Notas:
[^1] The revelation designating Independence as Zion is D&C 57:1-4. See also History of the Church 1:196-99.
[^2] Joseph Smith identified Adam-ondi-Ahman as "the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the prophet." D&C 116.
[^3] See Reed C. Durham's "The Election Day Battle at Gallatin," BYU Studies 13 (Autumn 1972): 36-61; Gentry, "Latter-day Saints in Northern Missouri," pp. 174-94.
[^4] See History of the Church 3:171-73, 175-77; Gentry, "Latter-day Saints in Northern Missouri," pp. 273-87.
[^5] Though Samuel Avard, leader of the Danites, claimed that he had the support of the top leaders of the Church, evidence indicates that they were not aware of the group's activities. See Leland H. Gentry, "The Danite Band of 1838," BYU Studies 14 (Summer 1974): 421-50.
[^6] Colonel Pitcher had command of the militia at Independence, which demanded that the Saints surrender their arms and leave the county. See History of the Church 1:433-36.
[^7] The health Drusilla describes is promised in D&C 89:18-20, where the Word of Wisdom is recorded. Her reference to the strength of Nephite women is from the Book of Mormon, 1 Nephi 17:2.
[^8] David Patten was a member of the Council of the Twelve. Another account indicates that his last words were: 'Whatever you do else, O! do not deny the faith." History of the Church 3:171.
[^9] The actual number was seventeen.
[^10] Charles C. Rich had anticipated talking to more sympathetic military leaders, Generals Atchison and Doniphan, but was met instead by Bogart. See Leonard J. Arrington, Charles C. Rich (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1974), p. 59.
[^11] A reference to Psalm 137. Two verses from Parley P. Pratt's "Zion in Captivity-A Lamentation Written in Prison" have been omitted here.
[^12] Charles Augustus Nurse was the husband of Harriott Nurse, a sister of Elizabeth Howe Bullard.
[^13] See History of the Church 4:19, 21, 24-28, 49; also Paul C. Richards, "Missouri Persecutions: Petitions for Redress," BYU Studies 13 (Summer 1973): 520-43.
[^14] Nancy Haven Rockwood and Mary Haven Palmer were Elizabeth's older sisters. See Israel Barlow, p. 173, notes 27-29.
[^15] A reference to D&C 1:35.
[^16] From the hymn 'Hark! Listen to the Trumpeters," History of the Church 2:186; Hymns (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1968), no. 253.
[^17] Since Genesis indicates that Eve was fashioned of the rib taken from Adam (Genesis 2:21-23), a wife was sometimes termed a man's rib in the nineteenth century.
[^18] Meaning deacon of Holliston's Congregational Church. John Haven had held that position before he was baptized a Latter-day Saint. Israel Barlow, p. 172.
[^19] See History of the Church 3:269-70.
