Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 ( 1982)

Chapter Four

Missouri

"Zion Has Been Scourged"

Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, according to revelation, was to be the "center place for the city of Zion." In August 1831 Joseph Smith and other Church leaders had dedicated land west of there as the gathering place for the Saints. But by 1836-1837, when the three women whose writings comprise this chapter—Drusilla Hendricks, Sarah Rich, and Elizabeth Haven—gathered with their families to Missouri, it was not to Independence they came. The hundreds of Saints who had earlier built homes there had clashed with old Missourians, who resented them for socializing and trading exclusively among themselves. Mormon settlements in Jackson County had been attacked by old settlers, and by the close of 1833 all Saints had fled Zion's "center place." [^1]

The Mormons sought temporary refuge in neighboring counties, mostly to the north in Clay County, anticipating that through legal operations they would soon recover their Jackson County lands. Drusilla Hendricks and her husband joined the Saints in Clay County, but they were not there long before they saw what Drusilla termed "the commencement of the compromise." When it became apparent that legal efforts to recover Jackson land were futile, the Saints "for the sake of friendship, and to be in a covenant of peace with the citizens of Clay County," agreed to leave that county. Church leaders had already been surveying possible areas for Mormon settlement further north in Ray County, and with legal assistance from non-Mormon Alexander Doniphan, they petitioned the Missouri state legislature for the formation of a new county from those lands. The creation of Caldwell County was the result.

During 1837 the population at Far West on Shoal Creek in Caldwell County mushroomed as Saints from Clay County and elsewhere gathered there by the hundreds. Far West quickly became Caldwell County's chief town, boasting almost five thousand inhabitants within two years of its settlement by Mormons. Drusilla and James Hendricks were among the first Saints arriving there from Clay County; Sarah Pea traveled there from southern Illinois to marry Charles C. Rich in 1837; later Elizabeth Haven, along with her brother and niece, moved there from Holliston, Massachusetts. In Far West industrious Saints built homes, cultivated the land, and set up schools.

Toward the end of 1837, as conditions in Kirtland deteriorated, Church leaders began to investigate "other stakes or places of gathering," deciding that the town of Far West should be enlarged and Kirtland Saints and those scattered elsewhere should gather there and to Missouri's other upper counties. Early in 1838 Joseph Smith moved his family to Far West, and over a period of several months the Kirtland Saints joined them.

The rapid migration to Caldwell County demanded new settlements, which the Prophet Joseph Smith authorized at Adam-ondi-Ahman in Daviess County and DeWitt in Carroll County. [^2] This spread of Mormon settlements outside Caldwell County annoyed Missourians, who felt the Saints should confine themselves to the "Mormon County." "Our trouble began over the election," Drusilla Hendricks remembered, referring to the August eruption at Gallatin near Adam-ondi-Ahman when Daviess County non-Mormons attempted to prevent Saints from voting. In the skirmish none were killed, but several were seriously hurt. Exaggerated reports of the battle brought over a hundred Mormon volunteers from Far West, including Drusilla's husband, James. [^3] The coming of more Mormons caused Daviess County residents to gather troops from neighboring counties. Tensions mounted, and both sides engaged in a series of conflicts referred to as the "Mormon War."

Battle broke out October 23, 1838, at Crooked River in southern Caldwell County when Mormon militia under command of David W. Patten encountered the encampment of anti-Mormon Samuel Bogart and his men. Three Mormons and one non-Mormon were killed in the contest—Drusilla Hendricks's husband was injured—but false information relating the "massacre" of fifty or sixty of Bogart's men created widespread alarm, and it was soon rumored that Mormons were on their way to burn Richmond, further south in Ray County. Missouri citizens, excited by such rumors, besieged Governor Lilburn W. Boggs to suppress the supposed Mormon insurrection, and on October 27 he hastily issued his infamous "extermination order": "The Mormons must be treated as enemies, and must be exterminated or driven from the state if necessary." Three days after the governor's order was issued, seventeen Mormons were massacred at an isolated settlement along Shoal Creek known as Haun's Mill. [^4]

Angry anti-Mormon militias surrounded Far West, and several Church leaders there, including Joseph Smith, were taken prisoner. Sarah Rich found herself alone in the beleaguered city when her husband, Charles, was compelled to flee for his life for his participation in the Crooked River battle. The Mormons surrendered Far West on the first day of November, and through the winter Missourians picked at the spoils. "They robed me of my riding horse, stole my chickins and drove off my cows that gave me milk," Sarah recalled.

Arrested Church leaders were examined at Richmond, where testimony given by apostates and anti-Mormon Missourians confirmed the existence of the Danites, a secret, unofficial Mormon brotherhood committed to violence against non-Mormons. [^5] For their alleged connection with the Danites, Joseph and Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and others were held on several counts and were committed to Liberty Jail in Clay County.

In the months that followed, thousands of Saints left Missouri. "The stakes of Zion will soon be bereft of all her children," Elizabeth Haven wrote her cousin in February 1839. Most of the Saints moved to Illinois and Iowa, where they settled temporarily in small companies or branches. Hundreds were received with kindness in Quincy, Illinois. There Sarah Rich gave birth to her first child. Elizabeth Haven found work as a seamstress for "genteel people." And Drusilla Hendricks nursed her ailing husband. Mormon life went on, but with a note of sadness. "By the river of Babylon we can sit down," Elizabeth wrote. "We weep when we remember Zion."

Drusilla Dorris Hendricks (1810-1881)

In the spring of 1836 Drusilla Hendricks moved with her husband James and four children from their home in Tennessee to Clay County, Missouri. Here they settled for a time before moving further north to Caldwell County, where for two years they enjoyed relative peace and lived, Drusilla said, "as we supposed the Saints would live."

Drusilla Dorris Hendricks, standing right, with her mother and her husband, James. Undated. (Hendricks family collection.)

In the sketch that follows, Drusilla describes what happened to her family as tensions grew to crisis proportions near Far West in Caldwell County. Though the account is a reminiscence dictated sometime in the 1870s, there is enough detail to recreate the anxiety among Mormon settlers at the time of the Battle at Crooked River. James Hendricks was critically wounded in that battle and remained an invalid for the rest of his life, but the family would endure the Mormon experience in Missouri, then in Illinois, and cross the Plains to live long and useful lives in the Salt Lake Valley.

This excerpt is taken from Henry Hendicks Genealogy, compiled by Marguerite H. Allen (Salt Lake City: The Hendricks Family Organization, 1963). Spelling and punctuation have been standardized.

We went on our way rejoicing until we reached Clay County, Missouri. We soon bought fifty acres of land there, and there were six families living on it. We went in the house with a man by the name of Jerome Benson. I put my beds upstairs.

There were a number of Saints in this settlement that had been driven from Jackson County, and we had great times in talking of their trials in that county, not knowing that the same fate awaited us. It was not a week until my husband's father, brother and wife and sister came to see us. They lived near Independence but had never heard the gospel and said that they took no part in the driving of the Saints from that county. And now nothing would do but we must go home with them for a visit. The old gentleman said that James (my husband) must go; he knew that he would not be molested. But having told that his youngest son was a Mormon, it was not easy to stay the hand of the wicked and ungodly. So we went home with him, partly to satisfy the old gentleman and partly to satisfy our own curiosity to see Independence where the center stake of Zion should be. My husband also wanted to see the rest of his sisters that were there.

After crossing the Missouri River, we had an excellent view of the country. When [we were] within about three miles of his father's house, the Baptist minister overtook us and the old gentleman had to introduce his youngest son James, and lo and behold it was the Rev. I[saac] McCoy, that old Baptist preacher who was at the head of Jackson County's mob along with Col. Pitcher, [^6] and he was going to Independence, and he would tell the boys to be still and not molest him [James] for his father's sake, but he would not wonder if his wagon wheels were sunk in the mill pond, so he had better be kind of careful. That made his father and brother feel awful bad, but James seemed very cheerful and showed no signs of alarm.

They had said that we could not go home in less than a week. He must now go with them up town, but they did not stay very long. They found that McCoy was making up a mob to come that night so they thought that we had best go. His father said he could not stand to see James abused. They got our and their teams ready. They intended to go with us as far as the river and wept nearly all the way, but it gave us an opportunity to explain the gospel, and we did not fail to embrace it. They went on with us until within four miles of our house where they turned back with sorrowful hearts. We reached home all right.

Our wagons, some five or six in number, had stirred up the mob spirit for fear the Mormons would come and take away their place and nation. The mob was gathering within half a mile of where we stopped, and the brethren we bought of had bought quite a tract of land, and we had paid over money to them and they to the party they had purchased from who was also a Baptist preacher, and of course when his flock required him to do anything he had to do it. And they wanted him to rue bargains. He first sent his wife to tell the brethren they must give up the land, for his church was not willing that it should go to the Mormons. The brethren were not willing to give it up, for they had drawn up agreements and made the first payment and had given their notes for the balance, and everything was done according to law and now they were to have possession of the land. She made some threat [that] if they did not give up the land willingly then they would be forced to.

We found that the mob were still gathering at this place; I cannot remember their names. Our brethren began to gather and get ready to defend themselves. Lyman Wight stood the highest in the priesthood of any one there, and he was no coward. The next morning after the visit of the preacher's wife, there were twenty-five or thirty of the brethren there with their arms. I noticed they went upstairs and came down without their arms, and soon after I had to go upstairs for something and in stepping on my bed I was frightened and on removing some of the clothing found the bed full of guns, pistols, and swords.

The brethren stayed there, for the mob said if they could get Lyman Wight they could get along with the rest of them but would fight about four o'clock p.m. The land man rode up to the fence and four others stopped back four or five rods with broken horse whips in their hands. Eight or ten of the brethren were in the yard. He inquired for the man who had made the purchase of the land; they came out and asked what he wanted. He said he wanted the land he had sold back and was going to have it or he was going to do something terrible if they did not do as he said. He began to make some threats; I was looking out of the window not a rod from them. Lyman jumped over the fence and caught hold of his bridle, and in less than half a minute there were twenty-five or thirty brethren around him, and the man wilted, which was no surprise, for Lyman looked like he would tear him to pieces. He agreed to be rather decent, but those four men never came up to the crowd. If the brethren had of known what they had been doing, they would not have left a grease spot on them as they had caught one of the brethren alone and whipped him nearly to death, and that is what had broken their horse whips, and there was the commencement of the compromise in Clay County. We all gave up our land and agreed to go to Caldwell County.

We were to be let alone there, so we were glad to do so and not be mixed up with [the mobbers]. Our leading brethren worked day after day to accomplish this move. We were among the first to go, and Brother Emmet and family (the elder who baptized us) went with us. We soon selected a place, built a cabin, and cut hay, for we had but little time to prepare for winter. We got about twelve tons of hay stacked very nice. On looking out one evening we saw the prairie on fire and knew it was three miles away, but the wind was driving it direct to us. He [James] said he would go and fight against it. I went with him two or three hundred yards, but he had not time to light his fire until the fire was upon us. We were forced to run for life. The grass was tall and the flames were high, and when we reached the house the flames reached the stacks and burned them up. The house was filled with cinders but we saved it.

We now did not know what to do, but we found a man who had raised some corn a mile from us who wanted to sell it. My husband gave him sixty dollars for six acres in the field. We gathered and cribbed it, then we were provided for the winter again. I never lived happier in my life. I was always very sickly until now. I had quit taking snuff, tea, and coffee, and I became healthy and strong. Where before I could not walk half a mile, now I could walk three miles and not tire, for we kept the Word of Wisdom. I can bear my testimony to the world. I could run and not be weary, walk and not faint. I received health in my navel and marrow to my bones and hidden treasures of knowledge. I often made myself feel like the old Nephite women while they were traveling in the wilderness, for they became strong like unto the men. [^7]

We never missed a meeting, for we loved the Saints and had confidence in them. We read considerable, mainly the Bible, Book of Mormon, and Doctrine and Covenants; had our children baptized when eight years old, and, in fact, could hardly keep them waiting until they were old enough.

We entered land at the land office, paid our money, and began to live as we supposed the Saints would live, to make their own clothing, etc. We bought some sheep and prepared to sustain ourselves, but when we were driven, we had to do the best we could to keep soul and body together. In the years of 1836-1837 we did pretty well, and on March 23, 1838, my fifth child was born and we called his name Joseph Smith Hendricks.

The summer passed until August without any trouble. We had had just three years of peace, but the first of August our trouble began over the election. My husband had to stand guard for three months, as the mob would gather on the outside settlements. The brethren had to be ready and on hand at the sounding of a brass drum. At three laps on the drum my husband would be on his horse in a moment, be it night or day, while I and my children were left to weep, for that is what we did at such times.

I was willing for him to go as I always was until he fell in defense of the kingdom of God. Our crops were nearly destroyed while he was on duty, but I gathered in all I could in his absence. This scene of things continued until October 24, 1838, when the mob gathered on the south of us and sent out word that they would burn everything they came to and that they already had two of our brethren as prisoners and the prairies were black with smoke. Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum, with others of the brethren, came along, going upon the high places to try and discover, if possible, what was going on. They came back by the door of our house and stopped for a moment. They thought the mob was burning the grass and outer houses to scare the inhabitants to make them flee so they could rob and plunder them of what they had.

We had no chance of taking care of our vegetables, so my husband said that we had better make the cabbage into kraut, so we went to work and finished it at ten o'clock that night. He asked if I would go with him to get a stone to weight the kraut. I walked behind him and watched his form, for he always stood erect. The thought came to me that I might never see him so straight and erect again. He got the stone and I still walked behind him, watching his form with those same thoughts and feelings on my heart and mind (that I might never see him like that again). I couldn't tell my feelings if I should try, but I said nothing.

We had prayer and went to bed and fell asleep. I dreamed that something had befallen him and I was gathering him in my arms when Bro. C[harles] C. Rich called at the door for him and told him what he wanted. They had word that the mob was on Crooked River ten miles south of us and was a strong band. He said they had two of our brethren as prisoners and were doing all the damage that lay in their power. I got up and lit a fire, for it was cold, while he brought his horse to the door. I thought he was slower than usual. He told me where they were to meet. I got his overcoat and put his pistols in the pockets, then got his sword and belted it on him. He bid me goodnight and got on his horse, and I took his gun from the rack and handed it to him and said, "Don't get shot in the back." I had got used to his going, so went to bed and went to sleep.

Just about the time he was shot I was aroused from my sleep suddenly, and I thought the yard was full of men and they were shooting. I was on my feet before I knew what I was doing. I went to the window at the back of the house but all was still. I was afraid to open the door. I could hear nothing, so I ventured to open the door. It was getting light enough, so I could see very little. I went out and around the house and found there was no one there. Then I was worse scared than ever, for I thought it was a token to me that they had had a battle. I got the children up and walked the floor and watched the road. I tried to work but could not. I tried to keep still but could not. Finally I saw Brother Emit [Emmet] coming through the timber. I watched and saw that he did not stop at home but he hollered something about Bro. Hendricks. I could not tell what it was, but he was on express to Far West.

The [Emmet] children soon came over and told me that their father said that Brother Hendricks was shot. Then I went to the field to give vent to my feelings, and while there I saw a man pass through the field on horseback. It looked like he had a great roll of blankets. I went back to the house and found the children all crying. I went to the loom to try and weave to let on to them that I did not believe the report about their father. I could not weave at all, but had not sat there but a few moments when I saw a Mr. T. Snider (he did not belong to the Church, but a good man) get off his horse at the gate. (I saw him wipe his eyes. I knew that he was crying.) He came to the door and said, Mr. Hendricks wishes you to come to him. I asked where. He said to the Widow Medcalf's and that he had come for me. I asked where and how he was shot, and he thought he was shot in the hip.

There was a woman in the house that I had taken care of for weeks. I told her to do the best she could with the children, and I mounted the horse behind Mr. Snider. We had four miles to ride, and on reaching there we met nine of the brethren that were wounded and they were pale as death. They were just going to get into the wagon to be taken to their homes. I went into the house. Sister [Ann] Patten had just reached the bed where her husband [David Patten] lay, and I heard him say, "Ann, don't weep. I have kept the faith and my work is done." [^8] My husband lay within three feet of Brother Patten, and I spoke to him. He could speak but could not move any more than if he were dead. I tried to get him to move his feet but he could not. This was Thursday, October 25, 1838, and the next Tuesday was the battle of Haun's Mill, where men and boys were slaughtered and thrown into a dry well eighteen or forty-eight in number, out of which one (Benjamin Lewis) received a decent burial. [^9]

There were three beds in the room where my husband lay—he in one, Brother David Patten in one, and Brother Hodge was the one shot in the hip. Brother Obanyon [Patrick O'Banion] was on the floor begging for a bed, and some of the sisters ran and got him one. My husband was shot in the neck where it cut off all feeling to the body. It is of no use for me to try and tell how I felt, for that is impossible, but I could not have shed a tear if all had been dead before me. I went to work to try and get my husband warm but could not. I rubbed and steamed him but could get no circulation. He was dead from his neck down.

One of the brethren told me how he fell, for he was close to him. After he had fallen one of the brethren asked him which side he was on (for it was not yet light enough to see), and all the answer he made was the watchword "God and Liberty." On hearing this it melted me to tears and I felt better. Then I was told how many of the brethren were wounded and who they were and was shown the weapons used, and they bore blood from hilt to point. It makes me chill to think of it.

We stayed here until amost night when one of our neighbors, Brother [Stephen?] Winchester and wife came with a wagon and bed in it and took us to Far West. The brethren told me if I took him home the mob would kill him before my eyes. I left my children in care of the man and his wife that I had been taking care of for two months, who had been suffering with fever and ague. But when the army came in they ran and left everything, so the children had to go to the neighbors. But a Brother Stanley and his wife (who came from the east the day before the battle) gathered up my children and went and stayed with them and took care of things, for which kindness I shall always feel grateful.

We were compelled to stay at Far West until after the surrender, when we went home. The mob had robbed the house of bedding and, in fact, everything but my beds. My husband could not yet move hand or foot. Then we had to settle our business matters and fix to get out of the state. I went to work and sold what I could and gave our land for money to buy two yoke of cattle. Finally we had to leave everything, only what we could put into a little wagon.

About the middle of January [1839], Father Joseph Smith [Sr.] and Father [Isaac] Morley, with five or six others, came and anointed and administered to my husband. They stood him on his feet and he stood by them holding to each arm. He began to work his shoulders. I continued to rub him with strong vinegar and salt and liniments. The brethren were leaving the state as fast as they could. We did not know how we could go until Brother I[saac] Leaney [Laney], who was shot and wounded at Haun's Mill, came to see us and said we should not be left behind. He had been shot through and through from both sides, the balls passing through the lungs, but he was miraculously healed. He had twenty-seven bullet holes in his shirt. I counted them myself. He only had eleven wounds to be dressed.

The enemy was still on the alert. One night they were hunting the Danites about nine o'clock. It was very dark. The dog barked as if he was mad. I sat on the side of the bed where my husband lay. I was watching him and nursing my baby. My oldest son, William, said, "Mother, the mob is coming." They were swearing at the dog. We had the door fastened; they told us to open the door or they would break it down. I asked who they were. They damned me and said it was none of my business, and if I did not open the door they would break it down in one minute, so I told the children to open the door. I had a girl staying with us. She and the children were like a flock of chickens when they see the hawk flying around them. These men had false whiskers until they looked awful. One had a large bowie knife in one hand and a pistol in the other.

They came to the bed and told me to get up. I simply told them I was watching him [James] before they came. They took the candle from the table and turned down the bed clothes and asked what doctor I had. I told them I had none. They then asked me a great many questions. They told me they wanted to search the house, so one gave his pistol to another and took the candle. He told me to get up, as he wanted to look under my bed. I moved a very trifle higher upon the bed, for I thought of a dream which I had about three months before he was shot. I dreamed that he lay on the bed sick and was almost gone and two men came in to kill him. I told them they would have to kill me first. I thought they could not get me away from him; then they let him alone. But the men I saw in my dream and these of the mob looked as much alike as can be, so I was determined I would not leave him.

They looked under my bed and said they were looking for [Stephen?] Winchester. I told them to go to Illinois if they wanted to find him. They said his wife had been telling them that lie, but they did not believe it, so I told them when he started. After hunting under the beds at the back of the house, they must go upstairs. I told him where the children got up but said there was nothing there but meat. I had my meat up there to use on our journey. They finally concluded that Winchester was not there, so they came a second time to my husband's bed and turned the clothes down below his breast. I sat still on the side of the bed, for I was determined I would not leave him. They made him talk, but he was so weak and pale he looked more like he was dead than alive. They turned around and asked me for water. I told them that there was a pail and a cup by it, that I would not get up. They drank. I had wood in for the night. They sat down by the wood and put powder in their pistols. One said, "All is ready." Each man put his finger on the trigger of his pistol and said let us walk. I expected when they got back of the curtain they would fire at his head as he was bolstered up, but they stood about one minute and then went out. The mob had often sent me word that they were coming to help the Lord off with him. So I thought they had come for that purpose, but I acknowledged the hand of the Lord in it.

Then the doctor came and wanted to take his case in hand. He [James] said the doctor was on the side of the mob and he knew he could do him [no] good. He wanted to lift the bone in his neck that pressed the spinal marrow. He came a time or two, but I could not engage him. Then he said he would give me a receipt to make a liniment to rub him with to open the pores of the skin. He also gave me some things to put in the liniment. By this time my husband had got so he could stand on his feet without helping him to get on them.

Brother Lainey [Laney] had secured one yoke of cattle as we thought one yoke would haul all we could get in one wagon that we had. We could then save the money we had to buy our bread and clothing.

We started March 17, 1839, for Quincy, Illinois. On the first of April as soon as the brethren found we were there, they secured a bottle of oil, consecrated it, and came with Father Joseph Smith [Sr.] at their head, (seven in number) while we were camped out and got him [James] on a chair and anointed and administered to him again, then assisted him to his feet and he walked, between two of them, some thirty yards and back.

We soon got into a room, partly underground and partly on top of the ground. The room was very close, and he took sick and I had to lift him at least fifty times a day, and in doing so I had to strain every nerve.

We had the cattle which had hauled us here but could not sell them, but could hire them out for a small sum to break prairie, so we hired them. We had one small heifer that the mob did not take that gave us a little milk for twice a day, but in less than two weeks there came a drove of cattle from Missouri and they drove her off with them, so we were like Job of old and my husband as sore, for his blood cankered and he broke [out] in sores all over his body so that you could not put a pin point on him without putting it on a sore, from the crown of his head to the soles of his feet.

In two weeks we neither had bread or meat so we sent our oldest son, William, three miles out on the prairie to the man who had hired our cattle. We had one spoonful of sugar and one saucer full of cornmeal so I made mush of the meal and put the sugar on it and gave it to my children. That was the last of the vegetables of any kind we had in the house or on the earth. We were in a strange land among strangers. The conflict began in my mind: "Your folks told you your husband would be killed, and are you not sorry you did not listen to them?" I said, No I am not. I did what was right. If I die I am glad I was baptized for the remission of my sins, for I have an answer of a good conscience. But after that a third person spoke. It was a still small voice this time saying, "Hold on, for the Lord will provide." I said I would, for I would trust in Him and not grumble.

Sarah De Armon Pea Rich (1814-1893)

Sarah De Armon Pea was born in St. Clair County, Illinois, in 1814. She married Charles Coulson Rich near Caldwell County, Missouri, in 1837, and the following sketch focuses on the young couple's life there. Charles C. Rich was a leader among the Saints during the Missouri persecutions. After Elder David W. Patten fell mortally wounded, Charles C. Rich assumed command of the Saints at the battle of Crooked River, and consequently incurred the wrath of the gentiles. He was forced to flee to Quincy, Illinois, leaving Sarah, pregnant with their first child, alone in Missouri "under mob law."

Sarah DeArmon Pea Rich standing right of the gate in front of her home at 273 North First West, Salt Lake City, with her daughter Elizabeth Rich Pratt and three of Elizabeth's sons, ca. 1880. (LDS Church Archives.)

Though Sarah's hopeful anticipation as a new wife was sobered by trials and terror, she was sustained by the support of close friends and family and by her commitment to her husband and the Church. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was to determine the course of the Riches' lives as they moved with the Saints to Nauvoo and the Great Basin, and later, when Charles Rich was named an apostle, they founded Mormon colonies in San Bernardino, California, and Bear Lake Valley, Utah-Idaho.

This excerpt is taken from Sarah D. Rich's two-volume holograph autobiography written in 1885. The volumes are located in the Church Archives. Since the holograph contains no periods, minimal punctuation has been added here for clarity, but Sarah's phonetic spelling has been preserved. Capitalization of the letter s has been standardized since in the original holograph the upper and lower case s's are indistinguishable.

As Far West was a place everybody lived in log houses so my husband had built a nice little hewed log hous and got it reddy to live in by the time we ware married. It was 4 miles from Farr west near my husbands fathers. So I left my fathers house in Farr West and we mooved to our coasey and happy home and we thought we ware the happyest couple in all the land. My husband had a beautifull prospect for a nice farm with plenty of timber and watter and our plans were laid for a comfortable and happy home in the near future o[u]r religion being first with us in all things.

My father in fitting me out for to help us along gave me a nice riding horse, saddle, bridal and Martingills [martingales] as they ware fashenable in those days. And Mr Rich had a nice horse and rigg for riding so we attended meeting ever[y] Sunday at Farr West. So we rode horseback to meeting every Sunday and had the privalege of often list[en]ing to the prophet Joseph Smith preach and enstruct the people a privalege we both appreciated very much. Things went on so nicely during the summer we never once dreamed what was in store to brake up our happy anticipations and plans that were laid for our happyness with our home and friends.

Sometime in the fall rumers ware afloat that a Mob spirit was begining to trouble our Misourie kneighbors and there was prospect of trouble a head and those rumers soon turned into reality and we could foresee trouble for us instead of the quiat happiness we had layed out for us. My husband and myself talked over the matter and could see no way but to face the trouble[s] when they did come and as he was allwais well gifted in desearning what was coming [he] would let no time be lost in giving me good council and trying to have me prepare my mind to lean apon the Lord to give me faith that I might withstand the trials that was a head of us as a people.

He could foresee maney things that I had not yet learned to think of and he seamed to realise that the time was coming when we ware to be seperated from each other in the midst of our worst trouble and would often tell me if such a time did ever come that I must not let my faith fail me but pray for couriage to withstand trials when they did come. Little did I think the time was so near that he would be compelled to flee for his life and leave me as it ware in the midst of a howling mob with no one to look to for pertection but my Father in heaven.

But such was the case and thus it did accur as he had feared it would. For it was not long before the mob maney thousand strong gethered in apon us and surrounded our pleaseant homes and caused us to gether together into Far West in order that we could be better pertected in the absence of our men that ware out trying if it was posible to make peace with our enemyes and pertect the setlements that could not posibly leave there homes and gether in with the rest of us.

My Father and mother and sister had gone on a visit to Illinois to see my brother. They went just before those troubles commenced and as it was not safe for them to travil and return to there home in Far West they wrote for me and my husband to moove into there house and look after the things they had left. Conciquently we did so and I took in those that had to leave there homes and flee into the city untill I took in seven familys. By this time there was no room for aney more. Among that number was John E Page and his sick wife. He was then one of the twelve apostles of our church and about one week after, his wife died. And as the mob was troubling us so sevearley at this time it was impossible to have Sister Page burried for three days and twice while she lay in the house a corpse the mob entered the house and made a search all through the house to see what they could find. They ware at that time in a camp about a mile from our house and would keep up screaming and yelling like a band of indian war party.

And it was then that I stood in my door and watched my dear husband as he was sent out to the guard of there camp bearing a flagg of truce. I see them shoot at him while bearing a white flag with a message from our people to them in order to try to make peace if possible. But thus he was received by one of there guard a Methodist preacher by the name of bogard [Bogart]. [^10] He was the man that had a battle with our people on crooked river when David Patton was killed one of the twelve apostles of this church. My husband was allso with David Patton when he was killed and Bogard knew him and this is why he wished to kill him, and my husband and some others ware compelled to flee for there lives as the mob swore they would kill him.

I do not remember the names of all the brethren that left with Mr Rich but Hose[a] Stout, Samuel Smith a brother of the prophet and Seamor [Seymour] Brunson and Phineous Young ware among that number that had to flee. And they had to travil out into a willderness country where there ware no settlement[s] in order to avoid meeting aney of the mob that was prowling all through the country. Conciquently the[y] expearenced maney hardships and [were] hungrey for food as they only had one horse a peace. Conciquently [they] could not take much provision with them and to help along they ware five days lost and did not know where they ware nor which course to travil. One of those days the company of six only had one black bird among them to eat. They finely come upon a camp of indians who received them friendly and fed them and suplyed them with provision in there rude way and sent a pilot with them to the settlements. From thare they made there way to Quincy Illinois.

The company stoped there while Mr Rich went to the south part of the state where my brother lived and where my father and mother and sister was stopping and got my father to take a team and come to Fare West and bring me to him at Quincy. He was to meet me thare. This was in the month of January [1839] and the wether was veery coald for my father to travil 4 hundred miles but he made the trip in good time.

Now I must return to some of my expearence during the three months I was left alone in the midst of the mob after my husband had to leave. Him and I parted that night at one oclock. We had went to his sisters to stay that night befor he knew he had to leave. His sister lived at the store on the publick square of far West. Her husband kept the store. And when we parted not knowing whether we should meet again for a long time I felt confident it was the only thing he could do to avoid a madened mob from taking his life so I felt contented to have him go feeling that the Lord would spare us to meet again. So him and Hosey Stout made a coven[an]t to stay together untill we should meet again and Hoseys wife and I made a covenant that her and I would remain together as true friends untill we should meet our husbands again and apon this prommis we shook hands with our dear husbands and parted.

Her and I then went into my sistern laws house and went to bed praying the Lord to protect ourselves and our dear companions untill he saw fit to have us meet again. So in the morning after we had our brakfast we started to go home to my house abut 4 blocks away but found on the road the mob had placed more guards out to prevent any one from passing. We attemted to pass but was stoped by baynets pointed at us and told we could not pass. I told them I was going to my home a short distance away. The[y] still refused and all that we could do was to return to my brotherinlaws but when we got thare and was telling in the store what had happened the captain of the guards happend to be thare and here what I said. He steped up to me and asked what was the matter. I told him. He said was it your husband that capt boeguard killed yesterdays I said yess sir for they thought he was killed. He then said he would go with me to where the guard was and see that I passed on to my home.

I told him on the way that I had sent my hired boy out with a teame of oxen to git me a load of wood and that the boy was taken prisner and the oxen kept in there camp. He told me to give him the name of the boy and the discription of the cattle and he would see they ware returned. So he told the guard to let us two ladys pass which they did. We went to our home and the captain hurried on to the camp and arived thare just as the[y] had drove up my oxen to kill them for beef. He called to them to hold on and asked for the boy that had come for wood with that team. He then orderd some of his men to hitch up the team and go and load on the wood and guard that boy to his home with the wood. So I soon had the boy, wood and team returned to me again.

So by his carrying the impreshian into camp that my husband was killed it kept [them] from looking for him untill he had time to git out of the way. But when they found out he was not killed they felt awfull mad and would often come to my house and tell me if I did not tell where he was hid they would blow my brains out, at the same time pointing pistols at me. For they thought he must be hid up somwher never once thinking it posible for him to make his escape when there was so maney troops of mobs in the country.

This was the kind of life I had to live under mob law for 3 months not knowing what time they might set fire to my house for they thretned severl times that they would do so in order to find my husband, and I at the same time in verry delacate health. They robed me of my riding horse, stole my chickins and drove off my cows that gave me milk. Thus things went on untill my father arived. He found me verry sick through excitement and hardships. But notwithstanding my sickness with the help of Sister Samantha Stout we gethered things together and packed up what little we had left and on the 3rd of February in the cold storms we started in wagons 2 in number. I mean 2 waggons to hawl all my father had and all that myself and Sister Stout had allso Thomas Richs effects for he drove one of the teames. We started for Quincy Illinois. I was so feeble that I had to lay and [on] a bed and travel over frosen ground for 4 hundred miles.

I must here mention the kindness of brother Thomas Rich to me. He is a cousin to my husband and lived with us as one of our family. He was so faithfull on this journey for I had to be helped out and into the wagon ever[y] night and mourning and he being young and strong to[ok] that care apon himself and was so kind to me that I wish his name ever held in remembrance by my children. Allso the name of Sister Samantha Stout the wife of Hose[a] Stout. She was like a dear sister to me through all my trials and hardships in misouree she to[o] passing through hardships and sorrow as well as myself. But she bieing poor in health and verry young her hardships shortend her days for she did not live a year after we landed in Quincy where we met our husbands that had fled for there lives some months before.

When we reached the Mississippi river the ice had broke up on the west side of the river and was running so the ferry boat could not cross. So of cours I and Sister Stout felt quite down hearted. We knew our husbands ware on the opasite side in Quincy waiting for us and by this time quite a number of the brethering ware allso there on the banks of the river waiting to cross over. All the chance for crossing was to go across in a skift or canoe through the ice untill they reached the iland and from thare walk on the ice to reach Quincy on the east side.

While I was setting on the bank of the river feeling so bad brother George D. Grant come along and knowing of my poor health and seeing me feel so bad he said to me, Sister Rich cheer up and I will go over and tell brother Rich you are hear. Some on hearing what brother Grant said remarked that it would be a verry daingerous undertaking as the ice was runing so swift. Said brother Grant, well I will try it live or die. So him and another man got into a canoe and started over. Sister Stout and I set on the bank and whched [watched] him untill he or they reached the iland and started across on the ice. They had not gone fare before we see the ice brake and one of the men fell into the river. We then see 2 men from the oppasit side run a cross to where the ice had broke. By this time it was gitting late near sunset and soon a man came back with the canoe and said George Grant had fell through the ice and they got him out just alive and that was all.

So when we heard this news we went back to our waggons clear discouriaged. I went into the waggon to cry while Sister Stout and my dear father and Thomas rich prepared the supper as I was not able to help them do aneything. But all this time my husband and brother Stout after seeing that brother Grant was well cared for ware planing to get over to us for they were the 2 men that we see go too brother Grant when he fell through the ice. They got him out of the river and conveyed him to a good place where he was attended to and then got a skift and carried on there shoulders to the lower iland beeing joined by brother Webb whose wife was allso in our company. They cross on the ice carrying the skift untill they reached where the ice was running. They then launched there skift and came down the river to where we ware camped and great was our joy to meet with our dear companyans who ware compelled to part with us 3 months before and flee for their lives from a howling mob.

And after there staying with us that night they concluded that it was best for us wimon [women] folks to cross the river at once and not waite untill the ferry boat could cross which was not likely to be the case for severl days. On my account it was nessary we should cross over immeadiatly as I knew not what moment I would be confined with my first child. So in the morning us three wimon and our husband[s], that was myself, Sister Stout and Sister Webb with our husband[s], got into a canoe and they 3 men road [rowed] us over the river to where we could cross the ballence of the way on the ice. Just think of it my dear reader to see us undertake such a perilous trip across the watter running with ice the cakes of which ware so large that some times the men would have to jum[p] out on the ice in order to puch it away and then jump back into the canoe again and by hard work reached the ice on the other side. And my poor oll [old] father had to be left with the teams and waggons untill the ferry boat could cross. The poor old man stood with tears in his eyes watching us, not knowing whether we could rech shore or not. He said afterwards that sad was his feelings to see us start out to cross the watters of the Miss[iss]ippi 6 of us in a canoe. But we reached the shore in safty and was met on the banks of the river by a brother George Crowch and his wife at whose house my husband had been stoping and they made us welcom and done all for our comfort that they could untill Mr Rich could find a place to rent which he found in a few days.

Elizabeth Haven Barlow (1811-1892)

Elizabeth Haven, a daughter of Elizabeth Howe and John Haven, was born and raised in Holliston, Massachusetts. Elizabeth was active in the town's Congregational church, but after reading the Book of Mormon given her by her cousins Brigham Young and Willard Richards, she decided to became a Latter-day Saint. She was baptized in September 1837, when Parley P. Pratt was proselyting in the Holliston area.

With her brother Jesse Haven and Ellen Rockwood, a niece, Elizabeth migrated to Far West, Missouri, in the spring of 1838. By February 1839 the family had taken refuge in Quincy, Illinois, with the main body of the Saints, and while there Elizabeth penned several letters to her cousin Elizabeth Howe Bullard in Holliston. The letters gravely portray the Saints' situation in Quincy as seen by a young woman committed to the restored gospel. But Elizabeth balances the weightiness of the Saints' trials with her own light-hearted humor and delight in everyday activities.

Elizabeth Haven married Israel Barlow at Quincy in 1840. The couple moved to Nauvoo and later settled in Davis County, Utah. The following letter, composed by Elizabeth over a two-week period, is taken from The Israel Barlow Story and Mormon Mores (Salt Lake City: Ora H. Barlow, 1968). The original letter is in private possession. Spelling and punctuation have been standardized.

Quincy Feb. 24th, 1839

[Women's Voices, page 106-108 Dear Elizabeth

With much pleasure I commune with my dear friends far away in the East, which my frequency in visiting will boldly testify. Weeks and months have rolled away in rapid succession since I left my friends far behind in N[ew] E[ngland] for the land of Zion. But O! how Zion mourns, her sons have fallen in the streets by the cruel hand of the enemy, and her daughters weep in silence. It is impossible for my pen to tell you of our situation, only those who feel it, know. Between five and seven thousand men, women, and children driven from the places of gathering out of the state [Missouri] from houses and lands, in poverty, to seek for habitations where they can find them. The Saints are coming as fast as possible; they have only to the 8th of March to leave the state. The Prophet has sent word to have them make speed, haste out of the state. About twelve families cross the river into Quincy every day, and about thirty are constantly on the other side waiting to cross. It is slow and grimy; there is only one ferry boat to cross in. For three or four weeks past it has been beautiful weather and the roads great for traveling, which has made it very favorable for the brethren. But now it is rainy, the roads very muddy within three days. The stakes of Zion will soon be bereft of all her children. By the river of Babylon we can sit down, yes, dear E, we weep when we remember Zion. [^11] [There follows an eight-line verse by Parley P. Pratt.]

Elizabeth Haven Barlow with her husband, Israel, in the 1880s. (The Israel Barlow Story and Mormon Mores. Salt Lake City, Ora H. Barlow, 1968.)

We look upon our present with sorrow and much anxiety. We must now scatter in every direction just so we can find employment. Some of our dear brethren who have mingled with us in praise and prayer are now buried with the dead; some who a few months ago seemed to run well in the strait and narrow path have to our astonishment and grief forsook us and fled; our Prophet is still in jail, and many others whom we love. To look at our situation at this present time it would seem that Zion is all destroyed, but it is not so; the work of the Lord is on the march.

Never has there been a time since the Church was first organized that the work spread so fast as it has within the past six months. The Mormons have been the general topic of debate in this upper country, in the Western and Middle States and also in the Eastern States. I see by the papers that we have come up in remembrance there, though far from the truth sometimes. Many have now a curiosity to hear which previous to past difficulties would not so much as listen; but now anxious to hear both sides, the Elders can thereby preach the gospel to them. Much good will ultimately result in the past to bring about the purposes of Jehovah.

God moves in a mysterious way, his wonders to perform. Many have been sifted out of the Church, while others have been rooted and ground in love and are the salt of the earth. I have understood that some of the Missourians begin to tremble for driving us from the state and intend to leave also, lest God should pour out his judgment upon the inhabitants. I doubt not but that there are many honest hearts in Missouri. You will learn from Charles's letter before you receive this, that President Rigdon has been liberated from jail. [^12] He gave an account last Sabbath how he was set at liberty. He remarked that it was a miracle and indeed it is, but cannot stay to recite the particulars. If I could sleep with you one night, think we should not be very sleepy, at least I could converse all night and have nothing but a comma between the sentences, now and then.

When we shall enjoy the society of the Prophet and know the will of the Lord concerning the Church, we know not. We sigh and long for his deliverance. The word of the Lord is precious unto us, even as it was in the days of Samuel the prophet, for since the ancient prophets and apostles have been killed, the people have changed the ordinances and broken the everlasting covenant, and there has been no open vision.

We want to know very much how the few Saints in H[olliston] have stood affected while Zion has been scourged. Have any departed from the faith? I hope not. It is only those who stand amidst all these trials unto the end that will at last be found worthy of a crown of glory. These scenes try us exceedingly, and we are to be tried (everyone who inhabits the celestial kingdom) like gold seven times purified. Therefore if any think that they will not come among us because we are tossed and driven about, rest assured that they will be tried in some way until they are purified for the kingdom of Christ.

I often think of the church, the little branch which I left in H[olliston], think that I shall soon see some of them in this country. I presume that you often meet with those who delight to boast over you concerning our situation here, and you feel no doubt that it is as much as you are able to endure. God will lay no more upon us than what we are able to bear. I felt that trials were hard to endure alone there, but they were comparatively nothing to what I have passed through since. We want to know how many of the church are coming west: who? at what time they think of starting? and how they are coming, whether by water or by land? We wish to know all about it.

President Rigdon is now making out a history of the treatment of the Missourians toward the Mormons from the time that they were driven from Jackson County unto this present time, and he is going himself to Washington to plead at the feet of the President according to revelation. He has written to the Solicit[or] General of the United States court for a mandate or precept against the State of Missouri for redress of wrongs, also precepts against the Governor down to the private citizens who have [in] any way been concerned in injuring or driving us from Missouri. President Rigdon says he sees no way for the Prophet to be delivered only through the United States court. [^13]

Those who were put into Liberty [jail] for treason and at Richmond [jail] for murder, have been false[ly] imprisoned, and they even now hold an action against the state [of] Missouri for this treatment. What these things will result in we know not. Things have transpired within one year which the Church looked not for, and what another year will accomplish is known only in futurity. When Heber Kimball (one of the Twelve) was in England he had a vision of future scenes. He remarked to me one day that the past scenes was not one tenth of the tribulations which I should soon see. Therefore, said he, "Sister, prepare thyself for greater things."

There has been a general commotion and stir among the Indians for months past. Several hundred Indian chiefs have had meetings this winter. What it is for, none can learn, but it is feared by the people in upper Missouri that [it] is a preparation for war. One tribe which has a prophet among them will not allow the white missionary to be in their midst, because "they no preach the true God." I presume Sister Nurse has heard Brother Pratt speak of that tribe. The prophecies must all be fulfilled, and when the remnant of Jacob pass through there will be none to deliver. Micah 5:8. How soon they will pass through we know not. They are very wrathy toward the whites and we hear many things which they threaten, but God will not suffer them to rise until the Gentiles are ripe for destruction.

[February] 25. Dear E., After a day of sober reflection I resume my pen to converse with one [with] whom I have spent many happy hours in days past and gone, and hope to spend many, yes many more, but with far different objects in view. The understanding and knowledge we have of the scriptures makes friends and everything appear in a very different light to me. Mother wished me to write—in particular after I had seen the Prophet and had been to meeting—my testimony as to the truth of this work and let you all know. I have done so and several of you have my testimony. I wish that I had more of yours and the rest of the Church. Nancy will soon send her testimony to Mary. [^14]

Past scenes have greatly strengthened my faith. If we were of the world, I believe that the people of Missouri would love us well enough to let us remain somewhere in the state. But they hate us, despise us, and persecute us, and when they kill us they verily think they do God's service. My faith is strengthened by seeing the prophecies beginning to be fulfilled. Verily thus saith the Lord, peace shall even be taken from the earth. [^15] It is already taken from Missouri. They are troubled and perplexed, and since I have commenced this letter, [I] have heard that some who have fought against us are now fleeing their country, and also that the jailor at Liberty says if the government will not set the Prophet and the rest who are with him free, that he will, for such prayers as are offered up in that prison will never go unanswered. But the jailor would not dare to liberate them, for the mob surrounds them continually, determined to kill them if they are [liberated]. President Rigdon was let out of jail after dark, leaning on the sheriff's arm, and the next morning at sunrise he was forty miles from Liberty. When the mob learnt that he was gone they were much exasperated and are more bitter against those that are left.

Many fears are entertained in behalf of Brother [Parley P.] Pratt. The mob are determined that he shall be hung, but we hope not. He is a bold witness for Jesus, and his testimony has gone forth to the world in black and white. His wife has been with him in jail most of the time since their trial. We have written occasionally [of] the trials of the Saints of God within the past few months, but these are small to what we expect to pass through. Therefore let all who desire to live with the Saints count the cost before they set out on their pilgrimage to Zion, come prepared to suffer with the Church in all their afflictions, not to flee as many have, in the day of trial when labour was mostly needed. Yes this church

[Women's Voices, page 112 Wants no more cowards in their bands, Who will her colors fly. The call's for valiant-hearted men Who are not afraid to die. [^16]

President Rigdon was bailed out for $2,000, not that he was guilty, but to appease the wrath of the mob, and all the rest in Liberty jail have no cause of action found against them, but for their own safety they remain there, for the mob characters have threatened to [burn] Liberty if they are let out. We do not know how soon we will see them. Their families are in this place. The Prophet's wife says that she is not out of Missouri while her husband remains there. John Carroll [Corrill], formerly a brother in the Church but now a dissenter, a Representative for the State of Missouri, asked leave to introduce a bill into the legislature prohibiting anyone from prophecying or speaking in the name of the Lord in that state. Forty-one in favor, forty-four against it. Their cup of iniquity is fast filling up.

[Women's Voices, page 113 Brother Jesse [Haven] left us last Thursday on his way to Springfield in this state to attend the conference of elders the 8[th] of next month. He intends to start from there to the East in company with some elders preaching on their way to N[ew] E[ngland]. He is in hopes to reach there by summer. I suppose he intends to get his lost rib before he returns to Zion. [^17] Nancy wishes to say to Isaac [Bullard] to bring his rib with him next time he comes to Zion, for she thinks it a poor plan to travel 2,500 miles in these hard times to get a [wife]. Charles Nurse lives in this place and has gone to work in the flour mill for eighteen dollars per month and boarded, likes his employment, has a good boarding place, and lives very high such as he has not been used to of late. He sends his love to you and says you must come on, for there are many here looking after [Y]ankee wives. He thinks he can speak a good word for you. O Elizabeth, it is time for me to hush such nonsense.

[Albert] Perry [Rockwood] wishes Father to get his discharge from military duties and send it to Quincy immediately. We also want to have Father write us, as soon as you receive this, to let us know about his coming to the West, how and when, that we may know when to look for him. We all feel anxious to know how he has felt while Zion has been scourged, whether he is in prosperity or adversity. We want him to write within one week after you get this, for we know not how long we shall remain here, but if we are not driven and can get into business very likely shall stay several months. Our love to your dear mother, E[sther] Morton and finally to all. Be sure and write me a long, yes very long letter soon. Remember the Prophet and afflicted Zion at the throne of grace and receive this letter which is full of love and affection from a sister in the everlasting gospel, Elizabeth Haven.

[Women's Voices, page 113 [There follow some fourteen separate postscripts written over a period of time, which ask for news and give news of the Saints and Elizabeth's work with "genteel people" in Quincy. The following notes are representative of these postscripts.]

P.S. #1 When you write to me write much news. [I] want to hear from old Holliston: marriages, births, and deaths. Who is Deacon? [^18] But be particular to let me know how the work of the gospel is. Are there any enquiries? Any been baptized? And who is coming to Zion or near its borders? Almost March, time draws nigh when I imagine you will leave N[ew] E[ngland]. Come as early as possible so that you can raise something in a garden to live on. That is about all that the Saints can do. We shall not stay long in a place at present.

P.S. #2 We want to know if Aunt Howe is coming? Elizabeth, fetch a bonnet block and bonnet thread. Think you could make it very profitable sewing bonnets here. Quincy is quite a handsome place. Some beautiful buildings. General handsome stores. Quite a city. Have seen many things here, which I have not seen before for ten months.

The people of Liberty have permitted the friends of those in prison to visit them but have just now heard that they refuse that privilege since P[resident] Rigdon was liberated, threatening to shoot the first Mormon that comes into the place. We are all in commotion in this country.

P.S. #3 One of the brethren died yesterday on the other side of the river and was brought over today, was carried into the courthouse, and President Rigdon preached a funeral sermon. Full house. Many of the citizens present. This forenoon President Rigdon, Brother [John] Taylor, one of the Twelve, Judge [Elias] Higbee and Elder [John P.] Greene of the high council met in Nancy's room to draw up a paper to present to the citizens of this place this evening, making known to them the situation of the afflicted among us. [^19] Many in this place have great sympathy for us.

P.S. #4. The people of Quincy have contributed between four and five hundred dollars for the poor Mormons. God has opened their hearts to receive us. May heaven's blessing rest upon them. We are hungry and they feed us, naked and clothe us. The citizens have assisted beyond all calculation. Great things await us, and this generation. Mr. P. has not heard from his father's family since we left M[assachusetts]. Wants to hear. Write about them whether sick or well.

March 3d. Have been to Mr. Wells two days sewing [for] genteel people, treat me with much attention and kindness. Have a sleeping chamber by myself. They live on the luxuries of the market. Do not let their maid come to the table. Quite a contrast to my situation from a log hut, to a palace. I am particular[ly] thinking father will be glad to know all about us. Often we change our situation.

P.S. #13. Where is Miss Crawford and Miss Cook? Are they married? My love to them. If you see them tell them not to be in a hurry about getting married, for I am not. O Elizabeth, don't you think that I am very silly? I do, but I don't feel sober just this minute. Do not read this to anyone. Wish you would write how many letters you have all received from me since August because the mail as been irregular.

P.S. #14. About two weeks after we left Far West three suns were seen to rise one morning which were seen by the people there. The sun, the great orb of the day was in the center, the other two were not quite so bright but produced shadows only dim. Light projected into the heavens from all three. They were seen several hours, but as the sun traveled towards the meridian of the day the others disappeared.

Elizabeth, fetch me two good apples. I have not tasted one this winter. Abby Ann Greene also wishes you to bring her one. Tell Maria and Eliza Ann to bring me a handful of chestnuts. Write me. E[sther] M[orton] must write a few lines too. Where is Adelia? Love to her in Holliston. Does she love the Truth?

[Women's Voices, page 116]

Footnotes

Readers desiring further study into the Missouri period of the Church's history are referred to: Leland Homer Gentry, "A History of the Latter-day Saints in Northern Missouri from 1836-1839" (Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, Provo, 1965); Alvin R. Dyer, The Refiner's Fire: The Significance of Events Transpiring in Missouri (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1972); and T. Edgar Lyon, "Independence, Missouri, and the Mormons, 1827-1833, " BYU Studies 13 (Autumn 1972): 10-19.

Nauvoo dock, one of the steamboat landings in Nauvoo, located at the south end of Main Street.

---
Notas:
[^1] David E. Miller and Della S. Miller comment on the renaming of the city in Nauvoo: The City of Joseph, p. 35.
[^2] A survey of sources of tension in Nauvoo is Godfrey, "Causes of Mormon Non-Mormon Conflict in Hancock County, Illinois, 1839-1846." Mormon political activities are analyzed by Klaus J. Hansen in Quest for Empire: The Political Kingdom of God and the Council of Fifty in Mormon History (Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1967).
[^3] Dallin H. Oaks, "The Suppression of the Nauvoo Expositor," Utah Law Review 9 (Winter 1965): 862-903.
[^4] George A. Smith was a son of Clarissa Lyman (1790-1854) and John Smith (1781-1854). See Zora Smith Jarvis, comp., Ancestry, Biography and Family of George A. Smith (Provo, Utah: Zora Smith Jarvis, 1962).
[^5] Melissa Jane Bigler was Bathsheba's younger sister and apparently lived with her during the absence of George A. Smith. Information regarding family relationships has been drawn from family group sheets in the Church Genealogical Archives.
[^6] Mary Ann Bogges Bigler, wife of Bathsheba's brother Jacob G. Bigler, died with the ague about three weeks after this letter was written. Jacob G. Bigler autobiography, holograph, Church Archives. Thadeas [Thaddeus] was a son of Nancy Bigler Fleming, Bathsheba's older sister, and Josiah Walcott Fleming.
[^7] Caroline Smith (later Callister) was a sister of George A. Smith.
[^8] Dr. John M. Bernhisel, educated in medicine at the University of Pennsylvania at Philadelphia, was ordained a Latter-day Saint bishop in New York City while practicing medicine there in 1841. He moved to Nauvoo in the spring of 1843 and figured prominently in church and local government there and in Utah. For a full biographical sketch see Gwynn W. Barrett, "Dr. John M. Bernhisel: Mormon Elder in Congress," Utah Historical Quarterly 36 (Spring 1968): 143-67.
[^9] This lawsuit perhaps involved Bigler properties in West Virginia. Jacob Bigler recorded, "In March 1843 I returned to Va on business. " His father, Mark Bigler, had died in September 1839, and settlement of the estate had required some time. Jacob Bigler autobiography.
[^10] Arnasa Lyman (1813-1877) had accompanied George A. Smith on a mission through Illinois in 1842.
[^11] John Lyman Smith was the younger brother of George A. Smith.
[^12] Probably Josiah Walcott Fleming, Bathsheba's brother-in-law.
[^13] Caleb Washington was the husband of Bathsheba's older sister, Sarah Bigler.
[^14] The "Lawites," who broke with the Church in spring 1844, included William and Wilson Law, Austin Cowles, James Blakeslee, Robert D. Foster, Chauncey Higbee, and Charles Ivins, all of whom had been prominent in church government or business in Nauvoo. Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi, p. 308.
[^15] Jedediah M. Grant (1816-1856), at this time a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy, was returning to Philadelphia to resume his calling to preside over the Church there. He was, at the same time, to inform the brethren in the East of the martyrdom, though the news traveled so fast he was able to forgo that assignment.
[^16] Sarah Bigler Washington was one of Bathsheba's older sisters.
[^17] See Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi, pp.144-45.
[^18] Charles Thompson, from Elba, New York, a neighboring town toWarsaw, was apparently a Mormon the Randalls had known there. Later in this same letter Sally mentions "them people from Alexander,' another town near Warsaw.
[^19] Sally's father was George Carlisle, but the George referred to here is likely her brother, since later letters from her son Eli are addressed to "Uncle George."
