Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 ( 1982)

Chapter Five

Nauvoo

Bonds of Affection and Affliction

Missouri Saints in exile in Quincy, Illinois, through the winter of 1838-39 began to leave that place in the spring and travel seventy miles up the Mississippi River to newly selected gathering sites in Hancock County, Illinois, and Lee County, Iowa. There Church leaders had secured for the Church thousands of acres, and many Saints were trading titles to their abandoned Missouri lands or Kirtland property for lots in the area. Commerce, Illinois, rapidly became the central gathering place, and during the summer of 1839 Saints renamed the settlement "Nauvoo," a word of Hebraic derivation signifying, according to Joseph Smith, a beautiful, restful location. [^1]

In some respects Nauvoo did prove restful for Latter-day Saints as homes, farms, and businesses were established there over a seven-year period. Construction was a big business in the growing city, and log structures soon sketched a new skyline along the banks of the Mississippi. Newlywed Bathsheba Smith moved into her log home in 1842 and assumed responsibility for getting the rooms plastered, since her apostle-husband George A. Smith had left for a proselyting mission in the eastern states. Her letters to him detail the progress of their son, the new home, and a vegetable garden—one of the hundreds that flourished on Nauvoo city lots.

Elder Smith served a series of missions during the Nauvoo period, some indication of the rapid expansion of the Church's missionary program at the time. By 1846 nearly five thousand Saints had emigrated to America from Great Britain. Because new converts were encouraged to gather to Nauvoo, many made their way to the Midwest, including Sally Randall. She joined Mormon emigration in 1843, traveling from New York with two sons to meet her husband in Nauvoo. "I think it has been recommended full as highly as it deserves," she wrote her nonmember family upon arriving in the Saints' city.

"It is very sickly here at present with fevers and fever and ague and measles, and a great many children die with them," the letter continued. Swamps in the lowlands near the river made Nauvoo's climate unhealthy enough that scores died of malaria each year in August and September. Since children were particularly vulnerable, Bathsheba Smith was not unusual in feeling "uneaseey" when her year-old son, George, became ill. "I was afraid he was a going to have the feavor," she wrote her husband.

View of the Nauvoo House and the Mississippi River at the end of Main Street, Nauvoo, Illinois, ca. 1908. (George Edward Anderson, "Church History in Photograph." LDS Church Archives.)

In spite of the difficulties, population continued to increase until Nauvoo was one of the two largest cities in Illinois. Rejoicing in the blessings of being among Saints, Sally Randall remarked in an 1844 letter to her family, "I wish you could have the teachings that we have here at the conference." Though Nauvoo was without regular meetinghouses, the Saints assembled in homes Sunday mornings and then congregated out of doors, weather permitting, for afternoon preaching meetings. Here Joseph Smith, frequently the main speaker, expounded doctrines concerning the nature of the Godhead, man's free agency and godly potential, and ordinances for living and dead. A January 1841 revelation received by the Prophet commanded the Saints to build a temple that such sacred temple ordinances might be properly performed. In the spring of 1846 the Nauvoo Temple was completed and dedicated.

Women were not part of the public works crews who provided labor for the temple, but they contributed clothing and other provisions for workers as well as funds, through the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo. Bathsheba Smith was a charter member of the group organized in Nauvoo in 1842, with Emma Smith as president, to aid Nauvoo's poor and further the building of the temple. Joseph Smith frequently attended the society's weekly meetings and used the occasions to discuss doctrines concerning women's spiritual potential and responsibilities.

A new doctrine introduced by Joseph Smith at this time, but never publicly taught, was that of plural marriage. Many of the Saints eventually came to accept the new doctrine. Others never accepted it, and the concept became the focus of rumors and accusations against the Prophet and the Church.

Tensions continued to build between the Saints and their nonmember neighbors in Nauvoo with the organization of the Council of Fifty, a group of priesthood leaders concerned with establishing a righteous government in preparation for the Millennium, and with Joseph Smith's candidacy in 1844 for president of the United States. Nauvoo, with its powerful city charter, had been seen by some as a threat to the political stability of Hancock and Adams counties, and the bloc-voting tendency of Mormons had had its impact on Illinois politics. Tensions erupted in June 1844 when a group of dissenting Church members undertook publication of the Nauvoo Expositor to publicize charges against Joseph Smith. The city council, fearing the libelous charges would arouse anti-Mormon mobs, declared the paper a nuisance and ordered press and paper destroyed. [^2]

"Their has been some excitement in town, but I do not feel alarmed," Bathsheba Smith wrote her husband regarding the incident. The situation proved to be more serious than she had assessed it, however. Joseph and Hyrum Smith were both illegally imprisoned at Carthage on charges of treason in connection with the Expositor affair, and both became martyrs when an armed mob rushed the jail. [^3]

"They were Kililled at Carthag on the 27 of June and on 28 they weere braught home and such a day of mourning never was seen," Bathsheba later wrote.

"There are many that will rejoice and think Mormonism is down now but they will be mistaken," Sally Randall assured her family a few days after the martyrdom, "for the Lord has begun his work and he will carry it on in spite of all mobs and devils." Brigham Young headed the Council of Twelve Apostles as they assumed leadership of the largest number of Saints. Through 1845, while construction and industrial development continued in Nauvoo, particularly work on the temple, the Twelve renewed interest in Joseph Smith's plans for colonizing missions in the west, beyond the current U.S. boundaries. In January of that year, as tensions flared, the Nauvoo city charter was repealed, and the following September the Twelve revealed plans for a mass exodus westward. Bathsheba Smith described Nauvoo as "one vast mechanic shop" that fall. Her own parlor became a paint shop for wagons. She and Sally Randall crossed the Mississippi before the fall of 1846, leaving whatever rest they had found in Nauvoo to seek, according to Bathsheba, "a home in the wilderness."

Bathsheba Wilson Bigler Smith (1822-1910)

When the gospel was preached in Shinnsten, Harrison County, West Virginia, in the summer of 1837, most of the members of Bathsheba Wilson Bigler's family were baptized, including her parents, Mark and Susannah Ogden Bigler, and three of her older sisters. Bathsheba's own baptism was witnessed by a cousin of the Prophet Joseph Smith whose second mission for the Church had taken him to West Virginia. What young George A. Smith called "an agreeable acquaintance" with Bathsheba deepened, and they were married in 1841 after Bathsheba's family had moved to Far West and then to Nauvoo and after George A. had served two more Church missions in the eastern states and England.

In the summer of 1842 the couple moved from rented housing in Nauvoo into their own new log house, where a few days later their first child was born—a son named after his father. That September George A, Smith set out on a mission through Illinois, and during the next two years he was frequently away on missions to New York and Boston with other members of the Council of Twelve, giving him and Bathsheba ample opportunity to exchange letters.

After the exodus of the Saints from Nauvoo to Utah, George and Bathsheba established themselves in a Salt Lake City home that came to be known as the Historian's Office. There George A. carried out his work as apostle, Church historian, and counselor to Brigham Young, and he continued to travel frequently on Church assignments. In the Historian's Office Bathsheba reared her two children and carried out her Relief Society responsibilities. Sustained as general president of the Relief Society in 1901, she served in that capacity until her death in 1910.

Several of Bathsheba's Nauvoo letters to George A. are included in this chapter. They represent a larger holograph collection of Bathsheba's letters to George A. now on file in the Church Archives. In the reproduction of the letters here, minimal punctuation has been added.

Bathsheba W. Smith in Utah, ca. 1875. (George Albert Smith Collection. Special Collections, Marriott Library, University of Utah.)

Mr. George A. Smith

Nauvoo Ill Oct 2th 1842

My Dear Companion I sit down this morning to write you a few lines—and feel thankfull to my heavenly Father that I have the privalege. We are well this morning and in midling good sperits. Some little disappointed. I had givven way to a faint hope that you would return with Br [Brigham] Yo[u]ng. Your father said he though[t] it was likely you would, but I was sadly dissappointed when I found not a single line from you. Br Yong hallowed to me and told me you was well and if I wished to send you a line to bring it to his house this evening. Truly that much was a s[a]ttisfaction to me.

George Albert was sick last saterday and sunday. He had quite a feavor. I was vary uneaseey about him. I was afraid he was going to have the feavor. I took him to the fount and had him baptised and sinse then he has not had any feavor. He is about well now. Looks a little pail. I anointed him with oil a good many times and washed his little boddy with whisky and water which was burning with feavor but it did not do the good I wanted it should. I have written to you this will be four times but William did not take one I wrote for him to take. Br [George J.] Adams said he woul[d] take one for me, but I did not much expect it would reach you there. But I have thought since it has. Wheather you write or not I will be vary apt to trouble you with a line evry time I have the chance. I saw your Father friday. They ware all well. [^4] Had received a letter from you. I do not know what to write that well be the most sattisfactry to you. Br Yong will fell you all that is going on.

I have got my corn and fodder secureed, broom corn, sunn[?] flower seed and beeanes likewise. Mellissa [^5] and me did it. Gilbert I expect will dig my potatoes. Uncle George is a going to Keokuc [Iowa] to live. Br [Wilford] Woodruff to I expect my most sosi[a]ble neighbor. Their baby has been vary sick. Mary Ann has the ague [some?] since Jacob went away. Nancy's children has been sick. Thadeas is now sick. [^6] Jeramiah is ve[r]y low with the feavor. Br Alpheas and Jesse Harmon have gone. Appleton [Harmon] intends to go tomorrow. Mother Johnson sends her best love to you. Melissa likewise, and so do I. Br Lightle says he has bespoke a man to plaster my house and he will find lime and sand and hair. I think of getting the two roomes plasterd. Br Canada was hear last Satterday but one. Said he would bring some wheat heare and get it growned [ground] and let me have some flower. Said he would bring an half a bushel of salt and some shugar. I stay at home. Am a fraid to go to meting. Ben a visiting once at mothers. I have had somany melens and my dear was not heare to help eat them. O I am so londsome all alone only [except] baby.

[the writer guiding the baby's hand] I is a good boy. I write to you.

G. A. Smith, Jr.

(I do not no wheathe[r] you can read babys writing)

BWS

[on margin] Write evry chance. You do not know how I want to see you.

Mr. George A. Smith

Newyork City, Ny

Sabbath morning Nauvoo July 16th 1843

My Dear husban, I sit down this morning to address you with a few lines and I pray my heavenly father that these lines may find you in good health and sperits, and likewise the rest of the breathren. My health is midling good at presant. I have had a vary severe coald but have got nearley over it. The baby is quite sick with a coald. He had a vary hot feavor last knight. Father will lay hands on him as he goes to meeting. Thare are a great many complaining with coalds. It is called the influaza. Caroline [^7] has ben sick with a coald but is better now. Sister [Vilate] Kimball toald me Docttor [John M.] Burnhisel was a going to Newyork the middl of next week. [^8] He said he would carry letters to Newyork for us. I have not much to write for I have not heard much since you left. It seemes a long time all though I think I have got a long quite as well as could be expected. Your Father visits us evry day. They ware all to dinner one day with me. We had a plenty of beanes, peas, beets, and sutch like things. O if you could have bin here we would have been quite happy.

I wish I could have been with you and staid untill you started for it seemed sutch a long time untill the boat came. I thought perhaps you would come home again a few minits, but I was disappointed. I wanted to see you vary much. I would have gone to you if I could. O my Dear it is nothing to cry when one feeles as I did when I saw the boat going down. I was pleased to think you would not have to wait any longer, but then how could I bare to have it carry you off so rappidly from me. I watched it untill I could not see it any longer then I held my head for it aked. Soon your father and mother came in. George A cryes pa. He feeles bad. He wants to see you. He often goes to the door to see you. When we say whare is Father, he will say a da pa. Br [Alvin] Hor has brought me a load of wood. Evry thing has passed on smothly sinse you left as yet. I want to heare from you vary mich. Trust I may soon. I will close for the presant.

Sabbath morning July the 23—Dearest Albert as doctor Burnhisel has not gone as yet I again have the privalage of writing to you this morning. My health and sperits are good. George A has had the measels in addition to his coald and cutting teath. He has been quite sick but is getting well fast. He begins to play and croll about again. I expect he was exposed to the measels on the fourth of July. I have not went to meeting sinse you left but stay at home. Sickness has kept me if nothing else, but I think home is the best place for me, this hot weather. Joseph [Smith] preached last sunday. I should liked to have been thare very much. He preaches a gain to day.

Br Far gave me a letter you sent me last friday. He said you war all in good sperits. I shall not attempt to express the joy that I felt when he gave it to me. When I read you had been sick, I felt vary bad for I feared you had not got over it yet or you might take coald agen. I expect it was the influanza the same I had. I began to be sick the day you left, Satterday, Sunday and monday I was quite sick, but thank the lord I am well again a[s] usual, and think my baby will be soon.

I hope and pray you are well by this time. I should be pleased to spend this afternoon with you. It seems to me I could not wish to enjoy my self better than to sit under the sound of your rich and lovely voice and hear you unfold the rich treasure of your mind. Even the sound of your footstep would be music in my eare. I all most forget I am a lone, whilest I fancy to my self how happy I should be. The baby is a waking. I must quit writing for the presant.

Wednesday July 26th

Dearest George A, I am well and in good sperits but want to see you vary much. I cannot help liking to see the time roll away. Little George Albert is nearly well. Has three more teeth. Sister Ridge and Barton are boath dead, died in Fortmaddison [Iowa]. Our folks have had a letter from Jacob [G. Bigler]. He writes he has gained the lawsuit. Their is know telling when he w[ill] get the mon[e]y, for the land will have to bee soald perhaps on six or twelve months credit. [^9] Our gardon stands the drouth as well as any ones I have seen. We have had two or three small raines sinse you left. Our well hoalds out first rate. All the neighbour's come here fore water. I saw Sister [Phebe] Woodruff yesterday. She said she would write by mail for Dr Bernhisell kept putting off starting so much. I think he will go soon. She said she would write some for me so that would answer without me writing by mail.

August 1th 1843 tusday morning

Dearest, G. A. we are all well this morning with the exception of Malissa. She has the measels but is getting better. I received your vary kind letter yesterday. I was vary happy to heare you ware well and in good sperits. Amasa Lyman is sick. [^10] Your Fathers about like you was last winter. John [^11] is agoing to shcool. They are all well. They are all vary kind to me. I feel in good sperits. Think it will not be long untill I see you. I think I shall be able to get the house plastered soon. Dr. Burnhisell has given up going for a while yet so I will send it by mail. He has dissappointed us all vary much. We will try to be good children whilst you are gone. G A can go up stairs alone, but cannot walk qiute yet. Yesterday I received a skain of yorn sent to you by Rosell H. Smith Brown Co Ills. Your father says it is your cousin. Doctor [Levi] Richards was here yesterday. Says tell you we are all alive in Nauvoo only [except] those that are dead. He said tell you he had been heare, then he laughfed. I think he though[t] of what he said to you. Remain as ever yours sincearly B. W. Smith

Mr George A. Smith

Boston, Ms.

Nauvoo Sept 2th 1843

Dear Husban I sit down to write to you again to inform you that we are all well at present and in first rate sperits. I received a letter from you yesterday you wrote me in Pheladelpha which gave me great sattisfaction, for a line from you is the sweetest morsel I can posably get. I should like to have been with you and have seen the things you wrote about much, but I feel like I should be sattisfied if I could see you with out seeing any more. The time rooles a way tolerable swiftly. I hope it is half gone. My prayer is that you may get home before coald weather sitts in.

We got the letter you sent to Presidend [Sidney] Rigdon last Sunday which we was much pleased to get. When I get a letter first all the rest come to heare it. The breatherns wives have all been to see me this week. They are all well. I donot think thar is much sickness. Thare is not in our neighbourhood. We have had several good raines or midling good raines. I think our gardon will be tolerable good. Our potatoes are poor. Vines are quite good. We begin to have plenty of mellons which make many harts rejoice and ours are maid glad. We have a plenty of tomatoes. George Abert feasts on tomatoes and melons. He begines to walk and talk. I think I shall wean him before you get home. He has had the bowell and canke[r] complaint vary bad but is well now. I think it hendered his walking. He has only six teeth as yet.

Our well is dry. We have to go to the Bishops for the last few days. Our cow dose midling well. She dosenot go in the drov[e] for she cannot get any more on the prary than she can get at home. She comes home evry night vary well. With your Fathers [and] others help I shall be enabled to get our house plastered next week. Expect I have got it lathed up stayers with the exceptions of the largest room overhead. I got 10 bushel of lyme of [William?] Nyswanger and uncle [Isaac] Morley gote sand and maid the morter yesterday. I had money to get hair and nailes with the exceptions of one pickoon [picayune] which Melessa let me have. Josiah [^12] let me have fifty feet of lumber and Amos did the carpenter work. Br Moss is sick. He cannot plaster the house. Br [Samuel] Flag says he will. Ickabad got me a gallen of whiskey for pickels. My cowcumbers do well. He said he would get some flower and honey and candells as he could as well as not, but has not as yet. I am a bout out of flower now. Father has brought nearley one bushel of meal[?] sinse you left. Have plenty as yet. Caleb [^13] promest to bring me home the flower he borrowed this week. I think thare is not any danger but I shall get along.

Father and I thought perhaps you would get this before you left Boston and if not no harm done. I have had a fine ride in Josephs big carage. Went six or eigh[t] miles out. Amasa Lymon and family are at your Fathers. Have been thare two or three weeks. Amasa was vary sick but is so as to wride out now. His wife has the egue and feavor. The children have had it but are well now I believe. Perhaps your father will want to write some. Mr. Brown and Melessa talk so fast and so much it bothers me to write. You muss excuse this and look over all my imperfection. I am as ever yours in time and for eternity.

Bathsheba W. Smith

[There follows a short note to George A. Smith from his father, John Smith]

Mr. George A. Smith

Boston, Ms.

Nauvoo June 15th 1844

Dear Husband, I again take my pen to inform you we are well, and most earnestly desire this letter may find you so. We are just done mooping and cleaning the House. Melissa has maid or fixed three fine flower pots. We have got some new window curtens. We are a going to have a good dinner.

We have some appels a stewing for pies. Sister [Catherine] Clawson has just sent word for us to not get dinner, for she would send us some roasted veal.

O how I wish you could take dinner and chat an hour or two with us at least. We have been to the poast office again and a gain but cannot get one word from you. How I do wish I did know you ware well. I think I will get a letter to morrow. I expected one cirten last Wedensday. I sent but no letter. I thought you must be sick or you would have written, for I have been uneasy a bout you for you had to wride in the rain so much. At last I thought perhaps you had written to your Father and thought he would send it to me if you ware scarse of money, but the roads have been so bad, the bridges are most all washed away that it is all most inpossable to go to or come from Messedonia [Macedonia] here. Or perhaps the roads are bad othe[r] places so that the mail might be hendred. I flatter my self with these and other things that you are well and so I though[t] I would write to Boston and perhaps you would get it.

Uncel Asel Smith has been here and ate dinner with us. He says his famaly are weell. He said he was much pleased to see us so well, and getting along so well. I have not heard from Fathers for some time. They wer well the last I heard. Father sent me a quater of a dollar he got for your Books. George has gone to sleep and now I can finish my letter. He is quite well. Can walk nicely, begines to talk considerably begins to look helthy eats harty laugh's a gooddeal, is not half so much trouble stands on his stool to eat, has a plate to himself. Will not sleep with me more than half the time. Some time he will come in the bed an hour or two and be satisfied, but if I take him to bed with me it is against his will. So much for George. He ofen talks a bout you. I think he will not forget you.

We have had a gred deel of rain since you left. All most evry day for 7 weeks it has rained, a great many hard raines. Our sellar has water a considerable hier than the off set or the highest part. The well is vary full likewise. We have had the garden plowed. It looks vary well but wood [do] better if it did not rain so much. The wormes trouble all the neighbor's gardens, but have not mine but little. A great many people have had more or less out of our garden sutch as lettis onions Reddishes and greanes. Indeed I do not know what they would have done if it ware not for us. But to get any one to work in it is like pulling eye theeth. Our earley potatoes are getting quite large. The corn is in tossel. Cabbage looks well. Vines rather poore. Tomatoes in blow. Beets quite large. Will soon have peas. A good many of our flowers are in blossom. Our Cow has had the hollow horn. I believe she is well now. I have soald six pounds of butter since you left.

Their has been some excitement in town, but I do not feel a larmed. The lawites [William and Wilson Law and their associates] [^14] had got their printing press a going. Had printed one paper, and a scanlelous thing it was. The Citty Counsil exzamined its lease and found it a newicence so the atharites [authorities] went and burnt and disstroyed the press. This maid the Lawites mad. They tried to get a mob but failed. Joseph and those that were conserned in it have been tried but wer cleared. The Laws and a good many have gone and are going off.

I have not been to meeting since you left on the hill. I have been twice down to the meeting in Joseph['s] storehouse. I donot go any whar much. My health has been quite good ever since you left. I enjoy my self prety well. Would better if I could hear from you oftener. I received to [two] letters dated May 13th and a few lines May 21th. I have written three times. I do not know whether Sister Woodruff will write or not. I saw her this morning. She was well. I hope I will see you in two months from this day the lord willing. Be of good cheer and come home when you think best. You may besure I will be pleased let that be when it will. May the lord bless you and bring you home safe in health and prosperity. I remain yours affectionately.

B W S

[There follows a short note by Melissa Bigler]

Sister [Phebe] Woodruff has not received any word from B[rother] W[oodruff] since th[e] 21 of May. She and I see ech other and councel a bout writing and wonder why we cannot get a letter. Give my love to Sister Loyd. Tell her I would be pleased to see her. We have had rain evry day this week and I believe it will continue longer by the looks of the time.

B W Smith

[There follows a note from Phebe to Wilford Woodruff]

Mr. George A. Smith

Newark, Kendall Co, Illinis

July 6th 1844

My Dear Husband I sit down this morning to let you know we are all well, and in as good spirits as could be expected considering all things. We have strange times since you left. You will no doubt hear before this reaches you, of the death of our beloved Breathren Joseph and Hirum Smith. They were Kililled at Carthag on the 27 of June and on 28 they weere braught home and such a day of mourning never was seen. It paines me to write such a painfull tale, but the Lord has comforted our harts in a mesure. The Govener [Thomas Ford] begines to open his eyes. He says we are a law abiding People and he has pledged himself and the faith of the State that he will protect us. The mob has tryed to get the govener to get force to exterminate or drive the Mormons but he refuses. We feel as though he would try to redeem his carecter. Br [John] Talor was wounded but is getting bettr is quite weak but quite cheerfull. Br [Willard] Richards was not hurt. They were boath in jail at the time of the masecree. I will not write any more on that sub ject as I expect you will hear all the peticulars before this reaches [you].

I received a letter on thursday from you dated June 14 and this morning your Father sent me two letters from you one dated June the 14 and one dated June 21. I canot express my joy on receivin thes letters. I was pleased to hear you was so well and goot a long so well and had terned torg [toward?] home. I was sorrow to hear you had not heard from home. I have written this makes five times since you left and I write thinking probably you will not get this. You, and the rest of the Twelve are sent for. I expect you will get heare about the same time the rest will. They were sent for to come home as soon as posable.

Br Adams has gone to Boston and J[edediah] M Grant to Washington. [^15] Joseph toald Adams to go and tell the Twelve to come home when the Tragedy was over and a good many more things, whiche he should preache on sunday before he was killed, but the people did not enderstand it. Adams said he was a going to speak in parable. I have understood he said he did not understand all him self but it is explained now. I want you to take good care of yourself and not let the Mobbers get you. I shall pray for you much. I have not realy wished you here since our troubels but I cannot say I have not wished my self with you. A great many ould women expected our Citty to have been in ashes before this time but I have not been bad enought scared to make me trimble, though I have had some bad feelings.

George A is well as usuall has the Bowel complaint some but much better in health than he was when you left. He has been sick once or twice but generly tolerable well. I think he will know you when you get home. We get a long vary well. I have my health vary good. Our garden looks quite as well as anyones I have seen. We have had potatoes thre or four weeks. We have had several messes of boiled corn. Our peas are a bout write to eat. Wish you was here to help eat them. You must excuse this letter for we have had evry thing you could think of talked about since the flood and the worst pen I ever tried to write with by all odds. Sarah [^16] and her children are here and other[s] have been here since I commencd to write. Your Father came out and fanely last Fryday. Staid untill Monday. They were all well. Thought all would come out write at last.

Jacob [Bigler] and Jesse came home in a week or to after you left. Brought some dried Appels but not any monney. I got one bushel of him. We have aplenty to eat. Do not be uneasey a bout us but come home as soon as you can and see how we get along. O my Dear I do want to see you come home. I pray the lord to bring you home safe. Jacob was maried in four weekes after he came home to Miss Ama [Amy Loretta] Chases of Nauvoo. I hav written evry thing up to the war in my letters to you. I received the five dolla[r] note you inclosed in your last. I will put this in the office and wish it may reach you. You are excuseable for not writin oftener. I did not think it was your falt, but I though[t] on account of the rain or the mob for the mail did not come in regular. Four m[ails]* come in this week. The cause of this I have [not]* lerned. I have sent twice a week to the office allmost ever since you left. Tell the good folk to send you home as soon as posable.

Sarah and Melissa sends their love to you. I will close by saying may the Lord bless you with food and ramont and with health and friends and preserve you from all evel and the hand of wicked men. I remain as ever yours for time and eternity.

Bathsheba W. Smith

*Page torn. Word supplied.

Sally Carlisle Randall (1805- ?)

Letters written by Sally Randall from Illinois and Iowa to her family in New England reveal something of the personality and values of a common woman for whom almost no other record is extant. Born in Westmoreland, New Hampshire, a daughter of George and Betsy Torrey Carlisle, Sally married James Randall, and the couple set up house in Warsaw, New York, about forty miles from Buffalo. Their older son, George, was fourteen and their younger son, Eli, ten years old when the family converted to Mormonism and laid plans to gather with the Saints in Nauvoo. In 1843 James traveled ahead to arrange housing for the family, and Sally and the boys met him in Nauvoo that fall, traveling, as did many Saints, on the Ohio and Mississippi rivers.

Anxious to send her nonmember family news of her new home among the Saints, Sally recounts everything from the cost of flour to the new doctrine of baptism for the dead, enlivening the details with her own feelings and opinions. Her last letter speaks of leaving Nauvoo, and the Randalls did travel west with the Saints, though they settled temporarily at a Mormon camp in Iowa before moving to Utah in the 1850s.

The Sally Randall letters included in this chapter have been taken from typescripts on file in the Church Historical Department. Spelling and punctuation have been standardized.

Nauvoo October 6, 1843

Dear Friends,

I take this opportunity to write a few lines to you, knowing that you are anxious to hear from us. We are all in as good health as usual. We had a very good journey and good luck. We did not leave Buffalo until Monday morning and got to Cleveland Tuesday before noon and left there the same day. The lake [Erie] was very rough Monday night. Almost all on board were sick. I was not very sick nor the children, but we had to keep pretty still to keep from it. Brother Williams was very sick. We got to Beaver [Ohio] on Saturday and left there Sunday morning. We landed in Nauvoo the 22 [September] about 2 o'clock in the morning.

I found James in as good health and circumstances as I expected. He has a lot with a log cabin on it and it paid for. The house is very small but I think we can get along with it for the present. He had a table and three chairs. We have no bedsteads yet, but shall have soon. We have a cow is all the livestock we have at present. Provisions are very cheap. We can get good pork for four cents a pound, flour for one dollar and fifty cents a hundred, sugar from 8 to 10 cents a pound. Cows are from six to ten dollars.

As for Nauvoo I cannot tell you much about it at present for I have not seen much of it yet, but what I have seen I think it has been recommended full as highly as it deserves. It is very sickly here at present with fevers and fever and ague and measles, and a great many children die with them.

I expect it is a hard place for poor people that have no money to get a living. There is so many poor that depend on their work for a living that they can hardly get enough to be comfortable. [^17] I am in hopes that we shall get some land to work in the spring. I think if we have our health we shall get along.

I saw Elder [Charles] Thompson and his family last Sunday. [^18] He and Julia [daughter] are sick with the fever and ague. They have another daughter. He says he hardly knows where its birth place was. It was neither in Ohio or Kentucky but somewhere on the Ohio river. His wife said she wished they had waited and come with me. His goods are now in the storehouse for freightage. For about sixty dollars he has moved about twenty miles from here. Brother Williams sends his particular respects to father and wanted I should tell him how much it cost me. It cost me twenty-two dollars beside what I paid for provision and that was but a little. I could not had better company than he was nor one that would have been more interest[ed]. I feel to respect him so very much for his kindness to me. Them people went from Alexander [New York] as we expected was all the company we had. The boats were all very much crowded that we were on. The last week we were on the water was the warmest weather. I think my butter was entirely melted and some run out, but did not hurt it. My cheese came full [aged] as well as I expected.

George is a little homesick I think, but he don't say much about it, but Eli is one of the contented sort. They have gathered some walnuts and hazelnuts. They miss grandfather's orchard very much. You may tell Mrs. Patterson that I have enough to eat yet and that is good enough, only I have no meat today, but may have tonight.

I don't want George to send any money in a letter at present. [^19] Give my respects to all inquiring friends. I think you will not complain of me this time for not writing a full letter and I hope you will do the same and that soon too. I have wrote till I hardly know whether I am in Nauvoo or some other place. I should have written before, but I waited to see Elder Thompson. I shall write no more at present.

Sally Randall

I forgot to tell you we had a good well of water. I can work with it very well. We have two beef cattle to kill.

When George sends money I want it put in my hand.

Nauvoo November the 12

[1843]

Dear Friends,

I take my pen this morning to write a few lines to you, although with a trembling hand and a heart full of grief and sorrow, to inform you of our afflictions which are very great.

It seems more sometimes than we are able to bear, but it is the Lord that hath done it. Therefore, let us try to be reconciled.

George has gone to try the realities of eternity. He died the first day of this month about 3 o'clock in the morning. He was sick three weeks and three days with the ague and fever. He had it every other day about two weeks, and then every day till he died. We did not consider him dangerous only about three days before he died, and then medicine had no effect on him at all. He was taken in fits the day before he died and had them almost without cessation as long as he lived. When he breathed his last he went very easy, but oh the agonies he was in before it seemed I could not endure. He was not well after we got here, nor he was not contented and the Lord has taken him from the evils of this wicked generation. I know he is better off than the rest of us, but it seems hard to part, but I think the separation will not be long if we are faithful. His father took his death very hard and so did Eli. When we thought he must go, Eli said he wanted to tell George goodbye. It seemed as though my heart would break, but the Lord hath given and he hath taken his own to himself.

I have one request to make and that is that you will not cast any reflections and say if we had not come here he might have been alive, for we don't know. I believe it was the will of the Lord that we should come that his body might be laid with the Saints.

My health is good and has been ever since I got here and James has enjoyed good health. Eli is not well. He has a chill and fever every other day and I don't know but the Lord will take him to be with George. It seems as though my dependance was all gone, as though I had but little to live for. O mother, place not your affections too much on George for life is uncertain and death is certain.

I delayed writing sometime for it seemed to me that I never could write again. It is not as sickly here as it has been, but there is a good many deaths now. People are coming in very fast. There was a boat load came in yesterday from England. I have not more to write at present. Give my respects to all inquiring friends. I want you should write soon.

Sally Randall

Nauvoo April the 21, 1844

Dear Friends,

I take my pen once more after a long time to write to you to let you know that we are all yet alive and in as good health as usual. James's health is not good. Mine is about the same it was last spring. Eli is much better than he was last fall. He goes to school this summer. He went three months in the winter. He is well contented.

George was not contented. He said after he was taken sick he was glad he hadn't got to always live here, but I don't think he thought he should die. After I found he must go he could not speak so that I did not talk with him about dying. I don't know that he spoke after Monday. He did not make Eli any answer when he bid him goodbye. Oh what a trying time that was to me and it seems yet that I cannot be reconciled to have it so, but I have no doubt but he is better off than he would be here and will come forth in the first resurrection, which will be in this generation according to our faith. His father has been baptized for him and what a glorious thing it is that we believe and receive the fulness of the gospel as it is preached now and can be baptized for all of our dead friends and save them as far back as we can get any knowledge of them. [^20]

I want you should write me the given names of all of our connections that are dead as far back as grandfather's and grandmother's at any rate. I intend to do what I can to save my friends and I should be very glad if some of you would come and help me for it is a great work for one to do alone. It is father's privilege to save his friends if he will come into the church. If not, some other one must do it. I expect you will think this is strange doctrine but you will find it to be true. I want to know whether Lettice was over eight years old when she died. [^21] Oh, mother, if we are so happy as to have a part in the first resurrection, we shall have our children just as we laid them down in their graves.

I wish you could have the teachings that we have here at the conference. The 6th of April it was supposed there was from ten to fifteen thousand people.

Charles Thompson has buried his Julia and the people that came on with me from Alexander have buried their oldest child about three years old. It is quite healthy here at present. There are a great many coming in this spring. I understand John C. Bartholf is coming on this fall.

Eli wants you should send his cow bell and the rest of his little things that was left and if my shears and guage are there I want them sent. I have not seen them since I left. I have no news to write at present. I have not worked very hard since I have been here, but I have had enough to do. But I would have been glad to had some of mother's wool to spin last winter.

I expect you and the neighbors would like to know how we have lived. We have done very well. We have had a plenty of meat, milk, butter, flour, and corn. What fruit I bought has done very well. I have some left yet.

Now I want to know what father and the rest of the people thinks of Joseph Smith being president. If they want a righteous man at the head let them vote for him.

I shall write no more this time. Write to me and excuse me for not writing sooner. I received your letters about the first of March. Give my respects to all inquiring friends.

Sally Randall

Nauvoo July the 1st, 1844

Dear Friends,

I take this opportunity to write to you to let you know that we are all as well as usual, and hope these lines will find you enjoying the same blessing. We have had a very wet season so far. It is hard times especially for poor people. I expect you will have heard of something of our trouble before you get this and will want to know the truth, and I will write it as near as possible.

It has been about three weeks since the fuss begun. In the first place there were six or eight apostates cut off from the Church and from that time the devil has been raging with all fury. They got up a printing press and went to printing all manner of lies and abominations that could be thought of against the prophet and the heads of the Church, and the City Council held a council and agreed it was a nuisance and ordered it destroyed and it was done. We have been expecting the mob upon us ever since.

The governor was sent for by Joseph [Smith]. He came to Carthage, the county seat about fifteen miles from here, and there he stopped. The mob were then gathered there and the apostates with them. I would like to give you all the proceedings of the governor but my pen would fail me. He sent for Joseph and all that were concerned in destroying the press and said if they would come then they should be protected and have a trial according to law. They all gave themselves up and went, but instead of having a trial they were put in prison. The governor then sent and took away the state's arms and sent in a company of troops he said to protect us. [^22] The prisoners were all set at liberty except Joseph and his brother Hyrum and two of the Twelve, Elder [John] Taylor and Elder [Willard] Richards. And Thursday the 27th of June the governor came to this town and said he had dispersed the mob from Carthage and the same day about six in the afternoon was one of the most horrible crimes committed that ever history recorded!

[Women's Voices, page 141]

Sampler Embroidered by Mary Ann Broomhead, age 13, 1844. 13Â½" x 21". (Arts and Sites Division, LDS Church Historical Department.)

There were about one hundred and fifty of the mob made an attack upon the courthouse and the guards and went into the jail and the first one they shot was Hyrum. He was killed dead on the spot. Elder Taylor was badly wounded. Joseph then jumped out of the window. They shot him I know not how many times. The mob then fled as quick as possible. They were painted. There were some crossed the river the next morning and the paint was to be seen on them. There was only eight men left to guard the courthouse. The governor left this place the same day about sundown and took his troops with him. They got about four miles from here. They met a man coming to fetch the sad news and took him back, would not let him come. So we did not get the news till the morning.

If you can imagine to yourselves how the apostles and saints felt when the Savior was crucified you can give something of a guess how the Saints felt here when they heard that their prophet and patriarch were both dead and murdered, too, by a lawless mob. Never has there been such a horrible crime committed since the day Christ was crucified. It seems that all nature mourned. The earth is deprived of the two best men there was on it. They have sealed their testimony with their blood.

Joseph sent word to the Church after he went to prison to read the 6[th] chapter of Revelations and take particular notice from the 8[th] to the 12[th] verse. I have no doubt but that he knew he should be killed when he gave himself up. He told his wife when he left her he was going as a lamb to the slaughter and many other things give us reason to believe he knew what would befall him. He gave himself up to die for the Church that they might not be destroyed for it seemed all they [the mob] wanted was to kill him and they have done it. But I don't know as they will let us alone now, but I hope they will be easy a little while. They say there is nine more they are determined to have, and when it will end I don't know I expect.

There are many that will rejoice and think Mormonism is down now but they will be mistaken for the Lord has begun his work and he will carry it on in spite of all mobs and devils.

Now one and all of my friends as honest people, I entreat of you if you have any influence to use it now in our behalf among all people and in all places. I don't know how long we shall be permitted to stay here nor where I shall be next time I write if I ever have another opportunity. I am not sorry I am here at this time. I want you should write to me. I have not had but one letter from you since I came here. I have written you a long one this time. Give my respects to all inquiring friends. I have been braiding some this summer, but it is hard getting palmleaf. I intend to braid straw. I shall write no more at present.

Sally Randall

Nauvoo January the 15, 1845

Dear Parents and Brothers and Sisters

I take the opportunity to write a few lines to let you know that we are all yet in the land of the living and in good health, and hope these lines will find you all enjoying the same blessing. I have delayed writing a long time. I did not get the letter you sent by Mr. Bartholf. They left it to Elder [Almon] Babbitt's and they say there is no letter there and for that reason I have not heard anything particular from you since you wrote last winter. I have not seen Mrs. Bartholf but once since they came here. They live about 20 miles from here. She was well suited. I got the other things you sent by them and was very thankful for them.

Mrs. Bartholf told me Eliza had a son. I wish them much joy and hope it may live to be a blessing to them. I suppose Mother Nickols feels better if she has got to be a granny.

Eli talks and dreams a great deal about grandfather's folks and their apples, but when he wants an apple to eat he has to get a turnip. He is learning sword exercise this winter. As for myself I am not doing much of anything and yet have enough to do, but does not amount to anything. As to our living we have a plenty to eat and people can live as well here as anywhere, all excepting fruit that is very high this year. But provision is cheap: flour 2 dollars per hundred, wheat 50 cents, corn wt[?], pork from 2 to 3 dollars per hundred. Store goods are as cheap here as they were there although I have not bought anything but tea and a little sugar and hard work to get that, but people that have money can live as well as they please. But I think I have written about nonsense enough.

I expect you want to know something about the Church. It is peaceable times at present, but the mob characters and dissenters threaten of something in the spring, but we don't fear them much for we never shall be drove from here. We are too strong for them ourselves and besides that there is already ten hundred thousand of the Lamanites baptized into the Church and they are waiting very impatient to avenge the blood of Joseph and Hyrum. We have to keep men among them to keep them back or they would been here before this time. [^23]

I expect you will think this is not right but the Lord will not suffer his people to be always afflicted as they have been and he does own this Church as a people and there is no other Church on the earth he does own and if you don't believe it now there is a day a coming when you will know it. I think if you could know the great things that are revealed from day to day you could not stay away. I want father and mother to be baptized themselves and when the temple is done come here and be baptized for all of their friends. They can save their progenitors clear back to the apostles' day and if they don't do it some other one will and take their crown.

I expect the temple will be done in a year from this time so that they will be attending to the ordinances. [^24] It has gone on with great speed since the death of Joseph. If you knew what the Saints do I think you would not stay there long. If I could fly I would make you a visit once in a while and tell you some things, but I cannot write but a little and I must close for the present. Give respects to Brother Disbro's family. Tell them they are losing ground. My respects to all inquiring friends.

Sally Randall

I saw Charles Thompson the other day. He seems to enjoy himself very well.

Nauvoo June the 1, 1846

Dear Parents and Brothers and Sisters,

I now take the opportunity to write a few lines to you to let you know we are all well as usual. I received your letter written in March and was glad to hear from you once more. We expect to start in a few days for the West. Where we shall go I know not, but we are going into the wilderness. We go as Abraham went, not knowing whither we go, but the Lord will go before us, and be our front and rearward. The Saints have been going steady since last February and are still going by hundreds. They cross the river in several places and cross day and night.

Sampler embroidered by Ann Eckford, ca. 1846. 13Â½" x 18Â½". (Arts and Sites Division, LDS Church Historical Department.)

The [word missing] room of the temple is finished and dedicated to the Lord. It is a most splendid building. We received our endowments last winter with the rest of the Saints in the temple, but those things are not for any only such as belong to the Church of Christ and I am very glad that I am worthy to have a name with the Saints of God and enjoy the privileges that I now do and I would rejoice if my friends would receive the gospel and go with me. If I could even have one friend, it would be great consolation, but if you will not receive the truth, the more I shall have to do for our dead friends. It is my privilege to be baptized for all of our friends that are dead and I intend to do it, unless some of my friends that are living will come and help me, and the more I do the greater will be the crown.

You think there is no need of going from here, but the mob are threatening continually to come upon us. We heard they were coming today but I have not seen anything in the least, for I believe there is faith enough in the city to keep them back until the Saints all get away. We have to make a great sacrifice in order to get away. The most of the Saints are selling out although at a very low price. I expect the temple will be sold. The Roman Catholics talk of buying it. [^25]

Tell Mr. Disleno I expect he will make Mr. Holman's words true about going to Zion in his shirt. I think the time is not far distant when those that wish to be saved from destructions that are about to come upon this generation will have to flee for their lives. Tell Mrs. Disleno I have no notion of going to Wisconsin. I intend to follow the body of the Church and not be led about by every wind of doctrine nor by any false prophet that shall arise in these last days. [^26] Mr. Bartholf and family are going to [word missing]. I have not heard anything of Elder [Almon] Babbitt's going to France. He is one of the trustees of the temple.

I expect you have heard about enough of this kind of talk but out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh, and I will not trouble you much more. Lettice is married instead of coming to Nauvoo. I wish her much joy, but I do not think she has bettered her name. Eli goes to the prairie every day with the cattle to feed. We are going with a yoke of oxen and a mule. We have cows to drive. I don't know when I shall have another opportunity to write, but as soon as I have I will improve it, and I must close for the present so goodbye to all, earthly friends. Give my respects to all inquiring friends.

Sally Randall

Footnotes

While there have been over twoscore books relating to the Nauvoo period of the Church's history, those desiring additional background might profitably read the following: David E. Miller and Della S. Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph (Santa Barbara and Salt Lake City: Peregrine Smith, Inc, 1974); Robert Bruce Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1965); and Kenneth W. Godfrey, "Causes of Mormon Non-Mormon Conflict in Hancock County, Illinois, 1839-1846" (Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, 1967).

---
Notas:
[^1] From mid-September 1846 to May 1848 the sexton reported some 359 deaths at Winter Quarters and nearby Cutler's Park. Allen and Leonard, Story of the Latter-day Saints, p. 236.
[^2] The trail journal of Eliza R. Snow was first published in Improvement Era 46 (1943) and 47 (1944). Later The Pioneer 5 (1953) and 6 (1954) carried the journal, and Our Pioneer Heritage 17 (1974) published excerpts. Nicholas G. Morgan, in compiling Eliza R. Snow: An Immortal (Salt Lake City: Nicholas G. Morgan Foundation, 1945), included a large portion of the journal. Maureen Ursenbach Beecher is in the process of editing the journal in its entirety with a biographical introduction and notes.
[^3] See Eliza R. Snow, "Sketch of My Life," a holograph autobiography prepared for Hubert Howe Bancroft in the 1880s, now in the Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley, California, microfilm of holograph, Church Archives. In the sketch she discusses her marriage to Joseph Smith, pp. 13-14. See also Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, "Leonora, Eliza, and Lorenzo: An Affectionate Portrait of the Snow Family," Ensign 10 (June 1980):67.
[^4] Sarah Melissa Granger Kimball (1818-1898) and her widowed mother, Lydia Dibble Granger (1790-1857?), were close friends of Eliza Snow in Nauvoo and in Salt Lake City, where Sarah served as secretary to Eliza in the Relief Society.
[^5] Lorenzo Snow (1814-1901) was the first of Eliza's three younger brothers; he and a sister, Leonora, were the only members of the family to accompany Eliza in the Saints' westward trek.
[^6] Louisa Beaman and Clarissa (Clara) Decker were wives of Brigham Young. Sarah Lawrence had been a plural wife of Joseph Smith, and after his death, she had married Heber C. Kimball.
[^7] This poem has been published. Millennial Star 10 (May 15, 1848): 160; also Eliza R. Snow, Poems, Religious, Historical and Political (Liverpool: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1856; Salt Lake City: Latter-day Saints' Printing and Publishing Establishment, 1856), 1:161-62.
[^8] See Manuscript History of the Church, Brigham Young Period, 18441877, March 1, 1846, manuscript, Church Archives. This forty-seven volume work was compiled by clerks and historians under the direction of Brigham Young and others.
[^9] Poem published in Millennial Star 10 (July 1, 1848): 208; Snow, Poems 1:163-64.
[^10] Elizabeth Ann Smith Whitney (1800-1882), wife of Presiding Bishop Newel K. Whitney (1795-1850) and Eliza Snow had been well acquainted as "Campbellites" or Disciples of Christ, before joining the Latter-day Saints.
[^11] Sarah Ann Whitney Kimball (1825-1873) was a daughter of Newel K. and Elizabeth Ann Smith Whitney.
[^12] Amasa Lyman (1813-1877) was a member of the Council of the Twelve from 1842 to 1867 and frequently met with Church leaders and counseled the Saints during the westward trek.
[^13] John E. Page and William Smith, the last surviving brother of Joseph Smith, were members of the Council of the Twelve who were dropped from the quorum and excommunicated from the Church for dissenting from the leadership of Brigham Young and the Twelve. James J. Strang, a Church member who claimed to be the appointed successor of Joseph Smith, gathered a number of followers and established a church, and Page and William Smith both followed him for a time, William Smith had earlier made his own claims to church leadership. See Allen and Leonard, Story of the Latter-day Saints, pp. 240-41. Orson Hyde, another member of the Council of the Twelve, had remained in Nauvoo to help direct Church affairs there. Luke Johnson, a former apostle who had been excommunicated in 1838, came to Elder Hyde in Nauvoo in February 1846 and requested rebaptism. Manuscript History of the Church, 1844-1977, March 12,1846.
[^14] Poem published in Millennial Star 10 (June 1, 1848): 176; Snow, Poems, 1:146.
[^15] Mary gives a brief sketch of her life in England and her departure for Nauvoo in "The Memorandum of Mary H. Parker," photocopy of holograph, Church Archives.
[^16] Henry Phineas Richards was the brother of Mary's husband, Samuel.
[^17] The Richards family had formerly resided in Richmond, Massachusetts. Maria Richards Wilcox was the sister of Mary's husband, Samuel, and wife of Walter Eli Wilcox.
[^18] Mary met Ellen Wilding in Preston, England, in 1838 or 1839, and apparently the two young English women formed a friendship that endured for several years. Ellen became a plural wife of Edwin D. Woolley in Nauvoo in 1843. See Leonard J. Arrington, From Quaker to Latter-day Saint: Bishop Edwin D. Woolley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), pp. 114, 489.
[^19] This meeting of the Twelve and the Indians is recorded in the Manuscript History of the Church, 1844-1877, December 12, 1846.
[^20] Stephen H. Goddard (1810-1898) was one of three trustees of the concert hall in Nauvoo, where he apparently directed a singing school or choir. He opened a singing school in Salt Lake City in 1848 and directed the choir that sang in the city's Old Tabernacle. Journal History, January 24, 1845; Andrew Jenson, Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia: A Compilation of Biographical Sketches of Prominent Men and Women in the Church, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Andrew Jenson History Co., 1901-1936), 4:704-5.
[^21] The record of this meeting as contained in the Manuscript History of the Church, 1844-1877, December 20, 1846, corroborates Mary's account, showing her to be a careful listener and reporter.
[^22] Henry and Mary Moyer Grow and family lived near the Parkers in Nauvoo. Files of Nauvoo Restoration Incorporated, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^23] In the fall of 1846 Church leaders considered sending three hundred men to the headwaters of the Yellowstone River for the purpose of opening farms there, but plans for settlement still centered on the valley of the Great Salt Lake or the Bear River Valley. See Allen and Leonard, Story of the Latter-day Saints, p. 237.
[^24] Biographical information pertaining to Patty Sessions and her family is contained in The Diaries of Perrigrine Sessions, comp. Earl T. Sessions (Bountiful, Utah: Carr Printing Co., 1967). Claire Noall, Guardians of the Hearth: Utah's Pioneer Midwives and Women Doctors (Bountiful, Utah: Horizon Publishers, 1974), pp. 22-51, includes a biographical essay on Patty Sessions. Information regarding the deaths of her children is from the family group sheet of David and Patty Sessions, Church Genealogical Archives.
[^25] See Chapter 1, note 38, for reference on the use of brandy in light of the Saints' commitment to the Word of Wisdom.
[^26] The diary of Patty Sessions makes frequent reference to the gathering of women with or without men to exercise spiritual gifts, such as speaking in tongues, healing the sick, or calling down blessings through prayer. This practice among Mormon women is discussed more fully in chapter 1.
