Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 ( 1982)

Chapter Seven

Immigration

"Some Little Description of My Travels"

"I am now, with my children, about to leave forever my native land in order to gather with the Church of Christ, in the valley of the Great Salt Lake." So wrote Jean Rio Griffiths Baker, a convert of two years, as she prepared to leave London in January 1851. Forty-nine years of age and recently widowed, Jean Rio was one of 15,000 British converts who left England for Utah between 1849 and 1857. Patience Loader was another; in 1856 she, with her parents and brothers and sisters, boarded a Mormon immigrant ship at Liverpool to begin the journey to the Zion newly established in the tops of the Rocky Mountains.

The gathering that had commenced when the Saints first assembled in Ohio, and had continued in Missouri and Illinois, took on new meaning and strength as the main body of Saints settled in Utah. They saw in the building of their Great Basin kingdom the literal fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy "that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it." During the 1850s missionaries were sent to Europe, Latin America, the Pacific Islands, India, Asia, and South Africa, carrying out the commission to teach all nations and gather together the dispersed children of Israel from the four corners of the earth. [^1]

Elders instructed those whom they baptized—new members of the spiritual community of Saints—to join with the temporal community of Saints in Utah in order to "rear a Temple unto the Lord . . . to more fully keep the commandments of God than they can here in Babylon . . . [and to] be near where the Prophets and Apostles of God reside." [^2] Missionary success outside of Europe was minimal during this early period, but in Europe, particularly in the British and Scandinavian missions, it was phenomenal. When Patience Loader sailed from Liverpool in 1856, she and her family accompanied nearly five hundred Danish Saints to New York. At that time the Scandinavian Mission was baptizing some one thousand converts each year, about one-fourth of whom gathered to Utah.

River view of the city of New Orleans, after an illustration published in Harper's Weekly, 1867. (Leonard V. Huber Collection. Historic New Orleans Collection. New Orleans, Louisiana.)

This mass migration of new converts to Zion required organization and means, both of which the Church provided through the Perpetual Emigrating Company. Incorporated in 1850, the company supervised migration and administered the Perpetual Emigration Fund, a fund based on donations of cash and property from Saints in the Great Basin. There were converts, such as Jean Rio Baker, whose personal means adequately covered their journey to Utah, but thousands of emigrants—butchers, shoemakers, weavers, clerks, farmers—depended on the rotating fund to assist in or totally finance their westward travel. Ideally, as they repaid their indebtedness the PEF could finance further migration. Despite the fact that many debts were never repaid, the PEF financed emigration until its dissolution in 1887. By that time the Church was firmly established, and Church leaders placed less emphasis on building a stronghold of Saints in Utah.

Liverpool agents for the PEF chartered ships for emigrants or, if it was not possible to charter a full ship, an agent arranged to have part of the ship sectioned off for Mormons. On board, Saints were organized into wards or branches with returning missionaries presiding over each group. Larger ships had as many as twelve wards, sometimes formed according to language groups. In her diary Jean Rio recounted aspects of daily life during her eight weeks on board the George W. Bourne, including such details as the role of the presiding elders and shipboard provisions for bathing. Conditions varied from ship to ship, though Mormons were generally well known for their organization and orderliness. Morning and evening prayers, shipcleaning, and religious classes were typically part of the daily routine.

In 1851 the George W. Bourne carried Jean Rio and other Saints from Liverpool to New Orleans, where PEF agents booked their steamboat passage up the Mississippi River to St. Louis. By the mid-1850s, the New Orleans route was abandoned in favor of Atlantic crossings to New York, Philadelphia, or Boston with passage to St. Louis by rail. This was the route followed by Patience Loader and her family in 1856. From St. Louis the Saints continued to outfitting posts in Iowa.

PEF agents outfitted Saints with teams and wagons to prepare them for the overland journey. "A life of toil, fatigue, and privations, to which we are unaccustomed," Jean Rio anticipated. Five months of travel across the Plains was wearying but bearable for most. Many immigrant families encountered sickness and death in the course of the rugged crossing, but the only large-scale tragedies occurred in 1856 when two companies of European Saints, including the Loaders, left Iowa City late in the season. Church leaders had hoped that large numbers of poor Saints could walk across the Plains carrying their possessions in handcarts, and the safe arrival in Salt Lake City of the first three handcart companies in fall 1856 seemed to fulfill their hopes. [^3]

In the meantime, however, the Willie and Martin companies had been stalled in Iowa City awaiting completion of their handcarts. Due to their late start, they were caught in early snows in Wyoming. Rescue teams arriving from the Salt Lake Valley in mid-October were shocked to learn that more than two hundred members of these companies had frozen to death. "We know that if God had not been with us that our strength would have failed us and bodys would have been left on the plains as hundreds of our poor brothers and sisters was," Patience testified after she arrived in Salt Lake City. By 1860, the last year for handcarts, over three thousand Saints had walked to Zion. Beginning in 1869 immigrating Saints came to Utah by rail.

The gathering to Zion was an experience of unparalleled newness for Saints who had never before been away from their native lands. Like many other immigrants, Jean Rio Baker and Patience Loader sought to capture the richness of their new experiences by writing them down for others. Patience loved to recreate her traveling companions by relating their very words and conversations. Jean Rio carefully drew word pictures to share new landscapes and cities with her family in England. "As you are aware," she wrote them, "I am not one to go through the world with my eyes shut." Her eyes since have opened more eyes than she might have imagined.

Jean Rio Griffiths Baker (Pearce) (1810-1883)

Unlike most of the immigrants who journeyed to the Great Basin, Jean Rio Griffiths Baker left England with a fine education and considerable means. Her daily accounting of the journey from Liverpool to Utah is the work of a woman of remarkable perception and literary skill. The record is not reminiscent, however, and only sketchy facts exist concerning Jean Rio's life previous to her immigration. The daughter of John Walter and Susanna Burgess Griffiths, Jean Rio married Henry Baker, a civil engineer, in 1832. The couple were baptized Latter-day Saints in London in the summer of 1849, following the example of their oldest son. Henry died that fall, leaving Jean Rio and seven children well provided for. [^4]

When the Bakers boarded the George W. Bourne at Liverpool in January 1851, they were an even dozen among the 281 passengers en route to New Orleans. Jean Rio traveled with her six sons: Henry, William, Edward, John, Charles, and Josiah; her daughter, Elizabeth Ann; and four in-laws. Nearly all the passengers on the George W. Bourne were Latter-day Saints, and Jean Rio provides some telling glimpses of their interactions as a shipboard congregation.

The excerpt selected for this chapter includes the first four months of the diary Jean Rio kept for about fifteen months, until March 1852, when she settled in Ogden supposing she had "finished my ramblings for my whole life." A few additional entries indicate that she married Edward Pearce in 1864, but was widowed within six months. In 1869 she moved to California, and she returned to Utah only briefly to visit her children. The following excerpt is taken from a photocopy of a typescript in the Historical Department of the Church. The location of the original is unknown. Spelling and punctuation have been standardized.

Jean Rio Griffiths Baker. (Portrait Collection. LDS Church Archives.)

January 4, 1851. I this day took leave of every acquaintance I could gather together, in all human probability never to see them again on earth. I am now, with my children, about to leave forever my native land, in order to gather with the Church of Christ, in the valley of the Great Salt Lake in North America.

Jan. 5. Left London for Liverpool. On arriving at Euston found that the train had gone two hours [before]. Took lodging for the night.

Jan. 6. Arrived in Liverpool at 8 P.M.

Jan. 7. Passed our medical examination and went on board the ship George W. Bourne, on which our passage is taken. Myself, six sons, one daughter, one daughter-in-law and my late husband's brother and Uncle [Jeremiah Bateman] and Aunt [Mary Ann Bateman]. Also Mr. [Zachariah] and Mrs. [Mary Shepherd] Derrick and four children.

Jan. 8. Myself and eldest son paid a visit to Mrs. Naish at Oxton in Cheshire. I have now, I suppose, seen the last of all my friends in this country.

Jan. 11. The ship towed out onto the river to be ready for a fair wind.

Jan. 12. Sunday. Meeting on deck in the afternoon, spent the evening in singing.

Jan 13. Provisions served out for a week. Laughed heartily at our supply of oatmeal, 70 pounds! [^5]

Jan. 15. The ship has just got foul of the mooring chains of a government hulk, and lost her largest anchor and cable. The wind has been very high the last four days but against us. The ship rolls as badly as if she were off the North Finland in a gale and that is no joke, as I well know.

Jan. 17. The anchor has just been fished up.

Jan. 19 Sunday. Wind still contrary. Meeting held between decks.

Jan. 23. Shift of wind in our favor. At 10 A.M. the tug hauled us out of the [Mersey] river into the Irish Sea. At 6 P.M. the wind turned dead against us. More than half of the passengers sick, and we who have escaped are obliged to hold onto anything that comes in our way in order to keep on our feet.

Jan 24. The wind blowing tremendously—only 10 out of our company of 181, but are seasick. Myself, I am happy to say, with Eliza, are in the minority. [^6]

Jan. 25. We have had a dreadful night; the ship has seemed as if she really must turn over several times. Some of the passengers terribly frightened, but as for myself, the sea has never had any terror for me at any time. One of the sisters delivered of a fine healthy boy this A.M.

Jan. 26. Sunday. Meeting between decks. Sacrament administered, after which a couple were married by our President Elder [William] Gibson.

Jan. 30. I went on deck today—the first time in a week, and a bad week it has been. All my children, except Eliza, have been sick. Contrary winds all the time. The wind has not advanced us twenty miles for the past six days.

Jan. 31. A clear view of the Irish Coast. It appears very mountainous at this distance, quite as much so as the Welsh Coast. Saw many fishing boats in Dublin Bay—also five ships. This wind has changed in our favor, and if it continues, we hope soon to be out of the horrible Irish Sea. My dear little Josiah continues very weak, but is not, I think, any worse than when we left home. Oh how I pray that the sea may return his health.

Feb. 1. We are going at the rate of eleven miles an hour. Mr. and Mrs. Derrick are very poorly, also Aunt and John. The dear child has suffered more from sickness than any of us. Josiah has escaped it and I hope is recovering.

Feb. 2. Sunday. We are now on the broad Atlantic, the wind still favorable. Meeting as usual. Cooked our last piece of fresh meat this day.

Feb. 3. Plenty of wind—going at twelve miles an hour. Seven or eight porpoises playing around the vessel. Passed a Dutch ship, which saluted us.

Feb. 4. Spoke to an English schooner. Wind not as good.

Feb. 6. Almost a dead calm the last two days. The folks at home are, I suppose, sitting by good fire while we are on the deck enjoying the view of a smooth sea in warm sunshine.

Feb. 9. Sunday. Meeting on deck. A fresh breeze has just sprung up.

Feb. 14. Still favorable wind. We have averaged eight miles an hour since Sunday. Preaching on deck this evening by Elder Thomas Margetts. I can hardly describe the beauty of this night—the moon nearly full, with the deep blue sky studded with stars, the reflection of which makes the sea appear like an immense sea of diamonds. And here we are walking the deck at nine o'clock in the evening without shawls or bonnets. What a contrast from this day three weeks ago when we were shivering between decks and not able to keep on our feet without holding fast to something or another. If we managed to get on the upper deck the first salute we got was a great lump of water in the face. Well, I have seen the mighty deep in its anger with our ship nearly on its beam end, and I have seen it as now, under a cloudless sky and scarcely a ripple on its surface. I know not which to admire most. I cannot describe it as it should be described, but I feel most powerfully the force of those words "the Mighty God" which Handel has so beautifully expressed in his Chronicles. [^7]

Feb. 15. Still a fine wind. Three sails in sight. My dear little fellow not so well tonight. Signs of squally weather.

Feb. 16. Sunday. We have had a heavy gale all night. Scarcely one in ten can keep our footing on the deck. The sea looks like a number of hills rolling over one another. We are obliged to sit on the deck to [eat] our meals and hold our plates pretty firmly to prevent their running away from us. My little Charles fell down the after hatch-way this afternoon. It seems almost a miracle that he is alive, having fallen on his head. Josiah very poorly.

Feb. 17. The wind has moderated a little but still squally.

Feb. 18. The weather very rough all night. Saw schools of flying fish this morning. Josiah rather worse than better. I am afraid.

Feb. 19. A good breeze in our favor.

Feb. 22. At half past 5 P.M. my little Josiah breathed his last. He had sank rapidly since last Tuesday, when he practically lost his speech. I did not think his death was so near, though when witnessing his sufferings, I prayed that the Lord would shorten them. He has done so, and my much beloved child is in the land of the spirits awaiting the morning of Resurrection, to again take possession of a tabernacle, purified and fitted to enter the presence of the Great Eternal, in the Celestial Kingdom. The Captain has given me permission to retain his little body until tomorrow, when it will be committed to the deep, nearly one thousand miles from land, there to remain until the word goes forth for the sea to give up its dead. Then shall I have my child again, and with those others who have gone before him, to present before the Lord, never again to be separated. [^8] I do feel this trial to be a severe one. I had hoped to be able to take all my family safely through to the city atop the mountains. My poor little Charles, too, is suffering with inflammation in his eyes. Has been blind for two days. Spoke to a French war brig today.

Feb. 23. Sunday. The body of my dear little boy is removed to a snug little cabin under the forecastle, where the male adults of my family have watched it all night. The second mate with the assistance of Uncle Bateman have sewn up the body of the dear little fellow ready for burial. At eleven o'clock the tolling of the ship's bell told us that the time had come that the mortal part of my dear child was to be committed to the deep. Elder [William] Booth conducted the services, in Longitude, 44/4 West, Latitude, 25/3 North. This is my first severe trial after leaving my native land. But the Lord has answered my prayer in one thing—that if it was not His will to spare my boy to reach his destined land with us, that He would take him while at sea, for I would much rather leave him at sea than alone in a strange land. Charles's eyes are better today. He can open them a little. The rest of us are in good health.

Feb. 24. A most tremendous squall this morning with such a storm of rain as I have never seen before. It had the appearance of a dense fog. The deck was covered with water to a depth of three or four inches in less than five minutes, rushing through the scuppers in a torrent. The passengers were all ordered below so that I was unable to watch the effect of the storm, but our ship was in a greater bustle for a short time than I have ever seen it. Every sail was taken in, and in a minute or two the vessel began to roll and pitch as if she would turn us all into footballs. Keeping your footing was impossible, so that the only alternative was to sit on the deck and hold on as best we could. This lasted about an hour when we could go up on deck again. We found that the storm had passed away, but we had the effect of it in a heavy swelling sea during the remainder of the day. Charles's eyes are much better.

Feb. 25. Fine weather. Numerous schools of porpoises just ahead of us. One of the brethren struck one and hauled it on board. It measured five feet in length. It was soon skinned and cut up into pieces. A part of it was presented to me. I did not much admire it—it was like very coarse beef and in color, very black.

Feb. 26. Squally weather and the heat almost unbearable. Charles's eyes nearly well and the rest of us in good health. The sea is covered with foam and gulf weed, with a flying fish here and there springing out of the water and a few porpoises tumbling over and over as if enjoying the warm sun. Our ship is in the center of an immense circle bounded only by the clouds. All is grand and beautiful and fully repays me for the inconveniences of a sea voyage. By the by, I have said nothing as yet about our everyday life. A bugle sounds every morning to let us know it is six o'clock, when all who think proper, arise. At 7:30 it sounds again for morning prayer, after which, breakfast. We then make beds, etc.

We employ ourselves during the day according to our inclinations. Sometimes a few musical ones get together and have a few tunes. Sometimes [a few] get together and gossip and so the day passes. When we have rough weather we have enough to do to keep on our feet and laugh at those who are not so clever as ourselves! But we are most of us getting our sea legs as the sailors say. For my part, I can now walk the ship when she is rolling and pitching with tolerable care. I have only had two tumbles from the first. Sometimes a lurch will come of a sudden when we are at our meals, and capsize our teapot, and send us one over the other, but we are getting accustomed to it so we are on our guard. Our general custom is to sit on the deck and take our meals in our laps. Each family have their own department in front of their berths and can have their meals without being intruded upon by others. We can cook our food in any way we please and amuse ourselves in any way we please (within the bounds of decorum), go to bed and get up when we choose. Indeed we are under no restraint whatever. Our president is, I believe, a really sincere servant of God. His name is William Gibson, a native of Bonny Scotland, and his office is to watch over us as a pastor, to counsel, exhort, reprove if necessary. In short, to see that all our doings are in accordance with our profession as Saints of the Most High God. I much regret that we cannot have his company to the Valley. He will leave us at St. Louis.

March 2. Sunday. Meeting as usual. The last three days have been a succession of exceedingly heavy squalls, to the terror of many of our company who have been again attacked with sea sickness. I have much reason for gratitude that neither myself nor my family have suffered. I have gone on deck as often as I could, but the motion of the boat was so violent that I could not do so without difficulty. It was awful, yet grand to look at the sea. I could only compare it to an immense cauldron, covered with white foam, while the roaring of the wind and waves was like the bellowing of thousands of wild bulls. Conversation on deck was out of the question. I could only look on, and wonder and admire, for through our literal ups and downs I have felt no fear; and were it not that my bones ache with the incessant motion, I should feel no inconvenience. I was on deck this morning about six o'clock to see the sun rise but was disappointed, the weather being very cloudy, but not so boisterous as it was yesterday. We have now a fair wind and are progressing at the rate of nine miles an hour. I hope it may continue, for the last few days have driven us back some hundreds of miles.

March 9. Sunday. Fair wind and plenty of it for the whole of last week. We have passed the Bahama Islands and are happy in the expectation of seeing the land of America soon. We had a sad meeting this afternoon. Elder Booth was suspended from fellowship for inconsistent conduct.

March 10. I came on deck at five o'clock this morning to enjoy the cool breeze and see the sun rise. The heat is intense during the day, and it is dangerous to be on deck with the head uncovered. Nearly half our company are affected, more or less, with prickly heat. The Captain has supplied us with a large tub for the purpose of bathing the children, and the little ones are, many of them, dipped in it every morning. The men amuse themselves after another fashion: they don a thin pair of drawers and pour water over each other, proving the benefits they receive by the increased healthiness of their appearance. This evening we came in sight of the island of Abercoa. [^9] It has a stationary light.

March 11. Passed the islands of Great and Little Isaacs, Green Turtle Island. The last we were within three miles of and could see the houses on it, with a number of small schooners lying at anchor. About the middle, on a rising ground stands a revolving light which made a brilliant appearance. The island is about forty miles across.

March 12. Passed Bush Island, also Double Headed Shot. This last is not exactly an island, but a long chain of rocks. At the distance we were, it had the appearance of long detached rocks or buildings. On one stands a tall light house bearing a stationary light. We are now in the Gulf of Florida. Held a meeting this afternoon in which three of the sisters were cut off the Church for levity of behavior with some of the officers of the ship, and continued disregard to counsel of the president. Also Elder Booth and Sister Thom. The conduct of these two has been most shameful ever since we came on board ship, and since they were placed under suspension it has been worse than it was before. Brother Thom is deeply grieved at the conduct of his wife. He is an excellent man and a pattern for every man in the Church. We all hope he will soon be able to forget her entirely. Such a woman deserves no place in the remembrance of a man of God.

March 14. Fine weather, intensely hot. Passed seventeen sails of various sizes. Upon measuring the water it is found that we have enough for twenty-three days supply. Our allowance has always been ample. I was on deck this morning to see the sun rise; there was not an atom of cloud to be seen in any direction. I have often read of the beauty of Italian skies, but I am sure they can not exceed in splendor that which at this moment arches over the Gulf of Florida, or Mexico, as it is mostly termed.

March 16. Sunday. Meeting as usual. Saw a water spout at half past eleven A.M. At seven in the evening a violent squall came on, driving most of the passengers below, myself, with a few others, remaining on deck, bidding defiance to the rain, for the sake of enjoying the lightning. It was very beautiful, seeming to illuminate one half of the horizon at once. We heard no thunder.

March 17. We have had a very rough night, and have rolled about nearly as badly as when skirting the Bay of Biscay. Aunt and Mrs. Derrick as sick as they were in the Channel. Foul winds all day. When I came on deck this morning, it was as much as I could stand, and to my astonishment, the sun was rising on our starboard bow instead of astern of us. It is now 8 P.M. and the wind has veered a little in our favor.

March 18. A fine boy has been born in the night. At 10 A.M. a boat brought a pilot, a horrid-looking fellow, the very facsimile of a pirate. We can now see land plainly. At twelve o'clock a steamer came and took hold of us and at two o'clock we were at anchor at Belize, a pretty looking little village. [^10] A boat has come alongside loaded with oysters, which has found a ready market.

March 19. Coming on deck this morning I was struck with the appearance of the water. It is a perfect mirror. The reflection of the houses on shore is seen as clearly on the water as they are above it. There is a small schooner lying at anchor right by the landing place, and every rope and block in the rigging is seen reversed, exactly as if standing in an immense looking glass. The water is quite still as much so as in one of our cisterns at home. At 9 A.M. a steamer took us in tow, and we are now going up the river—the Mississippi.

March 20. Our ship is at anchor at New Orleans, 170 miles from the mouth of the river. We arrived here at 5 P.M. today. To describe the scenery on each side of this mighty river needs a better pen than mine. No description that I have ever read has done it anything like justice. Sugar and cotton plantations abound. The houses of the planters are built in the Cottage style, but large with verandas on every side and beautiful gardens. At a little distance are the Negro huts, from thirty to fifty on each plantation. They are built of wood, with a veranda along the front, painted white and mostly have either Jasamine or honeysuckle growing over them. Each cottage has a large piece of garden or ground attached to it. In general appearance, they are very superior to the cottages inhabited by the poor in England. Groves of orange trees are very numerous, the perfume from which is delightful, as the breeze wafts it toward us. Thousands of peach and plum trees are here, growing wild, and are now in full blossom. We saw plenty of wild geese, also foxes and a racoon or two; storks fly by here in numbers, over our heads, and settle down on the river side, and stretching out their long necks look at us as if in astonishment. There is an endless variety of landscape. The only thing which detracts from its beauty is the sight of the hundreds of Negroes working in the sun. Oh Slavery, how I hate thee! [There follows a description of the city and the slave market.]

March 23. The steamer Concordia came alongside and received us and our luggage. So we start for St. Louis.

March 29. Arrived at St. Louis. Our portage up the river has been delightful. You must know that an American steamboat is nothing like our English one. If I describe the Concordia it may serve for a general description, though some are larger and some smaller. Its length is 300 feet, its width 60 feet. It is flat-bottomed and when heavily laden draws seven feet of water. She is built of fir and is consequently very light. The engines and boilers are on the deck; the stoke-hole is quite open on each side and the firemen have an uninterrupted view of the country. The head of the vessel is pointed, the stern circular. There is a clear passage of eight feet in width all around the boat, except where it is stopped by the paddle boxes, and these have good steps both up and down. From this, which is called the lower deck, you ascend by a handsome flight of steps to what is called the hurricane deck, which is an open gallery five feet wide entirely round the vessel, with a low railing next the water and roofed overhead. There are chairs here for the accommodation of the passengers. On the inner side of this gallery is a row of cabins with two doors each, one opening on to the gallery and the other into the saloon, which is 150 feet in length and thirty feet in width. Here the cabin passengers dine, etc. The ladies cabin is placed astern; its size is fifty feet by thirty, and [it] is splendidly furnished with sofas, rocking chairs, work tables and a piano. The floor (as well as that of the saloon) is covered with Brussels carpeting. There is also a smoking room for the gentlemen, opening out of the saloon forward, in which are card tables, etc. In front of this there is a large open space, the whole width of the ship, roofed over like the gallery and furnished with seats.

From this is another staircase leading to the upper deck, on which are built several neat cabins for the officers. The one forward encloses the steering wheel. Here stands the pilot completely secured from wind and weather. To the wheel two ropes are attached which are conveyed downward to the lower deck. Each rope is fixed to a lever which works the rudder. The whole arrangement is very simple and the elevated position of the pilot (forty feet above the lower deck) enables him to see and avoid any collision with snags, which are pretty plentiful still. Government has done much toward cleaning them away by sending out what they call snag boats, with men in them to either drag away the snags by force and let them float off, or by sending down divers to cut them off close to the mud. . . .

St. Louis is 1,250 miles from New Orleans in the State of Missouri. It is a large and fine city extending five miles along the river side and about half as far inland. The plan of New Orleans will apply to this city, so that no other description is necessary. I took a house for a month into which we had our luggage brought and once more found ourselves in a home, though but a temporary one. It contains two parlors, two bedrooms, and an outhouse answering all the purposes of kitchen and wash house, a large yard with back entrance, and a cellar, in which I found coal enough to last me three months, left by the last tenant. I suppose the reason for this apparent waste is to be attributed to the cheapness of the article. The mines are but seven miles from the city.

The next discovery that I made was that I wanted a cooking stove, which I purchased for $14 with all the utensils belonging. Early in the evening a gentleman by the name of Howard came to the door and introduced himself as a member of our Church, appointed by his branch to visit all newcomers, enquire of them if they are in want of anything, and see that their needs are supplied. Here I would say that I feel under much obligation to Brother Howard for his untiring kindness and advice to us all during our stay in St. Louis. His wife also greatly attached herself to me. She introduced me to the best stores of all kinds and was the means of saving me many a dollar. Their house is exactly opposite to mine, and they have a family. Their children and mine soon became acquainted and enjoyed themselves finely in their rambles about the town and the country beyond. The markets are extremely good. They open at four o'clock every morning except Sunday. All kinds of meat, poultry, and fish is very cheap. The flesh meat is good but not so large and fat as in English markets. Vegetables and fruit are abundant and of great variety. Groceries, wines, and spirits are very cheap. I have omitted to say that we have found the weather gradually cooler as we came up the river.

April 4. We had a heavy fall of snow and were glad to sit by a good fire. On the next day, to our astonishment we were glad to throw open the windows. And this I am told is the general character of the American springtime, but the summers are intensely hot. We had one day of heavy rain, with thunder. On the following morning I looked in vain for the road, but saw a perfect river in the place of it, and Mrs. Howard at her parlor window laughing at my very evident amazement. The sidewalks are all right, being raised so much above the road, and the lumps of stone I have before mentioned in describing New Orleans enable the pedestrians to get on pretty well. As to the horses, or oxen, which are more commonly used, except in private carriages, they dash through it without ceremony, sending the water in all directions—which, to those like ourselves who do not believe in sprinkling, is not very agreeable. The town, however, being built on a rising ground from the river, is soon dry again.

The churches are magnificent buildings. By the by, any place of worship, but let it belong to any denomination it may, has a steeple, and is called a church. The Catholics have three churches surmounted with a large gilded cross, the Presbyterians have three (two of them splits from the first), the Baptists have four, the Episcopalians and Independents several each. Too, there are the Methodists, Lutherans and Swedish churches, so that the religions are as plentiful as can be wished. The poor despised sons of Africa have a little church to pray and praise the Lord in, too. It is only lately that their white masters have allowed them this privilege. The Mormons have six meeting rooms. They also have the use of the Concert Hall on Market Street on Sundays, which holds 3,000 persons. I could but feel amazed to see that spacious room filled to overflowing and the staircase and a lobby crowded with those who could not get inside. They have an orchestral band and a good choir, ten of whom are trebles.

I went on Palm Sunday to one of the Catholic churches. I had as good a squeeze as I ever had on trying to gain admission to one of Julian's concerts. When I did get inside, the lay brother in attendance put me in a seat where I could both see and hear to advantage. The mass was splendid. They have a powerful organ and a fine set of singers. The solos and duets were beautifully performed; the organ gave the choruses a much finer effect. After the service was ended I was allowed to look around the interior of the building. At the upper end are three altars, the High Altar, of course, in the center. The altar cloth is of white satin, richly embroidered, edged with rich lace, half a yard in depth. The coverings for the cushions are in purple velvet. The altar rails are of black walnut, handsomely carved and polished. On each side are seats for the scholars and nuns of the adjoining convent. Strange-looking beings these last! They wear black woolen shawls reaching down to the hem of their coarse black camlet gowns, a close bonnet made of black glazed cambric, and black crepe veils reaching to the knees. Well may they be called the Black Nuns. The attendant priests wear long black gowns with a hempen cord around the waist, to which hangs a rosary and a crucifix.

On each side of the building are confessionals with dark green curtains. The walls are ornamented with a number of finely executed oil paintings, but horrible to look at, all of them representations of the martyrdom of the different saints. In the upper part of the church (over the gallery) are several little chapels dedicated to various saints. And gloomy places they are, but the altar in each of them is much ornamented. Adjoining the church is a college, similar, I am told, to that at Marynorth. So much for public places!

I have purchased four wagons and eight yoke of oxen, each wagon to hold a fourth part of our luggage and provisions for our journey. [^11] Our four wagons are to leave here in company with sixteen others on April 19 for Alexandria, by steamboat, and then travel overland to Council Bluffs to join the company who intend to go on to the Valley this year.

April 19. At 5 P.M. went on board the Financier steamboat. On each side of the vessel was lashed a barge, one of which received our wagons, the other our cattle. Seeing this we thought it better to waive our rights to berths in the steamer and betook ourselves to our wagons, where we made our beds and slept in comfort without the constant jerking which is always caused by the action of machinery. In the morning when I drew aside the curtains in the end of my wagon, I was almost startled at finding myself close to what I took to be a stone wall, but looking upwards, found it to be a pile of rocks some hundreds of feet in height, the top of which was covered with verdure. I cannot describe the grandeur of the scenery—it was almost appalling. In some places it seemed almost as if the pressure of a finger would have sent it toppling down. These rocky shores are so perpendicular that our boat could run, in safety close enough for us to pluck the blossoms off the trees which grow at their base and in the crevices within our reach here and there. Masses of the rock had fallen, and trees and shrubs had grown in their places.

Every few miles we came to a town built near the river side, the hills behind rising above the tops of the houses. Leaving the towns, we every now and then saw the cottage of the solitary settler, with its enclosure of perhaps forty or sixty acres of land, the cattle and sheep grazing and pigs and poultry running at liberty. The man and his elder children would, in most cases, look at us as we passed, sometimes waving by way of a salute, while the wife would stand watching at the door, usually with a child in her arms. We passed hundreds of these farms and tens of thousands of acres without an inhabitant.

While [I was] gazing on the scenes, a gentleman passed me on the edge of the barge, and looking up I saw that he was intoxicated. I had scarcely turned my eyes from him when I heard the shouts of the passengers that someone had fallen into the river. Going around to the other side, I saw the same gent who had just passed me, struggling for his life. The boat was stopped instantly and every effort made to save him but to no purpose. As he sank he threw out his pocketbook, which was picked up by one of the men and given into the hands of the clerk in order to be restored to the relatives of the deceased. It contained his address and $275. It appeared that he was a citizen of the town of Hannibal in the state of Illinois. He was the owner of what is here called a flat, which is a sort of barge, very wide and long and made square in both ends. These are filled with produce of various kinds, roped in and the sides closed. At one end a cabin is built for sleeping in. These flats are taken down to New Orleans. The freight is taken out and sold. The vessel is then taken to pieces and the lumber sold, the owner taking his passage on a returning steamboat to his home, and when arrived there, set to and built another one, load it, and away again. These flats are built entirely of fir planks and are very light. They seem to just lie on the surface of the water and when laden will carry from fifty to eighty tons. Our unfortunate fellow passenger had been down to New Orleans and was returning with the profits of his journey when he met his death in the way I have described, not more than fifty miles from his home. Our vessel remained some time stationary, but we saw him no more. The probabilities are that he had been sucked in some hole, with which the bottom of this river abounds, or his clothing caught by a sawyer, from which he was unable to extricate himself. This occurrence cast a gloom over us for the remainder of the passage.

I was glad when we landed on the eighteenth in the evening. And a bad landing it was for our poor cattle, for the brutality of the men belonging to the boat was most shameful, and many of the poor beasts suffered much on consequence. However, we all got ashore at last and without losing any of our luggage, which was more than I expected. We drew up our wagons on an open space of ground, by the side of the river, close to the town of Alexandria in the state of Illinois, and here we made our first encampment. We then made a fire, there being plenty of wood lying about in all directions, and soon had our kettles boiling. We sat down to a comfortable cup of tea. Afterwards the men took our cattle to water and then placed them in a large yard near at hand, having procured some hay for their food for the night. During this time we got our beds made in our wagons, and on the return of the brethren we unitedly offered up our thanks to the God of Heaven for bringing us here in safety through unseen and unknown dangers, and then retired to rest, feeling sure of His protection during the night.

I should like here to say a little about this mighty river which I have seen in all probability for the last time. Mississippi is the name given it by the Indians, signifying "Father of Waters." It has been explored, I am told, for 4,800 miles without coming to its source, and is supposed by some to at last loose itself in the Pacific Ocean. It has more tributary streams than any river in the known world. It is of various widths, and on its surface shows many small islands inhabited only by birds and otters. The water is very muddy but perfectly sweet and as soft as rain water. The instant you leave the Gulf of Mexico the water is entirely free from salt, the current running only one way—that is, toward the sea. The distance from St. Louis to this place is 230 miles, so that I have traveled 1,630 miles, and I will say that such scenery, both wild and beautiful, I had never expected to look upon. It has seemed to repay us for all our inconveniences, and here we are all in good health.

I do not expect so much pleasure in our overland journey, as we must expect a life of toil, fatigue, and privations, to which we are unaccustomed. When I recall to mind the various scenes through which we have passed, and the thousands of miles we have traveled during the past three months, and the manifold instances of preserving mercy we have received at the hands of our Heavenly Father, I doubt not I shall still (if I remain faithful) enjoy the same protection upon land which I have done upon the water. I have told you as well as I could the major part of what I have come in contact with, and the future will most likely be an account of trials, difficulties, and privations such as at present I have no idea of, so as to be able to provide against them. But as you are aware I am not one to go through the world with my eyes shut. I expect to be able to send you some little description of my travels to amuse you in a winter's evening. In the meantime, may the God of Heaven bless you eternally. . . .

Patience Loader (Rozsa Archer) (1827-1921)

When James and Amy Britnell Loader were baptized near Oxford, England, in the winter of 1850-51, their twenty-three-year-old daughter Patience declined to join them because she liked fun, and to her religion seemed "long-faced." The fourth of the Loaders' thirteen children, Patience had been working in London for several years at the time her parents were baptized. When she moved closer to home and witnessed the daily lives of Latter-day Saints, she found their way of life attractive. She investigated the Church and was baptized in June 1853. [^12]

Along with her parents, three sisters, and two brothers and in-laws, Patience emigrated to America in February 1856. The Loaders rented rooms in New York and planned to stay there for a year to earn enough money to outfit themselves for the westward trek. In May, however, they received word that they should leave immediately for Iowa City and prepare to travel west by handcart. Because the Loaders and other members of the Martin Company waited in Iowa City most of July while their handcarts were constructed, they reached Council Bluffs about three weeks behind schedule. Realizing that in starting so late they risked an encounter with early winter storms, the group still voted to go forward. More than one hundred members of the company lost their lives during the three-month journey. James Loader died on the trail at the end of September, leaving Patience, her mother, four sisters, and a brother to complete the trek by themselves. The following excerpt from Patience's reminiscence begins just after the death of her father and ends with the entry of the Martin Cornpany into Salt Lake City on November 30.

Patience Loader Rozsa Archer in later years, when she frequently recounted her handcart experience. (Drusilla Loader Smith family collection. Pleasant Grove, Utah.)

In this reminiscence which she wrote in her later years in Pleasant Grove, Utah, Patience also detailed her early life and her marriage to John Rozsa. [^13] The reminiscence exists in typescript at BYU, and the original is in private possession. The original spelling was preserved in the BYU typescript and has been maintained here. The typescript contains no punctuation, but minimal punctuation has been added here for clarification. Capitalization in the typescript is very irregular, particularly with letters g, m, k, s, and w, which in some handwriting are neither distinctively upper or lower case. Since in most other instances Patience's capitalization is regular, use of these letters has been regularized.

The night and morning began to get very cold. About the begining of October we had the first snow storm. We was then at the black hills. We halted for ashort time and took shelter under our hand carts. After the storm had past we traveled on untill we came to the last crossing of the Platt river. Here we meet with the wagon company. Thay was campt for the night. We the hand cart [company] had orders from captain Edward Martin to cross the river that afternoon and evening here. Poor brother stane [Jonathan Stone] was missing. He was sick and laid down to rest by the road side. He fell asleep it was suposed. Some of the breathren had to go back in sea[r]ch of him and when thay found him he was dead and nearly all eaten by the wolves. This was a terrable death poor man. Br Stone was aloan [lone] man from London England.

As I said we had to cross the river. Mother went to see Mrs. Ballen thay in the wagon company. Sister Ballen gave Mother three good sliceses of bread and molaces [molasses] for us girls. Br Nathen Porter from Centervell [Utah] had been to England on a mission. After landing in New York he was taken very sick. Bro Bestan took him to his home to take care of him. Here we became acquainted with Bro Parter. My sister Maria and myself took turns in siting up at night. He recou[p]ed in health suficiant to go home to Utah. That season he bought a muel and road crossing the plains in the wagon company when we meet with him at the Platt river. He remembered our kindness to him through his sickness. His heart went out in sympathy for Mother and us girls when we told him that dear father was dead. He fealt so sorrey to see us having to wade the river and pull the cart through. He took Mother on his muel behind him telling her to hold fast to him and he would take her safely through the water. Then he told Mother that he would return and bring our cart through the river.

This we did not know that he intended doing so we started to cross the river and pull our own cart. The water was deep and very cold and we was drifted out of the regular crossing and we came near beign drounded. The water came up to our arm pits. Poor Mother was standing on the bank screaming. As we got near the bank I heard Mother say for God sake some of you men help my poor girls. Mother said she had been watching us and could see we was drifting down the stream. Several of the breathren came down the bank of the river and pulled our cart up for us and we got up the best we could. Mother was there to meet us. Her clothing was dry but ours was wett and cold and verey soon frozen. Mother took of[f] one of her under skirts and put on one of us and her apron for another to keep the wett cloth from us for we had to travle several miles before we could camp. Here Mother took out from her Apron the bread and molaces Sister Ballen gave her for us. She broke in peices and gave each some. This was a great treat to us and we was all hungary. It seemed to give us new strength to travle on.

When we was in the midle of the river I saw a poor brother carreying his child on his back. He fell down in the water. I never knew if he was drowned or not. I fealt sorrey that we could not help him but we had all we could do to save our ownselvs from drownding. That night we had no dry cloth to put on after we got out of the water. We had to travle in our wett cloths untill we got to camp and our clothing was frozen on us and when we got to camp we had but very little dry clothing to put on. We had to make the best of our poor cercumstances and put our trust in God our father that we may take no harm from our wett cloths. It was to late to go for wood and water. The wood was to far away that night. The ground was frozen to hard. We was unable to drive any tent pins in. As the tent was wett when we took it down in the morning it was somewhat frozen so we stretched it open the best we could and got in under it untill morning. Then the bugle sounded early in the morning for us to travle seven miles as we could not get any wood to make a fire. There was snow on the ground.

We had a good many sick people more than could ride in the sick wagon so the captain apointed Brother Ward to take charge of the inveleads as he had traveld the plains so many times having been on several misseans. Captain Marten thought he would be the right man to put in charge of the sick and bring them sefe to camp but this araingment failed. The poor man misstook the road and thay got lost. The captain started Bro Ward out of camp along time in the morning before the main companys started so that thay should be able to get to camp before we arived there. It was aterrable day. It snowed and drifted and the wind blowed all day. We traveled seven miles and when we campt there was no signs of Brother Ward and his sick breathren. Then captain Marten called for some of the breathren to go back and find the company of Inveleads and when it was geting dark thay returned bringing in nineteen all f[r]ozen. I never knew if that was all that started out in the morning or not.

Now I must say after we got to camp we found we had to go along way to go for wood so my sister Maria and myself went with the breathren to get wood. We had to travle in the snow knee deep for nearly a mile to the ceders. We found nothing but green ceder as all the dry wood on the grown[d] was coverd over with snow. I ask one of the breathren to cut me down a shoulder stick so he kindly gave us quite alarge heavy log. My sister took one end on her shoulder and I raised the other end on to my shoulder and started back to camp. We had not gone very far when we boath fell down with our load. The snow beign so deep made it very hard work for us to get back to camp with our load but after much hard work we got there. My Mother and sisters was anxiously awaiting our return for thay was boath hungrey and cold in the tent.

As soon as I could get some wood chopt I tryed to make afire to make a little broath as I had an old beef head. I was allways on the look out for anything that I could get to eat not only for myself but for the rest of the family. We got off] the skin from the beef head chopt it in peices the best I could put it into the pot with some snow and boiled for along time. About four o clock in the after noon we was able to have some of this fine made broath. I cannot say it tasted very good but it was flavord boath with sage brush and from the smokey fire from the green ceder fire. So after it was cooked we all enjoyed it and fealt very thankfull to have that much. It would have tasted better if we could have alittle pepper and salt but that was aluxury we had been deprived of for along time. After I done with my cooking the beef head for that day I took the pot into the tent for thay was all [waiting] anxiously for there dinner and supper together. For after we had eat what we could the remainen was left for the next day. I put the fire into the bake oven and took it in the tent and we all sat around it to keep us warm as we could. We young folks had drank our broath. My Mother was still drinking hers. The captain of the company came with two other breathren and fetched poor brother John Laurey to our tent. Since my poor father died this brother had staid in our tent as he had no friends with him. He was alone. He was one of the poor Inveleads that was lost. Brother Toone said to Mother give him somthing warm. Mother said I have alittle hott soup Patience made for us. I will share with him. Thay left this brother with us to take care of. We tryed to give him alittle with atea spoon but we could not get the spoon between his teeth. Poor dear man. He looked at us but could not speak aword. He was nearly dead frozen.

It got dark. We rapt him up the best we could to try to get warm but he was two far gone. We all laid down to try to get warm in our quilts the best we could my Mother and myself and sister Jane in one bed my sister[s] Tamar Maria Sarah and my little brother Robert in the other bed and poor brother Laurey in his own bed. Poor man. He had only one old blanket to rap him in. We had a buflow roab. This he had over him. After we was in bed it was a dark loansome night he commenced to talk to himself. He called for his wife and children. He had previously told me that he had a wife and nine children in London and that thay would come out as soon as he could make money enough to send for them.

He said he was counceld to come to this countrey first and leave his family in England for atime. He was told that he could earn more money in this countrey than in England. He was a taylor by trade and had never been acostomed to working out doors. Poor man. I doubt if he had lived to come to Utah that he would have made but very little money working at His trade for in those days there was but very little call for Taylors as there was but verey few people could aford to employ a Taylor to mak there clothing. And another thing there was but very little cloth in Utah. Some folks was able to get own made geans and the sisters generly made all there husbands and boys clothing as they had nothing to pay for tayloring to be done.

In the night we could not hear him talking any more. I said to Mother I think poor brother [Laurey] is dead. I have not heard him for the last hour. Mother ask me to get up and go to him. I got up but everything in the tent seemed so silent and then was such a sadd feeling came over me. It was so dark and drear that I said to Mother I cannot go to him. She sais well get back in bed and try to get warm and wait untill daylight. Of course we did not sleep. Early as it was alittle light I got up and went to the poor man. Found him dead frozen to the tent. As I turned him over to look in his face never can I forget that sight. Poor man. I told Mother that he was dead. She said go and tell Brother Toone. I went to his tent. Told him Br Laurey was dead. He said well he will have to be buried. He told me we would have to rap him in a quilt. I said he has no quilts. He has only one small thin blanket and we cannot spare any of our quilts as we had allready used one to rap my dear father in when he died. So we rapt him in his own little blanked and the breathren came and took him away to burey him with eighteen more that had died dureing the night.

What a deplorable condition we was in at that time. Seven hundred miles from Salt Lake and only nine days full rations. That morning the bugal sounded to call us together. The captain ask us if we was willing to come on four ounces of flour aday. All answered yes. We had allready been reduced to half pound pr day. [^14] Well we return to our tents. I had left the remainer of the beef head cooking on the fire. The next tent to ours was Br Saml Jones and sister Mary Ann Greening was traveling with Sister Jones and family. Sister Mary Ann was at her fire cooking something. I dont [know] what she had to cook. I am sure she had but little. We look around towards the mountains and she called out oh Patience here is some Californians coming. And as thay got nearer to us I told her no thay are not Californians. It is Br Joseph A. Young from the valley. [^15]

He was acompanyed by brother Hanks or James Furgeson I cannot say which it was of those two breathren with there pack animal. Thay came to our fire. Seeing us out there Br Young ask how many is dead or how many is alive. I told him I could not tell. With tears streaming down his face he ask whare is your captains tent. He call for the bugler to call everybody out of ther tents. He then told the captain Edward Martin if he had flour enough to give us all one pound of flour each and said if there was any cattle to kill and give us one pound of beef each saying there was plenty provisions and clothing coming for us on the road. But to morrow morning we must make a moove from there. He said we would have to travel 25 miles. Then we would have plenty of provisions and that there would be lots of good breathren to help us that thay had come with good teems and good coverd wagons so the sick could ride. Then he said that he would have to leave us. He would have liked to traveled with us the next morning but we must cheer up and God would bless us and give us strength. He said we have made a trail for you to follow. He bid us good bye.

Thees breathren had to go still further seven miles to the Platt river as the wagon company was still campt there and thay was in great disstres as there teems had given out. So many of them and there provisions was givingout and geting very short. After the Breathren had left us we fealth quite encuraged. We got our flour and beef before night came on and we was all busy cooking and we fealt to thank God and our kind brothers that had come to help us in our great disstress and miserey for we was suffering greatly with cold and hunger. When night came we went to bed. We slept pretty comfortable more so than we had done for some time. We fealt assured hope. We was all glad to make a moove from this place.

It seemed that if God our Father had not sent help to us that we must all have persihed and died in a short time for at that time we had only very little proveseans left and at the request of Br Martin we had come on four ounces of flour a day for each one to make the flour last us as long he could. I dont know how long we could have lived and pulled our handcart on this small quantity of food. Our provisions would not have lasted as long as thay did had all our breathren and sisters lived but nearly half the company died and caused our provisions to hold out longer.

Accordingly we struck tents in the morning and packed our carts and started on our journey again. It was a nice bright morning but very cold and clear. The snow was very deep in places. It was hard pulling the cart. I remember well poor Brother Blair. He was a fine taul man. Had been one of Queen Victoreas life guards in London. He had a wife and four small children. He made a cover for his cart and he put his four children on the cart. He pulled his cart alone. His wife helped by pushing behind the cart. Poor man. He was so weak and waurn down that he fell down several times that day but still he kept his dear little children on the cart all day. This poor man had so much love for his wife and children that instead of eating his mosael of food himself he would give it to his children. Poor man. He pulled the cart as long as he could then he died and his poor wife and children had to do the best thay could without him to help them. The poor children got frozen. Some parts of there bodys was all sores but thay all got in to Salt L City alive but suffering. Wether the children lived or not I never heard as they went north of the city and our family went South.

I will say we traveld on all day in the snow but the weather was fine and in the midle of the day the sun was quite warm. Some time in the afternoon a strange man appeard to me as we was resting as we got up the hill. He came and looked in my face. He sais is you Patience. I said yes. He said again I thought it was you. Travel on. There is help for you. You will come to a good place. There is plenty. With this he was gone. He dissapeared. I looked but never saw whare he went. This seemed very strange to me. I took this as some one sent to encurage us and give us strength.

We traveld on and when we got into camp there was five or six of the breathren with there wagons camped there. They had been and got quantitys of wood and thay had allready made about adozen big fires for us and there was plenty of lovely spring water. That was agreat treat to us for the last water we had seen was when we crossed the Platt river. We had nothing but snow water and that did not taste very good as we had to melt it over the campfire and it tasted of sage brush sometimes ceder wood smoke. We fealt very thankfull to our breathren for making us thees good fires and suplying us with wood so abundantly. I realy must say that I was very thankfull for since our dear father died it had fallen on me and my sister Maria to get the most of our wood and I thought it was so good that we did not have wood to get that night after such hard pulling all day through the snow and it was nearly dark when we got in camp.

It seemed good to get apound of flour again. That night the breathren fetched out some provisions and clothing but thay said thay had not got much to give us as thay did not know how long thay would be there that thay would have to wait untill the wagon company was heard from. Thees breathren was very kind and good to us did everything thay could for us. This place was Willow Springs. Here it was that poor William Whittacar died. He was in the tent with several others. In one part of the tent he and his Br John occupied and the other part of the tent another family was sleeping. There was ayoung woman sleeping and she was awoke by poor Br Whificar eating her fingers. He was dieng with hunger and cold. He also eat the flesh of his own fingers that night. He died in the morning and was burid at Willow Springs.

Before we left camp that day we traveld a good many miles. We meet several wagons load with provisions and clothing. From this time we began to get more to eat and some shoes and warm under clothing which we all needed verry much some worse than others. I was thankfull to get a nice warm quilted hood which was very warm and comfortable. I also got apar of slippers as I was nearly bear foot. We still had to pull our handcart for atime as there was not wagons suficiant for all to ride. Only those that was sick could ride but every day or two we would meet teems & wagons and those that was the most give out was taken into the wagons.

When we campt one evening abrother from the valley came to our camp fire. He enquired of me if I knew if there was afamily by the name of I cannot remember the name. But I well remember the circumstance. I told this brother that there was the two children living. The father got disscuraged and staid at Laremy and the mother had died. At this the poor man broak down. He said she was my poor dear sister. As soon as I heard of the trouble and disstress of this handcart company I made ready to come in search of my poor sister and family. He said whare are the two children. I directed him to the wagon they was in as he wanted to take them to his own wagon. He said he had fetched a feather bed and good warm blankets and quilts for his sister to keep them warm and provisions for them.

I told this brother that thees two poor boys had suffered severly with cold and hungar since there poor mother died. One morning as we was geting ready to leave camp I saw those two dear boys. The Eldest was eleven years old I beleive and youngst not more than four or five years. The Eldest was crawling along on his hands and knees. His poor feet was so frozen the blood runing from them in the snow as the poor thing was making his way to the sick wagon. The other dear child crying by his brother side his poor little arms and hands all scabs with chilblains and scarcely anything on to cover his body.

This good brother, there Uncle, ask me if I knew any good sister that will come and wash and take of[f] there old clothing. He said I have plenty to keep them warm and good bed and blankets. Sister Reed was standing near by. She said, I will wash them and make them comfortable and she washed thees two poor boy. There Uncle made them anice warm bed in his wagon and this was the Last I saw of them untill we arived in Salt Lake City. Then I was told that thay was boath living and that there Uncle had taken them to his home north of the city. Many years after I heard that thay was still living and doing well. Then thay was grown young men. I was also told that there father came in search of his two boy. He was then getting old and wanted to come and live with them but the boys did not feel very good towards there father for leaving them in such a helpless condition.

Another family by the name of Holiton boath father and mother died leaving four or five children. The Eldest daughter a fine young womaman eighteen years old was so frozen [she] had big wound in her back. Her sufferings was so great that she died after we got to Salt Lake City. Another poor girl eleven years old father and mother boath di[e]d of hunger and cold but there little daghter lived to get to Salt Lake but her poor feet was so frozen that boath had to be amputated above the ankle. This poor [girl] was crippled for life. I saw her several years after and she was agreat sufferer and had to go under another operation and have the bone taken of[f] still further up the leg as the flesh and bone was still roting. I dont know if she lived through the second operation or not poor afflicted girl.

The breathren that came to meet us was very kind and good to [us] and as wagons and teems arived our handcarts was left and we could ride in the wagons and sometimes we could sleep in them. One day I well remember we had avery hard days travel and we came to Devels Gate that night to camp. The snow was deep and terrable cold freezing. When we got to camp we found several big fiars. There was several log huts standing there and several breathren from the valley was camping there. Brother Joel Parish was cooking supper for the rest of the breathrens. We was all so hungory and cold many ran to get to the fiar to warm but the bretheren ask for all to be as patint as possable and that we should have some wood to make us afiar so we could get warm.

Brother George Grant was there. [^16] He told us all to stand back for he was going to knock down one of those log hutts to make fiars for us. For he sais you are not going to freeze to nigh[t]. Now he called out again stand back and said this night I have the strength of a giant[?]. I never fealt so strong before in my life. And at once he raised his axe and with one blow he knocked the whole front of the building took each log and split in four peices and gave he family one peice. Oh such crawding for wood. Some would have taken more than one piece but Bro Grant told them to hold on and not to be greedy. There was some that had not got any yet. He said there is one sister standing back waiting very patintly and she must have some. I called our Yes brother Grant my name is Patince and I have waited with patience. He laugh and said give that sister some wood and let her go and make afiar. I was very thankfull to get wood. I had waited so long that my clothing [was] stiff and my old stockings and shoes seemed frozen on my feet and legs.

My poor dear Mother was siting down waiting untill we got back with wood to make afiar. As soon as we could get this log cut in peices we soon got our fire going and took of[f] our wett stockings and dryed them ready for morning and we had to wait some time before we got our flour for supper. During the time we was waiting a good brother came to our camp fiar. He ask if we was all one family. We was six in nomber. Mother answerd Yes we are all one family. She told him we was her daughters and the boy was her youngst son. He ask Mother if she had no husband. She told [him] her husband had died two month ago and he was bured on the plains. He had been standing with his hands behind him. Then he handed us a nice peice of beef to cook for our supper. He left us and came back with a beef bone. He said here is a bone to make you some supe and said dont quarel over it. We fealt suprised that he should think that we would ever quarel over our food. Mother said Oh brother we never quarel over having short rations but we feel very thankfull to you for giving us this meat for we had not got any meat neither did we expect to have any.

We camped here for two days or rather two nights and it was reported around camp that we would not have to pull our handcarts any further that we would leave them at Devels Gate and that we would all be able to ride in the wagons. This was dileghtfull news to us to think we would not have to pull the cart any more. I fealt that I could still walk if I did not have the cart to pull. But oh what dissapointment the next morning. We faunt it was only those could ride that was to sick and weak to pull their carts and so we girls all pretty well in health we had to start out with our cart again. As we started out from camp there was quite a nomber of the breathren from the valley standing in readyness to help us across the streem of water with our cart. I was feeling somewhat bad that morning and when I saw this stream of water we had to go through I fealt weak and I could not keep my tears back. I fealt ashamed to let those breathren see me sheding tears. I pulled my old bonnet over my face as thay should not see my tears. One brother took the cart and another helped us girls over the water and said we should not wade the cold water any more and tryed to encurage us by saying soon we would all be able to ride in wagons.

We traveld on for some few miles. Then we came to the Sweet Water. There we had to cross. We thought we would have to wade the water as the cattle had been crossing with the wagons with the tents and what little flour we had and had broaken the Ice so we could not go over on the ice. But there was three brave men there in the water packing the women and children over on there backs. Names William Kimble, Ephrem Hanks, and I think the other was James Furgeson. Those poor breathren was in the water nearly all day. We wanted to thank them but thay would not listen to [us]. My dear Mother fealt in her heart to bless them for there kindnes. She said God bless you for taking me over this water and in such an awfull rough way. [They said] oh d--- that I dont want any of that. You are welcome. We have come to help you. Mother turned to me saying what do you think of that man. He is arough fellow. I told her that is Brother William Kimble. I am told thay are all good men but I daresay that thay are all rather rought in there manners. But we found that thay all had kind good hearts. This poor Br Kimble staid so long in the water that he had to be taken out and packed to camp and he was along time before he recovered as he was chil[le]d through and in after life he was allways afflicted with rhumetism.

After we was over the Sweet Water we had to travel some distance to agood place to camp. In between the mountains we had avery nice camping place. Here we remained for nine days as we had to wait untill more provisions came to us. What suplys had allready been sent to us had to be left for the breathren that had to stay all winter at Devels Gate as the cattle had nearly all gave out boath in the wagon company and our company and a great deal of freight had to be left there at Devels Gate untill spring. And we was on four oz. of flour aday nearly all the time we was in camp on the Sweet Water but the morning we had orders to leave there we was told to leave our handcarts. We was all very glad to leave the cart but we had to walk for several days before we could all ride in the wagons. It seemed good to walk and not have aload to pull through the snow. We got dear Mother in the wagon to ride and we girls was young and we was willing to walk untill such times as it was conveniant for us to ride.

During our nine days camping on the Sweet Water many of the stout young men went out and got raw hide and anything thay could get to eat. On one occasion I got a bone gave me with scarcely any meat on it. I was cooking it to make alittle supe for breakfast and the breathren from the valley came and ask [us] to go to there camp and sing for them. So we left Mother to see to the cooking of the bone. The breathren had cut down logs and formed seats for us all around there camp fire but thay said thay had nothing to give us to eat as thay themselvs was short of food. Well we sang and enjoyed ourselvs for two or three hours and then went to our own tent.

When arived there our fiar was out and Mother was gone to bed and my ten year old brother was also in bed. Mother said I fetched the pot with the soup. We said allright Mother we staid longer than we ought too but the breathren did not want us to leave but we told them we would go and sing for them another night. We was so hungory. We had nothing to eat so we went to bed but Mother sais it is to bad you have nothing to eat and it makes you more hungory to sing. You had better not go to sing for the breathren again. But I must tell you that I got so hungary that I took the bone out of your soup and picked the little meat of[f] it and put the bone back into the pot. It seemed that I could not go to sleep without telling you for I knew you would not find anything on the bone in the morning. We told her that was allright. We fealt glad that our dear Mother found alittle bit to eat and we all went to sleep and slept comfortable and warm untill morning not withstanding it was a terrable cold freezing night.

Then we got up and prepared our bone soup for breakfast. We did not get but very little meat as the bone had been picked the night before and we did not have only the half of asmall biscute as we only was having four oz. of flour aday. This we devided into portians so we could have asmall peice three times aday. This we eat with thankfull hearts and we allways as[k] God to bless to our use and that it would strengthen our bodys day by day so that we could performe our dutys. And I can testefie that our heavenly Father heard and answerd our prayers and we was blessed with health and strength day by day to endure the severe trials we had to pass through on that terrable journey before we got to Salt Lake City. We know that if God had not been with us that our strength would have failed us and our bodys would have been left on the plains as hundreds of our poor brothers and sisters was. I can truthfully say that we never fealt to murmer at the hardships we was passing through. I can say we put our trust in God and he heard and answerd our prayers and brought us through to the valleys.

I remember on one occasion when we was camping on the Sweet Water thees same breathren came to our tent and ask us girls to go to there camp and sing for them again. My dear Mother told them she thought we had better not go to sing that night. It made us still more hungary to sing and we had nothing to eat after we came back to the tent. They fealt sorrey for us but thay could not give us anything for thay was short of provisions themselvs untill thay got suplys from home. That night was a terrable cold night. The wind was blowing and the snow drifted into the tent onto our quilts. That morning we had nothing to eat if we got up not untill we could get our small quantity of flour. Poor Mother called to me come Patience get up and make us afiar. I told her that I did not feel like geting up it was so cold and I was not feeling very well. So she ask my sister Tamar to get up and she said she was not well and she could not get up. Then she sais come Maria you get up and she was feeling bad and said that she could not get up.

With this Mother sais come girls this will not do. I believe I will have to dance to you and try to make you feel better. Poor dear Mother. She started to sing and dance to us and she slipt down as the snow was frozen and in a moment we was all up to help our dear Mother up for we was afraid she was hurt. She laugh and said I thought I could soon make you all jump up if I danced to you. Then we found that she fell down purposely for she knew we would all get up to see if she was hurt. She said that she was afraid her girls was going to give out and get disscuraged and she said that would never do to give up. We none of us had ever fealt so weak as we did that morning. My dear Mother had kept up wounderfull all through the journey. Before she left England she had been in delicate health. For many years she had not been able to walk amile and after we started on our journey to Utah she was able to walk all across the plains only some times we put her on the hand cart to rest her alittle. [^17]

After we left the Sweet Water whare we campt for nine days she was able to ride in the wagon. We was so glad to get Mother in the wagon. If we girls could not ride it did us good to know that Mother could get arest and not have to walk in the snow any more. And when we got into campe that night the good brother that owned[?] the wagon told us that we could sleep in his wagon and he would make a hole in the snow and make his bed there. He thought we would be warmer in the wagon. We made our bed there but we only had one old quilt to lie on and in the night I woke up and called to Mother I am freezing the side I had laid on was so benomed with cold. Mother got up and helped me out of the wagon. There was some big fiars burning in several places in the camp and lots of the sisters siting and sleeping near the fiar to keep warm. So I went to the fiar and staid there the remainer of the night.

In the morning we traveld on again as usul. One great blessing we had more food to eat. We got our pound of flour a day and sometimes alittle meat and very soon we was all able to ride instead of walking and we could stay in the wagon at night. After we baked our bread we put the hott coles in our bake kittle and took in the wagon and that made it quite comfortable and warm for us to sleep in.

I can well remember how kind the breathren was to us poor disstresd looking creatures. I think we must have looked a very deplorable set of human beigns to them when thay first meet us camped in the snow. When Joseph A Young first arived in our camp the tents was half coverd in snow. Oh how thankfull and delighted we was to see those two breathren. What brave men thay must have been to start out from Salt L City in the midle of winter in search of us poor folks that was away back campt near the last crossing of the plat river. When thay left the city thay did not know how far thay would have to travle in the snow before they would find us.

When the word came to Presedent Brigham Young on Sunday he was in the Tabernacle in meeting. Those days the people use to go from the settlements by teem to attend meetings. And when the word came that there was hand cart company back on the plat river with scarcely any provisions and that many was dieing with hunger and cold Brigham Young told the people this message had come to him. And he also called on all the men to take there teems and wagons and gather up all the food and clothing thay could get and start out at once and not to come back untill thay found the people. He said that if thay did not go that he would go himself and he started out himself with the breathren. He got as far as the big mountain. He took cold and the breathren prevailed on him to return back home. Then he gave orders for everybody to go to work and bake bread and gather up all the clothing and quilts all thay could get together and every teem and wagon that could be got was loaded and sent out. Every day the road was kept open by teems coming to us every day with provisions and clothing of some kind. After the breathren came out to us there was not so many deaths. [^18] My Sister Mrs Jaques dear little two years [old] girl died near Fort Bridger. [^19] She rapt her in a blanket on quilt and fetched her into Salt L City and she was burid in Franklin D Richards lot. I well remember that when we campt in Echo Canyon that Sister Squires was confined in the morning. She had alovely baby girl and thay named her Echo. The morning she was born the father was running around camp enquiring of everybody if thay had apin to give him to pin somethig around the baby but I dont think that he was able to get one. The breathren fixed the wagon very warm and comfortable for Sister Squires and boath her and baby arived safe into the City.

I will now conclud my hard journey across the plains by handcart and say that we that lived through this terrable journey arived in Salt L City Sunday noon the thirtieth day of November 1856. We was met and warmly greeted by our kind breathren and sister and taken to there homes and made comfortable and welcomed to share there home and food with them. Brother William Thorn Bishop of the Seventh Ward took home with him my Mother and my brother Robert myself and sisters Maria, Jane, and Sarah. My sister Tamar went with Br. Thomas Ricks to Farmington. This is the kind brother that gave us the beef at Devels gate and told us not to quarel over it. The next spring he marr[i]ed my sister Tamar. . . .

When first we arived in the city to us everything looked dreary and cold. The streets was all coverd with snow but the people was kind and good and tryed to encurage us and make us feel as good as thay could. The next day my Mother and three sisters and my brother left the city with my brother in law John Dalling for Pleasant Grove Utah County. [^20] I myself staid in the city for some weeks. At that time the city was not built up very much. The houses was scatering. To me it seemed a very loanly place in the Seventh Ward. I had been living eleven years in the city of London before I left England and to me it seemed avery loansome place. I said to my old friend Annie Thorn if this is Salt L City what must it be like to live in the country. I dont think I will go to Pleasant Grove. So I concluded to stay in the city for atime as I had several friends living in the city that I was acquainted in the old country and I thought it would be better for me to stay in the city and let my Mother and sisters go to Pleasant Grove which I did. I visit two or three familys and enjoyed myself very much for several weeks untill I began to feel quite rested.

Footnotes

Studies of the emigration of Mormon converts include P.A.M. Taylor, Expectations Westward: The Mormons and the Emigration of Their British Converts in the Nineteenth Century (Edinburgh and London: Oliver & Boyd, 1965), and William Mulder, Homeward to Zion: The Mormon Migration from Scandinavia (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1957).

---
Notas:
[^1] Using Carroll Smith-Rosenberg's "The Female World of Love and Ritual: Relations between Women in Nineteenth-Century America," Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 1 (Autumn 1975): 1-29, as a point of departure, Maureen Ursenbach Beecher has shown that Mormon women, too, formed networks for support, plural marriage being a distinctively Mormon one. "Sisters, Sister Wives and Sisters in the Faith: Support Systems among Nineteenth Century Mormon Women," manuscript, Church Archives.
[^2] A family history recounting the life of Amasa Mason Lyman is Albert R. Lyman, Amasa Mason Lyman: Trailblazer and Pioneer from the Atlantic to the Pacific (Delta, Utah: Melvin A. Lyman, 1957). In 1851 Elder Lyman took some of his family with him to San Bernardino, where he and Charles C. Rich, another member of the Twelve, had been called to preside over a settlement of Saints. Eliza stayed in Utah.
[^3] Eliza's mother, Lydia Clisbee Partridge Huntington, joined her daughters after the death of her second husband, William Huntington. Lydia's first husband, Edward Partridge, had died in 1840. Two of Eliza's three sisters, Caroline Ely and Lydia, also became plural wives of Amasa Lyman-Caroline in 1844 and Lydia in 1853. Eliza's only brother, Edward, was the youngest of the Partridge children and was fifteen years old at the time of Eliza's writing in 1848. Elder Lyman had other plural families, so he planned to stay with Eliza and Caroline only part of the time. Louisa Marie Tanner Lyman was his first wife, and it was her child who was to stay with Eliza for schooling. Family group sheets of Edward Partridge and Amasa Mason Lyman, Church Genealogical Archives.
[^4] The winter of 1848-49 was a severe one. Frequent snows made difficult the care and feeding of cattle as well as the gathering of fuel. Temperatures were unusually cold, and there had been a poor harvest the preceding fall, leaving Saints constantly cold and hungry. See Arrington, Great Basin Kingdom, pp. 58-61.
[^5] In November 1848 Brigham Young called Amasa Lyman to go to California, hoping eventually to set up a Mormon outpost near Los Angeles to receive and outfit immigrants who would come by ship from Europe to California and then overland to Utah. See Allen and Leonard, Story of the Latter-day Saints, p. 266.
[^6] Paulina Eliza Phelps Lyman had been a wife of Amasa Lyman since 1846. Apparently she was living in the Old Fort at this time, and so she would have been in close touch with Eliza and her household. Lyman, Amasa M. Lyman, p. 302. Louise Maria and her four children were living at Cottonwood, in the southeast area of the Salt Lake Valley.
[^7] Eliza had been acquainted with the Hakes family since 1846 when she and Dionitia, a sister-wife, had made the journey from Nauvoo to Winter Quarters in company with Sarah Hakes Clark and her husband, Daniel Porter Clark. Autobiography and journal of Eliza Marie Partridge Lyman, November 9, 1846; Lloyd Clark Ward, "Highlights of the Life of Daniel Porter Clark," typescript, Church Archives.
[^8] David Frederick (1809-1886) was one of the members of the Mormon Battalion who returned to the Great Salt Lake Valley after having completed the journey to San Diego, California, in the summer of 1847. See Leonard and Allen, Story of the Latter-day Saints, p. 232. Frederick was apparently single at the time, and it seems that he worked closely with the Lymans while Amasa was away, exchanging labor for board and clothing.
[^9] Br Summy worked on the roof and br Hughes on the chimney and next day finished it. Until 1896 Saints held a special fast day and meeting on the first Thursday of each month. In 1896, as this practice began to interfere with the employment of Saints, the First Presidency instructed members to observe their monthly fast on the first Sunday of each month. Allen and Leonard, Story of the Latter-day Saints, p. 425.
[^10] Cornelia Eliza Leavitt Lyman had been a plural wife of Amasa Lyman since 1846. Family group sheet of Amasa Lyman.
[^11] See note 4 above.
[^12] Eliza Partridge Lyman, Emily Dow Partridge Young, Louisa Beaman Young, Sarah Ann Whitney Kimball, and Lucy Walker Kimball all had earlier been sealed to Joseph Smith as plural wives while he was alive. The wives apparently met together frequently, as indicated in Eliza Lyman's diary and the trail journal of Eliza R. Snow, a portion of which is contained in chapter 6.
[^13] These two women were sisters-in-law. Helen Mar Clark Callister was a sister of Daniel Porter Clark. The Callisters had joined the Clarks and Eliza and Dionitia Lyman in their journey from Nauvoo to Winter Quarters. Ward, "Daniel Porter Clark."
[^14] Walker or Walkara, a Ute Indian chief, with twelve of his tribe counseled with Brigham Young and several members of the Council of the Twelve. Chief Walker invited the Mormons to settle in Ute country, and soon over two hundred settlers left for the Sanpete Valley. Manuscript History of the Church, 1844-1877, June 14, 1849; Allen and Leonard, Story of the Latter-day Saints, p. 249.
[^15] The practice of the Word of Wisdom by Latter-day Saints in the nineteenth century is discussed in chapter 1.
[^16] One of the earliest public works projects was the building of a public bathhouse at the hot springs located in the north part of the Salt Lake Valley, named Warm Springs and later Wasatch Springs. Arrington, Great Basin Kingdom, pp. 54, 111.
[^17] Oscar Lyman was a son of Pauline and Amasa Lyman. Lyman, Amasa Mason Lyman, p. 182.
[^18] A seventh wife, Nancy Clements Smith (1815-1847), died at Winter Quarters. Short biographies of her and the other wives are contained in the family history compiled by Zora Smith Jarvis, Ancestry, Biography and Family of George A. Smith (Provo, Utah: Zora Smith Jarvis, 1962).
[^19] John Smith (1781-1854) and Clarissa Lyman Smith (1790-1854) were the parents of George A. Smith. John Smith arrived in the valley in 1847 and presided over Saints in the area until October 1848. He was ordained presiding patriarch to the Church in January 1849. Jenson, Latter-day Saints Biographical Encyclopedia 1:182-83. Further biographical information on both John and Clarissa is contained in Jarvis, George A. Smith Family, pp. 11-32.
[^20] Mary Aikens Smith was the wife of Silas Smith, brother of John in note 19 above. She went to Parowan in 1851 and died there in 1877. Journal of Jesse Nathaniel Smith: The Life Story of a Mormon Pioneer, 1834-1906 (Salt Lake City: Jesse N. Smith Family Association, 1953), p. 1.
