Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 ( 1982)

Chapter Eight

Colonization of the Great Basin

"The Foundation of a Life to Come"

Lucy Meserve Smith arrived in the valley of the Great Salt Lake in October 1849, so delighted "to sit at the table with long absent relatives and friends" that she called it "a foretaste of the resurrection of the just." It was another beginning—a new gathering of Saints "in the top of the mountains." Fifteen years of Mormon exodus caused Eliza Partridge Lyman to describe her 1848 arrival in the Great Basin less enthusiastically. It was merely "our journey's end for the present." But this place was to serve both Lucy and Eliza as a permanent home, and for generations to come the Great Basin would be the heartland of latter-day Zion.

After Brigham Young and the Pioneer Company (143 men, 3 women, and 2 children) arrived in July 1847, Mormon wagons continued to stream into the Salt Lake Valley. Following the vanguard by a few days was a community of Saints who had wintered four hundred miles southeast of the valley at Pueblo. This group of families, some of whom had traveled with the Mormon Battalion and others who had emigrated from Mississippi to join the gathering Saints, tripled the population. By the end of 1847 two thousand settlers had arrived, and over the next decade emigration swelled the number of residents in the Salt Lake Valley and surrounding Mormon settlements—to 11,380 by 1850 and to some 40,000 by 1857.

In preparation for the thousands of converts who would continue to gather to Zion, and as an important part of building a self-sufficient Mormon economy, Church leaders planned for widespread colonization of the Great Basin—a vast region including most of present-day Utah and Nevada as well as portions of present-day Idaho, Wyoming, and California. Over a period of more than forty years the Saints were called or assigned to settle various parts of this region for agricultural or industrial purposes. "Mr. Smith was sent by the Presidency with a Co[mpany] to Iron Co[unty]," wrote Lucy Meserve Smith of her husband George A.'s call to the "iron mission." Martha Cragun Cox remembered leaving the Salt Lake Valley when she was ten years old and her father "received [a] call to the Dixie country as a pioneer." Unlike men called on proselyting missions, those assigned economic missions were usually expected to take family members with them. Whole households moved from barely built homes back into wagons to trek to the site of a new community.

The same cooperative procedure used in building up the Salt Lake Valley was followed in outlying Mormon settlements. Land, water, and timber were publicly owned, and their use and distribution were regulated by local Church leaders. Families were housed in dugouts or lean-tos (Eliza Lyman chose to stay in her wagon box) while city plots were laid out, surrounding farmland assigned, and log or adobe homes built. Order, unity, and community being highly valued among the Saints, men continued to contribute at least a portion of their efforts to public or sernipublic works such as meetinghouses, mills, and ditches.

As they attempted to create a self-sufficient commonwealth, the Saints encountered considerable political hostility. With the 1850 organization of Utah as a U.S. territory, Church leaders entered into long-term conflict with the federal government over control of Utah's territorial affairs. Though numerous federal appointees were sent to Utah starting in 1851, Brigham Young served as territorial governor, the legislature was comprised primarily of local Church leaders, and local probate judges held both civil and criminal jurisdiction. While Saints were accustomed to church and civil government working closely together (the provisional State of Deseret had run smoothly for two years), federal officials deemed the practice un-American, and some went so far as to accuse the Saints of disloyalty to the U.S. government. Their malicious reports prompted U.S. President James Buchanan to replace Brigham Young as governor of Utah Territory in 1857. Having been misinformed that this action would throw Mormons into a state of rebellion against the government, President Buchanan sent along a military force to assure acceptance of the new appointee. Brigham Young had received no official announcement of the coming of the governor or troops, and he declared martial law as they approached. The ensuing Utah War was bloodless, but it was evident that for the Church, building an isolated kingdom was impossible. In fact, the freedom of the Saints to choose their own political, economic, and social norms was to remain a source of conflict until after Utah achieved statehood in 1896.

By the 1870s Mormon women would be actively involved in that conflict, but through the 1850s and '60s their concerns of necessity seem to have been more insular. All three of the women whose writings comprise this chapter played a critical role in providing food, clothing, and shelter for their families. Self-sufficient households were rare; most acquired some of the essentials through purchase or bartering. "We are spinning some candle wick which we shall try to sell for bread stuff," wrote Eliza Partridge Lyman. Lucy Meserve Smith and Martha Cragun Cox wove cloth and taught school in exchange for commodities and services. Since church and community obligations kept their husbands away for extended periods, these women bore the major responsibility for managing family resources.

If their peculiar circumstances often demanded unsought independence, women found what Lucy Smith termed "solid comfort . . . in our association together." Plural marriage sometimes strengthened bonds between women. Both Lucy and Eliza mention sister-wives with deep affection, and Martha gives a particularly warm and detailed account of female relationships in a plural household. In Eliza's journal, visiting female family members and friends appears as much a part of the daily routine as eating, and with characteristic gusto Lucy seems to have regularly relished gathering with neighbors to spin. As was the case with their American sisters to the east, Mormon women formed among themselves strong networks for support and companionship. [^1]

There was much in community social life to bring men and women together, however. One sister's memoir reconstructs a "Leap Year Pic Nic Party" at Provo's gristmill, and another rather soberly considers the personal impact of all the "theaters, music, and balls, concerts" in St. George. Through the 1850s in Salt Lake City and other settlements, small cultural societies—musical, dramatic, scientific, literary, "polysophical"—typically involved both men and women. Brothers and sisters assembled in church meetings and cooperated on special projects such as Sunday School. The official church organization for women, the Relief Society, was briefly reestablished during this period, giving sisters' "willing hands," as Lucy Smith recounts, and various opportunities to assist the brethren.

Taking on the commission to make the desert "blossom as the rose," the Saints who first settled the Great Basin began transforming a wilderness into their promised land. But establishing Zion was more than a matter of laying out streets and building meetinghouses; it required a people pure in heart. The following writings show that women self-consciously struggled to cultivate the soul as well as the sod. As they reminisced, Lucy Smith and Martha Cox seem to have been more aware of whom they had become than of the development of the land they had helped to settle. If, as Martha said, they "laid the foundation of a life to come," they conquered both outer and inner frontiers to do it.

Eliza Marie Partridge Lyman (1820-1886)

In the fall of 1848 Eliza Lyman arrived in the Salt Lake Valley with her two-month-old son Platte (named for the river the Saints had followed during their journey from Winter Quarters) and her sister, Caroline Ely Partridge Lyman. These sister-wives of Amasa Mason Lyman had made the journey across the Plains together, taking care of their own housing and food just as they had at Winter Quarters when Amasa had gone first to the Salt Lake Valley with the pioneer company and then on a mission to the southern states. He was captain of the "hundred" in which his wives, seven of them, traveled from Winter Quarters to the Salt Lake Valley, and the demands of his position required that the women be self-sustaining.

The journal of Eliza Marie Partridge Lyman shows that she maintained considerable independence after the family arrived in the Great Basin. Amasa Lyman, a member of the Church's Quorum of Twelve Apostles, was often away, and when he was in the valley, he had to share his time among several families. [^2] The process of settlement unfolds in Eliza's journal as she describes the daily activities involved in establishing a household in the wilderness.

The daughter of Edward and Lydia Clisbee Partridge, Eliza was born and raised on the frontier in northeastern Ohio, learning in her youth the schoolteaching and tailoring that she later employed to sustain herself. Eliza had lived in the homes of two prominent Church leaders before she married Amasa Lyman. Her father served as presiding bishop of the Church from 1831 to 1840, and she later lived in the home of the Prophet Joseph Smith in Nauvoo.

A reminiscence at the beginning of Eliza's journal describes her early life. She began making daily diary entries in February 1846 when she left Nauvoo, and continued writing long after her move to Millard County, Utah, in 1863, though her entries were frequently sporadic. The holograph journal is located in the Historical Department of the Church. Minimal punctuation has been added here, mostly periods after the dates of each entry, which in the original are set off in the margin.

Oct 17th [1848]. Reached the place of our destination in the valley of the Great Salt Lake. I have been quite as comfortable on the journey from Laramie as could be expected under the circumstances. Some of the time the weather has been very cold with rain and snow, so that I could not be comfortable anywhere as I had no stove in the wagon, but I and my child have been preserved through it all and I feel to give thanks to my Father in Heaven for his kind care over us. We are now at our journey's end for the present. The weather is beautiful. The country barren and desolate. I do not think our enemies need envy us this locality or ever come here to disturb us.

[Women's Voices, page 248 [April 1849]

18th. Moved into a log room. There are [eight] of us to live in this room this winter. My Mother and Sisters Caroline and Lydia and Br Edward, Mr. Lyman a part of the time, one of Maria's children to go to school and myself and Babe. [^3] We are glad to get this much of a shelter but it is no shelter when it rains for the dirt roof lets the water through and the dirt floor gets muddy which makes it any thing but pleasant.

April 8 1849. During the past winter we have had some sickness. My Baby was very sick with whooping cough. Many children around us died with it. [^4] My brother Edward also had it, they are both quite well of it now. We are intending to have our houses moved out of the fort onto our lots in town. Cooked the last of our flour to day and have no prospect of getting any more untill after harvest.

13th. Br Lyman started for California in company with O. P. Rockwell and others. [^5] May the Lord bless and prosper them, and return them in safety to their families and friends. Br. L has left us that is Paulina, Caroline and I without any thing to make bread, it not being in his power to get any. The family at Cotton wood have some. [^6]

Watercolor of Eliza Marie Patridge Lyman as a young woman. (Daughters of Utah Pioneers. Salt Lake City, Utah.)

Sunday 15th. Mr. Hakes and family here. Took Sarah and Dionitia home with them. [^7] We gave Sarah some cotton yarn for stockings, some tallow and soap grease. Samuel White a man in Br Lymans employ says they cannot move our houses till after harvest so I think I shall move onto the lot without a house and live in a wagon box and tent.

Monday 16th. David Frederic [^8] and brother Edward gone to Cotton wood.

Tuesday 17th. Br Frederic and Edward returned from Cotton wood. Brought a quarter of beef also drove our cow Frosty to us so that we can have some milk. Drove a yoke of Mother's cattle to work.

18th. Made preparations for moving onto the lot where we can make garden. Called on Sister Holmes in the evening. We are spinning some candle wick which we shall try to sell for bread stuff. There is an old Lady who goes round and peddles whatever any one has to sell and as there are no stores in the town or Territory she has very good success.

Thursday 19th. Moved onto our lot to live in wagons again. We are 4 in family, Sister Caroline, Br Frederic and myself and Babe. Sold a ball of candle wick for 3Â½ quarts of corn. Sold another ball for 3Â½ quarts of meal which has to be divided between Paulina Lyman, Mother, and my family.

Friday 20th. Visited at Mother's with Sister Lucinda Bingham.

21st. Sister Emily brought us 15 lbs flour. Said Presnt Young heard that we were out of bread and told her to bring that much although they have a scanty allowance for themselves. I sincerely hope I may be able to return it before they need it.

Sunday 22nd. Staid at the wagons. Sister Emily spent the day with us. Br Hakes brought some shoes to Carolina and Paulina.

24th. Went to Mother's and staid all night.

25th. Carded and spun 3 balls candle wick. Br Frederic setting out fruit trees on the lot. Jane James a colored woman let me have about 2 lbs of flour it being about half she had.

26th. Caroline gone to tend sister Emily's babe while she washes.

28th. A military organization, more men together than I have seen before in the valley. Samuel White gave Paulina I dollar to buy corn with. Sister Caroline gave 2Â¼ dollars for a calico dress pattern. Gave Charles Burk 25 cts for his trouble in getting it for her.

Sunday 29th. Staid at the wagons with the babe while the rest went to meeting. Wind blows hard and cold. Went to Mother's who is still in the Fort and staid all night.

Monday 30th. Carded and spun some cotton yarn. Came home in the afternoon and cut out 2 shirts for D. Frederic.

[Women's Voices, page 251]

[May 1849]

May 1st. Made a pair of pillow cases, the baby an apron and sewed on a shirt for D.F.

2nd. Went to the Fort and visited at Sister Holmes' with sisters Fuller and E.R. Snow. Had quite a rain with high cold wind. Went to Mother's and staid all night.

Thursday 3rd. Fast day. [^9] Went home found Caroline going to washing. Assisted her. Paulina bought a Â½ bushel of corn of Mr Shoemaker.

4th. Sewed and went to the Fort.

Saturday 5th. Did sundry kinds of work. Priscilla and Cornelia Lyman and Charles Burk came from Cotton wood. Brought Dionitia home and took me back with them. Slept at Mother Hakes with her.

Sunday 6th. Went to meeting, heard an excellent discourse from Wm Crosby. Took dinner with Sister Crosby who is a most excellent woman. Went from there to Sidney Tanner's where I staid all night.

7th. Spent the day with Mother Shepherd. She gave me some tea for Mother. I bought some soap and cotton cloth for which I am to sew. In the evening went to Cornelia Lyman's. [^10] Heard from home. Learned that Sister Caroline had taken a school about 10 miles north of us because she has nothing to eat at home, and is under the necessity of doing something as there is nothing to be bought although we have the money to pay for flour if there was any. [^11]

Tuesday 8th. Maria Louisa born. She is the daughter of Maria Lyman.

10th. Attended a sewing party at Mrs Hakes'. Br Erastus Snow happened along and took dinner with us.

12th. Visited at Sister Crosby's. She gave me some nice stuff to make my Boy a cap.

13th. Went home in br Hake's carriage. Found Sister Caroline there but going back again in the evening to her school. Have got sister Lydia to stay with me till I can do better, or some other way.

14th. Washed &c. Lent D. B. Huntington the spy glass by B. Young's order.

Wednesday 16th. Visited at Wm Walker's with sisters Emily and Louisa Young and Sarah Ann and Lucy Kimball also Presnts [Brigham] Young and [Heber C.] Kimball. [^12]

18th. Cut and made a pair of pants for J. Holmes. Staid at Mother's all night. Came home the next day but the wind blew so hard and cold that I went back to Mother's again.

19th. Our tent burned down, burnt the rocking chair while I was away.

Sunday 20th. Staid at the wagon. Caroline came home but went back the same day. I went to the Fort again in consequence of a cold rain.

21st. Paulina and Dionitia moved into John Hess' room in the Fort. Sister Emily visited us.

Tuesday 22nd. Tremendous rain and snow storm with high winds.

23d. Snow blowing furiously. We were so very uncomfortable although we had a stove in the wagon that we thought best to go to the Fort to Mother's. We did so and found her worse off than we were, for the rain was running through the roof and every thing in the house was wet, and the ground perfectly muddy under her feet. We thought it would never do to live that way so took her and her effects up to the wagons deeming it more prudent to live out of doors than in such a house as this. In the afternoon br Frederic went to look for the cows that had strayed away during the storm but did not find them. Spent several days hunting them. Found them at last. Bought 11 lbs flour and 11 lbs shorts of T[itus] Billings at 10 cts pr lb.

25th. Edward went to Cotton wood to get br Frederic's cow, but S. Driggs forbade his taking her so he had to come back without her. Charles Burk brought us some beef. Some of old Mike which was tougher than a boiled owl. Sarah Clark came up on a visit.

Sunday 27th. Took my babe to meeting. Went to sister Emily's to dinner with Caroline and sister Brown.

28th. Washed &c. Had company in the afternoon sisters Sarah Clark and Helen Callister. [^13] Bought 9Â½ lbs corn meal of Sister Holmes. Paid 50 cts in work for it.

29th. Cut and made a pair of pants for br Holmes.

30th. Saw a head of wheat which looks encouraging in this time of scarcity. Visited at Paulina's with Sarah Clark. Bro, Frederic shearing sheep for Charles Rich.

31st. Spent the afternoon at Br T[homas] Callisters.

[Women's Voices, page 254]

[June 1849]

June 1st. Sister Emily spent the day with us.

Saturday 2d. Caroline came home. We washed &c. Went to the Fort and staid all night.

3d. Came home and staid at the wagon all day. Br Tinney and S[amuel] White here to dinner. Caroline went to her school in the evening.

4th. Spent the afternoon at Sister [Augusta Adams] Cobb [Young]'s with Sister Emily Young.

6th. Edward went to Cotton wood and got the white cow and calf. Paid Washburne's boy I dollar for herding.

7th. Edward moved the hen house from the Fort to the lot.

8th. Br Frederic ditching, Edward building hen house. Mother spinning cotton, Lydia helping Emily wash. Caroline teaching school and myself making pants for D. Frederic, taking care of Baby &c.

9th. Washed some. Finished pants &c. Let D. Frederic have 2 dollars to buy summer coat.

Sunday 10th. Sister Caroline came home. We all but Lydia went to meeting.

11th. Br Frederic and Edward pulling down houses in the Fort and hauling the logs to mill to get the split. Mother carried the cotton yarn that she has carded and spun to the weavers. Maria Lyman sent us some cloth for pillow cases and a few dried apples.

June 12th. Let Paulina have 1 dollar to buy flour. This morning the mountains are covered with snow which makes the air quite cold.

Wednesday 13th. Sister Emily spent the day with us. Lydia and I washed &c. Washed wool for D. Frederic. Bought some coarse flour.

14th. The Indian Chief Walker here to day. [^14]

15th. Bought a Â½ bushel wheat of sister Richardson. Paid 20 cts for grinding wheat.

16th. D. Frederic at the mill sawing the logs for our house. Edward hunting oxen in the forenoon, and went to the mill in the afternoon to haul logs. Very high wind in the evening.

Sunday. Staid at the waggon. Sister Caroline does not visit us to day. Some rain and wind. Bought 4 pints of coffee for Mother for which I pay 50 cts. [^15]

Monday 18th. Picked wool &c.

19th. Went to the warm springs and took a bath. [^16] Went to Cotton wood with C. Burk and staid till the 1st of July. Spent the most of the time at Br Wm Crosby's. He and his wife went home with me. Sister Crosby gave me a pair of cotton stockings some bleached cloth for my boy Platte some shirts a box of pins a box of wafers and a cheese weighing about 16 lbs. a can of whey for vinegar &c. Sister Elizabeth Brown gave Platte some calico for a dress.

[Women's Voices, page 255]

[July 1849]

July 4th. Had green peas out of our own garden.

5th. Br Summy worked Â½ day on our house.

6th. Same as yesterday.

7th. Br Summy worked on the house all day. Sister Caroline came home. Went back next day. Paid 1Â½ dollars for 12 lbs flour.

Sunday 8th. Attended sister Abbott's funeral. Paid br Summy 4Â¾ dollars in gold dust and some cheese.

10th. Visited at br James Ferguson's.

16th. Sister Caroline home to stay, having finished her school.

17th. Paulina. moved out of the Fort onto the lot by us and will occupy one room of our house if it is ever finished.

18th. Went to the warm spring to bathe.

21st. Have some flour that was made from wheat grown this year. We are in hopes that we shall not be troubled any more for bread as the harvest has commenced.

22nd. Sunday. Staid home all day. Have been very busy all the week preparing for the feast that is to be enjoyed in the Bowery on the 24th.

23d. Made a shirt for br A[braham] O. Smoot.

Tuesday 24th. Great celebration which we all attended. Took dinner with the Cotton wood ward. Had a pleasant time. Plenty of victuals, music and mirth, and some good preaching.

Wednesday and Thursday. Washed &c.

[Women's Voices, page 256]

[August 1849]

Aug 18th. Maria Lyman sent some red calico for Platte a dress, a birthday present. Also a dress pattern for Caroline or me.

20th. Platte DeAlton Lyman one year old to day. Made a dinner in honor of the event. Sisters Billings, Warner, Burk, Walker, Paulina and Priscilla Lyman, Emily Young and Sarah Clark took dinner with us. Not a man there but one who will be a man if he lives a few years.

25th. Sisters Clarisa Robison, Eliza Duzett and Catharine Foutz visited us.

28th. Caroline and I visited as [at] Sister Keziah Burk's.

[Women's Voices, page 256-257 [September 1849]

Sept. 2nd. Attended meeting. Heard P[arley] P. Pratt preach in the forenoon and Erastus Snow in the afternoon. Br Frederic gone to Cotton wood for wheat. Br Crosby and Tinney here to dinner. We have very cold nights and our house if house it can be called is very uncomfortable. The logs laid up part of the roof on and a very little chinking in.

4th. Mother visited at br Riser's.

Wednesday 5th. Took my year old babe and went to the field to glean wheat. I spread a quilt under the wagon in the shade for the baby while I gleaned, but the sun was so warm that I could not work long.

6th. Made a Babies dress for sister Rich, for which I get 1 lb of wool. Br Kimball called on us. Wrote to br Lyman.

7th. Visited at Lewis Robison's with sisters Caroline, Lydia and Paulina. Took two quilts to piece for Sister Billings also a shirt to finish.

8th. Received 6 lbs 3 ounces wool from Cotton wood to be divided among several of us. Br Frederic put up an adobie wall between the rooms.

Sunday 9th. Sidney Tanner and S[amuel] White here to dinner. Staid at home.

10th. Tremendous shower of rain and hail.

11th. Washed &c. S. Driggs sent us two lbs 10 ounces tallow, it being our portion out of a very fat cow.

12th. S. Tanner and wife here to dinner. Lucy Ferguson here visiting. Mr Frederic mudding the house.

13th. Visited at Dr D[arwin] Richardson's with Mother, Caroline and Sister Van Cott's.

Sunday 16th. Attended meeting. Heard a discourse from the Reverend Mr Marble an emigrant.

17th. Gleaned wheat.

18th. Went to Sister Billing's to sew. Cut and partly made a pr of pants for John Warner, took them home and finished them.

19th. Samuel White gave us an invitation to attend his wedding the next week at Mrs Foutz's.

21st. Sewed all day.

22d. Made a cap for Oscar Lyman [^17] and helped Paulina on her dress. Father Gould called on us, just from the States.

Sunday 23d. Staid at home all day. Brs Tinney and White here to dinner.

24th. Making preparations for the wedding.

26th. The wedding came off in good style and every one seemed pleased with themselves and every body else. Staid till one oclock at night and danced. Went home and rested till morning then went to Cotton wood and had another party and dinner at the residence of the bridegroom. Had a very pleasant time.

28th. Came home again and found all well. Sarah Clark came with us to spend a week. Bought a Â½ doz cups and saucers for 1Â½ dollars, an ounce of indigo for 20 cts.

29th. Saw br T[homas] Grover just from California. Read 2 letters from br Lyman, one to Caroline and one to D. Frederic.

Sunday 30th. Attended meeting and heard Levi Hancock and Lorenzo Snow preach in the forenoon and Father Isaac Morley in the afternoon.

[Women's Voices, page 258 [October 1849]

Oct 1st. Received some goods that Br Lyman has sent from California to his family.

3rd. Several of the friends from Cotton wood here to dinner. D. Frederic divided the goods that br Lyman sent. 11Â½ lbs coffee to each woman or family counting S[amuel] White and wife and Sarah Clark in the family. 13 lbs sugar, less than a lb of tea, 18 yds cotton cloth to the most of us. 1 bolt calico each, Lydia one bolt, Mother Â½ a bolt, br Tinney 1 bolt, John Gleason 1 bolt. He also sent 1 bolt pants cloth, 1 Doz hickory shirts, 1 bolt white flannel and one red, 2 bolts blue drilling which has been divided into dress patterns of which we each took one that is 7 of us. I let mine go to Sarah Clark to pay for one that I had been under the necessity of borrowing before the goods came.

4th. Our company from Cotton wood all gone home except Sarah Clark who is spending the week with us.

5th. Finished a pr of pants for D. Frederic.

6th. General Conference.

10th. Br White and Hakes here to dinner. Mother went home with them. Caroline and I visited at Sister Summy.

Sunday 21st. Mother came home from Cotton wood.

23rd. Visited at Father Lott's with Mother, Emily, Sister Pierce and her daughter Margaret. Making shirts to pay for soap. Spent a week at cotton wood with Cornelia.

Nov. 15th. Commenced weaning Platte DeAlton.

16th. Sister Emily moved home after staying with us for a time. Sister Lydia went with her to stay awhile.

18th. S. Tanner and wife and Br Brown here to dinner. Br Glover called on us in the afternoon.

Eveline Rollins moved into one room of our house.

Dec 3rd. Had company, namely, sisters Caroline and Harriet Huntington, Priscinda Kimball, Emily and Zina Young, Lydia and Mother, Dionitia and Paulina. Presnt Young and Kimball joined us at supper. Snowed all day. Edward commenced going to school.

4th. Mother has gone to live with Emily this winter.

12th. Caroline and I went to Emily's visiting. Platte and I staid all night. Edward drew Platte home on his sled.

15th. D. Frederic gone to board with Paulina.

16th. Paulina made a dinner for some of her friends in honor of Oscar's birth day.

17th. Br Haskins making sash for our windows.

Lucy Meserve Smith (1817-1892)

As a young woman, Lucy Meserve Smith worked in a cotton factory in Lowell, Massachusetts, in order to earn enough money to gather with the Latter-day Saints in Illinois. The skill she acquired with a hand loom assured her a livelihood in Nauvoo and later in Utah. Lucy took great pride in the hundreds of yards of cloth she wove. As any reader of her reminiscence is bound to discover, she had a pronounced sense of accomplishment about everything she did, from weaving to battling grasshoppers to teaching Sunday School.

The daughter of Josiah and Lucy M. Bean Meserve, Lucy was born in Newry, Maine. She lived there until a few years after her baptism in 1837, when she left for Lowell. After she arrived in Nauvoo, she hired out as a spinner and weaver, spending some time in the employment of Emma Smith, wife of the Prophet Joseph. At age twenty-seven Lucy became the second wife of George A. Smith, a member of the Church's Council of Twelve Apostles. (Letters of Bathsheba W. Smith, George A.'s first wife, appeared in Chapter Five.)

The Smiths were an exceptionally happy family. George A. Smith had six wives, who lived in various settlements in the Utah Territory. [^18] The wives were in many regards as close as sisters, and Lucy referred to them as such. Sister Bathsheba and Sister Susan lived in Salt Lake City, Sister Zilpha in Parowan, and Sister Hannah in Provo with Lucy, where the two of them raised the son of Sister Sarah following her untimely death. George A. Smith was heavily involved in Church responsibilities, serving with the Council of the Twelve and as Church Historian. He became a counselor to Brigham Young in the First Presidency in 1868. Though he was more often away from Lucy than with her, she found happiness in their relationship and in her own achievements in maintaining a household.

The "Historical Narrative" of Lucy M. Smith recounts her ancestry and early life as well as her activities in Utah. The following excerpt begins with the arrival of the Smiths in the Salt Lake Valley in 1849. The original holograph is in Special Collections, Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah. Minimal punctuation has been added here. Some portions of the manuscript appear twice, and the version revised and rewritten in Lucy's own hand is used here.

Lucy Meserve Smith. (George Albert Smith Collection. Special Collections, Marriott Library, University of Utah.)

Oct. 27th [1849], we arive in Salt Lake City quite late in the evening tired and hungry, but I must cook supper for myself and teamsters, and then I could go back to my wagon and go to bed and thank my Heavenly Father for my safe arrival. We found my husband's Father and Mother well and pleased to greet us. [^19] They made a feast next day, had us all to partake. It was a great treat to sit at the table with long absent relatives and friends. I feel that it must be a foretaste of the resurrection of the just.

I slept in my wagon til into January, cooked and washed for ten persons over a fire in a little fireplace in a little log cabin floor only over part of the room belonging to the widow Smith Mother of Silas S. and Jesse N. Smith. Aunt Mary Smith died at Parowan Iron County. [^20] Sister Zilpha moved into Father [John] Smith's house as they moved into their new house. There her Joseph was born and I went and took care of her. The following Aug. 6th [1850] I gave birth to a still born son, then I nursed Sister Caroline's babe at my breasts six months, which is now br. F[rancis] M. Lyman's wife. [^21] [added later] Clara

Mr. Smith was sent by the Presidency with a Co[mpany] to settle & found Iron Co[unty]. [^22] He took sister Zilpha with him. Sister Bathsheba must take her two children and go and do the work for Father Smith's family, and I must go to br. Calisters and nurs baby as we had no wood, although we had bread stuff & meat groceries &c. Sister Sarah and hannah with their babes went into a little adobie house belonging to br Henry Bigler (as he was away with the Mormon Battalion.) The next June 12.th, 1851. Sister Sarah died leaving her son John Henry who was three years the 18.th, of Sep. following. I was teaching school at that time in the 17.th, ward. I taught 4Â½ months, I had 56 pupils. Miss Sarah J. Rich was my assistant.

I weaned Clara at the age of 11. months. I then went to stay with sister Hannah, as Father Smith wished me to go and help raise the boys. [^23] We colored, hired wove a web of gingham to make ourselves and boys some clothes. When Mr Smith returned from Iron Co he was appointed to go to Utah Co. to preside. He took me and sister Hannah with the two boys, and settled us in the City of Provo, where I lived, til the boys were Married, being seventeen years. [added later] I think.

The first winter we lived in Provo Br. Kelting's and Br. Roberts ladies got up a Leap Year Pic Nic Party and I was presented with a Ticket also Sister Hannah, and all we had to do was to present our Ticket to a gentleman. That I could do very well but when the time came for me to invite my partner to dance first, "I that was the rub." [^24] Some one must lead me to him. My courage failed me. Then we had a nice dance, nice supper, and the Ladies ate on their partner's plate rather than wash them as both could not have room at the table at the same time the room was so small being the upper story of the Grist Mill.

The next Leap Year Party was conducted by Lucy M. Smith, Ann K. Dunyon, Hannah M. Smith, and Martha Bullock. We had our house trimmed with evergreens globes baskets and flowers, many of them manufactured by sister Abbey Brown and her daughter sister Dunyon. The trimmings were nice and very tastefully arranged, which gave the rooms a delightful appearance. When the company assembled the four managers steped out on the floor and it fell to my lot to open the ball by prayer, then we invited our partners to dance until supper time, then we made the table look inviting as posible by loading it with all the variety of luxuries obtainable at that time, and then we had a green Fir tree in a keeler of dirt covered with a whitecloth and the tree was trimmed neatley besides having six lighted candles which contributed to give the table a delightful appearance.

We had a very dry warm spring and summer, and we were very destitute of sweet, so the Good Provider sent Honey Dew on to the Cottonwood and Willow leaves, and so br. Geo. Adair and wife, Sister Hannah and myself took the necessary utencils, went among the bushes, cut bows, washed off the sugar flakes into tubs strained the sap cleansed with milk and eggs then skimmed as it boiled. I understood the prossess nessessary, as I had seen my Mother manufacture sugar from the Maple sap. We four worked two days, made 50. lbs. of nice sugar, besides feasting on Pancakes and Molasses, and making a quantity of candy for the children. Br. Adair carried our Tithing to the Bishop. He said ours was the best of any brought in. He wished to know the reason. Br A told him that he had an old sugar hand along that understood the business.

Before we could raise any fruit, the fields abounded with ground Cherries growing spontaneously, which we appreciated as a great favour from the Giver of all good. I used to take Jonny and Charly long before the Sun peeped over the mountain and go to the field a mile and pick a five galon can full of the precious fruit and go back in time to eat our breakfast, as sister H. would have it ready, and then I would go to my school. Sister H. would fetch her babe sit her on the floor go and pick another can of Cherries. What we did not eat we could sell for a good price as fruit was scarce every where in the Territory.

When things got a little more plenty myself Sister Eliza Terril, Sister Rua Angeline Holden and Sister Hannah Maria Smith took our spinning Wheels and went to a large room in the Seminary and tride our best to see who could reel of the greatest No. of knots from sunrise to sunset. [^25] Sister Terril 100,11. knots. Sister Holden not quite so many but better twist on hers. Sister H.M. Smith and I made the best yarn. It was equal for twist but I had a few knots the most but she spun and reeled 80. knots. On the whole we concluded we all beat. We had refreshments four times during the day, indeed, we took solid comfort in our days labour, and our association together.

We used to have Ward Parties in cold weather beside numerous others. Sometimes they would be kept up til nearly daylight. We had not much work to do in cold weather those days, so we had our dancing parties for exercise, then we had our meetings our Concerts and Theaters to while away time til work came on in the Spring, then we did not need any more dancing for exercise, but we could play on the Whimmikie Whammikie two Standard Lillikie Strikiety Huffity Whirlimagig. (Flax Wheel)

While Johnny and Charley were little boys down came myriads of grasshoppers, eating everything before them. I was teaching school. Mr. Smith had gone to Washington to intercede for a State Government. [^26] He calculated that we had sufficient provisions to last til he returned, but we had more or less company so we got out and were oblige to resort to bean bread. It was rather light food to teach school on. Sister Hannah's Sarah M. was a little baby, and Sister Redfield had a feeble babe at the time, and wished Sister H to nurse it what her own babe could spare. She did so and Sister R. gave her a few lbs. of flower, so we could have one pancake a piece in the morning. The little boys seemed satisfied, being told they could have only one. I would come home at noon and go back to my school without a bit of dinner til some one threshed, then I could get wheat on schoolbill.

One day an Indian brought some Sarvis berries, which I bought. [I] picked some green Currents, found a few weeds for greens, and made a Pie of the berries, and we had a way up dinner. We must have felt as thankful as the Pilgrims did over their dinner of clams they ate off the chest lid that good Elder Brewster gave thanks over. When we got our Wheat flowered, then we could eat and give thanks for more than one Pancake.

I had planted a little patch of sweet Corn. One Sunday the Hoppers came. I suppose they thought I would not meddle with them because they succeeded[?] in others of my neighbours garden on Sunday, but I said it was right to do good on the Sabath so I fought and saved my corn, and my good neighbours was glad of it.

While I was in School at Provo two of the Brown boys and John H. Smith, were out of School one day, and the Provo River being very high and running very swiftly, they thought they could have a nice boat ride. They accordingly procured a Skiff and started out. They paddled to the oposite side. When their boat capsized the two Browns managed to get back into the boat, but John Henry sank and came up and was sinking the second time, when to the surprize of the people on the shore there came a great swell in the water without a breeze stirring and went right down under John H. lifting him up out of the water and throwing him up the high straight bank, and as he struck on his stomach the water poured out of his mouth very profusely.

His Father (George A. Smith) was at Salt Lake City at the time, and at that moment as near as we could learn, a feeling came over him, that all was not right with his boys at Provo.

He hastened to his prayer-room, and prayed to our Heavenly Father that his boys might not be swallowed up in the Provo River. When I got out of school, J.H. looked very pale. I asked the cause and he related to me the whole circumstances also of his mirraculous deliverence, saying I took one good drink while I was in the River. Said I, Jonny the Lord has a great work for you to do. He has already been on two missions to Europe, once 15. years ago, and once since he was a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, in 1884-5. [^27]

[Women's Voices, page 267 [There follows a "school composition" prepared by Lucy in 1862 in commemoration of the Fourth of July.]

Sister Hannah and I took in spinning and weaving, and I learned to cut clothes so I could cut the boys suits myself. I taught school a No. of quarters. I attended Proff Charles C. Wandell's school one quarter at Provo in the old Seminary. I met with the Provo Choir of Singers twice a week two years and a half in succession which I injoyed very much. In the mean time sister Hannah and I wove hundreds of yards of cloth such as bed coverleds, diaper, geans, kearsey flannel linsey carpets &c. The draft work was very hard and dificult to get every figure right, and that I would have if I had to undo a half yard.

In 1856. the saints were called upon to confess our sins, renew our covenants, and all must be rebaptized for a remission of our sins, and strive to live more perfectly than ever before. [^28] Then we had greater manifestations of the power of the evil one. I fasted two days to obtain a testimony from the Holy Spirit that I was accepted of my Heavenly Father. At the same time I kept at work in my loom both days without breaking my fast. One evening after the rest of the family had retired I knelt down to pray and I was grasped by the wrist very tightly and it seemed as though there was something held over my face so it was very difficult for me to breath or utter a word. Said I old felloa you can figure away, but you've got the wrong pig by the ear this time. I kept praying every breath I could draw which came very hard and loud, but I did not hurry, nor I could not be frightened. I went to bed when I got ready, but they followed me still trying to smother me, and after I got into bed I was struck on the shoulder quite hard.

The Holy Spirit said to me they can do no harm where the name of Jesus is used with authority. I immediately rebuked them in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by virtue of the Holy Priesthood conferred upon me in common with my companion in the Temple of our God. All that evil sensation left me immediately. I soon fell asleep and was troubled no more at that time, but those wicked spirits seem to go from house to house annoying the saints after that, as they commenced their operations on me first I knew not why.

I was then chosen set apart and blessed to preside over the Relief Society with Sister Rua Angeline Holden for my first, and Sister Nancy Bigler Flemming for my second councelors, Sister Sarah Jane Goff Blackburn Sec'y and Treasurer. We did all we could, with the aid of the good brethren and sisters, to comfort the needy as they came in with Hand-carts late in the Fall [^29] They got their hands and feet badly frosted. Br. Stephen Nixon and wife nursed and took care of them til they were better. We favoured them br. and Sis. N. by quilting a quilt very nicely for them, as our Society was short of funds then we could not do much, but the four Bishops could hardly carry the bedding and other clothing we got together the first time we met. We did not cease our exersions til all were made comfortable. When the Hand Cart Companies arived, the Desks of the Seminary were loaded with provisions for them.

Just at the session of our Oct. Conference news came where these Hand Cart Co's were. President Young and others were excited and anxious for fear those Co's would be caught in the snow in the mountains. They could not go on with the Conference. The Pres't called for men teams clothing, and provisions, and they were soon on the way to meet the Companies with Pres't Young himself til he got into the Can[y]on. There he took sick and was oblige to turn back. The sisters stripped off their Peticoats stockings and every thing they could spare, right there in the Tabernacle and piled into the wagons to send to the saints in the mountains. [On the Plains] The Snow was fast falling and the saints were just piling down in a heap with the idea that they must all perish when to their great joy they discovered a light at a distance. Then they took new courge and they had everything for their comfort.

I never took more satisfaction and I might say pleasure in any labour I ever performed in my life, such a unimity [unanimity] of feeling prevailed. I only had to go into a store and make my wants known, if it was cloth it was measured off without charge. My councilors and I wallowed through the snow until our clothes were wet a foot high to get things together give out noticeses &c. We peaced blocks carded bats quilted and got together I think 27 Quilts, besides a great amount of other clothing, in one winter for the needy.

What comes next for willing hands to do? The brethren are called to go into the mountains to stand guard to keep the enemy at bay. [^30] They want bedding, socks mittens &c. so we sat up nights and knitted all that was needed til we made out a big load with the Quilts and Blankets which we sent out into the mountains to the brethren.

What next? The Provo Brass Band want a nice Flag. They chose a committee and sent To me desiring me to boss the concern. I said to the sisters less go to the fields, glean Wheat and pick ground Cherries to pay for material and make the Band a Flag. No sooner said than done. We paid br. Henry Maibin part dried Ground-Cherries and banance [balance] in money for the Gilding, part of the silk was donated The rest we paid for in Wheat, which we had gleaned. The middle of the Flag was white Lutestring Silk with an edge of changable Blue and Green let in the shape of saw teeth and a silk fring around the edge of that and sister Eliza Terrill embroidered the corners with a hive and bees, butterflies, roses &c.

The gilding was imitation of two Sacks horns crosed in the middle or centre and gold letters across the top of the Flag (Presented by the Ladies of Provo.)

Design of Provo Brass Band flag.

We had a handsome Staff with a beautiful bunch of ribbons on the top and a streamer on the oposite corner. The whole not counting our time or labour cost $76.

I wished to make a speech in behalf of the Ladies of Provo and Present the Flag to the Standard Bearer and have him make a Speech back to me in behalf of the Provo Brass Band, but our President James C. Snow put his foot on it. So we had a Grand Pic Nic Party when I returned from the City with the beautiful Flag. We had a nice supper and finished up with a dance. Our Flag took the prize in the big territorial Fair.

The next thing we must manufacture Carpets for our Provo New Meeting-House. We soon had them made and in position.

I organized and kept up a Sabbath School for many months before the brethern interfered and reorganized although perfect harmony existed among the teachers and children. The children were so strongly attached to me and took such an interest in their singing and other lessons, that I was appointed to take charge of the female portion and a br. to take charge of the males. Our Choirister visited me and wished me to get up some nice pieces and learn the children to sing preparitory for the celebration on the 24th of July. Now here are some of the songs which I composed and I printed off ten coppies with a pen so the little ones could learn them readily, and they made the bowery perfectly ring. They sang with such inspiration that the whole audience were perfectly delighted. Our banners with their appropriate Mottoes were perfectly inspiring. Our children are our glory was one. When our celebration was in marching order we carried a number of blue and white Silk Banners with their appropriate Mottoes, and the boys carried Flags with the stars and stripes.

Br. Samuel S. Jones composed a very nice piece which I took pains to print ten copies with a pen so the small children could learn them preparitory for the celebration, and I felt proud of the little angelic Choir as they sang so sweetly under the bowery on the 24th of July. . . .

Sister Hannah Libbey Smith and I Lucy M Smith did all in our power to provid for the nesitie of our family, as sister Sarah died before John Henry was quite three years old while her husband was away on a mission to help found the County of Iron. As soon as the two boys were old enoug to work they must chop wood tend the stock at the cor[r]al herd cows, spool quill hand ends for me to draw through the harness, and then help wash dishes make pancakes &c.

Charles Warren the Son of Sister Hannah and Apostle George Albert Smith was four months younger than John Henry, and the little fellow would stand out in the snow nearly the whole day and chop wood to get enough to last through the day and have enough to make a fire in the morning. If I would go out to get a little of his wood he would cry poor little fellow. It often makes my heart ache when I think of it, and Jonny tending stock at the coral, nearly freezing, poor boy.

I sat in my loom month after month and wove while Sister Hannah and the boys did the other work, indeed I did all in my power to ease up the burden of my husband as he was President of Utah County for years. . . .

Martha Cragun Cox (1852-1932)

"I am proud of the fact that I am one of Utah's early children, having been the first to come to my parents after their arrival in the valley of the Great Salt Lake," began Martha Cragun Cox. At age seventy-seven this veteran schoolteacher and homesteader wrote in longhand an autobiography of nearly three hundred pages. Martha's narrative is really a collection of short personal vignettes, most of them rich in detail and complete with titles.

Martha James Cragun was the seventh child of James and Eleanor Lane Cragun, Indiana farmers who first joined the Latter-day Saints in Nauvoo. Like her parents, Martha lived most of her life on the frontier. Her childhood was spent at Mill Creek, Utah, a small settlement several miles south of Salt Lake City. In 1862 the Craguns were called along with other Mormon families to settle St. George in southern Utah, and Martha stayed in the rugged Virgin River area much of her life.

The vignettes that follow here relate Martha's growing up in St. George in the 1860s and 70s. She did not focus her story on the taming of the desert, though the life of the Saints in Dixie is never far in the background. Her interest lay in conquering personal frontiers, and so she remembered her struggles with the decisions that led her from weaving into teaching and, in 1869, into plural marriage with Isaiah Cox. Writing for a generation of Saints who no longer practiced plural marriage, Martha felt strongly about giving her children and "all who may care to read it" an account of her experience in living "the principle" with "the two best women in the world," her husband's first two wives Henrietta and Lizzie. [^31]

The original holograph of the "Biographical Record of Martha Cox" is in the Historical Department of the Church. The manuscript is almost flawless, but where necessary, minimal punctuation has been added for clarification, including the replacement of short dashes with commas and standardization of Martha's rather confusing use of quotation marks. Marginal notes have been included in the text without notation except where they are clearly asides.

Martha Cragun Cox with grandchild. (Portrait Collection. LDS Church Archives.)

[Women's Voices, page 273-274 I Try School Again in 1868

Bro John McFarlane taught school in our Third Ward. That was a gay season for St George. The influence of School and Study bore light weight against that of Theaters, parties & balls. Whenever it happened that I awoke in time to get off to school in the morning I went. If too much of the morning was spent in restoring the strength lost from the night before, I stayed at home and prepared for the dance on the following night or wove out a few yards of cloth as many people still held to the home weaving. The routine of my life was that of every other girl in school.

The teacher too was interested in Theaters, music, & balls, concerts courts and councils and rarely came into school any earlier than the rest of us. The young lady who assisted the teacher was very frequently absent. As I was about the most steady in attendance among the lady pupils I had the privilege of hearing her classes when she was not there.

During the absence of the teacher at the noon recess we pupils used to dance the waltz in the school room. There were boys and girls a dozen of them just blooming or budding into their teens and I instituted myself their teacher. I was quite proud of this training class when I saw them take their places on the ball room floor always the best waltzers in the room were they. I felt a jealous pang when I saw they did not remember to waltz with their teacher. The theaters and plays in St George were first class. The concerts were also fine. McFarlane was an excellent leader. I had a great love for these things and had I been born with wealth I would have gone to the extreme. I would have travelled much and seen all that my heart desired but my kind heavenly parent placed me where I was out of the way of destruction. I think this school lasted about three months.

[Women's Voices, page 274-275 I Acquire a Desire to Teach

One day I was taking from the loom a piece of Jeans that I had woven for a pair of pants for Bro Jeffreys, a cultivated English gentleman. It had been made from nappy yarn and I told him did not reflect credit on the weaver. "O well," he said "'twill only be for a little while we'll need it! Twill soon be worn out and then my nappy cloth and the weaver's work will be forgotten. And the weaver too, though she becomes round shouldered over the loom in trying to serve the people with good cloth, will wear out and be forgotten and no one will know that she wove."

The words fell on me solemn like and prophetic, and I pondered on them deeply. "What profit is there finally" I said to myself, "in all this round of never ceasing labor? Weaving cloth to buy dresses to wear out in weaving more cloth to buy more dresses. When my day is past, my warp and woof of life and labors ended and my body has gone to rest in the grave, What is there to mark the ground on which I trod? Nothing," and the thought made me weep. After that I could not throw my schuttle as readily and swiftly as before. If I could only do some undying thing I felt it would move my arm to action. But to write my name on nothing except that that bore the device "Passing Away," was not intended in my creation I was sure of that.

In my dilemma I went to [James] McCarty. [^32] I told him what Bro Jeffreys had said to me. "What could I do that my work and myself would not be forgotten?" I asked. He answered: "You might plant." To this I replied, That the day would come when Jos. E. Johnson with all his fine trees, flowers, vegetables etc that he had given St. George would be forgotten by the people & his fine gardens vanished. "Plant in the minds of men and the harvest will be different." He said, "Every wholesome thought you succeed in planting in the mind of a little child even, will grow and bear eternal fruit that will give you such joy that you will not ask to be remembered." His words, though they enlightened brought to me an awful sadness of soul. I was so ignorant. I could realize how dense was my mind. I saw that I had hitherto lacked ambition for I had been content to dance, laugh and sleep my leisure time away, never supposing that I might reach a higher plane than that which enabled me to support and clothe myself.

Sympathy for myself led me into a feeling of sympathy for others who were in a like condition of ignorance. And there were many more who were in like condition with myself as far as education was concerned.

I one day passed a group of boys who had stolen out of school to play marbles on the street. The poor old crone who was trying to teach them must have been glad they had played truant for they were of the age and disposition to be most trying in school. And truly, the fact that a great many children were growing up on the streets of St George without schooling or moral training even was truly alarming. I said to the boys mentioned "If I were your teacher I'd be sorry to have you out of school." A big fellow answered. "Oh the old woman's glad we're out." I told the boys I was sorry to see them growing up without education. "If you're sorry for us" they said, "why don't you teach us? We wouldn't stay out of school if you taught us." "I wish I knew enough to teach you," I said "and I'd see whether you would." One bright little fellow spoke up and said "I should think you'd teach us that that you do know." Here was a new thought. There were many children who knew less than I. Why not give the little I had, if I could not give much. The bantering words of these rude boys on the street aroused a feeling hard to resist, and I resolved that henceforth as far as it lay in my power to do so I would spread light into darkened chambers. I decided to become a teacher.

But I had much to overcome. I was rough in manner, and though possessed of a good enough heart I was wanting in that pride and dignity so requisite in the make up of a good teacher, which I could never hope to become, but in a quiet way I meant to disseminate knowledge among all those who were poorer than myself in intellectual riches and the thought of doing so gave me happiness.

I had fallen into keeping company with a young man of no very lofty ambition nor striking virtues but had agreeable manners—liked to dance and have a good time, and my family made no objection to our associations. I knew him to be a tippler of wine though I had never known him to get drunk. The fact that he loved wine and that his father was a drunkard did not disturb me much and I gave him reason to expect I would stay by him and marry him, but a conversation I had had once with McCarty on the subject of my marriage would come to me sometimes with such force that it finally took lead in my mind especially when I saw the sparkle in his eyes when he quaffed a glass of wine. McCarty had said to me at the time mentioned that if I married a man who loved whisky as well as my father loved it I could not hope to have a posterity whose natural endowments would be equal to that even of the mediocre among men. I knew enough of the Gospel to realize the responsibility of parenthood and the condemnation I would be under in imposing this curse on my posterity. Again, I had many times said with much earnestness that if a husband ever came home to me drunken and abusive as some men in St. George did to their wives, "I would kill him." [^33] And I fully believed that I would do it. Though I knew that no murderer could enter the celestial kingdom.

This gave me much concern and I prayed much to the Lord to teach me what to do, and even that the young man's attentions might be turned away from me. I would have been glad to become distasteful to his sight. But the Lord kept by my side and when the time came I said without a fear "I cannot marry you, I'd lose my salvation if I did." I did not meet this man again face to face till the course of fifty years had run by. His bloated face, and other marks of debauchery during a life of drunkenness in which he lost love of wife & children and loss of all, made me say, "Oh how good is the Lord to me." As I could not summon courage to give an explanation my words created in his soul a sort of contempt for me, or so I thought. But if he wished he might have taken this consolation to himself: I did not quit him for a richer, younger, more popular young man than he for I married one of the poorest men in Washington Co. and one who had already two wives and a family of seven children, and who did not handle as much money in all the years I was his wife as the other handled in six months while a contractor in S.L. City, where he went into all kinds of excesses.

[Women's Voices, page 278 I Decide to Try Plural Marriage

My decision to marry into a plural family tried my family all of them, and in giving them trial I was sorely tried. I had studied out the matter—I knew the principal of plural marriage to be correct—to be the highest, holiest order of marriage. I knew too, that I might fail to live the holy life required and lose the blessings offered. If I had not learned before to go to the Lord with my burden I surely learned to go to him now. Having decided to enter this order it seemed I had passed the Rubicon. I could not go back, though I fain would have done so rather than incur the hatred of my family. If the Lord would have manifested in answer to my sleepless nights of prayer that the principle of plural marriage was wrong and it was not the will of Heaven that I should enter it, I felt I should be happy. But it only made me miserable beyond endurance when I tried to recede from the decision I had made to enter it. My only relief was in prayer, and prayer only strengthened my resolve to leave father, mother and all for—I scarcely knew what. I was sorry sometimes that I had taken up the question at all, but having assumed it I could not recede, and I found relief only in prayer when the Holy Spirit gave me inspiration and made it plain to me that it was the only source thru which I could attain salvation.

When the final decision was made known to my family that I could not recede from my purpose the storm broke upon my head. It was not a marriage of love, they claimed and in saying so they struck me a blow. For I could not say that I had really loved the man as lovers love, though I loved his wives and the spirit of their home. I could not assure my family that my marriage was gotten up solely on the foundation of love for man. The fact was I had asked the Lord to lead me in the right way for my best good and the way to fit me for a place in his kingdom. He had told me how to go and I must follow in the pathe he dictated and that was all there was to it.

[Women's Voices, page 279 Meet Wm Smith

Nov 20, 1869. We started for S.L. City to be married. On Monday Dec 6th we were sealed in the old end[owment] House. I received my endowments the same day. [An account of her trip to the Endowment House, where William Smith was an officiator, and her work in St. George as a teacher's assistant follows.]

[Women's Voices, page 279 Tests in Plural Marriage

It had always seemed to me that plural marriage was the leading principle among the L.D.S. and when I came to know how generally my action in going into it was denounced, especially the fact I had married into poverty, I was saddened as well as surprised. When in my mind I took a survey of our little town I could locate but a very few men, not one in fifty of the whole city who had entered it at all. One who had been my admiring friend said: "It is all very well for those girls who cannot very well get good young men for husbands to take married men, but she (me) had no need to lower herself for there were young men she could have gotten." And she and other friends "cold shouldered" me and made uncomplimentary remarks. The good kind women whom I had chosen to share the burdens of life with gave me strength and comfort with their sympathy and love, and I retired within the home and like the porcupine rolled myself into a ball when my enemies approached and showed them my quills only. But when thinking it over soberly I would come to the conclusion that the public dealt with me as charitably as I could expect it to do, and I blamed no one not even my own family for their coolness towards me.

I began to realize my own imperfections now, and I am grateful to my Father that I had wisdom from Him to see [and] know them. Adopting the rules and regulations of my husband's family—an order already established—I had to submit to an almost entire reversal of my nature and habits. The greatest foe I had to meet was the hot Irish temper that had always swayed me when occasion aroused it. Many times the words of McCarty would be brought to my mind. "Remember in your plural home to speak no words when angry." When I disobeyed that injunction it brought me sorrow.

To adopt an early hour for rising and for retiring worked rather a hardship on me. When at the stroke of five in the morning I was obliged to drag my drowsy head from my pillow I would bless my mother for having let me enjoy so many late morning naps when I was at home. And when the clock at nine in the evening sounded the curfew and I had to retire to bed to toss sleeplessly there until near the middle of the night I felt that order and method were hard masters indeed, and I desired to roam once more in the "Happy Valley." Again [came] McCarty's admonition to "conform to all the established rules of the house to which you are going and be careful of how you try to set up your own ideas of government."

To eat a dinner without meat and salt-rising bread without salt in it were two petty trials I had to put under my feet. And I hankered for a sip from my mother's tea-pot. I thank my Father above that He gave me strength to comply with all the rules of our house, the main rule being perfect obedience. The first year of my married life gave me more experience in the duties of life than I had ever learned before.

On 3 Mar. 1870 my 18th birthday Henrietta the Senior wife gave birth to a son. We named him George Washington. A bright lovely child he was and I loved him exceedingly, and his mother was beloved by me. Lizzie's boy Henderson Elias was born 20th of the following April, 1870. Geo. W. d[ied] 5 March 1871.

[Women's Voices, page 281 My First Born

Jan. 11th 1871 I received from Heaven the gift of a daughter, a mite of a creature weighing 7 lbs and 11 oz. As I looked at the waxen figure beside me on the bed I felt I had all I needed in this life to make up my sum of happiness. Two short days she adorned my life. Two short days of unmeasured bliss. But a lingering difficult birth had done its worst for her and on the morning of the 13th the spirit warned me to call the father and family and the elders. They saw no cause for alarm and attributed my uneasiness to the weakened state of my nerves but to humor me they proceeded to bless and name her. Scarcely was this accomplished when the spirit took its flight. This was my first real sorrow and the bitterest disappointment I had ever known. We gave the baby my name and that of my mother: "Martha Eleanor." She died 13th Jan 1871 (b 8:20 PM).

[Women's Voices, page 281 [margin] In this year 1871 B[righam] Y[oung] proposed to build a Temple. Dedication of Temple ground Nov 9th 1871. I attend it. First stone laid 16 Mar 1873. [I attend it.] Temple dedicated Jan 1 [1]877. [I attend it.]

[Women's Voices, page 281 Stricken with Measles

Through the latter part of Jan and thru February Measles prostrated our family one after another only the father of the house escaping. On 5th Mar our little George was taken. This I felt could have been avoided had we understood the disease better, but it was new to us all. The first visitation of it St. George had had.

During April and May I again attended school, to R.S. Horne again. This was at an expense and great sacrafice but I felt that I must get some training as a teacher if I ever succeeded in giving my "street boys" instruction. I had those idle marble players ever on my mind.

[Women's Voices, page 282 I ask for a School

In September of this year being reminded again by one of my boys of my promise to teach I applied to the Trustees of school to be permitted to teach in our 3d Ward School house. They would not listen to my proposal. My rude boys would smash the windows, break the benches and in fact make general destruction of the property. Besides they did not think I had the ability to teach.

When I went home Sister Elizabeth Whitmore was there. She who owned the hall wherein McFarlane had kept his school, and where for the past winter the people had danced. She offered to let me have her hall one month free of rent if I wanted it. She felt desirous of seeing me try out my ability as a teacher. I accepted her offer. But the room had no furnishings. Bro Charles A Terry loaned several planks and blocks with which to improvise seats. Sister Whitmore loaned me an old kitchen table of small size for a desk. I mustered up another degree of courage to ask the loan of a black board from the school. Their refusal abashed me so and I felt so belittled for having been turned down the second time. "Auntie" came to my relief. She said "Take the large bread board and paint it, and we'll use the top of the table for kneading dough." This great board four feet by 2Â½ I carried to Bro Kelsey that very night under cover of darkness and for 50Â¢ he gave it a good coat of blacking. A piece of white chalk from my husband's tool box and I was equipped. Now for my trial class.

Mrs W. advised me to take the children from the "select" families. She was a Southern woman and felt that "poor white trash" didn't amount to much. I first tried for subscription at the house of a gentleman of culture and education, one of the leaders of the people. His wife informed me that association with the children of the 3d Ward would not be elevating to hers. While Bp. Granger's wife who was present volunteered information and advice: I had married into a poor family—was no better than the other wives—[I should] go home and take hold with them in the work of the family and not be setting myself up for a school teacher. I tried to walk out with the air [of] an independent Republican citizen but I felt "mightily" small. I tried at several of the homes of the well to do and "upper class," but without avail. The last answer I received woke me up. "No, I don't wish to trust my children in a class built up for the teacher's test." I had confessed that I did not know that I could teach. How could I expect the people to support an uncertainty.

When I reached my friend's home and she learned the result of my visit to the "select families" a cloud settled on her face, and she said, "I guess your plan is a failure." I told her: "That is just what Sheriff Hardy says. It will be a failure because I have your house. He will not let his children have the association of yours." Anxious to know the objectionable feature of the association of her boys I had to tell her, "He says your children know nothing except to straddle a horse and swear." (Mrs Whitmore was a "cattle woman," and a very rich one. She owned immense herds of cattle and horses.) This changed her mood somewhat. She said she would not let me have the house if I took Hardy's children in the class.

Just then Mrs Andrus came by. "I hear you are taking up teaching." "Yes" I said, "I'm going to teach." Mrs W. told her she was giving me a chance to try out my ability and see if I could teach. I said with my head held high, "Whatever I do is going to be teaching, teaching of as high an order as anyone else's." Mrs Andrus said: "When I heard of your intention I just ran up to see if we can get our children into your class." That settled the matter with Mrs W. The Andrus family was not only one of her best friends but also except herself the richest family in the South. She stood by my school and myself to the end of the month promised. The class filled to overflowing. Some came for the love of learning and others because no fee was attached to the registration. At the end of four weeks I was in a dilemma. So flourishing a school could not be broken up. And I could not raise the subscription price which I meant now to up high enough to cover the expenses of rent: twenty five dollars per month, and seating, and warmth.

Now, the two best women in the world came forward with their helpful advice. During the summer we had built a new room of good size. It was unfurnished, had neither floor or windows yet. They said "Let us put a floor in that room and bring your school home." The father being away from home the task looked impossible. We had the lumber for the floor just from the mills. With the children's help we carried it in and fitted a floor. The uneven edges of the boards made ugly cracks but it was the best we could do. And we were thankful for it. While we were at work a letter came to Lizzie with five dollars enclosed in pay for some obligation. This was from her aunt Annie who came soon after to live with us. With this five dollars we put glass in the windows. With boards and blocks we arranged seats and by the following Monday I was ready for my class. The front yard was given over to the children for a playground.

I received a call one day from the Trustees who told me that my pupils belonged to the Ward School and I should dismiss them and let them go to the Ward. We can see a reason for this claim when we understand that our southern schools were taught on the subscription plan. Hence the more pupils the more money. While I was considering whether I should comply with the request made of me, I received a call from Bro R. Morris head trustee for the 4th Ward schools asking me to come into the 4th Ward School, "and" said he, "We want you to come right down this morning." It was yet early. I sent a runner to tell the trustee who wanted my school to come over at nine o'clock and receive my school. Thus ended that trouble in a very amicable manner. The trustees were pleased. I was pleased to have a ward school to superintend. The women at home were glad to have the children out of the yard and to have the use of the room. The father of the house had come home and was ready to finish the room. So we were pleased all around and had no complaint against anybody.

[Women's Voices, page 285 I Move to the 4th Ward School

1871—Richard Horne was again teaching in St. George. He taught in the 3d Ward School House. The 4th W. school was soon so crowded that an assistant was necessary but teachers were very scarce. There were none to be had. I wonder now how I wallowed through the work of that winter. Bro Horne taught a business course at night school. Rettie [oldest Cox daughter] and I both attended. My school closed in March I think.

29 May 1872 I was again blessed with a little girl. Rettie named her Rosannah. And on the 4th of July following Lizzie's boy Warren came. Just as the cannons were announcing the great Independence Day. "Our twins" we called them. Those were busy days. We had an apple orchard of the very best. Through the fall months we dried and put up much fruit. Peaches were plentiful and we bought and dried many peaches. [margin] Rosannah b. 6:40 AM. Thursday. Weighed 9 pds. 2 oz.

[Women's Voices, page 285 Home Regulations

We had our work so systematized and so well ordered that we could with ease do a great deal. One would for a period superintend the cooking and kitchen work with the help of the girls. Another make beds and sweep, another comb and wash all the children. At 7:30 all would be ready to sit down to breakfast. Lizzie was the dressmaker for the house and she was always ready to go to her work at eight or nine o'clock. She was also the best sales woman of the house. She generally did most of the buying, especially the shoes. She was a good judge of leather. Auntie did darning and repairing. I seldom patched anything. She did it all for me. She never ironed the clothes. I did most of that. When wash day came all hands were employed except the cook. On that day we liked the boiled pudding. Noon saw our family wash on the line.

We usually bought cloth by the bolt and whoever needed most was served first. In fact we had in our home an almost perfect United Order. No one can tell the advantages of that system until he has lived it. We enjoyed many privileges that single wifery never knew. We did not often all go out together. One always stayed at home and took care of the children and the house. In that way we generally came home with a correct idea of what was given in the sermon.

Whenever one was indisposed she was not obliged to tie up her head and keep serving about the house but she could go to her room and be down knowing that her children and all her share of the work would be attended to. No one was obliged to bend over the wash tub when she was delicate in health or condition. All stepped into the breach and helped each other.

We acted as nurses for each other during confinement. We were too poor to hire nurses. One suit or outfit for new babies and confined mothers did for us all, and when one piece wore it was supplied by another. For many years we lived thus working together cooking over the same large stove with the same great kettles, eating at the same long table without a word of unpleasantness or a jar in our feelings portrayed. The children we bore while we lived together in that poor home love each other more than those that came to us after the raid on polygamists came on and we were obliged to separate and flee in different directions.

To me it is a joy to know that we laid the foundation of a life to come while we lived in that plural marriage that we three who loved each other more than sisters, children of one mother love, will go hand in hand together down through all eternity. That knowledge is worth more to me than gold and more than compensates for all the sorrow I have ever known.

Footnotes

Excellent studies of the early years in the Great Basin include: Leonard J. Arrington, Great Basin Kingdom (Harvard University Press, 1958); Leonard J. Arrington, Ferarnorz Y. Fox, and Dean L. May, Building the City of God: Community and Cooperation among the Mormons (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976); and Joel Edward Ricks, Forms and Methods of Early Mormon Settlement in Utah and the Surrounding Region, 1847-1877 (Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press Monograph Series, vol. 2, 1964).

---
Notas:
[^1] Brigham Young sermon, July 18, 1869, JD 13:61.
[^2] Eliza R. Snow, "Female Relief Society," Deseret News, April 22, 1868.
[^3] Eliza R. Snow address, First Ward Relief Society Minutes, June 7, 1877, Woman's Exponent, November 15, 1877.
[^4] Eliza R. Snow address, "Great Indignation Meeting," Deseret News Weekly, January 19, 1870,
[^5] General Epistle, January-February 1868, p. 26, Brigham Young Circular Letters, Church Archives.
[^6] A recent biographical treatment is Patricia Rasmussen Eaton-Gadsby and Judith Rasmussen Dushku, "Emmeline B. Wells," in Vicky Burgess-Olson, ed., Sister Saints (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1978), pp. 457-75.
[^7] Bryant S. Hinckley, Daniel Hamner Wells and Events of His Time (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Printing, 1942) contains a chapter by Annie Wells Cannon that provides insight into the "Home and Family Life" of the Wells family, pp. 337-62. The wives of Daniel Hanmer Wells included Eliza Rebecca Robison, Louisa Free, Martha Givens Harris, Lydia Ann Alley, Susan Hannah Alley, and Hannah Corill Free, and all of them had children. Newel Kimball Whitney took Emmeline as a second wife, Elizabeth Ann Smith being his first wife. See note 9. A third wife, Anne Houston, was added to the family in 1846.
[^8] A handwritten note by one of Emmeline's daughters at the end of this diary reads: "This Mr Hendry so often referred to was very much in love with my sister Emmie. An extremely nice man, educated wealthy good family but not a member of the Church. Mother idolized Emmie and desired her happiness but belief caused difficulties."
[^9] Elizabeth Ann Smith Whitney (1800-1882) was the first wife of Newel Kimball Whitney (1795-1850). Emmeline, his second wife, was married to Elder Whitney in 1845. These sister-wives were very close, much like mother and daughter. The relationship is discussed by Eaton-Gadsby and Dushku in 'Emmeline B. Wells," Burgess-Olson, ed., Sister Saints, pp. 463-64.
[^10] Mary and Ida Cook were recognized and esteemed teachers, sisters who had graduated from New York State normal schools and arrived together in Utah in 1870. They were baptized members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints early in 1871, and both the Deseret News and the Woman's Exponent followed their varied and productive teaching careers with interest. A biographical treatment of the two sisters is Jill Mulvay (Derr), "The Two Miss Cooks: Pioneer Professionals for Utah Schools," Utah Historical Quarterly 43 (Fall 1975): 396-409; also reprinted in Burgess-Olson, ed., Sister Saints, pp. 242-57. Emmeline seems to have taken a liking to Mary and Ida as well as their sister Cornelia.
[^11] Millie (Melvina) had married William Dunford October 11, 1867, a marriage that apparently ended in divorce.
[^12] George Q. Cannon (1827-1901) was Utah's territorial delegate to Congress from 1873 to 1882. He had been ordained an apostle in 1860 and was at this time assistant counselor to Brigham Young in the First Presidency. (Daniel H. Wells was also a member of the First Presidency at this time.)
[^13] Five days after Judge McKean sentenced Brigham Young to one day's imprisonment and a fine of $25, a press dispatch from Washington, D.C., announced the removal of the chief justice from office "caused by what the president deems fanatical and extreme conduct." B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Century I, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1930), 5:446-47.
[^14] Emmeline's daughter Annie Wells Cannon indicated that the Wasatch Literary Association was organized in 1872 in Emmeline's home. See Hinckley, Daniel Hanmer Wells, pp. 356-57.
[^15] Church leaders hoped to use George Reynolds (1842-1909), private secretary to Brigham Young, as a test case in trying the constitutionality of antipolygamy laws. He was arrested in October 1874, tried, and found guilty, with the conviction overturned for irregularities. When the case came up again a year later, he was found guilty and the conviction was upheld by the territorial supreme court and later, upon appeal, by the U.S. Supreme Court. See James L. Clayton, "The Supreme Court, Polygamy, and the Enforcement of Morals in Nineteenth Century America: An Analysis of Reynolds v. United States," Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 12 (Winter 1979): 46-61.
[^16] An account of the life of Myron Tanner (1826-1903) as well as some of his and Mary Jane's writings are included in George S. Tanner, John Tanner and His Family (Salt Lake City: John Tanner Family Association, 1974), pp. 15-27, 363-65, 401-6.
[^17] Excerpts from Mary Jane's autobiography, letters, and journal have been published in Margery W. Ward, ed., A Fragment: The Autobiography of Mary Jane Mount Tanner (Salt Lake City: Tanner Trust Fund, University of Utah Library, 1980).
[^18] The history of the Arizona Mormon settlements is set forth in Charles S. Peterson, Take Up Your Mission: Mormon Colonizing along the Little Colorado River, 1870-1900 (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1973).
[^19] Edward W. Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom (New York, 1877; reprinted. Salt Lake City, 1957).
[^20] Mary Jane observed that her father "was worth considerable property at the time of his return to Cal. He estimated it at about thirty-five thousand dollars. After his death his property was sold and divided among the Lawrence family according to the will of his second wife, Sarah Lawrence (1826-1875). It was then thirty-five hundred dollars in cash Cornelia and myself received through the kindness of Henry Lawrence, one hundred dollars each." Mary Jane Mount, "A Memorial," Tanner, John Tanner and His Family, p. 404.
[^21] Brigham Young died August 29, 1877.
[^22] Hannah Smith and Hannah Clark were counselors to Mary Jane in the Provo Third Ward Relief Society.
[^23] From the time of the Nauvoo Temple, Relief Society members took on the task of sewing temple clothing. A temple and burial clothing department was established by the society's general board in 1912, though even then individual Relief Society women throughout the Church continued sewing the sacred clothing. See History of Relief Society, 1842-1966 (Salt Lake City: General Board of Relief Society, 1966), pp. 90-91.
[^24] Two recent articles on Susa Young Gates provide insight into the complicated life of this complex woman as well as leads to secondary and primary source materials on Susa: Carolyn W. D. Person, "Susa Young Gates," in Bushman, ed., Mormon Sisters, pp. 201-23; Rebecca Foster Cornwall, "Susa Y. Gates," Burgess-Olsen, ed., Sister Saints, pp. 63-93. R. Paul Cracroft, "Susa Young Gates" (Master's thesis, University of Utah, 1959), is a comprehensive survey and criticism of Susa's literary works.
[^25] Susa Young Gates and Leah Dunford Widtsoe, The Life Story of Brigham Young (New York: Macmillan, 1930).
[^26] This is probably Susa's half-brother John Willard Young (1844-1924), who served for a short time as counselor to Brigham Young in the First Presidency and later as a counselor to the Twelve Apostles.
[^27] Like Susa, Dora had two children by her first marriage. Frank Moreland Dunford was born in 1873 and George Albert Dunford in 1875. Either or both of these may have been with Susa at the time, since Dora had recently been there. See note 31.
[^28] Emma May Bigelow (1873-1880), a daughter of Lucy's brother Daniel, is one relation who seems to fit this situation, although there is no other indication that this niece was living with her aunt Lucy Bigelow Young at this time.
[^29] Susa's references here to "trial" and "case" may well pertain to claims made by seven of Brigham Young's heirs, including Dora, against executors of the Brigham Young estate. The case is discussed by Leonard J. Arrington in "The Settlement of the Brigham Young Estate, 1877-79," Pacific Historical Review 21 (February 1952): 1-20.
[^30] In Mormon theology, salvation is equally available to men and women, but exaltation is reserved for men and women who marry. Susa's own views on the earthly relationship between men and women varied substantially over the course of her lifetime. See Cornwall, "Susa Y. Gates," Burgess-Olson, ed., Sister Saints, pp. 81-85.
[^31] Dora's first marriage to Frank Moreland (Morley) Dunford took place against her parents' wishes and in spite of their efforts to thwart it, with an elopement October 3, 1870. Susa says, "Industrious he was, with a sunny disposition . . . but he inherited or developed a deadly weakness of will and lack of self-control. He drank." By 1877, according to Susa, "Dora had left her husband" and returned to St. George. She had two children by the first marriage and six children by a second marriage to Judge Albert Hagen, also a non-Mormon, contracted sometime prior to 1882. See Susa Young Gates, 'From Impulsive Girl to Patient Wife: Lucy Bigelow Young," ed. Miriam B. Murphy, Utah Historical Quarterly 45 (Summer 1977): 283, 286; also Gates and Sanborn, "Brigham Young Genealogy," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 11 (1920): 132-33.
[^32] Zina Young Williams (1851-1931) was a daughter of Zina D. H. Young and Brigham Young, a half-sister of Susa. Married in 1868 to Thomas Williams, she had two sons by him. Following the death of Williams in 1874, she moved to Provo so her sons could be educated by Karl G. Maeser. During 1879 she opened the Primary Department at the Brigham Young Academy and served as matron. She married Charles Ora Card in 1884. Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia 3:338-39.
[^33] John Daniel Thompson McAllister (1827-1910) was president of the St. George Stake from 1877 to 1888. James G. Bleak (1825-1918) was clerk of the Southern Utah Mission.
