Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 ( 1982)

Chapter Nine

The 1870s: a Decade of Collective and Personal Achievement

"My Sphere of Usefulness Is Being Enlarged"

It is no coincidence that the three women featured in this chapter were closely tied to the Relief Society. All three women were writers who published poems, articles, and books, and all three were suffragists. If the experiences of Emmeline B. Wells, Mary Jane Mount Tanner, and Susa Young Gates seem to differ somewhat from those of Latter-day Saint women before them, it is because their lives were impacted by changes that occurred around the 1870s, one of the most significant periods in Mormon women's history. The reorganization of the Relief Society in December 1867 thrust women into expanding roles of public leadership and increased their opportunities for personal achievement. Brigham Young himself sowed the seeds for this new era for women, declaring: "We believe that women are useful, not only to sweep houses, wash dishes, make beds, and raise babies, but that they should stand behind the counter, study law or physic, or become good bookkeepers and be able to do the business in any counting house, and all this to enlarge their sphere of usefulness for the benefit of society at large." [^1]

Dormant from 1857 to 1867 because of the general disruption of ward activities caused by the Utah War, the Relief Society became a prominent part of Mormon women's lives in the 1870s. The diaries of Mary Jane Tanner and Emmeline Wells show they both worked with their local societies "looking after some of the poor and the sick." President Young was explicit in directing societies to be organized in wards throughout the territory, not only to carry out such relief, "but for the accomplishment of every good and noble work." [^2]

"The subject was home-industries," Emmeline Wells once recorded after "society meeting." With money they had raised from fairs and parties, Relief Society sisters imported knitting machinery, raised silkworms, set up tailoring establishments, bought, stored, and sold grain, made everything from straw hats to shoes, and bought property and built their own cooperatives where they could sell their homemade goods on commission. Home industry was one means by which Brigham Young hoped to preserve the economic entity of the Saints as their geographic isolation faded in the wake of the transcontinental telegraph (1861) and railroad (1869); and it was one means by which women could step forward to build the kingdom "just as much as an Elder who went forth to preach the Gospel." [^3]

Having "no house for our meetings," Mary Jane Tanner's Relief Society gathered "at private residences," so she noted in 1874, a time at which many local societies had built halls with their own funds. Women gathered weekly in halls or homes to quilt, sew carpet rags, discuss church history and doctrine, and share testimonies. The impact of the organization spread quickly beyond these meetings, however. "We are going to meet tomorrow evening to choose a president for the Young Ladies Society which will be organized in this ward," recorded Mary Jane. Retrenchment societies, first started by Brigham Young in 1869, were to provide young ladies a way to band together to resist Gentile influences. Later known as Mutual Improvement Associations, these ward organizations were "mothered" by the older Relief Society women, who helped to staff and direct the young women's meetings. The Relief Society likewise served as a mother organization to the Primary Associations established for children in wards throughout the territory starting in 1878.

"[We are] women of God,—women filling high and responsible positions," declared Eliza R. Snow, "presidentess" or head of these three women's organizations. Encouraging her sisters to take up their new callings in Relief Society, Young Ladies Mutual Improvement Association, and Primary, she also rallied sisters in opposition to local and national antipolygamy campaigns. "Were we the stupid, degraded, heart-broken beings that we have been represented, silence might better become us," she told five thousand women assembled in the Tabernacle in 1870 in the first of many "indignation meetings." Over nearly two decades, through similar mass meetings and petitions and personal visits to Congress, Mormon women made an impressive though ultimately unsuccessful attempt to defend the Latter-day Saint system of plural marriage from legal harassment. [^4]

Increased public speaking and public service among Mormon women in the 1870s reflected growing opportunities for American women at large. Latter-day Saints were conscious of the women's rights campaigns being mounted by their contemporaries in the United States, and certainly they were influenced by the widespread concern for expanding woman's sphere. The rigors of frontiering largely behind them, Latter-day Saint women, like their American sisters, turned increasingly to social and cultural pursuits. With the granting of the vote to Utah women in 1870, many of them became involved in politics for the first time. "Political meetings are something new to me," wrote Mary Jane Tanner, noting her attendance with other ladies who said "i [aye] sometimes by way of exercising our rights, and went home feeling the importance of our positions." Their holding of the elective franchise linked Mormon women and the Relief Society with suffragists throughout the country, particularly with the National Woman Suffrage Association. In 1889 Mary Jane Tanner was elected president of the Provo Woman's Suffrage Association. Emmeline B. Wells, who noted in March 1875 "the first time in my life that I ever spoke in public before men," traveled east a few years later to defend the cause of Mormon women before Congress and the U.S. President, organized chapters of the Utah Woman's Suffrage Association in local wards, and attended national suffrage organizations and conventions.

Likewise, Susa Young Gates would eventually serve seven terms as delegate to the National and International Councils of Women (of which the Relief Society and YLMIA were charter members), but in 1879 she was a twenty-three-year-old student at Brigham Young Academy in Provo, and her letters indicate she was "busy with studies and lectures." For several years before the founding of his namesake school in 1875, Susa's father, Brigham Young, had heartily advocated the education of women "without distinction of sex," and his death in 1877 did not stop the movement. [^5]

For Susa, academic training was a critical part of fitting oneself "to be a useful member of God's kingdom." Certainly she saw other women about her educating themselves to work in various capacities within the Mormon community: telegraph operators, lawyers, professional teachers. Several Mormon women attended eastern women's medical colleges and returned to Utah as M.D.'s, setting up practices, conducting midwifery and nursing classes, and staffing the Deseret Hospital, established in 1882 by Mormon women's organizations. Such individual achievements brought unprecedented accolades for women from the Mormon community as a whole.

Susa's last letter mentions (with some apology) one of many pieces contributed by her to the Woman's Exponent, a semimonthly tabloid owned, edited, and published by Mormon women. Mary Jane Mount Tanner was also a frequent contributor, and Emmeline B. Wells edited the paper for thirty-seven years. From 1872 to 1914 the Exponent, as its first editor Louisa Lula Greene Richards indicated, attempted to discuss "every subject interesting and valuable to women." The Relief Society, the Young Ladies MIA, and the Primary Associations were amply featured in its pages, as were reports of suffrage meetings, household hints, notices of current events and special classes, testimonies of the Church and its doctrines, and reams of poetry and personal essays. Early volumes of the Woman's Exponent still survive to recount and symbolize the decade when Mormon women began to reach outside their homes to their church and community and even to the nation at large. If they, like Susa, were somewhat self-conscious, they were no longer silent.

Yet, in going public these women did not cease to be private. A brief listing of their external achievements is, as it should be, only background for the drama of their individual lives. In 1874, at age forty-six, Emmeline Wells, an involved mother of five nearly grown daughters, presided over her first meeting and wrote the first of hundreds of Exponent editorials. Though two of her girls "were indignant with me for working in the Office, as if I had to earn my living," she was "anxious to acquire a thorough knowledge of an Editor's duties." Prodded by an inner drive, Mary Jane Tanner, wife, mother, and local Relief Society president, continued writing poetry, though it was "tedious work owing to the annoyance of the children," and sought and succeeded at getting it published. Susa Young, leaving behind a marriage that had failed, sensed in 1879 that she had "a destiny in this Church to fulfill." With high sights for herself and her two children, she remained at the Brigham Young Academy in spite of her mother's oft-expressed hope that she would return home to St. George.

In a time of change, these three women found their own personal lives in a state of transition. Emmeline, Mary Jane, and Susa each expressed joy in her new accomplishments, but none sought to substitute her public achievements for her personal family life. Consciously and unconsciously these women battled for balance. Periodic losses of equilibrium were the inevitable growing pains of those who found their "sphere of usefulness . . . being enlarged."

Emmeline B. Wells (1828-1921)

In the rotunda of the Utah State capitol building sits a bust inscribed with the words "A Fine Soul Who Served Us." For nearly half a century Emmeline B. Wells served in civic, political, and religious capacities, proving the truth of a statement printed in an editorial in her own Woman's Exponent: "Happy the woman who has the foresight to see that through forty years of experience she has matured the ability to commence a grand, useful second half of her life!" After raising her five daughters, Emmeline deployed her writing interest and talents in the editorship of the Woman's Exponent and a lifetime commitment to working in behalf of women. [^6]

Born in Petersham, Massachusetts, to David and Deiadama Hare Woodward on February 29, 1828, Emmeline graduated from a "select" girls' school at age fifteen and became a teacher. She had joined the Church the year before, and her mother, fearing that she might be drawn away by her school associates, arranged a marriage for her young daughter with James Harris, son of a local presiding elder. Emmeline traveled with James and his parents to Nauvoo in 1844.

Emmeline's life underwent a dramatic change when she lost her first child, Eugene, soon after birth and was deserted by her husband. She later became a plural wife of Newel K. Whitney and traveled with his family to Utah in 1848. There she gave birth to two daughters before Bishop Whitney's death in 1850. They are Isabel (Belle Sears, in the diary) and Melvina (Millie). Marrying Daniel H. Wells (the Esquire) two years later, she bore three more daughters, two of whom died in young womanhood, and spent the years between 1852 and 1874 closely involved with their growing family. These daughters are Emmeline (Emmie and Em), and Elizabeth Ann (Annie), and Martha Louisa (Lou, Louie). Emmeline's diary abounds with names of both Whitney and Wells family members. [^7]

In 1874 and 1875, the period of this diary, Emmeline entered a traumatic period of her life, still heavily involved in family affairs. Because her residence was separate from her husband (Emmeline was the only one of his wives who did not live in the "other house"), she often felt less of his support and association than she desired, which caused her much anguish. Yet she was beginning to find great satisfaction in her service and a challenge in her growing responsibilities in the Exponent office. At times her yearning for a strong arm to lean on and a comforting shoulder were replaced by a self-reliance and an independence that made possible her extraordinary achievements.

Emmeline B. Wells, photographed in Washington, D.C., possibly in 1879, during the first of her many trips east to conventions of the National Woman Suffrage Association. (Portrait Collection. LDS Church Archives.)

As editor of the Woman's Exponent, 1877-1914, Emmeline found herself drawn into a public life that would take her back East many times to defend the cause of Mormon women before Congress and the President, and join her voice in the support of better opportunities for women. Active in Relief Society work all of her adult life, she became general president in 1910 and served until three weeks before her death in 1921. She published a book of poetry, Musings and Memories, in 1896; it was so popular that another edition was printed in 1905. In 1912 she was honored for her literary efforts by receiving an honorary Doctor of Literature from the Brigham Young University, the first woman to be so honored.

These excerpts are taken from one of the forty-seven volumes of her diary located in the Harold B. Lee Library at Brigham Young University. Minimal punctuation has been added. Some of the abundant semicolons have been replaced with periods, when the thought of a sentence was unrelated to what followed or the sentence ended the daily entry.

Sat. Aug. 22 [1874]. I went to the fourteenth ward to meeting, had a good meeting. After the close of the meeting Sister E[liza] R. Snow called on me to stay to a meeting of the committee of the Exponent, and they wished me to write an Editorial as Sister [Louisa Lula Greene] Richards was ill in Cache Valley; concluded to send a committee of 2 to call on [James] Dwyer to ask him to take the agency of the Exponent; Sister Woodruff who is going on a visit to her friends in the East, was appointed as a Missionary to preach and teach the Gospel in her travels; she was blessed by the sisters. In the evening Em. went for a ride had a nice time.

Sun. Aug. 23. Mary Jo's baby died this morn. We are none of us very well today. In the evening Will was here. Mill. went with Lib to the Methodist Church; Mr. Bryant came home with her. Jo Taylor, Rudd, Clawson, Hary Emory, Rulon [Seymour Wells], Heber [Manning Wells] and several others of the young folks were here; enjoyed themselves very much indeed.

Wm. was here drunk both Saturday night and Sunday very much to my annoyance; indeed on Sunday he made me quite sick; when will it all end; I am so worn out with these kind of things.

Mon. Aug. 24. This morning I commenced writing, I seemed concerned about the Editorial for fear I should not please the Committee. For my own part I would not be at all afraid, I love this kind of work. Mr. Wilson came here and spent the evening. Emmie was invited to go riding to Hilt's Farm with Richard Taylor, but the wind was blowing severely and Mr. Wilson being here she could not very well leave him; she missed her music lesson today on account of some difficulty about the key.

Tues. Aug. 25. I am still writing getting on pretty well, been not feeling very well in my mind; and not in health, my head seems confused and I am very nervous indeed; I feel so much care upon me I hardly know how to endure it, but the Lord helps me from day to day.

Wednes. Aug. 26. Today I finished my writing and Annie took it to the Office. I am glad to have it off my mind. In the evening Joshua [Kimball Whitney] came and took tea with us; Mr. Hendrie [^8] came after tea, Eliza [Free Wells] came to stay with Annie, he read a little to us; we had a pleasant time; Will[iam] Woods was down stairs with Millie all the evening. I suppose they will soon be married now; Mr. Hendrie did not leave until after twelve.

Thurs. Aug. 27. Little Lou's twelfth birthday. I was taken very sick in the morning continued very bad all day long. I suffered the most agonizing pain got a little easier towards evening. The Lady teachers called Sisters' Reed & Decker. Em. was home all day waiting upon me, and preparing Lou's supper. Annie made a cake, Callie gave her a silver ring Millie a pink neck-ribbon. She was not so happy as she had anticipated on account of my being sick. Mother [Elizabeth Ann Whitney] [^9] is very sick has had sinking spells they thought she was dying.

Friday Aug. 28. I am a little better to-day. We had a new girl come yesterday Lowena. I hope she will be more help, the last girl run away. I have been reading a little today not able to sit up though; Mother is better too. Will was here in the evening and Rulon Lou, went to a party at Lizzie Young's.

Sat. Aug. 29. This is a very fine day. Annie & Louie have gone to the Springs. I got up about four in the afternoon and went as far as the Globe [Bakery]; took Anie for a walk. Daisie and Louie went down to Mary Jane [Whitney Groo]'s to see Mother. In the evening Miss [Mary] Cook came to see us and staid until half-past ten. Em. Annie went home with her. Lou. went to the Theatre. Chapin was playing with Miss Jean Clara Walters; Will. and Millie Ned, & Lib went to dine at Mr. Robertson's; did not return until about eleven. Very late in the evening a friend of ours called I think he had heard I had been sick; he staid with us very late as little Leslie was very ill.

Sun. Aug. 30. This is another showery day. Em. went to German Meeting-all the others to Sunday school. We had no company except some of the girls from the other house; no one much. Will came in the evening.

Mon. Aug. 31. This is the last day of summer, Miss Cook opened school; Mill. went to Mac.Alister's. I had several calls from lady-friends; in the evening Rulon was here, and Eliza staid all night. Will was here very late indeed. Lou. went to Katie Young's to sleep. Nothing of any importance has transpired with us; the weather is variable. I am troubled considerably about Millie's marriage.

[Women's Voices, page 296-297 [September 1874]

Tues. Sep.1. The anniversary of Eugene's birth; he would have been thirty today. It seems almost like a dream when I consider and reflect upon it; if he were living how much happiness he might bring to me; what a rock to lean upon; what a shelter and protection his strong arm might be for his nervous and delicate mother; I feel sure he would have grown up pure and true-hearted, kind and generous. He was beautiful no lily could be fairer than this sweet lad of promise. I can never forget the sensation I felt when I realized I had become a mother; young, childish, inexperienced; always petted and indulged to the very extreme; away from home and friends in a strange city none who had known me hitherto save my husband and he so young, and altogether so unused to the world. We two so unsophisticated alone in a strange place where all were strangers to us, having no idea of the stern realities of life, how hard it was how severely we were put to the test. Our Father in heaven the only one to whom we could go, for comfort, sickness, poverty and all its attendant consequences. When I look back it seems incredible that I should have passed through such hard and thorny places and kept and preserved myself as free from evil and impurity as I have always [been] firm in the belief of the kindness of my Heavenly Father always hopeful believing in the light after darkness; in God's mercy and feeling that somehow it was all for the best. God has been very good to me in many things. He has given me beautiful children, and many kind and true friends, a husband whose interest in the kingdom of God is ever upper most.

Sep. 2. School opened. Em. does not know as yet whether she will teach or not, Miss Cook is undecided, she has fewer scholars. Miss Ida [Cook] was to open school in the 13th Ward Assembly Rooms but it was not ready. [^10] It is deferred until Wednesday consequently Miss Cook will not fully organize until that time. The weather is very warm, fruit is ripening and every one is busy with it, I am not well enough to commence as yet.

Tues Sep 3. No change of any kind. Everything dull in the way of business. I was very sick again similar to the other sickness, indeed I feel as if my health was failing seriously. I suffer with my head all night. I kept the folks up, Em. was very attentive. Millie was not well either suffering all the time with her side.

Sept. Wednes. I was very low-spirited indeed, every time anyone spoke to me I was crying; Annie & Louie commenced to dry a few peaches. I was writing most of the day. Mr. Hendrie called to bring Em. a book, Lile was here and baby, I could not see him. I felt more gloomy than usual. Annie went to ask a friend of mine to call but could not get them, they were engaged. I longed to see my husband who was dead. Why can we not call them to us in our grief and sorrow, why cannot our dead come back to us if only for one sweet hour. In the evening Em. went to the association so did Annie, Millie was at home; Louie slept up with Ruthie Young. Called on several poor people. . . .

Wednes. Sept. 30. One of the very warmest days for this time of the year. I posted a letter today of some importance. O how miserable I am in regard to som of my children, almost heart-broken; every nerve in my whole system is unstrung. All the anguish a mother can feel in seeing her children do wrong I feel tonight, my heart is bleeding almost. Misery and darkness and I have no one to go to for comfort or shelter no strong arm to lean upon no bosom bared for me, no protection or comfort in my husband. Emmie & the little ones are all tenderness. O what should I do without them. But they are only weak themselves and need to be nourished by me. O if my husband could only love me even a little and not seem so perfectly indifferent to any sensation of that kind. He cannot know the craving of my nature. He is surrounded with love on every side, and I am cast out. O my poor aching heart. Where shall it rest its burden, only on the Lord, only to Him can I look every other avenue seems closed against me. O help me Father in heaven to overcome and resist temptation in every form or shape.

Thurs. Oct 1 This is the Anniversary of Mill's wedding day seven years ago. How terrible when I look back upon it, and yet we were all satisfied then and thought it a happy marriage. [^11] How peculiar were my own circumstances at that time and how changed since then are all things concerning me; how different I have felt since then and how many things have transpired in my life to give me an experience, which is lasting and beneficial. Went to the fast-meeting in the afternoon, or rather the society I should have said. There was some talk about a new-order which some of our sisters who wanted to be very good had been trying to organize but through some misunderstanding it had fallen through.

This morning I went up City Creek to the place of baptism. I enjoyed the walk. My thoughts although solemn were not altogether unpleasant and my heart was fully alive to all the beauties of scenery and the many-hued leaves of autumn always had a charm for me, always reminded me of something pleasant in the past. How wonderfully are our minds impressed by certain objects in Nature.

My heart seemed tuned to harmony with all inanimate things. I did not care to hurry home. I felt I could have wandered among the mountain shrubbery for hours alone, no companion, but my reflections and thoughts. But duty that stern mentor whose calls are paramount recalled me to a sense of the obligations I was under and I turned my footsteps homeward. . . .

[Women's Voices, page 299-300 [November 1874]

Wednes. Nov. 4. The association met up at Hannah's. Emmie went up to see her father and he came down with her. Will was here; we had a very good time. He was more than usually demonstrative with me, manifesting great love for me and interest in my welfare, said he would get our furniture &c. We shall have to hurry up so little time to make our preparations. It is fully decided that Millie will be married on Saturday evening; Mr. Welch will perform the ceremony at his residence. We shall go up in a carriage with Mill Em. & I. Ned & Lib in their own buggy, then return immediately and the reception will commence at eight.

Thurs Nov. 5. Today is sister Ellen's birthday. She is 43. How anxious I feel to hear from her, how neglectful they are about writing to me, so many girls & none of them to pay attention to even a family correspondence. Today we got the cake from the Globe and took it to Brown's.

Friday Nov. 6. We have been expecting all day to get our things. Neve came and measured for our blinds and carpets. It was pouring with rain and has turned to snow, this morning the trees were nearly broken down with the weight of it, they looked enchanting like fairy-work. Weather is cold most unpleasant for a wedding. I have made three jelly cakes and frosted them. Sister Winter & Sarah, Sister Sedon and Clara are all here helping. We had Colt to come and Whitewash all the lower rooms to-day. We got to-day 1 doz. plates 1 doz. cups & saucers Â½ doz. tea spoons Â½ doz knives & forks 2 gravy boats 1 glass water pitcher 1 coal scuttle 1 tin washbasin.

Sat. Nov. 7. The morning was fine overhead but the mud was fearful. My sister Mrs. Earl came to help us. Every thing is decided upon, the carpets are come. I am pleased with them also the parlor furniture. I never expected to have been so well off in my life. I am pleased with all, nothing extravagant but all in exact keeping and conformity. At half past seven we were at the residence of Mr. Welch and shortly after they were married, and we returned home, there were no arrivals in our absence. Everything was in complete readiness and we had a moment or two to think before any one came.

The first ones were Aunt Hannah's folks and Dessie; then Martha Lydia Ann Susan Katie & May, Inez and Charlie & Mrs. Tanner; next Joshua and Mary Jane then [unclear] Tibbetts, then about nine we went in to supper. While we were at supper, Ort. Rulie & Heber came then next came my husband. He came and partook of refreshments but took no wine; after we were through came all the help and last arrival was Budd. Every one seemed pleased and gratified with the entertainment. Ort played and sang. Lou. sang several of her pieces; at ten minutes past ten the carriage came to take them home. They bid us all good evening and left us. Ned & Lib went with them and so carelessly and indifferently Millie left her home to which she never expects again to return, as one of its inmates, to make a new home for herself. May she be able to make herself a sure place of rest and refuge in her husband's bosom, and in poverty or sickness always feel secure in his love and protection.

None but mothers know each other's feelings when we give up our daughters whom we love and cherish so tenderly to the mercies of a man, and perhaps even a stranger; Will seems in every way qualified to make a good husband and to be ever tender of women but time will tell the story truly.

[Women's Voices, page 301 O heaven grant it prove a happy union Founded on true respect and sympathy. May they increase in goodness ever, And more abound in unity. May peace and contentment Ever wait upon their happy lot And richest blessings which the earth Can give, be theirs in wisdom sought.

[Women's Voices, page 301 About twelve the last of the guests left, and we sat alone in the parlor enjoying the fire and talking over all the events of this most wonderful day. . . .

[Women's Voices, page 301 [March 1875]

[Women's Voices, page 302 Tues. March 9. Septimus [Sears] is thirty one to-day. Belle made him a present of Dr. Hollands Poems, and Dot gave him a pearl handled gold-pen, and Em a paper holder—black Walnut. Monday was Sep's birthday instead of Tues.

[Women's Voices, page 302 Wednes. March 10. To-day we had our Relief Society party, had a pleasant time. Pres. Young was there. Sat until 10 o'clock, Annie went with me. I danced some the Esq. [Daniel H. Wells] did not dance at all.

[Women's Voices, page 302 Thurs. March 11. Another stormy day. Pres. Young was tried for not paying his fine; and Chief Justice MacKean condemned him to 24 hours imprisonment in the penitentiary and 25 dollars fine. He went accompanied by Mayor [Daniel H.] Wells; and a large company staid his time.

[Women's Voices, page 302 Friday March 12. Will & Mill, Ned. & Lib were here to dinner. The President & party returned about two o'clock. Em. has gone to the Court-House with Rulie. We were alone all the evening.

[Women's Voices, page 302 Sat. March 13. Frankie Wells is 23 today. Swift[?] is getting up a Surprise Party for her; Em. is invited. Mrs. Larsen came here to-day she has left Margaret Young. Br. Joseph Scofield was buried to day his funeral was in the Assembly rooms. Br. George Q. Cannon arrived this evening from Washington; the Esqr Hanmer & Junius went up as far as Ogden to meet him. [^12] Yesterday there was a petition of about nine hundred ladies taken to Gov. [Samuel B.] Axtell to see what he could do towards releasing Prest. Young from his confinement in the penetentiary; the ladies who presented it were Mrs. I.M. Horn, and Mrs. Davis; he received them courteously and promised to aid them to the extent of his ability and the laws and constitution of our country. Tonight the Young Ladies Retrenchment Society in this ward was organized at the residence of its Prest. Mrs. Elizabeth Thomas; Coun's Mrs. Flora Shipp Miss M. S. MacClean Miss May Wells Miss Ruth Woolley Miss Lucy Stringham Miss Lillie Taylor Miss L. Ashby Sec. Miss Annie Parks Assis; Sec. and organist.

[Women's Voices, page 302-303 Sun. March 14. A most fearful storm of snow again, wind blowing direct from the North. Millie came up and went up to Lib's; Em. went to Belle's. I staid at home all day but at evening went as far as Horace's [Kimball Whitney]. Found Helen [Mar Kimball Whitney] alone although the children soon came in; spent the evening pleasantly with her and after Horace came in conversed with him upon portions of his mother's life and so on.

[Women's Voices, page 303 Mon. March 15. The snow is quite deep, and the cold raw wind blows terribly. I went to the Eleventh Ward to a Retrenchment meeting; Sister E.R. Snow and Zina D. Young were there also Bishop McRea and his Counselors'. It was a very good meeting I rose and tried to speak for a few minutes, the first time in my life that I ever spoke in public before men. I called on my sister after meeting. Came home called on Zina, and Elvira; Annie went to the fourteenth ward to the association.

[Women's Voices, page 303 Tues. March 16. Went in the morning to the Exponent Office was there all day correcting and helping the Editor; in the evening was busy writing. A telegram reached us today stating Judge McKean's removal from office, and the appointment of Parker from Missouri. [^13]

[Women's Voices, page 303 Wednes. March 17. There is more snow falling at intervals through the day. The Wasatch Club or Literary Association met here this evening. [^14] There was an excellent attendance. The weather is moderating.

[Women's Voices, page 303 Thurs. March 18. Went to the Relief Society meeting, the principal subject was the manufacturing and dressing [?] of straw hats, as a branch of self-sustaining home industry. In the evening there was a party for the benefit of the St. George Temple which Louie attended with [Le] Grande Young. I called on Mill.

[Women's Voices, page 303 Friday March 19. Went around to the Exponent Office afterwards to Lib's and took dinner, then up to Mr. Sears in the Eleventh Ward. Called at Olives on my way home, was everywhere welcomed cordially. Lillie walked home with me. Today they put up the ornament on our front porch. In the evening after German Em. went to the Debate and Annie spent the evening with Alice Crismon.

[Women's Voices, page 304 Sat. March 20. Em. went up with Belle this morning in the buggy to spend the day and practice a little on the piano; I went to the meeting in the Fourteenth Ward the subject was home-industries, and the one branch before the meeting and made a speciality was straw hats and bonnets. In the evening Annie & Louie went to the Retrenchment meeting in our own ward. Br. Pond from Cache Valley came and staid all night. We knew each other in the states.

[Women's Voices, page 304 Sun. March 21. Went to meeting with Em. to hear Orson Pratt. He spoke upon the Priesthood. An excellent discourse, and I sorely regretted that there was not a reporter there. In the evening Annie went to meeting, several boys and girls were here.

[Women's Voices, page 304 Mon. A dull drizzly sort of day heavy atmosphere; went to the Exponent Office to work all day copying and correcting reports.

[Women's Voices, page 304 Em. went to the Theatre to see the Lingardes, Annie & Louie to the Fourteenth Ward Association.

[Women's Voices, page 304 Tues. 23. Anna Sears birthday, 7 years old today. Belle came down, and brought both her children intending to stay a day or two. It seems nice to have her home. She is a woman rather superior for her age and the time in which we are living. Sep[timus] came down to see her. Annie went to the Theatre.

[Women's Voices, page 304 Wednes. March 24. Went to the Office again. Belle went down to Mill's and had dinner. I did not return early, called on Sister Eliza and spent the earlier part of the evening, met Miss Cook and Miss Cornelia Cook. Belle and Em. were indignant with me for working in the Office, as if I had to earn my living; it seems out-of-place to them, but I am anxious to acquire a thorough knowledge of an Editor's duties.

[Women's Voices, page 304 Thurs. March 25. Belle went home in the morning. The teachers called and afterwards two of the sisters, and I was very late going to the office. Louie and Mary Larsen went to the Theatre.

[Women's Voices, page 305 Friday March 26. Anie got her face burnt with chocolate, but not bad. Many hindrances. They commenced yesterday to put up the back-porch, are working today. After reading some proof, the first I ever did we called on Aunt Rhoda Richards, and afterwards on Lib. Mell & Bell have both been down to Mary Jane's today. Annie & Louie went to a party in the Court House Annie with Johnnie Spencer Louie with David Hilstead. Em. went to her theatre I was alone all the evening. Went to Elvira's a few minutes; Sister Kimball Adeline were here.

[Women's Voices, page 305 Sat March 27. Was busy all morning went to the Office and read proof about two hours, came home about three. Mrs. Robison and Mrs. Childs, called and staid some time. Harry Emery Jim, Ferguson and Rulie called. Harry staid all the afternoon and evening until after the theatre. Lou. went up to Belle's about noon Annie went to the Retrenchment Meeting. Sister Brooks was here, I went to the Theatre to see Lingard, enjoyed it very much indeed; saw my husband but not to speak to him.

[Women's Voices, page 305 Sun. March 28. Staid at home all day writing and reading. Katie is twenty-two to-day;

[Women's Voices, page 305 Sun. March 28. Katie Wells is twenty-two today. I have been at home all day, looking over old papers etc. and filled with gloomy reflections, looking at dear treasures letters, scraps of poetry, the perfumed essence of the days gone by.

[Women's Voices, page 305 This was Easter Sunday. Mill went with Lib to Church.

[Women's Voices, page 305 Mon. March 29. Stormy and windy, to wet and disagreeable to go out, went to the Post Office. Got my feet wet, felt very sick when I came home.

[Women's Voices, page 305 Tues. March 30. Went up to the other house had lunch in at Lydia Ann's; afterwards came down and was reading all the evening.

[Women's Voices, page 305-306 Wednes. March 31. A very cold raw air, was writing all the morning. Went out to call, in the afternoon, called on Mrs. Z D.Young Mrs. Park Mrs MacLean Mrs. Mussers, Mrs. Barney, Mrs. Herrick.

[Women's Voices, page 306 Engaged a girl from Manti San Pete [County]. Took a lock-box in the Post Office 555. It is said to be the twenty seventh anniversary of Modern Spiritualism today Em. went to the association Annie & Louie to the theatre. Was alone nearly all the evening reading and thinking.

[Women's Voices, page 306 Thurs. Apr. 1. They are trying George Reynolds for polygamy here in the district courts, today brought in a verdict of guilty, and found a flaw in the indictment being legally served, consequently it will be necessary to try the case again. [^15] Went to the Fast Meeting in the morning had an excellent meeting. Went again in the afternoon to our own meeting over which I preside.

[Women's Voices, page 306 I feel deeply the great responsibility resting upon me in being called to fill this public office; but hope to be guided and sustained by the Holy Spirit in this calling and duty that I may keep humble and be qualified to do all things that are required of me and please my husband and gain his good will and favor as also all with whom I am associated.

Mary Jane Mount Tanner (1837-1890)

When Myron Tanner met Mary Jane Mount in Salt Lake City in 1855, he was charmed by the "literary tastes and poetic instincts" of this "refined and intelligent woman." Though he admitted to owning a "rugged, untempered and uncultivated nature" himself, the young Miss Mount found him attractive enough to accept his offer of marriage the following year. The couple decided to move to Payson, Utah, but by 1860 Myron's business ventures had succeeded so well that he bought a mill and two farms in Provo, where the Tanners settled permanently. [^16]

Mary Jane's parents joined the Church in Ohio, where she was born February 27, 1837, a daughter of Joseph and Elizabeth Bessac Mount. Her only brother and sister died before the family joined the Saints in Nauvoo. The Mounts were among the first group of Saints to winter in Salt Lake City, having crossed the plains in the fall of 1847.

Of Myron and Mary Jane's first four children, only Joseph Marion, frequently mentioned in the journal, survived childhood. Five years separated him from the other children born to Mary Jane in Provo: Bertrand, Mary Elizabeth (Bessie), Grace Lillian, Lewis, and Arthur. Mary Jane also cared for a niece and nephew, Mary Elizabeth and Joseph Edward (Eddie) Tanner, who were boarding with her while attending school in Provo. A hired girl, first Martha and then Marie, completed the Tanner household. In 1866 Ann Crosby joined the family as Myron's plural wife, for whom he provided a separate home.

While her husband attended to business, civic, and church affairs, Mary Jane divided her time between her growing family and Relief Society responsibilities. Appointed president of her ward Relief Society in 1868, she held the position until her death twenty-two years later. Fond of literature and history, Mary Jane wrote life sketches of the female descendants of the ruling houses of Europe for publication in the Woman's Exponent. She also contributed some of her own poetry, which she compiled into a book, Fugitive Poems, in 1880.

Officers of the Provo Third Ward Relief Society with Mary Jane Mount Tanner, seated left, as president. Seated center and right, Hanna Clark and Phoebe Pratt. Standing, Sarah Liddiard and Hannah Libby Smith. (LDS Church Archives.)

Mary Jane's frustration in finding time to write not only poems but in her journal is well chronicled in the following excerpts. Often the demands of husband, family, and church left her little time to compose the poetry and prose that sprang from the depths of her soul.

The following excerpts are taken from a microfilm of Mary Jane's holograph journal. Minimal punctuation has been added. Mary Jane's periods and commas are often indistinguishable and here have been translated as whatever would be appropriate. The original journal and correspondence of Mary Jane Mount Tanner is in the Special Collections of the Marriott Library, University of Utah. [^17]

Feb. 11, 1876. My head aches today. I have been busy all the week helping to fit out the missionaries for Arizona. [^18] The Relief Society was called on to assist the Bishop and it makes us considerable labor. We did all we could to get Jessie Harding and wife ready, and thought we had the job nicely off our hands, when we were informed that another party wished an outfit. Polly Ann Carter of our Ward is going to be married to William Whipple of the Second Ward, and go to Arizona with him. We got her a few things with means from the treasury, and some donations from the people. I gave something that I thought would be useful, and could, no doubt, collect more if I were able to get around.

May 31, 1876. The weather is raw and chilly, and the wind has blown cold and uncomfortably all day. I have been very busy preparing some of the members of my family to attend the jubilee at American Fork tomorrow. It was nearly night and I had just finished a dress for Mary (my hired girl) when a waggon drove up to the gate and a lady alighted, enveloped in a watterproof and sunbonnet. She was very cold and tired, having rode from Payson. When I had taken her things and made her comfortable she informed me that she had come to teach the District School in our ward, and had been recommended to me to seek board. Her name was Davis, Widow of Dr. Davis of Mona. Her husband had been dead about two years. He left her with very little available means, alone and friendless, in a strange country. She was a lady of intelligence and refinement, but poorly calculated to make her way, or support herself among strangers. I told her I was not prepared to take a boarder, but she should remain with us until she could suit herself better.

June 1st 1876. This is the aniversary of President Brigham Young's birthday. Mary has taken the children and gone on the excursion train to the jubilee at American Fork. We hurried them off this morning. The weather was cloudy and they had just started when it commenced snowing. I fear they will not have a pleasant day. Sister Davis and I are glad to stay quietly at home and rest.

June 2, 1876. The young folks came home last night all right, having enjoyed their trip though the weather was rather disagreeable. The baby grows nicely and we all think him very sweet. My housecleaning is through and we are using the adobie house where Ann used to live for a kitchen, but the weather is so cold that we cannot enjoy the nice clean house very much as we have moved the stove out and cannot have a fire there. Myron is making his home entirely with Ann for a few weeks on account of her health and I feel somewhat lonely but I try not to alow myself to be unreasonable.

June 17. I have coppied my last few entries a little out of place from not being careful in my dates. I find it was in 1875 instead of 1876, that I first made the acquaintance of Sister Davis, and the events just recorded transpired before my mothers death. June 16. 1875 a little boy was born to Ann. She called him William Myron. This is her sixth child, she has burried two. I find no more records until

Dec. 17, 1877. It is Monday, and I arose as usual, assisting with the work and helping wash until three oclock. I sat down to rest and read in Tulledge's new book called "The Women of Mormondom." [^19] It carried me back in immagination to the various scenes through which we had passed in colonizing this teritory, and I was led to reflect on the goodness of God to us as a people in bringing us through the trials which had called forth almost superhuman energy and strength of endurance. I know that the colonization of Utah is a marvel to the world, but how much more would they marvel if they knew the various perils we had passed through and the hardships we encountered and which we never could have born but for the hand of an Allwise Providence.

While reading and reflecting on these things I received a call from a gentleman who introduced himself as Mr. Tulledge, the author of the book. He is a small spare man with sharp features and very black eyes. He was canvassing for the book, and we had a long conversation, in which he informed me that he had belonged to the Church for thirty years and had never apostatized as was generally supposed. I showed him my collection of poems and read some, asking his opinion of their merits in regard to publishing as some of my freinds are urging me to do. He said publishing was very expensive business. I would have to bear the expenses and take the risk of pleasing the public. He thought my poems showed considerable merit and had a commercial value. I promised to lend my influence in behalf of his book.

Dec. 18, 1877. I sewed this forenoon and after dinner I went to see some of the sisters about canvasing for his book. Some thought they would like to have it but had not the means at present. No one felt like canvassing for it, but the Teachers promised to mention it when they visited the ward. I called on severel of the neighbors and got home just before dark. Mary and Eddie Tanner, Joseph's children, are boarding with me going to school. They received a letter from home yesterday saying the children were sick. They went home in our buggy and sent it back today with word that their little sister was dead. I feel sorry for them all for I know they will feel the loss deeply. The children are rehearsing for the Christmas exebition, Grace has gone but Bessie is not well and I kept her at home.

Wednesday Dec 19. I sewed on the little girl's' aprons this morning, and in the afternoon I went into my neighbor's where I met a lady of my acquaintance from Salt Lake.

Thursday Dec 19. Today our Relief Society met at the residence of Sister S. A. Davis. We attended to several items of business, and closed early, as we were all busy preparing for Christmass.

Friday Dec. 20. I have been busy all day sewing and preparing for Christmas. Mother Coulson is here visiting and staid all night. I went in the evening and filled a business engagement, then called on Sister Beebe. She wished me to go with her to the School Exebition at the Methodist Meeting House. The performance was very entertaining and I should have enjoyed it if I had not forgotten the brine I was making for the beef. Marion made a fire and put the water over and I had promised to finish it. I got home at ten oclock and found the family in bed. The fire was out and the water nearly cold I knew Myron would be vexed if the brine was not made so I kindled the fire and put in the salt. Marion came in from some of his engagements and finished it. And I went to bed very tired.

Saturday Dec 22. I feel very weary after yesterday's fatigue but I haven been cooking for Christmas.

Monday Dec. 24. I have been very busy all day. I took the buggy about noon and drove around giving a few invitations for dinner tomorrow. I called at the Hall where the Christmas tree was being arranged but as my assistance was not needed Sister Harding and I went to the Second Ward Assembly Rooms to look at their Christmas Tree. It was very prety but not so expensive as ours. I came home and helped to prepare supper as Maria was busy cooking and churning. We all went to the Exebition in the evening. The tree was very nice and proved a success. All the children had nice presents. My little girls had shell boxes. Bertrand had a pocket book and knife, and Lewis a horse on wheels.

Tuesday Dec. 25. Christmas is over at last. The day so eagerly anticipated by the little folks. Owing to the decoration of the tree Santa Claus had but little for their stockings. There were some cakes and apples and little prize boxes, and some trifles that Bessie had made for her brothers and sisters. Bessie had a nice wax doll and Bertrand a pair of skates. I sent the buggy for Mother Billings and Sisters Tyrel and Merit, some of those invited to dinner. I did not care to invite those who had freinds and good cheer at home, but remembered the poor and the lonely. About ten oclock the band serenaded us. It commenced snowing about that time and the snow fell all day. The children were disappointed for they wanted a run, but they made their playhouse upstairs. We had a nice dinner and enjoyed ourselves until night when we sent the old people home with a covered carriage it was snowing so fast. I went with Myron to a ball at the Acadamy Hall. We enjoyed the music and dancing until eleven oclock when we came home thoroughly tired, and glad to close the day and sleep until the beams of another day should call us to life and action.

Wednesday Dec. 26, 1877. The snow has fallen quite deep through the night and is still falling. We slept late this morning resting from yesterday's fatigue. We are reasonably well and feel comfortable and happy. I received a letter from my sister Martha, now Mrs. Read, telling us that her husband had his shop burned down and lost all his stock. It was a saddle and harness shop and comprised a large stock of goods in that line, as that was the business he depended on for a living. She tells me the people are making up a portion of his loss, but they cannot replace the accumulation of years of industry.

I am trying to write some today but I always find it tedious work owing to the anoyance of the children. If I sit in the room with them they play and talk to me, and if I sit in another room they are continualy coming to the door for something and keep me answering their questions every few minutes. It is always so, and for that reason, as well as many others, I am not able to accomplish much in the literary line. I work a little and keep my paper in as good shape as possible. Family cares have taken my attention and long periods have passed without writing in my journal, and many interresting incidents are omitted.

Monday Jan. 1st 1878. Another year is ushered in. Another page has been turned in the history of time, and we begin life as we left in [it] last night when we bade the old year goodbye and closed our eyes to slumber. We awakened, and Lo! another year had commenced. So silent, so stealthy were his steps that no stirring of our pulse told us a change was coming. That a new year was with us, and the old year gone, with all his labors and cares, his sorrows and disappointments. A year ago yesterday Dec. 31. 1876. my father passed away, in the seventy first year of his age. His nephew T. N. Mount of Napa [California] wrote and apprised me of it. His illness was short and he had all necessary care, but it was a great shock to me for I had always hoped to see him again. I tried to get his property for Cornelia and I but we are not likely to succeed. The Lawrences claim it. [^20] I have saved the corespondence concerning it but it is too voluminous to copy here.

We have invited company to dine with us today. Myron bought a turkey and wants his freinds to help eat it. I received a letter today with some lines from a paper, speaking disrespectfully of the death of our beloved President Brigham Young. [^21] I sat down and wrote some verses that were sudgested to my mind, and they sound very well. We have spent a pleasant day. Sister Newel Sister Bollwinkle and Sister Pratt were here. The children with their company ate their dinner up stairs. We had a pleasant time and felt that our day had been well spent.

Sunday. Jan 13. I have been very busy since New Year's day. I have revised and coppied my poem for press. It is quite a long one, and attracts considerable attention. I receive many compliments about it. Mary and Eddie Tanner have returned from spending holliday at home, and started to school. Bertrand and Bessie have started but Grace has a lame foot and cannot go until it is better. Our ward is preparing for a picnic at the Hall next Saturday. I dread picnics they make so much work. Mrs. Leavitt will help Marie wash tomorrow if her husband is better, he has a very bad finger. I have been coppying some today in my book of poems. I have written one hundred and thirty one pages, and have more to coppy. I wrote a poem today in memory of Sister Whipple which I will present to her husband.

Tuesday Jan 22. Our picnic is over and that seems all that is worth recording. It passed off as such things usualy do, with a great deal of hard work and confusion, but withall quite satisfacterily. The children had a nice time and we did all we could to make them happy as it was especialy for the Sunday Schools. There are 181 children belonging to the Sunday School of our Ward. I have been sick ever since. Mother Tanner is here for a visit. Lewis will be six years old tomorrow. I am invited out to dinner.

Friday Jan 25. Our little Arthur is three years old today. He is the baby and a pet with all the family. We killed two hogs yesterday, and were just starting to try the lard and get the meat taken care of when the door opened, and there stood Aggie Ridges from Salt Lake. I was very much supprised. Dear Aggie: How glad I was to see her. She had just a few hours to stay so I laid aside my work and improved the time by talking. Clara came about noon, and soon after Sister Beebe and Sister Clark came in and we had a good visit and Marie got us a nice dinner. We tried to persuade Aggie to stay and go to the ball this evening, but she could not stay from home so we bade her a reluctant good bye and sent her to the depot. It was certainly a day of supprises, and has passed so pleasantly we can work the better tomorrow.

Monday Jan. 28. I attended a meeting today for electing delegates to the County Convention. Political meetings are something new to me. There were severel ladies present, and we said i[aye] sometimes by way of exercising our rights, and went home feeling the importance of our positions. After meeting I called on Frances Clark and took dinner. I came home and helped Marie get supper. Spent the evening knitting.

Tuesday Jan 29, 1878. I helped Marie wash Today and am very tired. Sister Newel came in, and wished me to write to Bro Newell who is on a mission and inform of his release to return home. I have written the letter and read a little. I am so very tired. It is too hard work for me to wash. I called on Sister Holden last Saturday. She was in estacies over my new poem. Said every one was delighted with it.

Friday Feb. 1, 1878. It snowed this morning and I began to think I should have to postpone our proposed visit. We had planned to make Sister Hannah Smith a supprise visit. [^22] About 8. a m it quit snowing and cleared up so I went in search of some one to harness, as the boys had all gone to school. Mr. Loveless came and harnessed old kate to the buggy, and about ten oclock I started out calling first for Sister [Hannah] Clark had to wait for her to get ready. Then we called for Sister Pratt and then for Sister Beebe, after which we called for Polly Curtes, making five of us for the one horse, but she pulled us bravely through the mud, and with light hearts and merry jests we made our way to sister Smith's, who was as much supprised as we could wish. We sent for Frances Clark, Sister Holden came and we spread the table with the ample good cheer we had brought, and enjoyed our dinner and visit with the best of good feelings. About 4 p.m. Sister Beebe's team came for her, and Sister Carter. I loaded my buggy, going around by Sister Holden's to take her home. I took sister Pratt and Sister Clark home, and we all felt better for our little visit.

I came home and helped prepare supper. I received two letters this evening; one from my cousin in Napa, a very kind pleasant letter. I always like to hear from him although many sad thoughts are stirred, for he lives where my father did and knew something of his life. I did want so much to see my father once more in this life, but it was not to be so. He died suddenly among strangers. I was deeply grieved and many a sad thought was awakened by the circumstances of his death. The other letter was from Bro Whipple acknowledging the receipt of a poem I wrote on the death of his wife. It is very pleasant to receive such little acknowledgements of kind feeling.

Sunday Feb. 10, 1878. I am neglectful of my diary, but there seems so little to write. One day comes and goes, and the next follows; the same routine of work is gone through, and the same remains to be done. No change worth mentioning from one week to another. On saturday I went to the factory and got part of the flannels they had been colloring for me. The green was not finished. I called on Sister Holden. Bro. Holden read me some interresting letters he had received from the east and the answers he had written. I went to the store and did a little trading and went to the theater in the evening. Today has passed as Sunday usualy does. It takes the forenoon to get the work done, and the children dressed ready for Sunday School, with an unlimited amount of scolding. At last dinner is over, the work done and all are gone. I can sit down quietly to write a few pages, with Arthur climbing on my arm and pulling my paper. I coppied two pages in my book of poems, then Myron came and read to me a lecture given by Moses Thatcher. It is very interresting, but Lewis teases all the time, and wanders around in search of a pencil. Finaly I get him one but he soon finds he does not want it, and goes to the room where the girls are. They raise a fight, and I settle it by sending them all out of the room. I in the meantime listening to the lecture but nearly wild and wish there was no lecture.

Maria gets supper. After supper the usual confusion reigns for awhile until one after another goes to bed and at eight oclock Maria is finishing work in the buttry, and I am writing in my diary. Each Sunday repeats itself with very little variation. Maria has let the teakettle boil dry and burn and I feel vexed, but there is not much variety in that. A lady once said to another, "You do not know anything about trouble for you keep no hired help." I think sometimes she was right. Marion preaches at American Fork today. I wish I could hear him. I think I should be a better woman if I could hear a gospel sermon sometimes. I have a letter commenced, to my cousin which I should like to finish, but I am tired and nervous, so I will drop a line to my sister and go to bed.

Sunday March 10, 1878. I must write a little in my journal tonight. It is hardly worthwhile to write in it daily. Breakfast, dinner, supper, washing ironing and sewing, with now and then an item of gossip and the record is made. Mother Tanner went home Friday the first of March. I was so lonely, it seemed as if some one was dead. John McEwan died the day before and Mrs. Jane Gee died that morning. The next day my head ached, and I felt lonesome. The sun shone pleasantly and I walked out trying to feel better. I called on some of my friends and did not get home until nearly night. Myron invited me to go to the concert. I went although I feared to overtax my strength; but I felt better on Sunday. Monday I had the headache as usual. Mrs. Leavitt helped wash and I got dinner. Severel of us made arrangements to visit Sister Bunnel but it blew up a cold storm and we could not go.

On Tuesday evening the boards of the Relief Societies met at Sister [Margaret] Smoot the Stake [Relief Society] President's to devise ways and means to interrest the ladies in coming to Society meetings. It was resolved that the presidents and counselors were to visit each house in the ward and try to persuade the ladies to attend the Society meetings. I think we hardly realized how heavy the task would be. I am afraid we shall be a long time performing it, for Sister Clark is lame in the feet and I am lame in the head. Sister Pratt is sick a great deal and altogether we are a poor feeble set. I told them our ward was doing well at present and enjoyed a good spirit. I did little sewing and that finished the week.

Today I have headache all day, but that is no variety. I can scarcely tell when I have not had it. I wanted to go to meeting and hear Marion preach, but was not able. The sun shone pleasantly and I walked over to Mother Moss's and sat a little while. I came home to dinner, and while eating, a little girl came in and said Mrs. Hindmersh was sick and wanted to see me. I went to see her and found her up getting dinner. She had been sick in the morning and lain down but did not know that I had been sent for. I stopped a little while at Hannah Clarks and came home feeling so sick that I thought I was hardly fit to visit sick people. My head is so bad I will not write any longer but go to bed.

March 17, 1878. I have been to Springville today. I took Mrs. Leavitt, the Misses Alexander and Bessie. I visited Mrs. Katie Dugal. She is having her new house finished and is nice and comfortable. The weather is lovely and I long to be out fixing up the spring work. Sister made me a visit and we spent a pleasant day. I sewed some and finished the girls dresses. I hope the weather will be pleasant and my health be good so I can do a great deal this week. I have written a long letter to my sister, Martha Read and one to my sister, Cornelia Taylor.

Monday March 18, 1878. Marie washed today and Mrs. Leavitt helped her. I have done some of the house-work and written a little. The weather is damp and cloudy. Mary and Eddie Tanner are boarding with us going to school. They have been home to Payson and came back about noon. Mary said who has been in my room and left the wash bowl dirty. But she did not say who has swept and dusted so nicely and put up clean curtains to make it nice and pleasant. It is human nature. How much quicker we are to find fault and speak of what anoys us than of that which is pleasant and cheerful. How much plainer people's faults show than their virtues. The children have got their suppers and gone to bed and the rain is falling steadily. The clothes willl not be dry to iron tomorrow. I have done no work and if I do as well tomorrow I shall fall short in my calculations for the week. It is after nine oclock and I must retire.

Tuesday March 19, 1878. I laid out some work for today, made a fire in the little stove and commenced a pair of pillow cases. I must do a little writing though and did not sew very fast. Presently Sister Holden came and I laid my work aside. Sister Clark came too and I marked a temple apron and showed her how to work it. [^23] Sister Holden fell unwell and laid down. When Eddie came from school he and Bertrand took the horse and scraper and worked awhile at the door yard. Then Eddie took Sister Holden home with the team.

Wednesday March 20, 1878. Myron went to Springville, and I rode down to the store with him and made a few purchases. I called at Halmar Smith's and engaged him to whitewash. Called at Thomas Holdaways and took dinner with them. I made Sister Pratt a short visit. Her and Sister Holden and Sister Clark are going over the river with me to make Sister Bunnel a visit tomorrow. It was half past two when I got home. Maria was ironing. She does up the fine shirts nicely and it is a great care off my mind. I finished my pillow cases tonight. I shall not get much sewing done at this rate. The children have gone to rehearsal. I think exebitions a nuisance they keep them out so late evenings.

Thursday March 21, 1878. Our visit to Sister Bunnel had to be postponed on account of the horse having cast a shoe. The wind was raised this evening so I fear we cannot go tomorrow. I sewed a little and have written some.

Friday March 22, 1878. We had our visit today and enjoyed it very much. I bought some shade trees of Bro. Bunnel. In coming home we forded the river. Bro Bunnel rode down to the bank and saw us safely across. I took the rest home and called on Sister Smith who is quite sick. When I got home it was nearly dark.

Saturday March 23, 1878. I have been very busy getting the children ready for the exibition. I went to the rehearsal, then to the store and got them some fine shoes. We went to the exibition in the evening. Martha Woodard came and staid all night.

Sunday March 24, 1878. The girls took the buggy for a ride and took Martha to the depot, and the children to Sunday School. I wrote some letters.

Monday March 25, 1878. Jeannett came last night and staid today. She will help me this week to cut carpet rags. Mrs. Leavitt helped Marie wash. It rains hard tonight but the clothes are all in except the flannels.

Tuesday March 26, 1878. Marion is niniteen years old today. We cut carpet rags.

Wednesday March 27, 1878. Washed some quilts and other things this forenoon. I went to Nathan Barrett's to the funeral of their babe. It is the third one they have lost. Jeannett helped Marie with the ironing. I have taken cold and feel unwell.

Thursday March 28, 1878. It has rained all day. We held Society Meeting at Mrs. Bowen's. Rained hard while we were there but slacked in time to come home.

Friday March 29. We are cleaning the chambers. The girls are whitewashing. Mary is not well and did not go to school.

Monday April 1, 1878. I went out today, calling on Sisters Smoot, Smith, Holden and Kimbal. Sister Kimbal entertained me by relating some of her early experience in poligamy. There were manv trials in those early days. I stayed until nearly sundown.

Tuesday April 2. 1878. Went to the store with Myron to do some trading. We bought me a new dress, a bolt of bleached muslin, a sack of sugar and severel other things. I was very tired.

Wednesday April 3, 1878. Rested some today and sewed carpet rags.

Thursday April 4, 1878. Took the buggy and [went] to Society Meeting over the river, taking Sisters Clark, Pratt and Garner with me. The bridge is torn up to make a new one and we had to ford the river. Being a little afraid of the water with our light conveyance we women walked over on the timbers of the old bridge and Emery Hill drove the team over for us. We took tea with Sister Bunnel and came back by the lower ford when I drove across myself and got home safely.

Friday April 5, 1878. Sister Clark and a few others came and helped me sew carpet rags. As dinner was about ready Marion came, bringing Bishop Herrington. Myron came in, in a great hurry to start to conference. Mary and Eddy came in a hurry to start home to Payson, and I was so tired and worried that I could hardly get it on the table. Dinner went off all right however and all got away and I sat down with my company and rested awhile. Then my sister Martha Read came with her two children which was a pleasant supprise.

Sunday April 7, 1878. Weather warm and windy. I am tired and stupid. The children have gone to Sunday School and the house is quiet. I should like to lie down and get a nap but I must go to Bro Lydiards and see when he is coming to finish the wash house. I want it cleaned up so I can put the stove out there in the summer. I try to write a little every day but do not progress very fast. I am drafting a narative, or biographical sketch. Have not coppied any for some time. This term of school is out and there will be a weeks vacation. I am glad to have a rest. I want Bertrand to go next term.

Monday April 8, 1878. It was cloudy this morning and rained some, but the clouds cleared and the wind raised, and has blown cold and disagreable all day. I had taken the stove out of the bedroom but was glad to put it in again and make us comfortable while sewing. Martha helped me and we did a nice lot of sewing, made some underclothes for the girls and four pair of pillowcases. The children were very troublesome, having to stay in the house. They played on the organ and made all kinds of noises. William Gill Mills had his store burned last night. It is thought to be the work of an incendiary as traces were found of the store having been robbed before it caught fire. A warrant was issued to search the city for the goods. Some men came here and I told them they were welcome to search. They looked around a little and went away. It is so cold and windy tonight I shall retire soon.

Saturday April 13, 1878. I went to the weavers with Martha to order a carpet. She went home on the train this afternoon.

Monday April 29, 1878. The time passes so quickly. The weather has been cold and stormy the most of the time since Martha went away. There is still much excitement about the fire. The opinion is gaining that Mills set it himself, for the purpose of attaining the insurance money. A guard is out every night. The citizens taking turns. Marion and his father have both been out. The children have the Whooping Cough, Bertrand, Lewis and Arthur. They cough very hard. William Croff has moved into the Higby House. Mr. Higby has given it to Mrs. Croff who is his daughter. Mrs. Croff called on me today, also Sister Pratt. We are going to meet tomorrow evening to choose a president for the Young Ladies Society which will be organized in this ward on Wednesday evening.

Thursday May 2, 1878. The Young ladies Mutual Improvement Association for this Ward was organized last evening. Mrs. Ella Haws President, Mrs. Pheba Holdaway and Miss Mary Hoover Counselors, Miss Hattie Taylor Treasrer. The secretary is not yet chosen. Br. Lydiard came and fixed the Wash House chimney, it looks better and I hope it will draw better, though he did not turn it upside down as I advised him. I took the horse and buggy yesterday and did severel errands. I drawed Martha's dividend and paid ten dollars on her carpet. It is in the loom and looks very handsome. Called on Sister Smoot inviting her to attend the meeting in the evening. Saw severel with reference to selecting the officers, and went to meeting in the evening.

Sunday May 5, 1878. We got the work done up and I made myself tidy and sat down to rest. Looking out I saw Messre. Tullidge and Crandel, publishers from Salt Lake. They had promised to call and inspect my writings and tell me the cost of publishing a book of poems. I read them my poems with which they were very much pleased, and strongly urged me to publish; selecting such peices as seemed to them suitable. They said I had enough to make a book of a hundred pages that were well worthy of publication. It would cost $350.00 for a thousand coppies. I should like very much to publish, but should be sory to spend so much money and not have the book appreciated. If I could but have a foresight to know how my book would be received I should have more courage to proceed. I read some of my prose writings which also pleased them very much and they encouraged me to proceed with an article I am writing. They staid all night. Myron is in Salt Lake City, but Marion came in and I was proud to introduce him. He conversed with them to good advantage. They talked of science and religion and I was pleased to see him so well informed. I thought he was better than a book and if I did no other work the honor of having such a son is more pride and pleasure than a dozzen books.

Monday May 6, 1878. This morning after breakfast the gentlemen went away. I was glad when they were gone, for trying to acquit myself in a ladylike manner, and cover Marie's awkwardness and the children's rudeness was such a strain on my nerves.

Tuesday May 7, 1878. I went in the washroom today and left Marie to do the work. I always get so tired doing the work on wash-day and I felt so smart & thought I would have a change. It took her until dinner time to do the breakfast work so I let her get the dinner and wash the dishes and then she came to wash. Myron brought the buggy to the door and asked if I wanted a ride. I took Arthur and we called for Sister Moss. We went up the river and over the bench as far as Mr. Carter's. It was a pleasant ride. We could see our farm as we passed. The wheat and lucern looked green and nice. We called on Sister Newel as we came back.

Susa Young Gates (1856-1933)

By the time she was thirteen and a student at the University of Deseret, Susa (or Susannah or Susan), the second of three daughters born to Lucy Bigelow and Brigham Young, had already demonstrated her quick mind, energetic personality, and musical and literary talents. [^24] She edited the school's paper, studied telegraphy and stenography, and also took a course in baking. Moving to St. George with her mother and sister in the winter of 1870-71 did not markedly diminish Susa's activities. She taught music lessons, joined the St. George Home Dramatic Group, and organized the Union Club, a social and self-improvement society.

After the dissolution of an unhappy marriage in 1877, Susa worked with her mother in the St. George Temple and then attended the Brigham Young Academy in Provo. Her younger sister Rhoda Mabel joined her a few months later. With Susa also was her young son, Bailey. Her two-year-old daughter Leah had remained in the custody of Susa's former husband, Alma Dunford. Susa attended the academy for only a brief period, but during that time she directed the academy choir, taught piano and voice, and assisted in establishing a department of music. Years later she would also organize a department of domestic science (in which her daughter Leah would teach with her) and serve as a trustee of the academy as well as of the Brigham Young College in Logan.

Her short sojourn as a student at the academy proved to be an uplifting and refreshing experience for Susa. The letters she wrote home from January to June 1879 show a young woman attempting to make a new beginning for herself. Not lengthy, they offer a rare glimpse into the mind and emotions of the person who would become one of the most influential Mormon women. Susa discounted the likelihood of her own remarrying, but she was concerned about the romances of her two sisters, Rhoda Mabel and Eudora (Dora or Dollie). Hoping at this point in her life to be reunited with her daughter Leah and then devote herself to her children's education, she was determined to rear them "in the fear of God and wrong-doing."

Susa Young Gates. (Susa Young Gates Collection. Utah State Historical Society.)

A trip to the Sandwich Islands the next year and her marriage to Jacob Gates in 1880 changed the course she had plotted for herself and her children. Unable to obtain full custody of Bailey and Leah, Susa devoted herself to rearing a new family and entering a life of public and Church service. Eleven children were born to Susa and Jacob, seven of whom died as infants or young children.

Susa founded and edited the Young Woman's Journal, a magazine for the YWMIA. Her long enduring interest in temple work led to a genealogical class that she instructed in the Lion House for ten years; and after her appointment to the Relief Society general board in 1911, she helped to incorporate genealogical lessons into the Relief Society curriculum. She also served as first editor of the Relief Society Magazine and wrote several novels and numerous poems and stories for local publication. Always an adoring daughter of her beloved father, in 1930 she wrote a biography of Brigham Young. [^25]

Tomes of published material distinguish Susa Young Gates as one of the most prolific of Utah's women writers. Many of her personal papers, including holographs of the letters that follow, are in the Utah State Historical Society. Minimal punctuation has been added for clarification.

Provo. Jan 11th '79.

My own Dear Mother and Sister.

You know how I hate letter writing, but am going to write just a word or so to let you know you are always remembered. I must first tell you that Dollie has just gone home. She has been with me a week, and seemed to feel a great deal better. I am in hopes that if John W. [Young] starts soon she will go with him. [^26]

The boys are both well. [^27] Hope you are well and prospering. I do hope Rhoda will soon resume her studies, for there is no pleasure on earth like that given by a refined and cultivated intellect, lit up by the glorious rays of the spirit of the living God. Dear mother, I am very happy and contented and trying to enjoy all that I can, for who knows when sorrow will come. God give me grace to enjoy the sunshine of life, and to profit by lessons learned in adversity. Shall I have done moralizing? Yes, and come to practical things. Dont fail to send my pillows (you have in your house three of them and the other two are at Dora's) and pillow cases and sheets. Please dont forget this as I may fit up a room and go away from here, to be nearer the Academy. Have started vocal lessons. Kept busy with studies and lectures. Please give my kind love to the Nixons. My regards to all who enquire. Tell Dan, the memory of his true unchanging friendship is about the brightest spot in my rather cool heart. Affection! Thou art dear to me, but Love! Away. Thou art fickle, false! even in my own breast I dare not trust thee. I wish to live for God and His Kingdom. Dear little May [Emma May Bigelow?]. [^28] Tell her I shall remember her shy farewell kiss. My lips are pressed to others too seldom to not be carefully remembered. God bless and cheer you both. Time will soon be gone then comes the great Eternity. What matters what old Time may bring!

Susa

Provo. March 14th '79.

Dearest Mother.

Your letter came last evening, and I hasten to reply.

First of all, let me set your mind at rest upon one point, Dora will not turn traitor. She started Wednesday afternoon with Aunt Harriet Hanks to California. She did not wish to be here when the trial came on, and would go no where but to Cal. I offered to go along, but she declined. She will be all right I trust, and her abscence from home will serve to open her eyes to the course she has recently taken. So let your mind be at rest. And dear mother, dont be afraid about there being any danger for either you or Bro. [Wilford] Woodruff. Go quietly on with your work in the Temple. That case will pass off with out much more fuss, I think. [^29]

Dora will soon be ready to return and I will see her when she does and once more try to persuade her to come down to you. So take all the comfort you can, and be patient. All will come out right. Now dont worry please, but remember God wishes us to devote all our time to the hastening on of His work which is soon to come to an end, and we have no time to spend in mourning over that which we can not help. I have been very much grieved at Dollie's actions, but she assured me she prayed always and wanted to do right, and so I trust to God for the rest. Now Mother, you surely dont wish me to break up all my plans and life, and once more be turned adrift without aim or object. I am contented and busy here. I feel that I am doing some good, and am receiving much instruction. All that we learn in this world counts us so much in the world to come. Dearest Mother, you know my nature well enough to know that without plenty of occupation, my mind would only rust, and I become dissatisfied and reckless.

If there is no absolute need let me remain here and fit myself to be a useful member in God's Kingdom.

Provo. March 21st 79

Dear Mother,

Thought I must write just a few lines.

The little girl down stairs has the diptheria, but we are keeping the children all up-stairs, but her. And giving them constant doses of purifing and opening medicines. We are watching them with great care, and trust in God our Father for the rest. I will telegraph if Baby [Bailey] should come down with it, but am in great hopes that he shall not.

How are you, dear mother? Bless you how often I think of and pray for you. I have tried so hard to do all I could to be a good daughter, but it seems impossible.

Dont sorrow for me. God is with me and I am all right.

How is Rhoda? Why dont she write to us any of us? Is she going to ruin herself, and her whole after life? In all her life she will never find one so noble good and true as Lyman. Tell her I shall endeavor to do all I can to keep him to believe in her truth till it is too late.

Do you know anything about her? Please write to me about her. I am very tired and lonesome, but thankful to God for all. Please write again to me.

Your devoted daughter

Susa

Have heard nothing from Dora

Provo. April 4th '79

My darling Mother.

Rhoda received your letter yesterday. So I thought I would write just to tell you how much we love you, and how often we talk of and pray for our dear mother. Rhoda returned from the City two days before I did, but now we are both here, and commencing school this morning. We are still at Bro. [Benjamin] Cluffs yet, but as they are soon going to the [Hawaiian] Islands we will find another boarding place. I scarcely know what we will do this term, we are not decided. I will let you know as soon as we know ourselves.

Grandma [Mary Gibbs Bigelow] has come down to Conference and is staying here at Provo waiting for Uncle Daniel [Bigelow] to come after her. I got her a few things in the City and sister got her a pair of spectacles.

Dearest Mother Rhoda and I are getting along so well, and we are going to try and be just as good as we know how to be. She is company for me, and we are quite happy. She is going to take music lessons, and I want her to take Vocal Lessons. I hope she will come again next winter as she will make a smart woman with culture. I will let you know if anything goes wrong, believe me.

Now you ask me something about Dan. He was a true kind friend to me in my deepest trial, and my heart will never cease to thank him for it. But mother dear, I do not love any one on earth as well as my precious good Mother, except my little children. I want by next year, (dont mention this to any one) to have my little girl here, and put her into the Kindergarten School, that is to be added to this Academy. Then you know I can devote myself to their education, have them with me, and try to rear them in the fear of God and of wrong-doing. This is my bright dream. This is what I long for in the future. Should I ever marry, my children might not be well-treated. And I must try to do all I can for them. Sometimes they tell me I must be saved by some good man. If that's all, I could be sealed to some one who has proved his integrity and passed away. [^30] I am happy, or at least as happy as mortals who have scared hearts and sore memories can ever expect to be. In short I am busy, contented, and useful. I am only twenty-three so there is plenty of time, yes years and years of it for me yet. Let your heart be at rest for me, as long as I am in the Academy I am safe. That is as long as I am a partaker of the spirit that rules in these walls, I am all right.

Now I will not talk of myself any more. Bailey is so fat and seems so happy and well. I have put him in pants. And oh he is so sweet and cunning.

I write simple little letters to my precious "little forsaken," every little while, and thus keep my memory fresh in her mind. I always tell her to pray for the time when she will be with Mama again. She is well. Dora has not written to me at all. Love to my darling Mother

From her Susa

Bailey sends his love to his dear Grandma. Rhoda will write soon. So will I. Lyman is going home to-day. Love once more

From Susa.

S. L. City April 6th 79

My darling Mother.

Rhoda and I thought we would write. We are staying with Aunt Eliza B[urgess] at conference. My dear mother your letters have reached me and I am sorry to say two received without an answer. I do hope that the heavy clouds of sorrow will be lifted from your mind, and God will graciously give you the light of His Glory. Dearest, do not worry about my dear little sis and I, we are trying to do right, and be quiet and good. Mother, if you really think I can do you any permanent good by coming down, I will willingly do so. But dear, I could not see you now, and the fact of my being there would subject me to a close watch on your account. Let your heart be comforted in knowing that God doeth all things well. Dearest one you will never know how truly I love you, and how much I am willing to do for you, if it is necessary until the Great Hereafter. But I cannot sacrifice all my cheerful labor, happy prospects in my dear Academy, unless I feel I can do you a lasting good. If I can sweeten your bitter cup, if I can soothe your sore heart, and indeed help you with my presence, I am ready to come.

Dearest, how would you like to take nice, comfortable, quiet trip around Soda [Springs] or Bear Lake. Everything being well arranged and everything safe and well. Tell me about this when you write next.

From all accounts I can hear Dora seems to be all right. Dont worry about her. She is the child of God, and He will watch over her. Be comforted my darling Mother and accept the devoted love of your daughter

Susa

Provo April 18 '79

Dearest Mother.

This morning your letter lay on my table, and as I have a few minutes before I will have to go to my students I thought I would start at least to answer your letter.

Dear mother I understand fully how you feel about my coming down, and when the time comes that it will be right for me to come, I shall do so.

I decidedly object to my name and Rhoda's being placed alongside of Dora's for being untrue to men. I was never under the same circumstances as she. I have not given my heart to any man good or bad, nor am I full of the lust of the world as she is. [^31] You do not seem to understand me or my purposes. Is it wrong to want to help build up God's Kingdom? The only desire I know of at present or at any time, is to live so that father will meet and welcome me. Please, my darling mother, do not mention Dan's name to me again, it will be worse than useless. Let us try and think of how much there is to be done in the future, and cease to vainly wish for that which "might have been." Rhoda is very young, and I for one, did not expect such a child to know her own heart. I wish to the goodness she had stayed there and married Dan. For I believe she would have been quite happy with him, and I pay him the compliment of thinking he would be worthy of her. But I see no use in wishing for what cannot be, and so am trying to do what little I can to keep Rhoda straight. She is a dear good sweet girl. . . .

I know nothing about Zina [Young Williams], but as for me I have no desire to be any man's wife. [^32] And doubt whether I ever shall. There is very little room in my heart for any one but my darling mother, my precious children, and sisters Zina and May. I care nothing for the fame of the world, but here my few small talents are being daily improved, my sphere of usefulness is being enlarged, and how much happier am I than as though forced to go through a daily routine of work distasteful to me. It is no use talking about recording in the Temple, I could not be contented at that two weeks. If you had not come up here when you did, I should have come any way, and perhaps done much worse than I have done so far.

Yes dearest mother, I am trying to forget all that was, all that might have been, and make myself contented and happy here. I humbly thank God for all his blessings, and want to be worthy of His goodness to me. I enclose three cards. Please give one to Bro. [James G.] Bleak, and one to Bro. [John Daniel Thompson] Mac[Allister]. [^33]

Your loving Susa

Provo. May 9th 1879

Dearest Mother.

I was so glad to hear from Zina that you are feeling better, and are in better spirits. It will seem so good when everything gets settled down once more, and you can take comfort with your children. I have written to Bro. Taylor about Johnnie and will tell you instantly of the result. I hope the way will open for me to have my children with me this winter, and I do hope Rhoda will come too. Encourage her to come here, for it is the best place on earth for her I feel assured. Is there anything here you want or need, if so let me know.

I neglected to tell you Grandma had been to see us, and I have given her a few things. I was informed that the girl of Aunt Sariah [Bigelow Cook]'s was desired to be sent to you. [^34] Mrs Holliday sent word over for me to tell you that the people who have the child would be glad to let you take her. I give this just as sent, reserving my opinion or comments.

My eyes have been quite bad. Rather dread coming into that hot climate, but guess it will be all right, at least for a week or so. Shall try to come down as soon as I can make the arrangements.

Rhoda sends love and kisses. Hope she'll succeed in Keeping Dan's heart since she wishes to. [^35] Thank the Lord, my heart beats only for my children, my mother, and my few friends. It is never disturbed with a throb of love. Guess it never will be. Please darling mother take all the comfort you can, for you will soon meet father.

Your Susa

Provo. June 8th 1879

My darling Mother.

There is a letter down at the schoolhouse now partly written to you. But as I am obliged to do some writing here at home to-night I concluded first to write a few words to her who is more precious to me than fine rubies. And who I love better each day of my happy busy life. I am so vexed with myself for allowing you to go one week without a letter from me. But really mother dear you can scarcely realize the amount of work I have done lately. The Academy Choir (under me of course) learned ten, chorrises, and anthems, in two weeks. I am obliged to sing each part with everyone as I did in the old club. It is indeed very wearing on the lungs and nerves. But I love it, and am so glad I can assist the fresh young and oftentimes sweet singers of Zion to praise God in melody and in song. During the Conference here we sang for the Twelve who were here, and Bros. [John] Taylor, [Daniel H.] Wells, [Brigham] Young Jr.], and [George F.] Gibbs expressed themselves highly pleased with our music. Both Bro. Taylor and Sister E[liza] R. Snow expressed the very kindest feelings to me, and seemed to feel a great interest in my course.

God help me to be worthy of the good opinion of all of the true Saints. For verily I want to be as near what father would wish me to be, as it is possible for my weak queer disposition to be. Oh mother, dont you long to see father to[o], clasp his arms around your neck, and hear his blessed voice pronounce those sweet words "Welcome, my beloved, to your home." Oh I know I am young and have a destiny in this Church to fulfill, but how I would love to go to father!

The end of the term comes in two weeks, and we are going to be so very busy. I dread to think of all I must do. I will be somewhat glad if I can have a little rest, but will be ready to work again when school begins again. I hardly know what to do this summer. When I have decided, you shall know of course. There will be only ten weeks and then—school again.

Now mama dont be disappointed, but you know how bad my eyes are down there, and I have had a touch of sore eyes already, and as my business will oblige me to come in Aug. or Sept. I think I shall wait till then and come in the grape season. I will, of course, send Rhoda down as soon as school is out. For pity's sake keep her a child as long as you can dont let her "marry in haste and repent at leisure". Set my example before her and let it be a warning. I love the child dearly. She is doing nicely.

Haven't said a word about Br. Mac. Seldom felt so bad as when we heard he was dead. Thank God it was untrue. Give my love to them.

Bailey is well and sends love to his grandma. Had some pictures taken. Will bring some down. I went up to Provo Valley this week after Bailey. Stayed all night with Aunt Lavina [Bigelow Witt]. Zina was with me. Saw Uncle Daniel. All sent love. I urged them to go down there this fall. Please dont worry about Rhoda and I. We are all O.K. so far.

Forgot to tell you that the rhyme piece of "poetry"(?) in the last but one Exponent called the Three "Rain drops" was written by your ambitious but not very wise or talented

Susa

Footnotes

The last decade has seen a spectacular rise in the number of books and articles regarding Mormon women. Readers who desire further study into this aspect of Mormon history are referred to the following: Jill C. Mulvay (Derr), "Eliza R. Snow and the Woman Question," BYU Studies 16 (Winter 1976); Gail Farr Casterline, "The Toils or 'Onward for Zion': Images of the Mormon Woman, 1852-1890" (Masters of Arts thesis, Utah State University, 1974); Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, "A Decade of Mormon Women: The 1870's," New Era 8 (April 1978): 34-39; and Sherilyn Cox Bennion, 'The Woman's Exponent: Forty-two Years of Speaking for Women," Utah Historical Quarterly 44 (Summer 1976): 222-39. For a more complete history, see Madsen and Whittaker, "History's Sequel."

---
Notas:
[^1] J.L.S. to Editor Exponent, January 9, 1886, Woman's Exponent 14 (February 1,1886):133-34.
[^2] See Arrington, Great Basin Kingdom, pp. 353-79, for an analysis of the confiscation of church property and other economic impacts of the raid.
[^3] The Manifesto was unanimously accepted by the membership of the Church gathered at the conference and has subsequently been included in the Doctrine and Covenants. Discussions of the declaration include Kenneth W. Godfrey, "The Coming of the Manifesto," Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 5 (Autumn 1970):11-25; Henry J. Wolfinger, "A Reexamination of the Woodruff Manifesto in the Light of Utah Constitutional History," Utah Historical Quarterly 39 (Fall 1971): 328-49; and Gordon C. Thomasson, 'The Manifesto Was a Victory," Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 6 (Spring 1971): 37-45.
[^4] After his marriage to Julina in 1866, Joseph F. Smith took four plural wives: Sarah Ellen Richards (1850-1915), Julina's sister Edna Lambson (1851-1926), Alice Ann Kimball (1858- ? ), and Mary Taylor Schwartz (1865- ? ). To these wives and Joseph F. Smith were born forty-three children. The family members are listed in Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith: Sixth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1969), pp. 487-90. Some insight into the family life is provided in pp. 448-90. For a different view, see Randall Leroy Green, "The Joseph F. Smith Family: Life without Father," MS on file in Church Archives.
[^5] The eleven children of Joseph F. and Julina Lambson Smith include Mercy Josephine, Mary Sophronia, Donette, Joseph Fielding, David Asael, George Carlos, Julina Clarisse, Elias Wesley (born in Hawaii, April 21, 1886), Emily, Rachel, and Edith Eleanor. There were also two adopted children: Marjorie Virginia and Edward Arthur.
[^6] Remained at home Jet being poorly. Enoch Farr (1845-1914) was president of the Sandwich Islands or Hawaiian Mission from 1885 to 1887.
[^7] Susa Young Gates and her husband, Jacob Forsberry Gates, arrived in Honolulu in November 1885, and Jacob was appointed secretary of the plantation. He was later president of the Laie Branch. They returned to Utah in April 1889.
[^8] J.L.S. to Editor Exponent, January 9, 1886.
[^9] Esther Farr, wife of the mission president, was president of the Relief Society and Julina was one of four women who served as counselors. Sandwich Islands or Hawaiian Mission, manuscript history, manuscript, Church Archives.
[^10] "Through the suggestion of President Joseph F. Smith a theological class was organized in Laie for the purpose of studying the first principles of the gospel." Hawaiian Mission, manuscript history, March 4, 1885.
[^11] The participation of women in the administration of healing ordinances is discussed in chapter 1.
[^12] Attended Releif Society. Robert (1883-1886), "Robin," was a son of Joseph F. and Edna Lambson Smith. Susa Young Gates wrote a tribute at the boy's death. See Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith, pp. 462-63.
[^13] Went to W[omen's] Coop[erativel Directors meeting. [^31] Nancy wrote a history of the elder Williams. See Nancy Clement Williams, After 100 Years (Independence Publishing Company, 1951).
[^14] Saw Dr E R Shipp and decided to pospone Press and Reapers meeting in her and Sister E B Wells honor till Saturday night on account of Bro Hornes party. Adoption had a peculiar meaning for nineteenth century Latter-day Saints. It was the means by which members were sealed, usually not to their own families but to prominent priesthood leaders. The practice, discontinued in 1894, is discussed by Gordon I. Irving, "The Law of Adoption: One Phase of the Development of the Mormon Concept of Salvation, 1830-1900," BYU Studies 14 (Spring 1974): 291-314.
[^15] It was common practice at this time for younger women, often even young married women, to attend the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association meetings rather than those of the older women's Relief Society.
[^16] Mormon temple ordinances are overviewed by James E. Talmage in The House of the Lord, rev. ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1971), pp. 79-84.
[^17] The academy at Ephraim, Utah, was one of thirty-one high schools started by the Church in Utah, Idaho, Arizona, Canada, and Mexico between 1888 and 1891.
[^18] Presented memorial to [Constitutional Convention] committee on sufferage. Was very courteously treated. We all felt it a great day in the history of Utah. The committee informed us they had passed on W[oman] S[uffrage] being ten to five in favor. [^33] Went to R. Society in the evening. Attended a surprise party given in honor of Sister Mary Freeze in 14 Wd. It was unusualy fine but oh! the dressing down Mr B H Roberts got from Joseph F Smith I realy felt sorry for him. [^35] Amanda Burns Williams and her husband, Fredrick Granger Williams, had been married thirteen years and had seven children by the time Nancy Clement entered the family in 1889. Two children had died, one in 1882 and one in 1884. The three oldest were Amanda Elizabeth, Fredrick Ezra, and Sarah Josephine. In 1890, Flora May was three years old and the baby, Joseph Fredrick, eighteen months. Fredrick Granger Williams-Amanda Burns family group sheet, Church Genealogical Archives.
[^19] Colonia Diaz, near the Spanish town of La Ascencion, Mexico, was settled by Latter-day Saints early in 1885.
[^20] Hazel Kathena (1890-1940) was a daughter of Fredrick Granger Williams and Amanda Burns.
[^21] Met with the women and organized a Releif Society with Ida J. Mortensen pres. Lydia K. Young 1st cou & Charlotte Carroll sec. counclor. Phebe I. Allred. sec. Josepha Wright ass[t]. sec. Nancy A. Williams treasurer, Kate Porter Chorister. I was set apart by by George Teasdale. There were 30 members in all. $5.75 were donated that day. Went to South Jordan with Mrs Edna Smith to speak at a political meeting. [in margin] Pres Smith came to Depot to meet his wife with his whiskers tied back with a [unclear] handkerchief. George Teasdale (1831-1907) was a member of the Council of the Twelve who helped direct the settlement of Diaz in 1885 and presided over the Mexican colonies for a period.
[^22] The same excerpt of the Fox diary edited by the authors here was edited by Linda Thatcher, "I Care Nothing for Politics: Ruth May Fox, Forgotten Suffragist," Utah Historical Quarterly 49 (Summer 1981): 239-53. Further information on Ruth May Fox and her family, her associations with other women, and her personal aspirations can be found in Ruth May Fox, "My Story," comp. Leonard Grant Fox, typescript, Church Archives.
[^23] Phoebe Couzins, of St. Louis, was one of two women admitted to the Utah Bar in 1872; she subsequently left Utah for an active legal career in Kansas and Missouri. She was an advocate of suffrage and visited Salt Lake City in January 1895 to lecture. "Phoebe Cousins," Woman's Exponent 23 (January 1 and 15, 1895): 228.
[^24] Was chosen President of the Young Ladies of the 14 Ward. Emmeline B. Wells, of whom Ruth May Fox later wrote: "No other woman had so great an influence as she in shaping my life," was at this time president of the Utah Territory Woman Suffrage Association.
[^25] Went with Young Ladies to take a party to Aggie and Annie Campbell house as a recognition of there efficient labors in the M[utual] I[mprovement] Ass. Emily S. Tanner Richards (1850-1929) and Margaret A. Mitchell Caine (1859-1929) were both ardent Utah suffragists whose husbands had represented Utah in Washington, D.C., Franklin S. Richards as Church attorney and John T. Caine as territorial delegate.
[^26] In 1894, Alice Chapin, a teacher trained in Boston by Elizabeth Peabody, the founder of the first American kindergarten, opened a model kindergarten in Salt Lake City. See Carol Cornwall Madsen and Susan Staker Oman, Sisters and Little Saints: One Hundred Years of Primary (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1979), pp. 41-42.
[^27] Went to Sugarhouse to the house of Sister Mary Young to speak on politics. The Second Triennial National Council of Women was held in Washington, D.C., in February 1895. Several Utah women attended, including representatives from the Relief Society and Elmina S. Taylor, president of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association. Both organizations were charter members of the council. Woman's Exponent 23 (January 1 and 15, 1895): 228.
[^28] Went to the Temple to do some sealing with Jette. As part of a revelation and prophecy dated December 25, 1832, Joseph Smith declared that "slaves shall rise up against their masters who shall be marshalled and disciplined for war." D&C 87:4.
[^29] Went to Press Club in the evening. Had a plesant time. Club entertained Phebe Cousins who spoke to us on the sufferage and currency questions. [^23] The Utah Federation of Women's Clubs was organized April 7,1893. Emma J. McVicker, a prominent non-Mormon appointed to the University of Utah Board of Regents in 1895, was president of the federation.
[^30] Spoke in the 1st precinct to women of the Rep. Club. The Women's Industrial Home, an elaborate structure originally built to house runaway polygamous wives, was at this time the home of various territorial officials and the meeting place of the territorial legislature. See Gustive O. Larson, "An Industrial Home for Polygamous Wives," Utah Historical Quarterly 38 (Summer 1970): 263-75.
[^31] Miss Cousins was at the Reaper's [Literary Club] to day. Mrs. F[ranklin] S. Richards and I delevered letter to Mrs E B Wells. Was interviewed in the evening by Margeret Caine who thought the letter was wrong. [^25] Jet and I sat up with some of the children to see the old year out. It is Grandpa [Jesse William] Fox's birthday. We had all the members of his family to dinner. The Relief Society opened the Woman's Cooperative Mercantile and Manufacturing Institution in 1890 "to promote home industries and help forward the cause of equal rights." Woman's Exponent 19 (December 15,1890):104. The venture, which lasted until 1912, was the society's second effort to establish a cooperative mercantile. The first was begun in 1876. See also History of Relief Society, 1842-1966, pp. 114-15.
[^32] Emmeline B. Wells and Ellis Reynolds Shipp had been in the East for six weeks, attending various women's meetings, including the National American Woman Suffrage Association in Atlanta, Georgia, and the National Council of Women in Washington, D.C.
[^33] The Committee on Elections and Suffrage began deliberating the subject of equal rights for women March 11, 1895, and presented the majority report eleven days later. See Jean Bickmore White, "Woman's Place Is in the Constitution: The Struggle for Equal Rights in Utah in 1895," Utah Historical Quarterly 42 (Fall 1974): 350-53.
[^34] "When the convention debate had been at its high point, Emmeline B. Wells had announced the anticipated May 13 arrival in the territory of Susan B. Anthony and Anna Howard Shaw to conduct a woman suffrage conference." The dignitaries arrived after the convention had voted in favor of including woman suffrage, and the Rocky Mountain Suffrage Conference, with representatives from Utah, Wyoming, and Colorado, celebrated the victory. Beverly Beeton, "Woman Suffrage in the American West, 1869-1896" (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Utah, 1976), pp. 143-46, an excellent discussion of Utah's involvement in the suffrage question and very pertinent to this portion of Ruth May Fox's diary.
[^35] B.H. Roberts was reprimanded more than once for his political involvement during his tenure as a member of the Church's First Council of Seventy. See D. Craig Mikkelsen, "The Politics of B.H. Roberts," Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 9 (Summer 1974): 25-43.
