Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 ( 1982)

Chapter Ten

Persecution, the Manifesto, and Statehood

Dark Moments—Rejoicing

1896 Opened auspiciously for Utah and its inhabitants. On the 4th [of] January 1896 President Cleaveland issued a Proclaimation admitting Utah into the Sisterhood of States. As soon as the message was recieved 2 oc. PM Guns were fired, Flag hoisted, Bands played, Shouts of joy arose from the heart and lips of all, with ringing of bells and everything which could be used to sound a note of joy was brought into requisition. . . . never had all Utah joined in such hilarious rejoicing.

So wrote Rebecca Elizabeth Howell Mace in Kanab, Utah, personally celebrating the end of nearly half a century of conflict between the Latter-day Saints and the federal government. And well might she rejoice, since the long turbulence and its resolution personally impacted thousands of Latter-day Saints, particularly during the 1880s and '90s. Julina Lambson Smith's mission to Hawaii, Nancy Abigail Clement Williams's settlement in Mexico, Ruth May Fox's effort to bring woman suffrage to Utah, and Rebecca Mace's celebration of Utah's statehood all were tied to Mormon relations with the United States government.

From 1862, when the first federal antipolygamy legislation was passed, efforts to enforce the statute steadily intensified. By 1879 the U.S. Supreme Court had determined that the statute was not unconstitutional, and finally in 1882 Congress put teeth in the measure with passage of the Edmunds Bill. Aimed largely at the local political power that allowed for "peculiarities of faith" including plural marriage, the law disfranchised polygamists and declared them ineligible for public office and jury service. It also provided for a five-member Utah Commission to administer the territory's elections.

Defining polygamy as a felony punishable with up to five years, imprisonment and/or a $500 fine, the law became the basis for increased legal prosecution, and new appointees to the territory's federal courts began in earnest a judicial crusade against polygamists. Following the lead of Church President John Taylor, many Mormon men and women went underground in an effort to elude federal marshals and nearly certain imprisonment. Sixteen-year-old Nancy Clement Williams entered plural marriage "at a dark hour for the Saints when persecution against that principle raged in its highest." Like others, she traveled to neighboring communities, hid out in friends' homes, and used assumed names. Some Saints left Utah and nearby Idaho, where the "raid" against Mormons also raged. When John Taylor visited Mormon settlements in Arizona, he found similar legal persecution underway and advised Saints there to leave the country. Eventually Nancy and Fredrick Williams were among those who went to Mexico; others fled to Canada.

While President Taylor himself decided to remain in hiding, he suggested that his second counselor, Joseph F. Smith, remove himself to the mission field, and so Julina Lambson Smith accompanied her husband to Hawaii in 1885. "Far off" and in a "strange land, so distant from many of our loved ones," Julina felt keenly that her two-year exile was a result of "infamous persecutions and prosecutions." Like many women who had personally experienced plural marriage, she spoke out in strong opposition to legislation against it. In a letter to the Woman's Exponent written from Laie in 1886, she maintained: "I have never felt that I have been guilty of any crime, notwithstanding the action of the courts. . . . It is not a question of any law with us, but a matter of conscience, of religious conviction and of earnest and undying faith in the laws and purposes of God, a matter of happiness or misery, of life or death." [^1]

Up against such strong religious conviction and marital loyalty, the federal government exerted greater pressure to force the Saints to abandon plural marriage. The 1887 Edmunds-Tucker law attacked the Church politically and economically. Stringent provisions facilitated polygamy prosecutions, woman suffrage was abolished, and a test oath was instituted for prospective voters, jurors, and office holders. In addition, the Church was dissolved as a legal corporation and its property escheated to the U.S. government. [^2]

Upon passage of the law, Joseph F. and Julina Smith returned to Utah. In July 1887, just as the statute was going into effect, John Taylor died and Wilford Woodruff assumed leadership of the Church. After three years of continued turmoil President Woodruff, having prayerfully considered what course the Church should take, declared with solemnity that "by vision and revelation" the Lord had "told me exactly what to do, and what the result would be if we did not do it." Acting upon this prophetic understanding, President Woodruff declared in a Manifesto read to Saints assembled in the Church's October 1890 general conference that his "advice to the Latter-day Saints is to refrain from contracting any marriage forbidden by the law of the land." [^3]

It was not without struggle and sorrow that Latter-day Saint men and women let go of plural marriage and of their hopes for a unique political and economic kingdom. Yet, on the eve of the twentieth century they recognized that they stood on the brink of a new era, one of improved relations with the United States and opportunities for unprecedented growth. The Saints began to move into the American mainstream, if not to be totally absorbed, at least to get their feet wet.

The Church-dominated People's Party was abandoned in 1891, and the Saints began to align themselves along national party lines. By 1894, within an increasing array of women's clubs, Mormon women like Ruth May Fox were discussing such national issues as the silver conspiracy. Ruth's prevailing concern, however, was woman suffrage, an issue that dominated her diary and Utah's constitutional convention in 1895. Due to the efforts of Mormon women like Ruth, when Utah entered the Union in 1896, it was the fourth state with suffrage for women.

A year before the century closed, Rebecca Mace closed her diary: "Farewell 1898 with all your changes and certainly great events have transpired." As the nineteenth century ended, women and men could not help but marvel at the myriad of transitions they had experienced as Mormons. The long-term scuffle over the separation of church and state in Utah ended, and the Saints began to see a manifold increase in its missionary work through the world. The Salt Lake Temple was dedicated in 1893, and the sealing together of family groups and the accompanying genealogical research took on new importance for the Saints.

Within their own households women found continuity. Julina Smith would find cooking to do beyond Hawaii's mission headquarters. There would continue for Nancy Williams lots of looking after children and grandchildren; Ruth May Fox would be active in organizations for Mormon sisters far into the twentieth century; and Rebecca Mace would "visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction" to the end of her days in Kanab.

Perhaps in praying "God to give us each the spirit and strength, in connection with our companions and fellow-laborers, to do our duty well," Julina Smith sensed the most important continuity: that within individual households of faith, Mormonism's real temporal kingdom existed. There women invested everyday occurrences with dignity and even holiness. The majesty of that investiture endures through this century and continues to be cause for rejoicing.

Julina Lambson Smith (1849-1936)

When Julina Smith left Salt Lake City in 1885 to accompany her husband, Joseph F. Smith, to the Sandwich Islands (Hawaii), she left five children at home, little realizing she would not see them for two full years. Mary (Mamie), Donette (Donnie), Joseph Fielding, David, and George remained with Julina's sister-wives, Sarah and Edna. [^4] Year-old Julina Clarissa (Ina) accompanied her mother and father to Laie, Oahu, where the Church had a mission, a six-thousand-acre sugar plantation and about 3500 members.

Joseph F. Smith had served two previous missions to Hawaii, but this mission was not for any designated period, since President John Taylor had called his counselor, President Smith, to remove himself from Salt Lake City in order to avoid enemies who sought to arrest members of the First Presidency for their practice of plural marriage.

Julina, a daughter of Alfred B. and Melissa Jane Bigler Lambson, was born in Salt Lake City, where she spent part of her growing up in the home of her aunt Bathsheba Bigler Smith and uncle George A. Smith. It was in this home, the Historian's Office, that she met Joseph F. Smith, a clerk there. The two were married in 1866 and, over a thirty-year period, had eleven children. [^5]

Having graduated from a class in midwifery, Julina was commissioned by the Church to serve as a midwife. She helped deliver the children of her sister wives, and on the mission to Hawaii had more than one occasion to use her obstetrical skill, once when she herself was eight months pregnant! Her son Elias Wesley was born in April 1886, just after the last diary entries quoted here.

This three-month representation of Julina's two-year mission with her husband shows her to be as skilled in the homemaking arts as was her Aunt Bathsheba (see Chapter 5). Julina's constant concern with cleanliness and good meals and her handiness with a needle and thread made her central to the management of the mission's domestic affairs. In addition, she worked hard to learn the native language and served in the mission Relief Society presidency as a counselor.

Julina Lambson Smith. (Courtesy Julina and Paul Hokanson, Afton, Wyoming.)

Five years after her return to Salt Lake City in 1887, Julina was called as a member of the Relief Society general board, where she helped set up the department for temple and burial clothing in 1912.

The excerpts that follow are part of a small collection of Julina's personal records, including three holograph diaries and a reminiscence deposited in the LDS Church Historical Department. Her careful attention to detail makes for an accurate record of a woman's daily activities without precluding a glimpse at her personal thoughts and feelings. Minimal punctuation has been added here for clarification, and where Julina used commas and periods interchangeably, the authors chose whichever mark enhanced the readability of the sentence. Entry dates have been set off with periods.

Laie Friday Jan 1st 1886

Got breakfast for 25. Attended a native feast and meeting in honor of the new year. Jos. F. Smith Geo. Wilcox Jos. S. Hyde and J[acob] F Gates spoke of the foreign brethren, & two of the native brethren. We had a pleasant time. Bro. and Sister [Enoch] Farr [^6] & Son, and Bros. [Albert W.] Davis & Wilcox went up in the canyons to look for oranges, but had poor luck. The day has been mild and pleasant. I made May & Rebecca a present each of a silk handkerchief, from home. Gave Geo a knife Hanna a photo of myself and Kalwihaona Napapali and Kaaka a bow made of lace and ribon. I got supper.

Saturday Jan 2nt 1886. Got breakfast then made some mince meat for pies, got Lily Barrell, to chainge work with me. Susie [Young] Gates [^7] helping her, and Jos & I went with a company of 56. brethren and Sisters foreign and natives, up to Kaliuwaa. We started about 10. a.m. and got back about 4. p.m. We had a pleasant time and gathered some fearns. I was afraid of the ride on horseback hurting me, so we did not try to keep up with the company but took our time, coming home. I was very tired and lame and expected to go to bed as soon as I reached home, as the folks had promised to get supper, but on my return I found they had made some pies and expected me to get the supper. I did it but realy was not able. The native girles helped me and did the work after. I went to bed but was up & down till midnight, suffering with such pain I was really alarmed, not knowing how it might turn I rested very well the after part of the night.

Sunday Jan 3rd 1886. Fast day. No breakfast to get. Prepaired bread for sacrament. Cooked a good dinner. Did not go to meeting. Can hardly get up and down I am so lame. Jos. brought Kahaana home with him to dinner. I got supper with the help of the girls. Feel some little better this evening.

Mon 4th 1886. We sent out mail to Honolulu by James Kahananni. I wrote to Mamie Donnie Sarah and Edna. I helped get dinner to day to pay Lillie for helping with me work Saturday. She is washing to day. I find that I am not the only one that has grunted from their ride. The rest of the women are all complaining. Jos says he never heard me complain so much in his life before.

Tueasday 5th 1886. I did an extra large wash to day. Took a nap after I got through and feel very well. Jos tended Ina and has had a gay time. She had everything she could get in the room to play with.

Wedensday 6th. We spent last evening over to Susie Gates. It was the aniversity of her wedding day six years. We had a very good time playing games &c. Pie and cake was passed around. I did some mending and listened to Jos read the papers this morning. Did my ironing this afternoon. Jos is tired and has gone to bed leaving me up for once since we have been here. I generally go to bed and he writs for some hours after. It will be eleven months on the 10th since we arrived here. Little did I think when I left home that I would have been seperated from my children so long. May we soon meet again in health.

Thursday Jan 7th 1886. I made a pair of pillow cases, and two aprons for my self. A[lbert] W. D[avis] arrived about three Oclock with the mail, and pictures of Mamie Nomie Donnie and Sarah. I cannot tell how it made me feel to see them. The girls have chainged considerably in a year. All are well at home. Albert climed the pali [precipice] last night. It was so dark he had to feel his way.

Friday 8th. Made a pillow and two cases for baby, and started to work a dress for her. I had to draw the patron [pattern] of from a nother. Jos has been writing all day.

Saturday 9th. I have been writing a peice for the Exponent. [^8] It has taken me all the time I could get. I feel tired setting so long.

Sunday 10th. Attended meeting this morning. This after noon went with Sisters [Lucy B.] Young [Susa Young] Gates [Marian] Wilcox & bro Gates to see, Carolines baby boy. It was born at three Oclock this morning. She was around as though nothing had happened. Kahaana came home with us from meeting to dinner. Meeting in the evening. They called a vote for the women folks to take turns with the men folks praying and asking the blessing.

Jan Monday 11th 1886. Joseph Albert Enoch and Son bro [Elihu] Barrell and bro [Frederick] and Sister [Ellen (Nellie)] Beesley started to Honolulu this morning. Nellie went to see her husband off. He and bro Barrell are on their way to their field of labor. J and A are agoing to see what can be done about our return tickets. We are also expecting an other mail. I took baby Sister Young accomp[an]ying me and went down to the seashore. Kept her there till twenty minutes past one. She had a good sleep. This afternoon I made a paste board card receiver to hold our photographs.

Tuesday Jan 12th. Did my washing.

Wedensday Jan 13th 1886. After breakfast went back to bed again with a bad headeach. Have not been well all day neither has baby. Robert [B.T. Taylor] came this afternoon with bro Farr. Jos. and Albert staid. Jos is getting some new gold bows to his specks.

Thursday 14th Jan 1886. Jos. and Albert got here at 12.15 Oclock. We were all in bed. I got up and set them some bread and milk. They had not had any supper. Jos got his specks fixed.

Friday Jan 15. 1886. Did my Ironing. Sent the shirts and my dress to Susan. She brought them back to night. I was not here. Jos baby and I had gone to take a walk on the promentory. I made some zephyr bols for Sister Naau. Meeting tonight. Bros Gates and [George] Cluff were the speakers. Jos spoke a few words after on appostacy. I tried to say the blessing in Native to day noon a[nd] broke down. Sister Wilcox brought some molasses candy over after meeting and we pulled candy. Mabel [Young McAllister] and Cluff got well dobed. Their hair was full and a good portion on their clothes.

Saturday 16 Jan 1886. I paid Sister Farr 1.00 for babies slippers and 50Â¢ for silk floss, that she got for me while she was in Honolulu. I gave Kaiwi Haone a silk handkerchief. I attended Relief society meeting. Robert was there. He spoke also did Sisters Young, Gates [Elizabeth] Noall and my self. [^9] Meeting passed off very well.

Sunday 17. Baby did not rest very well. Papa was up to give her water four times in the night and she dirted her diaper twice. That is something she has never done before since she could talk. I did not go to meeting this morning on her account, but she seems better this morning. Sister Yound [Young] is doing the work in the kitchen this week. She has been trying to churn for four hours, and gave it up. I went and helped her and we soon got a nice lot of butter. We havent had any before for two or three months.

Monday 18th. Baby is not well. I took her down to the sea, worked buttonholes in two pairs of panties then she teased for something to eat. I came back as far as Kekawokas. They were eating dinner. Baby eat with them some pancake and sugar and drank some milk, then I came home and let out the back seam of Roberts breeches.

Tueasday 19th. It was a stormy morning but I started my wash. It soon cleared off. I got my clothes dry. Albert and bro [Isaac] Fox. went for guavas. They got a good suply, but came back as wet as they could be. It rained very hard up in the gulch. I fixed A a bath. Studied my leson for evening.

Jan Wednesday 20th 1886. Baby has felt very bad to day. I tried to sew but she would not let me. Sister Farr went with me. We took her down to Kekawokas she had a nap. We eat breakfast with them about ten Oclock. Baby would not eat. I asked the blessing to day in native. Baby has been very fretful and peavish all day. I made her some sage tea to night. She drank it, but threw it all up. I studied my lesson for school, [^10] but it was adjurned on account of the men folks giving bro Miller an alcohol sweat. He has not been well for some days. Nellie's biscuits were taken for graham, on account of the Nuiloa [great] quantity of soda they had in them.

[Women's Voices, page 349 My Native, Blessing upon Food.

E Ko makou nei makua ma ka lani. Ko nonoi nei makou ia oe, e hoopomaikae mai i keia mau mea ai ia makou pakaki. Oia ka makou e nonoi nei, ma ka inoa o Jesu Kristo—Amene.

Thursday 21st. We took a bugy ride this morning to see if it would help baby. There were four of us Jos. Albert Sister Gates myself and two babies Ina and Carl. We had a good time. The[n] we went by the sea side the waves were very high. It was a grand sight.

Friday 22nt 1886, Jos. took Sister Young Mabel Me and baby for a carriage ride. We went to Punulu. Saw the fragments of a wrecked ship. It was washed to shore by the late high waves. Sister Young got her some specks at a Chinamans store. Baby seems much better. I think taken her out has helped her. I did my Ironing this after noon. Sent 25Â¢ worth to Hanna. Nellie put the boiler of meet on to cook with out salt and only made enough fire to heat it through. It would have spoilt if I had not made it boil and salted it. There has been no interest taken in the work this week. Sisters Nowl and Beesly were the housekeepers. I take the work in the morning. Have mixed two batches of bread to night. We Jos and I Sister Young Mabel and bro Hyde, went down to the sea for a bath. I swam a little. We are expecting Bro Fox to night with the mail. I have been to bed and had a nap, no one could sleep here. There is a terrible noise kept up in the other room. The folks are anxiously waiting for the mail. Up till 12.30.

Saturday 23rd. Bro Fox did not come. I have done the work to day and am very tired. Did the scrubbing all my self. Albert made me a mop stick to do the floors with. The girls went to meeting both this foornoon and after noon. Their trial came off this afternoon. They did not proove May to be guilty but advised Rebecca and Kekawoka to get married. They have been carrying on very badly.

Jan Sunday 24th 1886. I have done the cooking to day and attended meeting this after noon. Evening meeting is over and no Bro Fox yet. The Ship cannot of got in yet. O how we are longing for good news from home. I have felt very much worried lately about home.

Monday 25. Jos. and Albert went up Kim's Gulsh this morning and got some puanas, and a sack of oranges. I put up preserves this afternoon. Sister Young wants to take the work half of this week for Susie but I prefur doing it my self for she would remain here three weeks longer, should her mother take the work for her. Bro Fox returned this evening with the mail. Good news from home.

Tueasday Jan 26th. Bro Gates and family moved to themselves tonight, which will reduce our family by seven souls. It was like pulling teeth to get them to go. We are now 18 in family.

Wedensday Jan 27th. I had Stued chicken mashed potatoes and puanas pies for dinner. I am taken the work alone this week, but will not have to come in again for four w's.

Thursday 28. We had roast beef and custard pies for dinner. I got through with my work in good time. Sister Farr, I and baby went for a ride. I drove. Baby is not feeling well, and I am beginning to feel as though the end of the week was coming, one more day and my time is up. I have to have breakfast ready at six oclock. Albert went to Honolulu this morning in hopes of getting a picture of his family group. It is now 9. Oclock p m. I expect Jos will be writing till late. We have had another class in native to night. I will have to go to bed.

One year this morning since I left my home, and precious children. Little did I think of being away from them so long. Oh how my heart yearns for their presence. When O when can we go home.

Jan Saturday 30. Sister Farr takes the work this morning. I cut Joseph's hair to day, and have tied up some locks to send hom[e] to the folks. He went to meeting. I took baby and went to the sea for a bath. The women folks all went but Sister Farr. I can swim a little. It started to rain before we came out. Papa came with the umberella for baby.

Sunday 31. Went to meeting this morning. Took a nap after dinner and have been copying some of my native lessons since. Have left friday 29th out of my journal. It was my last day in the kitchen. I wrote to Mamie Donnie Sarah & Mother, on that day. Meeting this evening. We read in the book of mormon. Then bro's Noal and Gates spoke. I prayed. Jos. is not feeling well. His stomach is out of order, and head aches. He did not eat any supper. Baby is feeling some better to day.

Feb 1st 1886. Monday. Spent the day coppying my native lessons in a little book. Jos. helped me. I also did some studying.

Tueasday 2nt. Did a two weeks wash, and was two tired to do any thing else after I got through. Did not wash last week on account of being in the kitchen. Could not do both.

Feb 3rd Wedensday. Darned nine pairs of stockings. Took a ride to Haula. It is Election day. It was very quiet. Most of the voting was over when we got there. Sisters Young, Barrell, Bro Fox, and my self and baby went in the carriage, bro Wilcox and wife in the cart, and bro's Taylor and Hyde Sister Beesley and Mabel McAllister went horse back. Jos has been writing to Mother, Sarah and Edna. I wrote the following lines in Sister Lucy B Youngs Album.

Trials are necessary to the perfection of mankind. May your trials be only such as may be necessary to separate the dross of human nature from the pure gold of divine wisdom.

Feb 4th Thursday. Half past ten p m. I did my ironing and mending to day. Have spent a very interesting evening. Jos has been talking of his young days, and of his mother [Mary Fielding Smith] and Father [Hyrum Smith]. Sister Young and Gates were the listeners. They seemed very much interested. Susie is not able to get out much. Expects to go to bed [deliver] in three weeks.

Feb 5 Friday. Jos and Albert went for guaves this morning. Worked hard to get them. Came home soaking wet. Had to chainge all of their clothes, which makes me two extra suits to wash. I made sixteen button holes in sister Wilcoxes dress and sewed the buttons on. We had a good meeting tonight. Bro's Hyde and Taylor were the speakers, after which Jos. made a few remarks to the point. He explained the difference between the gift of the Holy ghost and the Holy ghost.

Feb 6th Saturday. Helped Jos. paste scraps in his scrap book. This foornoon attended relief society meeting and Sister Young, Beesley, Joseph and my self took a bath in the sea. Baby sat and watched us. Seemed to enjoy it as much as the rest of us. I sent one of the babies white dresses to Caroline. She could not have her baby blessed for she had nothing for it to wear. The mail came to night but brought us no letters from home which was a dissapointment to us.

Sunday 7th 1886. I attended meeting this morning. Fast day. Took a nap then wrote to Mother. We had a good meeting in the evening. Jos. and Albert spoke.

Monday 8th 1886. I wrote a few lines to Mamie and Donnie and finished my letter to Mother. Bro Fox started in with the mail this morning. I cut apair of linnen breeches for Jos. and started to make them.

Tueasday Feb 9th 1886. Did my washing. Am not well. Had hard work to get through with it. Went to bed as soon as had finished, felt much better after a good nap. Fixed the pockets in the breeches and cut a pair for Albert.

Wedensday Feb 10th. Have been sewing most of the day on the breeches. I think I can finish both pair tomorrow if I dont stop to Iron. Jos got me some coal this morning to iron with. He called at Sister Couls, and Vickey let Ina take her dol[l], she has played with it all day. To day is her birthday. She is two years old. It is one year to night since we arrived here at Lanikuli. I am feeling very lonesome and homesick. Oh how I want to see my precious children. We are looking for bro Fox to come with the mail but it is late and I am afraid he will not get here to night. God bless our pets and keep them from all sickness and harm till we can all meet again. I hope we will go home before long.

Feb 11th Thursday. When we got up we found our mail here. Bro Fox got here at two Oclock this morning. Brought some little tin-dishes and a linnen book for baby. I finished both pair of breeches to day for Albert. Wil try to make J a pair this week. Good news from home.

Feb 12th Friday. Did my plain ironing. Susanna did my starched clothes. I paid her 30Â¢ in Alberts name. I felt very tired and took a nap did not sew much. Lillie overcast the breeches for me.

Saturday Feb 13th. Worked steady all day. No time to sleep. Finished Josephs breeches. He was buisy writing home.

Sunday Feb 14. The mail carrier came this morning with the rest of our mail. Some more dishes for Ina a pair of mits for me from Edna a very nice Valentine each (from Edna) for Jos and me, also one from Mamie and another from Donnie. I attended meeting this morning. Staid home to write this afternoon. Tried to write to Edna but did not get my letter finished on account of company. Sister Coles came to be administered to. She has a large lump growing in her Opu [stomach or womb]. It pains her consideably. Sister Young anointed the afected part, and Jos. Albert with some of the other Elders administered to her. [^11]

Monday Feb 15. Wrote to Melissa J. Davis and Edna. Made a pair of garments for Joseph and cut a bathing suit. Sewed some on it. I cut it to button on the sholder (cross waist) by Enochs say so or at least that is the way he likes them made.

Tueasday Feb 16. 1886. Did my washing, sewed on the bathing suit in the afternoon.

Wedensday 17th. Did my Ironing. Mended Roberts and Alberts overalls then I sewed on the suit till after dark. Kekawoka and Rebecca were married to day. Most of the folks went to the wedding supper. I did not go. I was anxious to finish Joseph bath suit.

Thursday 18th. Let Sister Farr have the bathing suit I have made for cloth to make another. She gave me three quarters of a yard extra for my work, the cloth is 50Â¢ a yard. Joseph thought he would like his to button strait best, and Enoch liked the cross waist best, and it fit very nice. Sister F worked the button holes and sewed the buttons on. I cut and made a suit for Joseph. He likes it very well, I also made a pair of drawers for me. So much towards my suit. Sister Gates sent for me a false alarm.

Friday 19. Finished my suit to day and worked the button holes in Josephs.

Saturday 20th. Albert started to town this morning for the mail. I have been mending and doing od jobs. Attended Reelief Society meeting. We had a good meeting. There were near 40 members present. Sisters Farr Wilcox and I were the only white sisters there. Lilly is quite sick not able to be out coughfs very hard. Sister Young and Mabel went for a horseback ride. Bros Smith Farr Cluff Noal and Gates, Sisters Smith Farr Noal Wilcox and Beesley went to the sea for a bath. The waves were very high, we crisened our new bathing suits.

Sunday 21st. Attended meeting this morning. Took a nap and wrote to my children in the afternoon. Albert came early in the evening bringing the sad news of little Robert [Smith]s death. [^12] Joseph met him at the barn. I stepped out of the door. I could see by their looks that something was [w]rong. They both looked so sad. I asked what is the matter you have brought bad news. Albert answered "Your children are all right. I thought he ment all of Josephs children, so I said is it yours Albert" "no." Is it Mother. "no," it is Robert he is dead. I burst into tears. I felt that it was too hard. Oh, my poor Sister Edna in her touching letter she says, "I am so lonesome no baby to love." Poor girl how my heart aches for her, and poor papa to see his grief seems more than I can bear. O Lord comfort their hearts.

March 7th. Sunday. Joseph Enoch and Robert [Taylor] went yesterday to attend conference. I expect them back to night. Albert started at half past three in for the mail. O how I dread the news he may bring. I fear all is not well. It has been a sad long two weeks since we got our last mail and since I wrote in my journal. Jos has fretted so much and felt so very bad over the loss of his little Robert one of the nicest children we had. At first I thought it was no comfort to him my being here with little Ina, but I can now see that if he had been here alone, it would have been harder. It seems that he can not stand it to be alone.

This last week I have been doing the work in the kitchen. Have been obliged to be out of my room most of the time, and it has made me feel terrible to go in and see his eyes red and swolen with crying, but Ina has been with him much of the time. I took the work saturday, the 27th and worked very hard scrubbing and cleaning all day, for I found every thing was dirty and filthy. A little before twelve oclock in the night bro Gates came for me. Susie was sick. I went over as soon as I could, but was very tired and lame from my hard days work. Her watter had broke but her pains were very light. I staid till half past three then came home and went to bed, got up and went over again at six to see if I could go on with getting breakfast, but found she was getting along nicely and was just going to send for me. I sent word to Sister Farr who got breakfast. Susies ten pound boy was born ten minutes to seven Feb 28th. She had a very easy time. I left both mother and baby comfortable, and got back in time to help wash the breakfast dishes and get dinner. I have had no one but May to help me and have helped wash all the dishes have mixed a big batch of bread every night and done most of the scrub[b]ing. The kitchen dont often look as nice and clean as it does now. This is my second day on another week. It is hard for me but I thought I could do it better now than I could in another four weeks. I will not have to come in again before I am sick [deliver]. The work will not be as hard this week as it was last for every thing is clean an[d] in order. . . .

Monday 15th. Cut three little gowns. I will have the use of the machine, wedensday and thursday. Must get a little ready for fear of needing them before I get the things from home I sent for. I wrote the following lines in Susie Gates album.

Dear Sister Susie In this far off and strange land, so distant from many of our loved ones and the cherished scenes and homes of childhood, with such a wide range for usefulness before us, and so much to be done in the fields of mental and physical labor for the welfare of our race, (and so little power on my part to accomplish my allotted task) I can only sincerely pray God to give us each the spirit and the strength in connection with our companions and fellow laborers to do our duty well.

Hawaiian children with plantation buildings in background. Laie, Hawaii. (Joseph F. Smith family album. LDS Church Archives.)

Nancy Abigail Clement Williams (1872-1954)

Fredrick Granger Williams's proposal of marriage came as such a surprise to Nancy Abigail Clement she "could have fell down." She had worked for Fred and his first wife Amanda for several months, but Nancy "never realized that he ever dreamed of loving me." After personally and prayerfully considering "a question of so great importance," she agreed to enter furtively into plural marriage, a marriage that would be kept absolutely secret for a time, since arrests and prosecution for cohabitation were then at their height.

Nancy Abigail Clement was born May 22, 1872, in New Harmony, Utah, a daughter of Darius Salem Clement and Louisa Kelsey. The Clements moved to Fairview, in central Utah, in 1874, and there Nancy first met Fredrick Granger Williams, farmer, miner, and namesake of an early Church leader. [^13] It would seem that most of Nancy's family, including her brothers Easton, Oliver, Jessie, Albert, and Orin, were unaware of her marriage, though her parents and her sister Elizabeth (Lizzie) were in on the secret.

At one point Nancy and Lizzie left Fairview to board a few miles away near the Ephraim Academy, where they had enrolled for classes. After nearly a year of traveling up and down the territory to avoid recognition as Fred's wife, Nancy joined Fred and Amanda and their children in a move to Colonia Dublan, one of the Latter-day Saint colonies in Mexico to which plural families had been moving to escape persecution. Despite her trials and hardships, Nancy remained cheerful and devoted to her husband and the Church.

The excerpt that follows is the first portion of Nancy's reminiscence and journal, written in a notebook along with some of her Ephraim Academy lessons. Nancy kept various notebooks throughout her life, many dealing with family genealogy, others with talks she heard, and some with her poetry and essays. The following selection is taken from the original holograph in the Historical Department of the Church. Minimal punctuation has been added.

Dublan (Mexico) Ward Primary in 1898, with Nancy Clement Williams, standing left of window, as second counselor. Caption written by Nancy reads: "Where I helped to mother all The Primary children in June before Estte was born in July." (LDS Church Archives.)

Jan 3rd [1889]. Eastons boy Sanford aged 3 years old died with croup, & I spent much of my time with them after that. The middle of Jan. I went with him & wife to Manti & tended the baby while they did work in the Temple. We were their a week, and after my return home, father & mother desired that I should board with some one in town & attend school the remainder of the winter. Several women were anxious for me to stay with them. But my parents wished me to go to F. G. Williams. This I feared would not suit their wishes. But father spoke to him & he said they had wished for a long time that I would come but thought it would be imposing on me to ask me to. One Sunday morning I took my clothing & went, prepared for school next morning. My Father gave me good advice as to what kind of company I kept & not keep late hours. Said he would not have any occasion to worry while I was stopping with them as they were very strict in their releigon. I attended school regular for 2 weeks when Easten sent for me to help them. Their baby was very sick & I remained with them a week, when I returned to school.

March 1st. Father decided to go to the temple to do work for his fathers family, & obtained a reccomend for me & all the children older. I mentioned it one Sunday morning to Fred W[illiams] stating that Easton & Oliver were going to be adopted to Father & Mother. [^14] He Jockingly ask if he could be adopted also. I suggested, that they had already more boy's than girls, & it would be more profitable to adopt girls. "Dont you understand my meaning, he ask," I told him no. He then ask me if I would marry him, & share my lot with his. This was such a surprize to me, I could have fell down. I never realized that he ever dreamed of loving me. I had found him to be a true Latter Day Saint, & had great respect for him & if I ever loved him I never would show it, because I thought he cared nothing for me. I told him it was a question of so great importance I could not answer him directly & ask him to give me untill the following day to answer; this he granted, & I sought unto the Lord earnestly to know if it was his will. Having received a testimony that he was the one destined to be my future husband I gave him the desired promise on the evening following.

No sooner had I done this than the powers of darkness tried to thwart my purposes, by discouraging me in every way. About 2 weeks later I was voted in as ass[t]. sec. in the Relief Society. I never dreamed of such a thing untill it was done. Then of course I was powerless to do any thing; but this was my first and greatest trial. I at first said I would not hold the position. The idea of a young girl only 16 and unmarried attending the married sisters meeting. [^15] I knew I would be the laughing stock of all my friends; & it would give more cause for suspiction that I was to be married. However I over came these feelings and attended the meetings & always took minutes, although I felt out of place.

March 25 1889. With my parents, brother Easton & wife & Oliver I went to Manti to do work in the temple. 26 recvd. baptism for my self and several of fathers sisters. 27 had the happy priviledge of receving my washings and anointing and the 2 following days received endowments for the dead. [^16] When the elders laid hands upon me for the reception of the Holy Ghost, during my confirmation I was told to keep my promise, and enter the path that had been opened for my footsteps, and keep sacred my covenants and great would be my reward. Said the Lord had heard my prayers, and was pleased with my course. This was a great satisfaction to me, and another strong testimony that I should enter the principle of Celestial Marriage, although it seemed a dark hour for the Saints, when persecution against that principle raged in its highest.

On our return home I made preperations to attend to April Con[ference] in Salt Lake City. My mother, Easton & wife a cousin and several friends were the happy number who started from home very early one morning, arriving S. L. at about 4 P.M. We had bedding & grub and stoped at the tithing house. The same evening I went to a theatre with Bro. Williams. While in the city the time was well spent, attending the various meetings. In the evening of the 8th I was sealed for time and eternity to F. G. Williams, the man of my choice. The same evening we attended a theatre. After it was out we took a short stroll to have a chance to talk, as he was to return home the next morning & I was going to take the train for Ogden. No one of our crowd knew of our marriage, untill the next day I informed my mother, that it had been accomplished, but she ask me no questions.

Next morning we gathered up our things, and went to the D[enver] & R[io] G[rand] R[ailwa]y depot to take the train for the penitentary. We were earlier than needed to be, & my sisterinlaw Malissa [Sanderson Clement] and my self went to Wm. Palmers, (my intended brotherinlaw's) where my mother was, she having staid their over night. At 7-30 we boarded the train and in a short time found our selves at the penitentary guard house, and a fierce wind blowing. At 11 we were escorted into Uncle Sams boarding house; and when the hugh iron doors closed behind us, it made me realize the responsibility I had just taken upon my-self, and a shiver went over me to see so many of our brethern mingling with so many criminals. We were seated in the dinning room, and the men called in that we wished to see. They were Eastons father-in law, H[enry] W[eeks] Sanderson, Bro. Rasmussen, and E. A. Day. We talked across a table with them for half an hour with one of the guards close by to over hear what we said. . . . [Travels to Ogden; returns to Fairview in April 1889. Engages in domestic service for several families in Fairview. Visits Fred at mining camp.]

Thursday [September ? 1889] Fred went to town, & came back Friday. Said Lizzie was going to Ephriam to school and thought it would be wise for me to go, and escape so much talk. They took me to a shingle mill, and I their got a chance to go on home with a coal team, but strangers to me, arriving home about 4 O clock. I ate some dinner, cleaned my self up and walked to town, got a new dress, underclothing aprons etc. That night and the next day we did up our sewing got all ready for school and the next morning with a crowd of young folks started for Ephriam. We rented a 2 roomed house of Bro. Willardsen; got our things all in, ate supper, then went to the tabernacle and heard a discourse from Wm. Palmer.

Next morning (Sept 9th. 1889) we entered the school house. The first day was spent in arranging classes, and pointing out the duties of students, making them acquainted with the rules of school. We all returned home with the blues, and had them for several days. Every thing looked to be such a task, and the Principal (Alma Greenwood) was such a stern man, with sharp black eyes that would look through a person; their was no getting around any of the lessons, nor any half way preparation; and we felt our weekness. As time wore on and we got acquainted with the students and teachers, we grew to love school. Many a night I have sat and studied until 3 O clock, & never retiring untill after midnight. Their were 9 of us, from Fairview, besides a cook. We had our own bedding, grub and paid the cook for doing all the work. We were allowed to go home every 2 and 3 weeks.

It was a month after I went before I got to see Fred. He happened to be in town on my second trip home. One day as we came out of school I saw his team tied to the wagon eating hay in the road, but did not see him. I did not say any thing about it, but one of the girls said she knew it was a team from home and would like to see the owner. When we got home I told Lizzie to find something to keep the girls with her & I would have an excuse to go to the store. I went to the Post office, then to the store, in hopes of seeing him. He passed the store while I was there with a load of coal, on his way to Manti. He nodded, and I returned it. And went home bluer than I came. Next morning the boys brought me a letter that had the Manti post mark on; they said they knew it was a love letter and they was going to read it. I had great difficulty in keeping it from them and had to burn it to do so. He composed some verses after he had passed me in the store. I wanted to keep them but could not.

One Thursday evening after school we were all out playing stink base for exercise. I got to chasing my cousin (Darius Sanders) & was determined to catch him. I run so hard that I had to sit down and rest. I turned faint and dizzy and had to go in and went to bed. I would chill awhile, then nearly burn up with fever all night. In the morning had a high fever. As soon as the drug store was opened, my cousin got me salts and quinnene, which I took, but threw it up as fast as they gave it to me. Lizzie bathed and soaked my feet, did all she could for me. She remained from school, also Darius, who went all over town to hire a buggie to take me home in. They were very uneasy at the thought of having me so far from home sick. At noon Al Cox came, and him and one of the brethren administered to me, which releived me some. About 4 O clock we started for home in Al's wagon; I had a bed between the seats.

It was just dark when we got into Fairview. The Y.L.M.I.A. were going to give a dance, and as Lizzie was president she remained in town but I went on home. As we were passing Freds shop I noticed a light, and knew he was over. I raised up so he could see me. He did, but did not know wether it was me or Lizzie. So he went to the dance and saw Lizzie, and knew it was me went home. He came their. We were all in bed but he staid untill almost daylight when he had to go. Next night he came again and went on home early next morning. Tuesday he came again and wanted me to go over with him next day. I went and when we were half way up the caynon we met Oliver, but I was under the cover so he did not see me. Next day he fixed up and moved to town. The rest of the week I helped them clean and get moved into the house. Sunday morning Jessie [Clement] took me to Ephriam in a cart. They were all glad to see me back again.

Nov. 15 was the last day of the term of school. I never hated to leave any place so bad in my life as I did their. The ties that endear one to those schools are hard to be broken. Only those who go can realize the trial it is to part from it. It was their I first received and bore testimony to the truth of the gospel. Many tears were shed that day, & I always have joy in thinking of the 9 weeks I spent in the Ephriam Accademy. [^17]

Nov. 18 th. Albert [Clement]s, and Mary Ann's first child was born, which they named for Lizzie and I.

Brother Easton was appointed a mission to the Southern States. Was to leave Dec 2nd. The evening of the 29th of Nov. they had his farewell party. In the after-noon I called at all of my brothers to see them the last time for a while. They ask if I was going to the party, I replied that I was. As soon as it was dark I gathered up a bundle of my clothing, Bade father good bye, peeked through the window at my younger brothers and with Lizzie and Mother started to town. As soon as we had got to Freds, he had a team and wagon, ready to take me to Thistle Station. We started about 9 Oclock, arriving their just as day was breaking. To avoid being seen he drove the team about a mile up the track behind the hills. About 9 O clock he went to the ticket office & got my ticket and at 4 O clock drove the wagon as near the station as he could to be safe. As soon as the train came, I went and boarded it, but I had a thick veil over my face, so no one recognized me.

It was 10 O clock when the train reached Ogden. I had been through the city twice before, going and returning from Plain City. The old depot buildings that were their in the spring were removed for large new ones, and instead of the train stopping on the east side as it did before, it stopped on the west. I had been turned around all day, and when I got out of the cars, I was afraid I was lost. Their were no Street cars, or cab's of any kind to take any one up town. I earnestly prayed for the Lord to guide me for I realized He was me only guardian. I started to go east, as I was supposed it was, but found my-self lost among a few scattered houses; and could see tramps bumming around. I entered a house and told the lady I was lost, ask her to show me where the Broom Hotel was. She escorted me around the large buildings where the electric lights made it visible for me to realize where I was. On leaving the train I [had] started west for east, and had it not been for the kind lady I would have wandered around, and probably been insulted by some wretch; as the city was full of rough characters.

As soon as I started up town I realized where I was and went east untill I came to Broom Hotel, then turned north. By this time the lights had gone out. The stores all closed, and only a few police-men and people, whom I suspected had been visiting houses of ill fame were seen on the street. These scanned me as I passed, but I hurried on, and when I came to George A. Lowe's machine shop I knew the next place was my father in law's [Dr. Ezra Granger Williams]. I knocked and went in. They were just retiring. I gave them a letter Fred had sent, and went to bed. As soon as I had got into bed I had to give vent to my feelings in tears. To think how risky it was for me to find his place so late at night, all alone; made me feel very much my dependence on my Heavenly Father. Next morning the doctor ask me how I got from the depot. When I told him it almost made him vexed at Fred for not sending him word so he could have some one meet me. I remained with them and did their work, never went out in town. Went by the name of Maggie Granger, and was only known to Ezra [Jr.] and wife, & the doctor and his wife.

Dec. 11 Fannie Budge (Freds sister) gave birth to a son and died Jan 1st. The Dr. and wife were with her most of the time, during her illness, which left me alone with the hired boy. Several nights I was all alone. The day she was buried I rode with Hyrum [Williams] in a cutter to Pleasant View many of the people thought I was his wife. We returned to Ogden the same day. Two days after her funeral, Fred came. Had heard nothing of her death untill he got their. My brother Orien was with them, but he did not knew of my whereabouts untill he saw me their. The next day they went on to Pleasant View. The next day Fred came back to Ogden and the next evening I went with him to Pleasant View to help clean up. I could not own relationship with Orin, and said I came from Dixie. The people in Fairview thought I was in Dixie. I wrote to the girls as though I was at my grandmothers. These letters I sent inside a large envelope. He understood my situation, and would post my letters at his office, and send them on to Fairview. Of course their would letters come back to me in his care & he would send them to me. I wrote to my brothers in the same way but to my parents, Fred would address the letters to Bro Peter Sundwall, and he understood that they were for them, and ma would have him address all her letters to Fred.

Feb. 21st. Attended the Weber Stake conference. 22nd. Went to Pleasant View with Sam. Ferrin to keep house for Thomas Budge. Kept the 3 oldest children; Mandy [Amanda] had the baby. [^18] I could get to see the folks real often here; and often Fred would come at night when the children were all asleep and stay until almost morning.

April 5th. I took the children to Freds, and took care of all the children while him and Amanda went to Salt Lake to Con[ference]. Next day John Mower from Fairview called to see Fred. I went in the bed room & had the priviledge of peeking through the key hole at him. Soon after this I went to Ogden where I met Lizzie who had been in Salt Lake working for Edward Anderson, & had moved with them to Ogden where she still worked. I staid with the Dr. nearly 2 weeks, helped clean house. One Saturday night Lizzie and I went to Pleasant View with Fred. She returned early monday morning but I staid untill Tues morning (May 2nd.) when I went with Fred before daylight to Ogden. We got in town very early. I went & saw Lizzie for a few minutes, then back to Ezra's. Ezra and his father soon came to see me, and Fred took me to depot in buggie. Here he saw president [Wilford] Woodruff who told him to go to Mexico as soon as possible. . . . [More travel to Fairview, Salt Lake City and Pleasant View.]

We remained here untill July 7th. When we removed into Ogden into a house back of the Dr's. barn. We were very busy preparing for our journey to Mexico. Lizzie came with her things from Fairview. I went to Plain City and spent a week with my folks their. When I returned home Lizzie went & spent several days. On the morning of the 7th of Aug we bade the folks good bye & was on our way for Mexico. We had arranged to leave Ogden at 12. thus arrive in Thistle in the afternoon. My mother went from Fairview (28 miles[)] to get to see us once more. But through mistake we had to leave at 7 in the morning. Thus when she came to Thistle she found we had gone, which has always been a sore disapointment. Orien got off here & went home with her. We had a long tiresome journey. Flora [May Williams] took sick the first day out and gradually grew worse, untill when we arrived in Deming [New Mexico] on the 10th, She was unable to walk at all. Heber & Joe Farr met us here & took us to where his father [Winslow] had rented rooms. We all piled in a small house (5 small rooms). Their were 31 in all (Bro Farr's 2 famileys) Brigham Binghams 2 families, Bro [William] Staker & wife and our family. We were here for 2 weeks. Flora got very low with spinal disease, her hair all came out and their were large holes in the back of her head.

21st. We left Deming for Diaz, [^19] Br Farr leaving his wife Tilda in Deming. The first day out was very pleasant, but the second day was mud to the wagon hubs some times. Those of the women & children who could walked. The drivers pulled off their shoes & socks, rolled up their pants and waded by their teams. The rest of the journey was very pleasant. We traveled with a Bro. David Wilson who was out to Deming from Diaz for provisions. We arrived in Diaz on the 26th. Mud houses & mud fences; the street full of Mosqueat, oh what a home sick crowd. No homes & we could not use our own things untill they were inspected, and there was a large river between us and Assencion the place where the custom house was. We drove our wagons to the very southern skirts of the town to the guard house where a Mexican could watch us. We were then permitted to go with Bro. Wilson to his house where he gave us his large front room. We were here several days when the guard let us have one tent and stove & a few articles. In a few days the river was down enough so the officers could come over and inspected our goods. We then pitched our tents back of Steven Wilson's house. Only 5 tents in all. Ours was 16 by 30 ft. But we found the country two windy & in such a rainy season as it was that year. We found our tent more convenient after it was cut down. For it blew down several times & left us without shelter.

My sister took sick the day we got in Diaz and two days after I came down with Typhoid Maleria. She gradually grew worse until the morning of the 12th of Sept. she passed away. I was recovering by this time; but this was a terrible blow. Only such a short time since we left our home & parents. In a strange land among strangers. Only 5 teams to the funeral; no friends to mourn with us. No one to speak of her good qualities as they had known her in life. We could only write to them the sad news; which was a very trying ordeal for mother & those at home. Fred went back to Deming for the rest of our furniture & clothes. On his return the men all went up the Casas Grandes river to look for homes.

In Dec. Fred again went to Deming & Josie [Sarah Josephine Williams] & my self went with him to get clothing. Here we met Philip H. Hurst & family on their way to Mexico. On our return we packed up our wagons to remove south. We were loaded in our wagons ready to start in the morning, & during the night several inches of snow had fallen. Our baby took sick who was then about 3 mts old; (Kathena Hazel born Oct 21 1890). [^20] Will. Staker had not pulled his tent down & we keep her in by their stove. Flora and Joseph also took sick, & for 2 weeks, we were up night & day, the elders & apostle George Teasdale often comming to administer. [^21] Patriarch Benjeman Johnson who had been acquainted with Fred's grandfather F. G. Williams came to see us and gave me the following blessings. . . . [Nancy was promised children, "the blessings of the earth," opportunities to help the needy, and wisdom.]

Jan 18th 1891. Hazel being much better we started for Dublan arriving their on the 22. The town site had been laid out and we chose a block near the center of town & pitched our tent on the grass which was thick enough to make a nice carpet. At this time our tent was the largest room in town and we very often had pleasant gatherings. On the 29th of March following we had a surprise party for Fred it being his 38th birthday. I put on a play.

April 30th. Fred hoisted our wind mill (The eclipse) which he had bought in Deming.

May 10. I was set apart to act as teacher in the Sunday School of the Sanfrancisco branch of the Juarez Ward, by Joseph H. Wright. May 11 we had a surprize party in honor of Winslow Farr it being his 54th birthday.

May 20 A gentle gale came up and upset our tent as we were eating dinner, breaking the ridge poll & several others; riddling it so far as not to be able to live in it any longer. We borrowed a small tent to put our stove table etc in & moved our beds and the rest of the things in the shop (blacksmith's). He had one or two loads of lumber to build with and he hurried to get the house built and on June 23rd.1891 it was for enough completed so that we moved into it, & it seemed like a palace to us after living in a tent so long. Fred lost one of his horses while on the mt. for lumber, & he got one of Edison Porters to put with the other one.

July 19 1891. Apostle George Teasdale met with the Saints and Set apart Winslow Farr as Bishop in the Dublan ward. 22nd. F. G. Williams, was set apart as 1st. councler & N. H. Hurst as sec. counclor.

Aug. 5th. The first store (Mr. Halls) was opened in Dublan, in the new Pratt House.

Aug 11th. Rebecca A. and Ella Hurst went teaching, being the first to visit as R. S. teachers.

Aug 15 91. The Y.M.Y.L.M.I.A's and the S[unday] S[chool] were reorganized. I was set apart as sec. counclor to Kate Porter in the Y L.M.I.A. by George Teasdale. He gave me one of the best blessings I ever heard, said that my labors among the young should be one of love, & that I would be a blessing unto them, in giving unto them words of wisdom and council. Said my tongue should be loosed, and I should speak as with the voice of an angell. Was set apart the same evening to act as teacher in the S.S.

The same day the first Deacons quorum was organized with Heber E. Farr President, James Hurst first and Albert Mortensen second counclors.

Sept 5th 6 7th. The first conference in the Mexican Mission was held in Juarez. The meeting house at that place was dedicated also.

Sept 23. Peter Mc.Bride & wife Laura came & stayed over night.

" 25. Being Sunday Fred, Amanda myself, Lizzie [Amanda Elizabeth Williams], & Josie all fasted and prayed in my behalf that I might bear children, as I had often felt down-cast that the Lord had not blessed me with children. We did not eat any thing untill at night, when my husband anointed me with oil and blessed me that I might have the desires of my heart, & him also. The Lord heard and answered our prayers, for it was not a week untill I became aware that I was to become a mother. Amanda was just like a mother to me, would not let me make even my own bed, do a lick of washing or ironing or any thing that she thought would injure me. Her own feelings were sacrificed and she only thought of others happiness. About Xmas time Al Cox came from Fairview and brought a lot of fruit my parents had sent. We had a very dry windy winter, no feed on the range and our stock wandered off in search of food, leaving us without milk, & with only a little flour corn meal, beans, & pork.

March 17th. Ezra & Hyrum Williams came with Fred whom had been in Diaz and met them their. They brought a lot of things from ma, which they found in the Deming P. O. We were very glad to see them. But we had about a week of the windiest weather I ever saw. They remained untill the latter part of April when they left & Fred went with them to Sonora where they parted Fred comming home alone, & when in sight of home his other horse died, leaving him without a team.

March 25. Caroline Buchannan gave birth to a pair of twins (a boy & girl, Archie Earl & Carrie Mearl) the first born in Dublan. Fred waited on her this being his first outside his own family.

May 25 1892. In the evening. wensday at 17 minutes to 10 Oclock I gave birth to a little 4# daughter (Premature 1 mt.) She was welcomed by all & when 8 days old her father gave unto her the name of Louie Bell. She was such a poor delicate little thing, only gaining Â¼# the first mt. After that I gave her the bottle to nurse and she grew better.

Sept 4 92. Amanda and all the children started for Arizona to visit her mother & folks. Fred worked on the cain mill and got molasses to last us a year. He had raised over 200 bu of wheet that season. Also it was in Sept. that Sis. Thompson & little boy were killed by Indians at Cave Valley.

Dec 4th. 92. My grandmother Abigail Kelsey died at her home in New Harmony, Utah.

In Dec. Fred started for Arizona for the folks, having sold his wind mill for a team to Willard Mortensen. Fred and folks arrived Jan. 8 1893. The Bishop was in Utah and it left the ward affairs all for Fred. He being very desirous to keep the young from failing into errors & from doing wrong constantly earged them to do wright, and some who were inclined to do as they pleased, reguardless of council tried by slander and every way possible to injure his character & that of his family's. But wright is wright; & the Lord assisted us with his holy Spirit to endure through those dark moments; & we had a chance to prove our friends; & those who were on the side of truth and honesty.

Ruth May Fox (1853-1967)

When Ruth May Fox died in Salt Lake City in 1967, she was Utah's oldest living resident, with grandchildren, great-grandchildren, and great-great grandchildren numbering 282. Even a cursory reading of the record she kept as she approached her own "middle age" raises the question of how one who moved so fast could live so long. This particular segment of her diary shows her intense involvement in Utah politics as the territory became a state, a state with constitutionally enfranchised women, much to the delight of ardent suffragist Ruth May Fox. Ever present in this diary segment also is Ruth's activity in the Latter-day Saint organizations for women: the Relief Society, Young Ladies Mutual Improvement Association, and Primary Association. Some thirty-six years later, in 1929, at the age of seventy-five, she was appointed general president of the Young Women's MIA.

Born in Westbury, England, November 16, 1853, Ruth May was a daughter of Mary Ann Harding and James May. After she came to the United States she worked in a Philadelphia factory with her father to earn money for the trip to Zion, and then hiked across the plains beside the wagon she and her father shared with twelve other persons. Her marriage in 1873 to Jesse Williams Fox, Jr., brought twelve children and more prosperous times, though the addition of a second wife in 1888 and the coming of nationwide depression a few years later curtailed some of that prosperity.

A hopeful and energetic writer, Ruth May Fox wrote and published poetry. She was active in the Utah Women's Press Club, founded in 1891 by some of Utah's leading women writers, Emmeline B. Wells, Susa Young Gates, and Louisa Lula Greene Richards. Associating with these accomplished women made her aware of her own educational limitations, so she enrolled in university courses and correspondence classes and studied a great deal on her own. She wrote the texts for several hymns and songs, the best remembered of which is "Carry On," the MIA anthem.

[Women's Voices, page 374-375

Ruth May Fox at age 33 (1888) with seventh child. From "My Story," by Ruth May Fox, comp. (Leonard Grant Fox, copy of typescript with photos. LDS Church Archives.)

The life of Ruth May Fox is recorded in her own comprehensive autobiography, "My Story." The following selection from her diary covers only a few months in 1894-95, but it well represents the vigor, awareness, and involvement that characterized her long and productive life. The selection has been taken from the original holograph in the Historical Department of the LDS Church, with daily entries set off and minimal punctuation added, including periods after entry dates. [^22]

Dec 1894

Sun. 30. Was invited to Dr E[llen] Fergusons where some ladies met to complain of the way they had been treated by the Ter[ritorial] Board of U[tah] W[oman] S[uffrage] A[ssociation]. Questioned the legality of the elections of officers etc. I gained some experience at that time. Made a mistake in signing letter requesting the calling of another convention, although I did it with the best of feelings toward Sister [Emmeline B.] Wells. [^24] What [went] to meeting in the evening. Bro Stevenson occupied the entire evening.

Jan 1 1895. Snowing. Jet and I called on Mrs W. C. Morris, Father, Uncle Gid. Went in cutter. Fine sleighing.

Jan 2. Met E. B. Wells. Had a talk on the sufferage question. Paid my yearly fee.

3d. Very busy making dresses for S. School party. Clara was here and spent the afternoon.

Fri 4th. Got children off to party. Went late to Emily Clawsons to Primary O[fficers] meeting to arrange about Miss Chapin's [kindergarten] Class which was imediately afterward. [^26] I remained and enjoyed it.

Sat 5. In the afternoon went to Mrs. [Phoebe Louisa Young] Beatty's tea she gave to help raise funds to send delegate to Atlanta.

Mon 7. Went to R[eapers] C[lub] in the afternoon and Y[oung] L[adies] meeting in eve, which met at S. Rockwells. Was asked to write for their paper. Called at Georgie [Fox Young]'s going home to see Lylie about taking part in a Primary entertainment.

Wed. 9. Very busy. Peral. E. left. Daisy and I did work. Attended Ter[ritorial] S[uffrage] executive meeting. I refused to withdraw my name from the letter because the ladies I signed with were not present with the exception of Mrs. F. S. Richards. It was quite late when I returned home being to late for supper.

Thurs. 11 [10]. Frank was sick to day, did not go to Primary. Borrowed $10.00 from Mrs Wimley for Jettie to get his glasses.

Fri. 12 [11]. Worked hard. At 4 o'clock went to Miss Chapins class. Came home in time to get supper. 4 of the children have gone to a party at Mrs. Pollocks.

Sat. 13 [12]. Hurryed all day to get to the club and found it was not to be untill the 15th.

Sunday. Went to hear Miss Phebe Cousin's lecture on the Silver Conspiracy which she did in a very able manner. Jet went also.

Tues. Went to sufferage meeting in the afternoon and P[ress] Club in the evening.

Fri 18 [January]. Miss Chapin class was dismissed as the members were all falling off.

Sat. Worked very hard all day. In the evening finished writing the Ten Virgins.

[Women's Voices, page 377 [February 1895]

Feb 9th. Have been too busy to remember my journal when I might have taken time to write in it. Jan 29 went to Relief Society. Sister E[lmina] S Taylor spoke to us asking our faith and prayers as she was going to Washington to represent the young ladies. [^27] Tues Feb 5 Went to S[uffrage] A[ssociation]. Heard Prof Stewart and S. B. Young also a Mr Adams from N[orth] D[akot]a on sufferage. Tried to vote down petition but failed. Feb 8th Went to Sister E Stevenson's birthday party. Had a glorious time. Sister B[athsheba] Smith and Helen [Mar Kimball] Whitney were present. Sister Sarah Phelps spoke in tounges [tongues] with great power insomuch that the floor and the chairs and our limbs trembled. She blessed Sister Whitney who was an invalid for years. Said we should know a year hence whether God spoke or not. The sisters laid hands on Sister W. and prayed for her speedy recovery Sister N[ettie] C Taylor being mouth.

Fri 15. Went to Weiler Horne's funeral. In the evening tended S[alt] L[ake] Co[unty] Sufferage Ass[ociation] entertainment to celebrate Susan B. Anthony's birthday.

Sat eve. Went to P[ress] Club. Sister [Ellis R.] Shipp had gone to Washington. I was chosen to represent the club at the [Utah] Federation [of Women's Clubs].

Sun 17. I have been to evening meeting. Bro Eli Pierce told us that general Carter of Industrial Army fame on the day of his departure made these remark[s]: That slaves were rising up against their masters and would shortly plunge the U. S. in blood. That it was but the sequel to the Civil War. Being a fulfillment of J[oseph] Smith's prophecy (or words to that effect). [^28]

Fri. 22. Last Monday at the Reapers Club we voted to send 50 ct apiece as a birthday present to Sister E B Wells who is now in Washington.

Tue. Went to suffrage meeting. We decided to inteview the delegates to the Constitutional convention. Sister Ella Hyde and myself were appointed to see Samuel Hill Richard Lambert and Mr Vanhorne. On thursday attended Primary and changed my name so that it would go on the minutes, from Polly to Ruth M. I thought it would prevent confusion in the future. To-day the children are out of school and I want to do some sewing if I can get time.

24th Sunday. Sick had cramps.

Mon 25. I interviewed delegates. Mr Hill was favorable. Mr Vanhorn did not think the constitution was the place for sufferage to come up. Went to see Mrs [Emma J.] McVicker about the federation. [^29] I forgot to write that last Friday night Jet told me he was going to the store and he did not come home till next day. I was quite worried was afraid something had happened to him. I don't like to be treated that way.

[Women's Voices, page 378 [March 1895]

I am afraid there are many little incidents my journal will not get. I am so busy I do not get time to attend to it but to day the 6th of March I attended the Federation bussiness meeting. This morning and this afternoon a reception given to the delegates, both at the Women's industrial home. [^30] Everything went along nicely. I was appointed one of a committee to organize womans clubs throughout the territory, but declined. My home duties are too pressing. Two subjects of the Press Clubs were accepted for discussion at the May meeting in Ogden. Yesterday attended Suff. Meeting.

Mon. Gave my paper [about] Herbert Spencer and Frances Hodgson Burnett at the Reapers.

Sat 2nd. Called at Georgie's. The sewing class met there. Had refreshments then went to Dr. R[omania] Pratt about the Federation.

Fri. Attended Mrs C E Dye's Funeral.

Mar 11. Was called to a meeting on the sufferage question at S[arah] M. Kimballs but could not remain it being to near the dinner hour.

Sat 16th. Had a pleasant time at the Club. Mrs E B Wells and Dr. Shipp gave interesting accounts of their visit to the East. [^32]

17th. Bro Brigham Young [Jr.] spoke this evening. His theme was to not mix to much with outsiders.

Mon 18th. Met with S. A. in convention at city and county building. Drafted memorial being one of the committee.

Friday. Am invited to meet the committee in the Probate Court room, when I hope to see inside of State Convention Hall.

Fri 22. Met with committee and decided to ask for a room not now in use for the purpose of holding public meetings for ladies, of course.

Thur 28. A very rainy day but I attended the convention to hear the debate on the sufferage question. Mr. B. H. Roberts was very eloquent but his only argument was that he thought it [woman suffrage] would defer Statehood.

April 1st. O dear I have worn myself out to-day. Have been to the convention all day and stood up all the time with the exception of a little while that I sat on the table. Mr Roberts was to give his oration but did not have time so it went over fill next day. What a shame he does not use his eloquence in a better cause.

2nd. Attended W. S. meeting. Dr Ferguson thought if we had petitioned it would have been a benefit but we shall see.

Wed 3d. Was called out suddenly to circulate petitions. Met with good success.

Thurs 4. Went with petitions a little while again but did so dislike to visit the business block.

Fri. Press Club met in the evening. Had a pleasant time. Adjourned early to discuss the sufferage question. Everyone present and there were some gentlemen, expressed themselves as being in favor of its being adobted and put in the constitution. The article giving women the Franchise passed in the convention to day 75 to 13 but it is expected to be brought up again so I am afraid the fight is not over.

Sat afternoon. Attended conference. Bro [Lorenzo] Snow and Bro [James E.] Talmage addressed us.

Sun. I went to conference both meetings. The First Presidency occupied the time.

Tue. Went to mutual [Improvement Association].

Wed 9. Have been arround again with petitions to find out who are willing the sufferage clause should remain in the Constitution. Met with very good success.

Apr 14 Sunday. Jette is 21 to-day. Should like to have remembered him but did not feel able.

15th. Clara's birthday. Made her a call after Reapers Club. Also attended P[ress] C[lub] called for the purpose of considering wether we should entertain officers of Federation.

Tues. Attended S[uffrage] Ass.

Thur. As usual went to Primary.

[Women's Voices, page 381 [May 1895]

May 1st. Have been very busy housecleaning. With that exception nothing of importance has happened to me personally although the air seems full of misfortune, excepting the entertaining of the Federation Officers. We had a very pleasant time but was greatly disappointed on account of Sister E B. Wells being unable to attend also Dr Ellis Shipp, so we had to do the best we could. I was chosen to preside.

Sun. May 19th. So many things have happened since I wrote last. In fact I have been too busy to write. There was the reception given to the delegates to Constitutional Convention, at the Templeton [Hotel] which I attended and enjoyed very much. Then the visit of Susan B. Anthony and the Rev. Anna Shaw whom we met at the depot last Sunday morning on the 12th. [^34] We had breakfast at the Templeton, about 40 of us, and then had a nice ride arround the city using the Utah and other carriages then it was meeting meeting meeting which I enjoyed very much and now comes the meeting of the Federation of Clubs in Ogden to which I am the delegate from the Reapers. We go on the 22nd.

May 27. The meeting of the Federation was a success in every way. The topics were particularly fine. The one by Anna K. Hardy and Lizzie Wilcox being very creditable to our clubs. I was made a director of the Federation. Our Press Club met Fri. 24th. I was chosen on a debate, "Is the double standard of money the one for America?" I am to take the negative side.

[Women's Voices, page 381-382 [June 1895]

Sat June 15. The Press Club was entertained by Mrs J Cameron Brown. We had a pleasant time. I wrote for the occasion Two sides of a question which I read and they seemed to enjoy.

16th. We visited Aunt Prudie her son Gid being very sick.

Sat 22. Went to both meettings of Primary Conference.

Mon June 24. Started to the summer school at the University [of Utah]. Am taking Grammar and English Literature. Do hope I shall make a success of it. Shall have to work very hard to keep up in Grammar.

[Women's Voices, page 382 [July 1895]

July Sun 14. Nothing of importance has happened excepting that the Republican women are forming leagues. [^36] I have been made Treasurer of the Ter organization. I do hope they will not engender bad feelings in their division on party lines. For my part I care nothing for politics. It is mormonism or nothing for me.

Wed. I am to recite at Saltair [^37] for the R. S. I do hope I shall do it creditably.

July 21. Well I went on the excursion. Gave one of my own pieces and I guess I did allright as so many people wanted a copy.

Sat the 20. I was invited with some other ladies to meet with the gentlemens Co[unty?] Republican Committee. We had a very nice meeting. In the evening the ladies Republican League called a meeting which I attended. This afternoon, Sun, I went to the Tabernacle.

24 July. Pioneer day. Went with Jet to the Lake. Had a bath.

Fri 26th. I was officially notified that I was one of the ladies chosen on the S[alt] L[ake] Co[unty] R[epublican] Committee.

[Women's Voices, page 383 [August 1895]

Aug 23. Since last writing I have been chosen one of the ladies to act on the reception committee [for] Republican Day at Saltair which meets Mon. 26. Yestreday 22, attended Salt Lake Co. Convention. Was there till 3 oclock in the morning. I nominated Mrs. Wells for the [state] House which was carried. Mrs. Lillie Pardee carried for the Senate. [^38] Today Emma Empy and myself went to Farmington to a Rep. Convention.

[Women's Voices, page 383 [September 1895]

Sept 1st. I am so busy that I almost forget my journal. Bro Fox and I went to the Lake Republican day. Had a very pleasant time. Tues. 27 of Aug. eve I went to speak in the sixth Ward on registration. Fri. 30th I went to Brigham City with Sister E B Wells to organize a R[epublican] Womens Club. We returned home with Jet who had been to Preston [Idaho] the following day we had a meeting in the Opera House. Staid with Bro. Rich and had a very pleasant time. Today I have been home all day. There was no one to stay with the children so did not go to meeting. I have been invited to speak at the Re[publican?] Ratification to morrow eve. My speeches as yet are very short, not being accustomed to it.

Sept 12. The Y[oung] Ladies M[utual] held their Annl [unclear] this eve. here.

Sept 15. Since I last wrote I have been to Payson Spanish Fork and to American Fork to attend Republican meetings. I also went to speak in the 13 Ward Tues the 10th but did not do very well. I felt very timid. Frank J. Cannon was at this meeting, so I was too frightened to speak. [^39] I forgot to state that I was made chairman of the 2nd precinct ladies republican club. I did not want it but because I was a Mormon they wanted me to take it. We were organized Aug 8th 1895.

Sept 17. Gave report of 2nd Precinct in the Grand Opera House where the Republican ladys held a meeting.

Sept 23. Went to South Cottonwood Ward with Mrs E B Wells to talk Republicanism.

[Women's Voices, page 384 [October 1895]

Oct 8. Held a very successful meeting in the 2nd precinct serving refreshments at the close.

Oct 12. Attended Reapers Club. I happened to give in as a current event, [Orlando W.] Powers play against the Priesthood for the democratic party, but withdrew it as our club is divided in politics and some of the ladies thought we should take no note of it on that account. [^40] But I think it quite serious.

Sun 20. Mrs Evans has come to pay me a visit. She is 86 yrs old and nearly blind.

Sat 26. Took part in the ladies Republican parade which was a great success. [in margin] Mrs Brown rode alone in a chariot in this parade.

Mon 28. Attended Reapers Club. Again a democratic member had a chance to defend judge Powers.

Oct Tues 29. Discontinued the meetings of the Womens R[epublican] League.

[Women's Voices, page 385 [added later between entries] At this meeting Bro Roberts posed as a blacksmith being [unclear] with a red kerchief round his neck.

Nov Fri 1st. The republican ladies met at my home today to see what we could do about a lunch for the workers on election day and this evening I have been to the theatre to hear B H Roberts speak on democracy. Some of his remarks I enjoyed. Some I could have wept over.

Day before yestreday Bro George Q Cannon was accused of saying a certain thing in Box Elder in a sermon he preached there which he promptly denied and afterward he was told that he did say it by some of the brethren. Though he could not remember it he accepted their statement and made a public acknowledgment and withdrawal. [^41] I feel very sorry for him and I felt sorry for Roberts when he said the Church had meddled in politics and he cared not who the meddler was he should be branded as an enemy to the Church and a traitor to the State.

Sat 2. Went to Young ladies in the morning, officers meeting. In the afternoon went to the Walker Pavillion. Settled the affairs of the precinct Rep. Club and found we did not have to serve lunch as the candidates wives were going to attend to it. In the evening went to East Bountiful to speak at a Republican meeting, but did not make myself know[n]. Mrs Clark who should have been there not being forthcomming I staid all night with Elisabeth Fox and visited Jessie Stringham and Eva Grant returning in the afternoon.

Mon eve 4. Went to Rep. Rally in the theatre.

Tues eve. It is election day. Have been to the Y.L.M.I.A. Do not know as yet how it will turn out but do not care much. Beleive we have got Statehood assured so far as the vote is concerned and that means sufferage for women.

Relief Society and Woman's Day at Saltair, ca. 1896. (Charles R. Savage, photographer. LDS Church Archives.)

Rebecca Elizabeth Howell Mace (1833-1917)

"I want you to take my place by the side of my husband, and [be] a mother to my two children." At the request of his dying wife, Rebecca Elizabeth Howell married Wandle Mace in June 1854. Rebecca's decision was made in haste but not without sufficient thought. Throughout the several volumes of her diary written in the 1890s, Rebecca seems well satisfied with the course her life has taken since her marriage as a young woman on the Plains.

Born December 23, 1833, in Norfolk, England, Rebecca was a daughter of John and Sarah Thompson Howell. She was baptized in 1851, and after immigrating to the United States, she found housekeeping work to defray her expenses to Utah. Wandle and Margaret Merkle Mace were among her employers. After Margaret's death and Rebecca's marriage to Wandle, the family—including two of the children, George and Jane—spent some time at Sandusky, Iowa, where they built a mill, then later moved on to Council Bluffs. They came to Utah in 1858.

In 1861 Wandle was called by Brigham Young to take his family and help settle southern Utah. After remaining "twice five years," the family picked up stakes and moved to Kanab, where they raised cattle and maintained the "finest vineyard and orchard" in the town.

Rebecca conscientiously kept both a diary and a journal. She had a mind for accuracy and detail and left blanks for exact names, ages, years, and such when she was unsure of the facts. In addition to her own records, she wrote the "Autobiography of Wandle Mace," a 252-page document "Written as near as possible as told by himself to the writer." Her diary entries often refer to her progress with this work.

After the death of Wandle Mace in 1889, Rebecca remained in Kanab, happily involved with her stepchildren and neighbors and active in the Church. Always interested in learning about the gospel, she recorded her opinions on discourses she heard. Not always agreeing with the brethren, she sometimes sent them her own interpretations of various subjects.

The original holographs of her records and those of her husband are located in the Historical Department of the LDS Church. Minimal punctuation has been added here for clarification.

Rebecca Mace. (Mace family collection.)

[Women's Voices, page 388 [1895]

March [1895]. It is a long time since I wrote in any journal since the last time on the 28th Dec that I visited the cemetery. Almost three months have fled. Colds and severe cough visited me at the commencement of the New Year and lasted with me so long that I became very weak, I had refrained from my usual beverage 'Tea' for several weeks had quite overcome, but the weakness of my body was so great I took a cup of Tea to stimulate me above the terrible feeling & it had the desired effect and I have continued in its use until now. It has to be done over again. I must again overcome the habit. We are told it is not good then why cling to an evil habit.

I have visited the grave yard again on Sunday, between the afternoon meeting and Sunday School conference, with Sister Jensen a Sister from Orderville who has spent the winter in Kanab and have been at my house quite frequently. She is very deaf and it is very difficult to talk with her. I advised her to use the New Hygeine treatment and she felt much benefitted.

We had a good Conference. The speakers were mostly Young men, three of those young men were especially interesting. They were Elder Meeks and Elders E & A Cutler. I was very much surprised and edified. These young men were raised in the Kanab Stake, I had not thought that we had such talent in our Stake, but I now believe there are many who if oppertunity offered would be bright and valient for the cause of truth.

On the first of March Friday the R[elief] S[ociety] held conference. President [Artemisia] Segmiller Presiding. One of her counsellors E. Pugh was present. The necessity of providing money for the expenses of our representative Sisters in travelling and otherwise to the conventions of the National R.S. was spoken of and also the requirement of 200 dollars per 3 years to be contributed to the national fund. [^42] It was necessary for this Stake to contribute by its R.S.s the larger wards one dollar yearly, the smaller Societies 50 cents to have funds to meet all expences of this kind. The members were severally invited to speak upon the subject myself one of the number. I spent much times at Ada [Rhoda Maria Howell Judd]'s. [^43] She is quite weak. The General Stake Conference convened on the 2 & 3rd March 1895.

On the 4th & 5 Horse racing took place just out of town about miles. Or as some expressed it the After Conference.

On the 7th the R S meet in a general monthly meeting. There was a good attendence and a good spirit prevailed. Sister Harriet Brown was called upon and she opened upon the evils of Horse racing, and all the sisters sustained her in her position. The Maoris Sisters spoke and Elder B Hamlin interpreted also addressed the meeting. Endorsed the remarks of the sisters upon horse racing betting & gamblin in general.

10th Sunday attended meeting after which Jane [Mace Ford] & I went to George [Mace]'s read a letter from John. He is very pleasant in his correspondence so far. The moon looks very peculiar, or like blood, it was a total eclipse.

14 With about 22 or 3 other members of R S provided with Pic nick, surprised Sister Rider and spent the day with her sewing her carpet rags.

15th Went to Ada's and ironed for her. Her babe was born on the th Feb a girl 5Â½ lb.

17 Sunday We had an excellent discourse from President Paxman of the Juab Stake. He spoke of duties as stepping stones and touched upon every duty in a short concise and spirited manner. Of the work for the dead he said the time was near when the Temple would be filled night & day with workers for the dead so anxious were the dead to be released from prison, that the names of our dead would be revealed to us that we may go forward and perform this work.

Spoke upon tithing word of wisdom, Politics horse racing card playing gambling etc. Spoke of the necessity of the reading those precious books—holding in his hands the Book of Mormon & Doctrine and Covenants—by the young men and women telling them of the great work they will have to perform before very long. He said, "There are young women before me who with others of the Sisters will go forth to gather in the destitute females who need succor and bring them in and take care of them." He said a good deal more than this, and he said it in the name of the Lord.

After meeting by invitation I attend a gathering of the Judd family at the house of Eli Judd. They met in the order of a club for mutual improvement. The father of the family Z[adok] K[napp] Judd presiding, the youngest daughter Gertrude acting as secretary.

18th Wrote letters to Sisters Swapp & Trump. I spent an hour very pleasantly with L Cutler & Wife.

19 Helped Ada.

20th This morning Bro J Lewis came to invite me to a birthday dinner at his daughters Ida Young it being the 63rd anniversary of the birth of his Wife Emily J Lewis.

Sister Lewis said I intended to spend the day with Sister Mace, and I want her here with me." I went and visited with them until sundown. . . .

[Women's Voices, page 391 [January 1896]

1896 Opened auspiciously for Utah and its inhabitants. On the 4th January 1896 President Cleaveland issued a Proclaimation admitting Utah into the Sisterhood of States. As soon as the message was recieved 2 oc. PM Guns were fired, Flag hoisted, Bands played, Shouts of joy arose from the heart and lips of all, with ringing of bells and everything which could be used to sound a note of joy was brought into requisition.

Some of our young men formed themselves into a military company calling themselves the Home Guard, and with the Martial Band—George Mace—leader marched and counter marched, serenading prominent men, also Brother Warren Johnson who had been seriously injured a few weeks before from being thrown off a load of hay, breaking his back. He was delighted with the call declaring it done him much good. And thus the day was made one of general rejoicing, from the moment the telegram arrived, never had all Utah joined in such hilarious rejoicing.

On the 6th—Monday, the officers of the new state—who was elected in the previous election held in November 1895—was inaugerated, the day being set apart as a holiday, to be remembered as such forever. It was enjoyed to the utmost.

Guns were fired a daybreak. 10, oc a procession was formed lead by the Band and the Home Guards—followed by citizens, also a juvenile corps, or Bell Brigade. At two oclock the citizens met in the Social Hall and partook of the PicNic Dinner, then followed speach and song closing the day with a grand Inaugural Ball.

The day was all that could be desired. The weather was pleasant and all enjoyed themselves. There was nothing to mar the occasion, and it will be a day long to be remembered by the inhabitants of Kanab both old and young.

I visited Brother Warren Johnson on this particular morning, when Knapp [Judd] came to take me to his home. Ada his wife and children took me home so I could fill an appointment with Jane for the Pic nic dinner. I do not enjoy these public dinners and picnic's but sometimes I feel obliged to attend them. . . .

[Women's Voices, page 392 [May 1896]

18th. Esther Ford came this morning. I potted the plants I received from Burpee.

Tuesday 19th Sister Dr Harris called this afternoon & her two daughters. She went home about 5 oc, and I went to the cemetery and watered my plants. They have not been watered by irrigation since the 11th.

20 A reception was given Elder Asa W Judd. I went to hear the programe an hour. Jane & husband got home about 11-30 PM. Eddie went to meet them and brought his grandmother home in a buggie They reached here about sundown.

21 I went to see them. They were all well. We had the [irrigation] water. George & his son George G & his Brother in Law trimed the Grape vines before taking the water. There is quite a number of Vines dead.

22 Sister Mantripp came to see me this morning. I was surprised to see her so well after her journey. Jane came too. I took home some plants from Burpee's. I went up to Georges this afternoon.

23 This afternoon I went to see Ada and from there I went to the cemetery and watered my plants.

24 Sunday Attended Meeting after taking dinner with Jane. Mrs Mantripp was taken very sick yesterday, but is some better today. Jane has given up her bedroom to her.

26 Visited the 7th & 8th district alone. We are gathering carpet rags to make a carpet for the St George Temple. It will require 100 yds from the Kanab stake as its proportion. Dr Harris bought out the Lot adjoining me. He has been baptized a member of the church. He came to see me on the 27th and I told him I was pleased to heare it, but I told him he would find many stumbling blocks to overcome, but the actions of men does not change the truth of the Gospel.

Footnotes

Some important studies relative to the period of Mormon history covered in this chapter include: Gustive O. Larson, The Americanization of Utah for Statehood (San Marino, Calif: The Huntington Library, 1971); B. Carmon Hardy, "The Mormon Colonies of Northern Mexico: A History, 1885-1912" (Ph.D. dissertation, Wayne State University, 1963) and Melvin S. Tagg, A History of the Mormon Church in Canada (Lethbridge, Alberta: Lethbridge Herald Co., 1968).

---
Notas:
[^1] J.L.S. to Editor Exponent, January 9, 1886, Woman's Exponent 14 (February 1,1886):133-34.
[^2] See Arrington, Great Basin Kingdom, pp. 353-79, for an analysis of the confiscation of church property and other economic impacts of the raid.
[^3] The Manifesto was unanimously accepted by the membership of the Church gathered at the conference and has subsequently been included in the Doctrine and Covenants. Discussions of the declaration include Kenneth W. Godfrey, "The Coming of the Manifesto," Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 5 (Autumn 1970):11-25; Henry J. Wolfinger, "A Reexamination of the Woodruff Manifesto in the Light of Utah Constitutional History," Utah Historical Quarterly 39 (Fall 1971): 328-49; and Gordon C. Thomasson, 'The Manifesto Was a Victory," Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 6 (Spring 1971): 37-45.
[^4] After his marriage to Julina in 1866, Joseph F. Smith took four plural wives: Sarah Ellen Richards (1850-1915), Julina's sister Edna Lambson (1851-1926), Alice Ann Kimball (1858- ? ), and Mary Taylor Schwartz (1865- ? ). To these wives and Joseph F. Smith were born forty-three children. The family members are listed in Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith: Sixth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1969), pp. 487-90. Some insight into the family life is provided in pp. 448-90. For a different view, see Randall Leroy Green, "The Joseph F. Smith Family: Life without Father," MS on file in Church Archives.
[^5] The eleven children of Joseph F. and Julina Lambson Smith include Mercy Josephine, Mary Sophronia, Donette, Joseph Fielding, David Asael, George Carlos, Julina Clarisse, Elias Wesley (born in Hawaii, April 21, 1886), Emily, Rachel, and Edith Eleanor. There were also two adopted children: Marjorie Virginia and Edward Arthur.
[^6] Remained at home Jet being poorly. Enoch Farr (1845-1914) was president of the Sandwich Islands or Hawaiian Mission from 1885 to 1887.
[^7] Susa Young Gates and her husband, Jacob Forsberry Gates, arrived in Honolulu in November 1885, and Jacob was appointed secretary of the plantation. He was later president of the Laie Branch. They returned to Utah in April 1889.
[^8] J.L.S. to Editor Exponent, January 9, 1886.
[^9] Esther Farr, wife of the mission president, was president of the Relief Society and Julina was one of four women who served as counselors. Sandwich Islands or Hawaiian Mission, manuscript history, manuscript, Church Archives.
[^10] "Through the suggestion of President Joseph F. Smith a theological class was organized in Laie for the purpose of studying the first principles of the gospel." Hawaiian Mission, manuscript history, March 4, 1885.
[^11] The participation of women in the administration of healing ordinances is discussed in chapter 1.
[^12] Attended Releif Society. Robert (1883-1886), "Robin," was a son of Joseph F. and Edna Lambson Smith. Susa Young Gates wrote a tribute at the boy's death. See Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith, pp. 462-63.
[^13] Went to W[omen's] Coop[erativel Directors meeting. [^31] Nancy wrote a history of the elder Williams. See Nancy Clement Williams, After 100 Years (Independence Publishing Company, 1951).
[^14] Saw Dr E R Shipp and decided to pospone Press and Reapers meeting in her and Sister E B Wells honor till Saturday night on account of Bro Hornes party. Adoption had a peculiar meaning for nineteenth century Latter-day Saints. It was the means by which members were sealed, usually not to their own families but to prominent priesthood leaders. The practice, discontinued in 1894, is discussed by Gordon I. Irving, "The Law of Adoption: One Phase of the Development of the Mormon Concept of Salvation, 1830-1900," BYU Studies 14 (Spring 1974): 291-314.
[^15] It was common practice at this time for younger women, often even young married women, to attend the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association meetings rather than those of the older women's Relief Society.
[^16] Mormon temple ordinances are overviewed by James E. Talmage in The House of the Lord, rev. ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1971), pp. 79-84.
[^17] The academy at Ephraim, Utah, was one of thirty-one high schools started by the Church in Utah, Idaho, Arizona, Canada, and Mexico between 1888 and 1891.
[^18] Presented memorial to [Constitutional Convention] committee on sufferage. Was very courteously treated. We all felt it a great day in the history of Utah. The committee informed us they had passed on W[oman] S[uffrage] being ten to five in favor. [^33] Went to R. Society in the evening. Attended a surprise party given in honor of Sister Mary Freeze in 14 Wd. It was unusualy fine but oh! the dressing down Mr B H Roberts got from Joseph F Smith I realy felt sorry for him. [^35] Amanda Burns Williams and her husband, Fredrick Granger Williams, had been married thirteen years and had seven children by the time Nancy Clement entered the family in 1889. Two children had died, one in 1882 and one in 1884. The three oldest were Amanda Elizabeth, Fredrick Ezra, and Sarah Josephine. In 1890, Flora May was three years old and the baby, Joseph Fredrick, eighteen months. Fredrick Granger Williams-Amanda Burns family group sheet, Church Genealogical Archives.
[^19] Colonia Diaz, near the Spanish town of La Ascencion, Mexico, was settled by Latter-day Saints early in 1885.
[^20] Hazel Kathena (1890-1940) was a daughter of Fredrick Granger Williams and Amanda Burns.
[^21] Met with the women and organized a Releif Society with Ida J. Mortensen pres. Lydia K. Young 1st cou & Charlotte Carroll sec. counclor. Phebe I. Allred. sec. Josepha Wright ass[t]. sec. Nancy A. Williams treasurer, Kate Porter Chorister. I was set apart by by George Teasdale. There were 30 members in all. $5.75 were donated that day. Went to South Jordan with Mrs Edna Smith to speak at a political meeting. [in margin] Pres Smith came to Depot to meet his wife with his whiskers tied back with a [unclear] handkerchief. George Teasdale (1831-1907) was a member of the Council of the Twelve who helped direct the settlement of Diaz in 1885 and presided over the Mexican colonies for a period.
[^22] The same excerpt of the Fox diary edited by the authors here was edited by Linda Thatcher, "I Care Nothing for Politics: Ruth May Fox, Forgotten Suffragist," Utah Historical Quarterly 49 (Summer 1981): 239-53. Further information on Ruth May Fox and her family, her associations with other women, and her personal aspirations can be found in Ruth May Fox, "My Story," comp. Leonard Grant Fox, typescript, Church Archives.
[^24] Was chosen President of the Young Ladies of the 14 Ward. Emmeline B. Wells, of whom Ruth May Fox later wrote: "No other woman had so great an influence as she in shaping my life," was at this time president of the Utah Territory Woman Suffrage Association.
[^26] In 1894, Alice Chapin, a teacher trained in Boston by Elizabeth Peabody, the founder of the first American kindergarten, opened a model kindergarten in Salt Lake City. See Carol Cornwall Madsen and Susan Staker Oman, Sisters and Little Saints: One Hundred Years of Primary (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1979), pp. 41-42.
[^27] Went to Sugarhouse to the house of Sister Mary Young to speak on politics. The Second Triennial National Council of Women was held in Washington, D.C., in February 1895. Several Utah women attended, including representatives from the Relief Society and Elmina S. Taylor, president of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association. Both organizations were charter members of the council. Woman's Exponent 23 (January 1 and 15, 1895): 228.
[^28] Went to the Temple to do some sealing with Jette. As part of a revelation and prophecy dated December 25, 1832, Joseph Smith declared that "slaves shall rise up against their masters who shall be marshalled and disciplined for war." D&C 87:4.
[^29] Went to Press Club in the evening. Had a plesant time. Club entertained Phebe Cousins who spoke to us on the sufferage and currency questions. [^23] The Utah Federation of Women's Clubs was organized April 7,1893. Emma J. McVicker, a prominent non-Mormon appointed to the University of Utah Board of Regents in 1895, was president of the federation.
[^30] Spoke in the 1st precinct to women of the Rep. Club. The Women's Industrial Home, an elaborate structure originally built to house runaway polygamous wives, was at this time the home of various territorial officials and the meeting place of the territorial legislature. See Gustive O. Larson, "An Industrial Home for Polygamous Wives," Utah Historical Quarterly 38 (Summer 1970): 263-75.
[^32] Emmeline B. Wells and Ellis Reynolds Shipp had been in the East for six weeks, attending various women's meetings, including the National American Woman Suffrage Association in Atlanta, Georgia, and the National Council of Women in Washington, D.C.
[^34] "When the convention debate had been at its high point, Emmeline B. Wells had announced the anticipated May 13 arrival in the territory of Susan B. Anthony and Anna Howard Shaw to conduct a woman suffrage conference." The dignitaries arrived after the convention had voted in favor of including woman suffrage, and the Rocky Mountain Suffrage Conference, with representatives from Utah, Wyoming, and Colorado, celebrated the victory. Beverly Beeton, "Woman Suffrage in the American West, 1869-1896" (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Utah, 1976), pp. 143-46, an excellent discussion of Utah's involvement in the suffrage question and very pertinent to this portion of Ruth May Fox's diary.
[^36] Even though the proposed constitution granted suffrage to women, it was not clear whether or not women would be able to vote in the November election. Both the Republicans and the Democrats were interested in the potential participation of women, and several prominent Mormon women had already spoken and campaigned for the Democratic Party. While the Democrats were integrating women into the regular party structure, the Republicans opted to organize women separately, though the organizations petered out when women were not allowed to vote in November 1895. Republican women were assimilated into the party's county and state organizations the following year.
[^37] In the wake of the financial panic of 1893, which threw the American economy into a slump, the Church took specific measures to stimulate the regional economy, including establishment of the Saltair bathing resort on the beach of the Great Salt Lake. See Dean L. May, "Towards a Dependent Commonwealth," in Poll, et al., eds., Utah's History, p. 238.
[^38] The territory's supreme court ruled against women participating in the November 1895 election, and both parties removed women's names from their ballots. Beeton, "Woman Suffrage in the American West," pp. 147-48. Emmeline B. Wells was a Republican candidate for the State Senate in 1896, the first election year for Utah women, but she lost the race, although three other women were winners. See Jean Bickmore White, "Gentle Persuaders: Utah's First Women Legislators," Utah Historical Quarterly 38 (Winter 1970): 31-49.
[^39] Frank J. Cannon (1859-1933), a son of prominent Church leader George Q. Cannon, left the Church and became one of its most severe journalistic critics. He was a Congressional delegate from Utah in 1894 and was elected on the Republican ticket as a United States Senator in 1896. He later became a Democrat.
[^40] 40. Orlando W. Powers (1850-1914) was appointed associate justice of the Utah Territory in 1885, but left the assignment to set up private law practice in Utah. Actively involved in Utah's Liberal Party, he later worked for the Democrats. In 1895, after waging "an energetic campaign," he was unanimously chosen chairman of the Democratic Territorial Central Committee. Whitney, History of Utah 4:537-41.
[^41] 41. In his discourse to the Box Elder Stake conference at Brigham City, Utah, George Q. Cannon, a member of the First Presidency, cautioned Saints against those who might defame the Church's leadership with lies. Journal History of the Church, October 27, 1895.
[^42] 42. On October 10, 1892, the Relief Society was incorporated as the National Women's Relief Society. The organization had become a charter member of the National Council of Women in 1891. See History of the Relief Society, p. 36.
[^43] 43. Rhoda Maria Howell Judd (1867-1953) was the daughter of Rebecca's brother Robert Thompson Howell.
