Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 ( 1982)

Conclusion

Orson F. Whitney in his History of Utah wrote, "The history of the Mormon community reads like a tragic poem, and the heart and soul of that poem is in the lives, labors and sacrifices of the heroic women of the community."

As we have looked back at these heroic women, the poem that emerges seems more inspiring that tragic, for our perspective gives us a view of the fruition of hopes and dreams that could only be dimly realized by the women who laid the foundation for their completion. It is through illuminating their lives and labors and sacrifices that we have seen a pattern emerge that sets them apart from other women of their time.

First, we see a pattern of complete dedication to the gospel. This commitment enabled women who joined the Church to endure poverty, ridicule, physical and mental hardships, loneliness, and displacement because they were able to see the experiences of this life in the spectrum of eternal life. Separations by death, mission service, and moves to other areas, while painful, could be coped with because testimonies were strong and friends and family were loving and supportive.

Hands that were busy with quilting and washing and writing and building still found time to reach out to sisters in need. Sharing was an important characteristic of these great women—not just sharing yeast and coals and food, but sharing self through being there when necessary, standing up for principles, and giving service in the Church.

A desire for beauty and the ability to recognize it are other common attributes of these great women. As they spent many hours on the prairies and contact with earthly elements, we feel the appreciation that they had for that which feeds the soul. They could love a sunset, a brook, the sounds at night, a rock formation, the smells around them, and display reverence for these gifts from God. This love of beauty could be carried into their homes as they struggled to reinstitute the comforts they had known in far-away homes. Doilies and curtains covered rough unfinished furniture. Flowers appeared around doorsteps. Lacking material, hair was made into pictures, and scraps of cloth became beautiful and serviceable quilts. The special nesting instinct that women possess is very much in evidence in their accounts of setting up new homes.

Familial love was a strong factor in the lives of these women. An almost overwhelming concern for children and husbands runs throughout their writings. In spite of hasty courtships and an environment of reserved personal relationships, there is a special love evident in their lives. This love and concern was honed through the sharing of so many trying and difficult experiences, which not only drove them to their Heavenly Father but to each other as well. And these Mormon women were different than most of their contemporaries in that they believed they were sealed to their husbands and families for all eternity. This conviction gave them a greater courage and resoluteness in the face of tragedy and an even greater calm than others experienced.

Finally, it becomes evident that they lived full, significant lives that deserve to be remembered. Mormon men could not have left homes to serve missions, colonize, and otherwise build the kingdom of God if it hadn't been for the women they left at home to raise the children, grow the crops, care for houses, and educate the offspring. This fact, while frequently overlooked in written histories of this people, is extremely significant. Participation in the community and in the cause of women everywhere proved them able in areas beyond the domain of kitchen and family as well.

The contributions of Mormon women to the Church, to their children, to the community, and to the world, while not as visible as those of men, were in many ways of even greater import partly because of the difficulties they faced.

Louisa Barnes Pratt, a forward-looking pioneer woman, closed her journal with these words: "Ah: but the Lord rules. . . . Let the faithful women trust in Him He will ere long adjust their cause, and help them to fulfill their destiny." Their destiny is ours, too. Commitment, sharing, a love of beauty, familial love, and lives of meaning must be lived anew in each generation. The challenge of their lives is before us.
