Copenhagen, Denmark, August 17th, 1850.

TO THE FIRST PRESIDENCY OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS; GREETING:

Beloved Brethren,—Knowing your anxiety, and your prayers and unceasing diligence for Zion at home, and for the welfare of the cause of God in all the world, I take great pleasure in writing to you at this time, to communicate to you a statement of the condition and prospect of affairs in this part of the vineyard, in which it has pleased God and my brethren to assign my labours for a season. * * * * *

By the advice and consent of those of the Twelve who were in England, I concluded to take with me Elder George P. Dykes—he having preached before to the Norwegians in Illinois, and having a little knowledge of their language as well as manners and customs. I thought, if the Lord opened the way, to send him into that country, to open the door of the gospel among them.

The spirit of the Lord seemed to lead me to this city, to commence my labors. From my first appointment my mind rested upon Copenhagen, as the best place in all Scandinavia to commence the work, and every thing has since strengthened my convictions. It is the capital of Denmark, and was, at one time, the capital of the united kingdoms of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden. It is a beautiful city, strongly fortified, numbering about 140,000 inhabitants, and is by far the largest and most influential town in the kingdom; and from its central position, on the east side of the Island of Zealand, within sixteen miles of the Swedish shore, it affords an easy communication by steamboat to the principal places of Norway, Sweden, and Denmark. It is the seat of learning for all the north of Europe; and, I might add, of priestcraft, infidelity, and politics; and in my opinion, it possesses more of the spirit of freedom than any other place in this part of the world notwithstanding.

After the separation of Sweden, Norway still continued under the Danish government until the fall of Napoleon, and then the Allied Powers, as a sort of punishment upon Denmark for her alliance with France, gave Norway to the king of Sweden; since which time Norway, though nominally subject to the Swedish king, has had her domestic legislature, and enjoyed a greater degree of political freedom than either of the other two countries.

The government of Denmark, until recently, was an absolute monarchy. The king and his ministry both made and executed the law, and the Lutheran clergy had the superintendence and control of all the primary schools, and public instruction of the country, with the exception of certain special privileges granted to the Jews, and to foreign mechanics who had been invited into the country. But no foreigner was permitted to attempt to proselyte from the "Evangelical Lutheran Church," or preach against her doctrines, on pain of being expelled from the country, which has been enforced against several foreign missionaries within the last ten or fifteen years; and would have been against us, in all probability, if we had come a little sooner. Mr. Peter C. Monster, the Baptist reformer, introduced immersion, and now his followers number in Denmark about three hundred and sixty. At first he was fined, afterwards imprisoned, and when he had served out one term in prison, he would preach until the priests would cause him to be arrested and imprisoned again; and so continued until he was imprisoned six times, and three years in all. Meanwhile French philosophy, infidelity, and republican principles have been increasing in this city and throughout the country, until about the time of the late revolution in France, the death of the old king of Denmark afforded the Danish people an opportunity to reform their government.

The heir to the throne was kept at bay until a constitution or "ground law" was agreed upon, signed, and proclaimed, June 5, 1849. This secures to the people a "Rigsdagen" or legislature, to be elected by the people; and quite as much POLITICAL FREEDOM as is enjoyed in England. The press is sufficiently free and untrammelled for all purposes for which we wish to use it; and while it protects and supports the Lutheran Church as the State Church, it secures to the citizens the right to dissent and organize other societies; but the rights and privileges of such societies are to be defined by law. The old laws are to be enforced until the legislature shall organize the different departments of government, and provide all the necessary laws and regulations for carrying into effect the new constitution.

Lutheranism is protected by similar laws in Norway and Sweden. Not long ago some Methodists were expelled from Sweden, and quite recently some Baptists near Gottenburgh were arrested and sentenced to leave the country; and an appeal was taken to the king, and petitions sent in against the decision; and quite a war is going on in the Swedish papers about it; and I pray that it may be increased, until Norway and Sweden shall follow the example of Denmark. I feel quite willing that the Lord should use the Methodists and Baptists to prepare the way for the fulness of the gospel; for their systems are less exceptionable to the wicked, and they have more sympathy to sustain them. How truly can we behold in these things, as in every other move among the nations, the fulfilment of the words of Jesus in the Book of Mormon, that "when these things shall come forth among the Gentiles, the work of the Father shall commence among the nations, in PREPARING THE WAY for the restoration of thee, O House of Israel."

We landed here, June 14. The first legislature elected under the new constitution was in session. They adjourned in July to meet again in October. The first session was occupied with the political and financial affairs, and they adjourned without providing the laws necessary for carrying into execution the provisions of the constitution relative to religious societies. There is a number of priests in the legislature, and they will stave off any action on the subject as long as they can. Among other important reforms that will be much in our favor, is the abolition of the odious internal passport system. Formerly their own citizens were liable to arrest and imprisonment, if they were caught even for one night beyond the limits of their own town or parish without a passport. This continual renewing of passports, signing and countersigning them by the police officers at every stopping place, and the inconvenience and expense attending it, has always been a source of great annoyance to those who wish to travel.

We have not been able as yet either to preach in Danish, or write for the press; and we have thought it wisdom not to create much excitement until we are fully organized, and speak the language better. Elder Hanson is now engaged in translating some extracts from our works, which I intend for the press. I intend, if the Lord will, soon to publish in Danish, a short history of the rise and progress of the Church, and its faith and doctrines. He had previously translated a few EXTRACTS from the Doctrine and Covenants, such as I thought wise for the benefit of the believers; also REVISED SOME CHOICE PASSAGES in the Book of Mormon. Brother Hanson had been so long in America, that he had become very dull in his native tongue; and having no Bible or any other Danish book with him in America, as might have been expected, his translation of the Book of Mormon was very imperfect, and will necessarily have to be thoroughly revised before it goes to press.

Last Monday, the 12th of August, we began to baptize, and baptized fifteen the first night, and eleven more during the week, making twenty-six in all. The greater part of these are from Mr. Monster's followers, and the best he had; and many more of them are believing, while the rest of them are full of wrath and indignation. Mr. M. himself, who received us at first, and opened the way for us to form acquaintances with his people, now stands as it were upon a pinnacle, undecided whether to forsake his people or the truth; still he will not turn against us and those who have left him; his influence is exerted for good, and I still hope and pray that he may follow. Among those who are baptized are Germans, Swedes, and Danes—all, however, understand the Danish. They are well-grounded in the work and firm—We had with us one copy of Elder O. Hyde's German work, which we kept moving among the Dutch, and when we found any that could read English, we gave them English books; and to the Danes we read Brother Hanson's translation of the Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants, &c. We have operated only in private, and in small family meetings; but we have now arrived at the time when we shall no longer seek retirement but notoriety. We hope soon to find a large public place, and we thank God that the seed has sprung up, and has deep root; so that if we are banished from the country, the work will spread.

The Lord has visited these believers with many visions, and dreams, and manifestations of the Holy Spirit, and some have told us that they had seen us in visions before we came. They have drawn out of us by their faith, every thing pertaining to the gathering, the redemption of the dead, &c., and drink it in as an ox drinketh up water.

I hope before long to have many of them scattered over the country, preaching the word. If the Lord permit, I shall endeavor to get the Book of Mormon published in the course of the fall and winter. I have not much means towards it as yet, but have the promise of backers in England, so that I trust the way will open for publishing by the time it can be properly revised, and I can know that it appears in Danish in its own native simplicity and truth. The literature of the great university of Copenhagen has long taken the lead in this north country, so that works published in Danish may be read and understood by a large portion of the Swedes; and as for Norway, although they have their rustic dialects, yet the Danish is the public language of the State.

I should like to know your minds about the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, whether, if the Lord should raise up much people in this country, and the way should be opened before us, it would be advisable to attempt to translate and publish it entire, or publish from time to time, such portions of it as circumstances shall seem to require. What little I have seen and learned, convinces me of this fact, that it is no easy matter to translate them with all the force and spirit with which those revelations are written in English. The English is much the richest language, and the IDIOM of the two are ENTIRELY DIFFERENT.

As far as my experience and observation extend, the Danes are a kind and hospitable people, especially the middle and lower classes; and a higher tone of morality pervading them, than exists in the corresponding classes in England and America; and if I mistake not my feelings, the Lord has many people among them.

Brother John Forssgren accompanied us to this place and stopped a few days with us, and then we blessed him and sent him on his way. The Lord is with him, he is full of faith and the Holy Ghost. From here to the home of his childhood where his relatives are, is about six hundred miles in a north east direction up the Baltic.

All that we have heard from the Valley since we left, was your General Epistle of April 12, which was brought from the Valley to the Bluffs by Mr. Livingston, and from there to Liverpool by Elder Pratt, a proof sheet of which was forwarded to me in a letter, which I received July 27, and after perusing it, forwarded it to brother Forssgren. It was a precious morsel to us all.

As to the signs of the times and the aspect of affairs among the nations of Europe, dark forebodings of the future seem to pervade all hearts, and the heads of the nations seem to be conscious that they are steering the ship of State in DANGEROUS SEAS. Denmark is at present the point of the greatest interest. The Dukedoms of Holstein and Sleswick, which are mostly German, have been in a state of REVOLT ever since the death of the old king. The new government has been unable to compel their submission. Several severe battles have been fought, and both parties still seem to be more and more desperate. On the 23rd and 24th July, a battle was fought in Sleswick, in which out of about 30,000 engaged on EACH SIDE, they sustained a loss of about 4000 EACH, according to their acknowledgments; but as the official reports have been kept from the public, it is generally believed that the loss was much greater. Over 3000 wounded were brought to this city, and all the hospitals had the appearance of slaughter-houses and the surgeons, butchers.

Considered by itself alone, this domestic war might not disturb the peace of Europe; but there is a secret at the bottom, which interests the great powers. By a glance at the map, you will see that Denmark's stronghold at Elsinore holds the key to the Baltic, and taxes all nations who traffic upon her waters. This is an outlet for the Russian fleet, and for the commerce of Prussia and other German States, as well as Sweden. The German States, including Prussia, are aiming to establish a FEDERAL UNION, and to build a fleet, that they may be able to compete with the great powers of Europe. Sleswick and Holstein are essential to that union on account of their harbors upon the North Sea for their fleets. They being Germans, are like minded, and wish to throw off the Danish yoke; in doing which they have the support of all Germany. * * * *

Since I commenced writing this letter, the postman has brought me one from brother J. Forssgren, dated Stockholm, Aug. 13th, of which I will give you a summary. He says he baptized his brother and sister, and one or two others at Geffle; and by request translated brother O. Pratt's pamphlet on the rise and doctrine of the Church; but the printers refused to publish it.

He next heard of a ship load of farmers about to sail for New York, and went to them, and while they were waiting for the vessel, he preached the gospel to them, and found them a humble people, who were looking for the redemption of Israel, and were going to seek for Zion in America.

He baptized some sixteen or seventeen of the farmers, and many more were believing. He ordained two elders and some teachers, &c., gave them instructions how to watch over and teach the company, and baptize others that should desire it. This he finished on the 7th inst., and preached the same evening at 5 o'clock p.m., in the woods just out of town. Having preached there once before, it had been noised abroad, and the grove was full of priests and people; the former, however, together with the marshal, were secreted behind trees and rocks.

He preached and bore testimony of the word with power, and many were pricked in their hearts. After he had closed and dismissed, the marshal, with the priests and police, arrested him, variously insulted him, marched him through the town, and proclaimed "the dipper," &c., and arraigned him before the governor of the city, and all the priests. Having an American passport he was sent to Stockholm. The king was not at home; neither the American charge-d'affairs. He was had several times before the courts in Stockholm, and when the American CHARGE came home on the 12th, he, with the judges, police, and all hands, tried to persuade him to quit his preaching; but he told them, the will of the Lord should be his will. He adds in a postscript, that they had concluded to send him out of the country; but he had not learned how they would send him. He further adds, that he should preach there by invitation the next eve. I immediately wrote to him, not to leave till he was obliged, and then to ordain such as were worthy, and come to Denmark.

Dear Brethren, Elders Dykes, Hanson, and myself unitedly greet you and the saints of God, with warm emotions of brotherly love; and we pray our Father in heaven, that we may be preserved to rejoice together again in the flesh.

Yours truly and affectionately,

ERASTUS SNOW.

P. S. Aug. 20.—We have baptized thirty four persons, and more are ready. A very scurrilous letter about the Mormons, from America, has just appeared in a Copenhagen paper translated from a French paper. It is the first of the kind that has appeared.

E. S.
