196 Norgesgade, Copenhagen, Denmark, February 14th, 1851.

Brother Zerubable,—I have received, through Elder Pratt, the letters you sent him to be forwarded to me; and was very thankful for them, and perhaps you have expected an answer before now, but I have deferred writing as long as I thought I could in safety and have my letters reach you before you start for the Valley; and you will be able to carry a report of me up to this date, in case the letters which I sent by mail fail to reach my family. I was very much pleased at the good spirit which was breathed in your letters, and particularly that you were so decided about going to that peaceful home of Saints early in the spring.

Your appointment as Judge of the Supreme Court of Utah territory, was from the Lord, though it came through the President, and will doubtless be a blessing unto you, in a pecuniary point of view; and if you are wise in the use of it, may be a blessing unto many thousands. * * * * * *

I suppose the Valley news of a general nature you will have obtained from the papers; probably you will also see my letters in the Star, and learn a little how we prosper here.

This is a well fortified and pleasant city. The winter has been pleasant—but little snow; and about the temperature of New York. I have good health, and plenty of business, warm friends, and plenty of enemies.

This is a perfect priest-ridden and king-ridden people, but many honest souls among them. We have had some persecution in this city, (saying nothing of the flood of lies that always follows the truth), such as breaking up our meetings, stoning houses and windows and the like, but not so much here as in some other places in the kingdom.

Brother Dykes, who is now laboring in the province of Jutland, has had a hard time, and made some hair-breadth escapes from his enemies, but has been greatly blessed notwithstanding, and has baptized over fifty.

Brother John Forssgren, (whose persecution and expulsion from Sweden I mentioned in my letter in the Star), has fared but little better in Denmark. He and a Danish brother was mobbed, and variously maltreated lately in Roskilde, the old capital of Denmark; and after two days complete uproar in the town, they were expelled by the chief authorities of the town, against all law. Notwithstanding all these things, we rejoice continually in the Lord our God, who blesses our labors and pours out the Holy Ghost upon us and the Saints, with its gifts and blessings, visions and dreams, prophecy and healing, casting out devils, &c. We have baptized about one hundred and fifteen in this city, and have a good prospect. We are but miserable tools in the Danish language, at the best, but the Lord makes weak things become strong unto them who believe.

Pray for us continually, that we may do a good work.

I am now very busily engaged with brother Hanson, in translating and publishing the Book of Mormon; it is a very laborious and tedious work to get it issued clean and pure, according to the simplicity of the original; and requires the closest attention. I am publishing three thousand copies—have only one hundred and sixty-eight pages finished, it will take me till May or June. I circulate two hundred by the sheet, weekly.

Yours, &c.

E. SNOW.
