Copenhagen, July 1st, 1851.

Beloved brother Snow,—Having received news from you through brother Dykes, I take pleasure in addressing you a few lines concerning myself and the church here universally. In the Copenhagen branch peace and union prevail. * * * Brother Dykes, in company with brother Jensen, from Aalborg, arrived here this morning in the steamer Juno. * * The little ship Zion, of Aalborg, has stood through a dreadful storm in the last eight or nine days, which you may hear of through the papers before you get this. On Sunday, the 22nd, Elder Jensen and his brethren of the priesthood, came to the conclusion to go and baptize at a public place by the sea shore, which caused a great gathering of great and small, aged, middle aged, and young. To these, brothers Larsen and Jensen bore testimony of the truth, according to the spirit of the Book of Mormon, and warned the people to flee from the church of the devil, and let them know those priests they had in those high steepled temples, were Gentiles, &c.

The ungodly became enraged, seized one of the brethren, and took him before the high priest; the whole body of the mob gathered round his house, to see what he would say and do. The priest with horror and affright cried out, "away with him." Some took shelter in brother Olson's house, but on the way were stoned, knocked into the gutters, and clothes torn off some. The mob then proceeded to the place of the Saints' worship, and began a havoc on the house, all the windows went in as with a blow, and doors torn down. Sister Petersen, who resided in the small room, escaped through a window with a babe in her arms. * * * The police and soldiers of the city guard were ordered out to quell the tumult, but all their efforts were in vain, till the artillery of heaven was moved upon. Sharp thunder and lightning and a shocking shower of rain came down upon them, which caused the mob to disperse for the night. Next day they began with more strength; all the windows of the Saints' houses were stoned to pieces; some of the women taken and dealt with in a brutal manner. Since the commencement of the uproar, all the Saints have been more or less roughly handled. Elder Jensen's manufacturing establishment has been threatened, but it stands good yet. The Saints' house of worship was unroofed, and part of the walls torn down.

For nine days has the town been in a dreadful tumult,—the police quarrelled among themselves, the citizens with each other, and the lower classes fighting among themselves. * * * * * *

Brother Dykes arrived there yesterday, but was immediately taken and sent on board the steamer out of the way, that none of the Saints could see him. Brother Jensen made his escape on board a boat, unknown to his enemies. * * * He will now be with us for a short time, he is full of joy in the Holy Ghost. He will probably seek to talk with the king, to seek protection for the Saints in Aalborg. * * *

No news from those brethren lately sent out on missions. We hope to hear from you soon.

Your ever humble servant, and brother in the new and everlasting covenant,

J. E. FORSSGREN.

P.S.—Last week eight were baptized, and the work is taking root among the better quality of people.
