Had the author of the following lines known the calling and mission of the Latter-day Saints, he would have, most unquestionably, represented them in his song; as it is, we offer it to our readers, assuring them that we often appropriate it to our own use.

WIFE, CHILDREN, AND FRIENDS.

When the black letter'd list to the gods was presented— A list of what Fate for each mortal intends: At the long string of ills a kind angel relented, And slipp'd in three blessings—wife, children, and friends! In vain surly Pluto declared he was cheated, For Justice divine could not compass her ends: The scheme of man's folly, he said, was defeated, For earth became heav'n with wife, children, and friends!

If the stock of our bliss is in strangers' hands vested, The fund ill secured oft in bankruptcy ends; But the heart issues bills that are never protested, When drawn on the firm of wife, children, and friends! The soldier, whose deeds live immortal in story, Whom duty to far distant latitudes sends, With transports would barter whole ages of glory, For one happy hour with wife, children, and friends!

But valor still glows in life's waning embers; The death-wounded tar, who his colours defends, Drops a tear of regret as he dying remembers How blest was his home with wife, children, and friends! Though the spice-breathing gales o'er his caravan hovers, While 'round him the fragrance of Arabia descends, Yet the merchant still thinks on the woodbine that covers The bow'r where he sat with wife, children, and friends.

The dayspring of youth still unclouded by sorrow, Alone on itself for enjoyment depends; But dreary's the twilight of age when it borrows No warmth from the smiles of wife, children, and friends! Let the breath of renown ever freshen and nourish The Laurel that o'er his fair favourite bends; O'er me wave the Willow, and long may it flourish, Bedew'd with the tears of wife, children, and friends!

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ONE YEAR IN SCANDINAVIA ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE
