Lyndon W. Cook, Donald Q. Cannon, Far West Record: Minutes of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1830-1844 ( 1983)

Acknowledgments

Initial interest in the Far West Record as an important source of early Mormon history was generated in a Church history class at Brigham Young University in 1971. While the editors considered publishing the record book in 1974 (when they first met as professor and research assistant), they did not submit a formal proposal to edit and publish the document to the Church Historical Department until 1976. In February 1977 permission was granted to prepare the manuscript for publication.

We are indebted to many talented individuals for assisting with this project. Research materials used in this work were taken from the Church Archives, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah; Special Collections and Manuscripts, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah; Manuscripts Division, J. Willard Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah; History Division, Library-Archives, Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, The Auditorium, Independence, Missouri; and Missouri State Historical Society, Columbia, Missouri. We thank the kind, able staffs at these libraries.

We give special thanks to Leonard J. Arrington, director of the Joseph Fielding Smith Institute for Church History, Brigham Young University, for his help in securing permission to publish the Far West Record as well as his encouragement and enthusiasm during the preparation of this volume.

We kindly remember the cooperation of James L. Kimball, Jr., at Church Archives. He has gone well beyond the second mile in helping us locate important materials used in this book. Chad Flake, Scott Duvall, Dennis Rowley, Hyrum Andrus, Haybron Adams, Donna McGee, and A. Dean Larsen of the Harold B. Lee Library, and Madelon Brunson and Patricia Roberts at the RLDS Library-Archives have also greatly assisted us in our work. Others who have contributed significantly are Richard L. Anderson, Dean C. Jessee, Larry C. Porter, LaMar C. Berrett, Milton V. Backman, Jr., Max H. Parkin, and Davis Bitton.

Finally, we appreciate the painstaking efforts of Steven Bergstrom, Steven Knowles, Karen Sundell Costello, Kaylene Porter Harding, Cindy Compton, and Cheryl Clement, who assisted in the research, typing, proofreading, and final preparation of the book.
