Lyndon W. Cook, Donald Q. Cannon, Far West Record: Minutes of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1830-1844 ( 1983)

Introduction

At a time when the Church has achieved international recognition as a keeper of historical and genealogical records, the Far West Record has special relevance. This pioneer effort in early Church record-keeping was faithfully performed in the spirit of D&C 21:1, wherein the Lord said: "Behold, there shall be a record kept among you."

Mindful of the unsophisticated nature of recording and preserving documents in the early nineteenth century as well as the difficult and extensive travels of the Saints from New York to Utah, it is undoubtedly providential that we have the Far West Record today. The secretaries or clerks who kept the minutes of meetings contained in this ledger did not have shorthand skills, and, except for some knowledge of orthography, were essentially untrained. Yet, while their reports are occasionally incomplete, they are largely lucid, conceptually well-rounded, and probably fairly accurate summaries of what actually transpired.

The Far West Record contains minutes of various kinds of Church-related meetings (general conferences, high council and priesthood quorum meetings, and special councils) for the period 1830-44. But while the record chronologically spans the entire Church career of Joseph Smith, it is not a continuous, unbroken history of events in Church history for that same period.

The Far West Record is a record book into which original, loose pages of minutes were copied. (Some had been around for at least eight years.) Although several different clerks had taken the minutes, it was undoubtedly John Whitmer who had preserved them. Whitmer had been ordained Church historian in April 1831. Except for good continuity in minute-keeping during the later Missouri period, the Far West Record turns out to be a potpourri of minutes taken at various meetings held in New York, Ohio, Indiana, Missouri, and Nauvoo, Illinois. For this reason the title is somewhat of a misnomer. Nevertheless, a full 80 percent of the total entries are from the Missouri period.

The ledger was given to the high council at Far West, Missouri, for their own minutes in 1838. But at some point in time it was decided that many loose pages of minutes of earlier years would occupy the first pages. The modern title of the record book was attached to the document by association after the Saints had settled in Utah. It was from the title page of the book that the name "Far West Record" was derived. This title was used in Church inventory of historical documents in 1855.

A study of the Far West Record demonstrates that Joseph Smith was respected and revered by early Church members as an inspired prophet. A perusal of its pages amply shows that he was an astute and wise counselor as well as a dynamic and charismatic leader.

Although the Far West Record does not contain the text of any revelation received by Joseph Smith, at least thirty-four different sections of the Doctrine and Covenants are referred to in the minutes of meetings (see index). A study of the record book provides information about the background and setting of some revelations (for example, sections 1, 32, 38, 82, and 133), precise dating of revelations previously unidentified (for example, section 57), the degree of acceptance and implementation of the instructions found in the revelations by members and leaders, and important insights into the nature of revelation.

In terms of tracing the early development of Mormon doctrine and polity, the Far West Record is critical. During this early formative period, theology was essentially undefined, and quorums of Church government were searching to find their proper places. Despite the forces of new scripture and the presence of a modern prophet, popular notions and forms of evangelical Protestantism significantly influenced the Church during its first decade. Consciously seeking not to become creedal, Mormonism was, nevertheless, attempting to define its boundaries and standards in doctrine and Church government. The Far West Record richly documents many of these early issues. Is disease of the devil? Should medicine be administered to the sick? How can one detect false spirits? Who can receive revelation for the Church? Who has authority to organize a stake? Can one hold a Church office without keeping the Word of Wisdom?

The Far West Record was an important source used by early Church historians in preparing Joseph Smith's history. And while B. H. Roberts occasionally footnoted the published version of the Prophet's history with citations from the Far West Record, professor Richard L. Anderson has proposed that any revision of the seven-volume History of the Church should properly include additional material from this record.

Historically, the Far West Record is significant in understanding the law of consecration, the United Firm, the organization of stakes, mission calls, priesthood assignments and ordinations, the growth of testimony among members as well as their frustrations and disappointments, excommunications, dates and places of meetings and conferences, business enterprises, Church-state relationships, and land purchases. The lists of names that are included within the minutes of nearly all meetings of this record provide important data for the historian, biographer, and genealogist in establishing chronology and outlining profiles of early Mormons.

Significant information on Church courts of both a general and specific nature is also found in the Far West Record. Many procedures implemented during this early period (some by revelation) soon became established precedents—many have remained to the present time. While the court was used to discipline violaters of the law of chastity, the ordinary function was to work out petty differences between members. The charge of "unchristian-like conduct" was a catch-all for a wide variety of infractions ranging from refusing to pay a debt to licentiousness. Each quorum of the priesthood could try its members for wrongdoing, and these decisions could be appealed to the bishop's court or high council court.

The organization of high council courts in 1834 marked an important milestone in Church tribunals. The high councils held wide judicial and administrative powers during this early period, and while their authority would subsequently diminish, members of these early councils (ordained high priests) were clearly recognized as "general authorities." Although these early high councils rarely convened to hear criminal cases, Church courts did adjudicate controversies that today would be settled by civil courts. An important feature of the high council court was that the rights of the accused were protected by at least half of the participating high councilors.

Because courts decided administrative as well as juridical matters, they naturally convened more frequently during Joseph Smith's lifetime than they do today. Yet, early Mormon history reveals a democratic spirit that actually encouraged uninhibited criticism of Church policy and procedure and a certain freedom in questioning the actions of one's neighbor. These notions and the fact that Church courts often acted as civil courts effectively multiplied the number of cases that came before them.

In terms of possible discipline, other options were available in addition to disfellowshipment, excommunication, and exoneration. In the case of brethren, misconduct could result in some form of restriction of priesthood privileges: one could be "stripped" of his priesthood office; "silenced" (restrained from preaching); or have his preaching license taken away. If misconduct on the part of sisters was not sufficient to warrant excommunication or disfellowshipment, they were usually restricted only in partaking of the sacrament. Recalcitrant Church leaders, after being "cut off" (excommunicated), were often delivered over to the buffetings of Satan. (Of particular importance in the Far West Record are the excommunication trials of Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer.) However, it should be pointed out that whatever the charge, a humble confession was, almost without exception, rewarded with forgiveness and the hand of fellowship without any period of waiting. (See Appendix B.)

The Far West Record is an important source in helping us understand the growth of the Church and the changes that have occurred in one hundred and fifty years. Church meetings during the 1830s and 1840s were nearly always held in homes, sometimes in schools, but rarely in meetinghouses built for worship. During this period the brethren could "apply" to be ordained to a priesthood office, and minutes in the Far West Record show that men were sometimes rejected as members of the high council because they were "too noisy" in meeting, and in one case because they were merchants.

Strongly influenced by American Protestantism, early Church customs reveal a contrast with present practices. Yet, this contrast between past and present helps one comprehend today's Church. Change has been, is now, and will be an integral part of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Studying the Far West Record, today's Church member can more easily understand and accept the rapid changes associated with a rapidly expanding international Church.

The Conference Minutes, and Record Book, of Christ's Church of Latter Day Saints

Belonging to the High Council of said Church, or their successors in office, of Caldwell County Missouri;

Far West: April 6, 1838.
