Lyndon W. Cook, Donald Q. Cannon, Far West Record: Minutes of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1830-1844 ( 1983)

April 7, 1837

At a meeting of the quorums, of the Presidency, and High Council and Bishop and Council convened at the house of Levi Jackman in the City of Far West, on the 7th April, 1837. [^1]

Present: John Whitmer & W. W. Phelps, Pres. and John Murdock, Levi Jackman, T. B. Marsh, D. W. Patten, Solomon Hancock, Simeon Carter Lyman Wight, Calvin Bebee and Elias Higbee Counsellors. Also Edward Partridge Bishop, and Isaac Morley and John Corrill his Counsellors.

Meeting opened by prayer and singing, "The Towers of Zion soon shall Rise, &c.

1st Resolved, that John Corrill act as clerk.

2nd Resolved, that the City Platt of Far West remain in its present form or draft. [^2] And we unanimously accept of it

3rd. Resolved, that the Alleys be opened by the majority of each square or block when they shall desire it

4th. Resolved, that the price and saile of town lots be left with the Judgment of the wise men, viz W. W. Phelps, John Whitmer, Edward Partridge, Isaac Morley and John Corrill

5th. Resolved thus: These quorums accept of Jacob Whitmer, Elisha H. Groves, and George M Hinkle as building committee of the house of the Lord in this City. Also that Jacob Whitmer be received as a high Counsellor until President David Whitmer arrives at this place.

6th. Resolved, that President David Whitmer, John Whitmer and W. W. Phelps be appointed to superintend the building of the house of the Lord in this City Far West and receive Revelations Visions &c. concerning said house

Closed by singing, and benediction by John Whitmer

(Signed) John Corrill Clerk

July 25, 1836

Clay County Mo. July 25. 1836 [^3]

A general assembly met at the house of President Phelps to transact business for the Church.

High Council of Zion organized also the bishop and hid Counsellors.

Opened by singing, "the Spirit of God like a Fire is Burning &c. and prayer by President John Whitmer.

1st. Resolved unanimously that

Whereas this body is informed that about one hundred families of emigrating Saints, being in waggons and tents on Crooked River in the lower part of Ray County and threatened with mobbing and pestilence some being now sick and many of them destitute of means to purchase lands or provisions. And whereas it is allowed or said, that about one hundred families, are on the road between there and the Mississippi River destitute also and will soon be in like condition; and whereas some of both companies, as we are informed, say they have left their money at the East, and we have no doubt, but our brethren there will forward them the money, as soon as they write to them, that they must suffer without it. As land and provisions cannot be had, without means, flour having risen to $3.00 per cwt. and pork to 10 and 12 1/2 per lb.

Therefore Resolved, by the High Council, and Bishop and Elders and multitude, to prevent mobbing and confusion, and pestilence and death, if possible, that all the emigrating brethren, who have not means or friends to furnish them, be advised to scatter among the people below where they can find accomodations, and labor for the present. And that two Elders be appointed as a committee to carry them this intelligence and that they be authorized to loan and collect money among the Churches in Mo., Illinois Indiana, Kentucky and Tennessee, and put the same into the hands of the Zion Presidency, for the upbuilding and benefit of "Poor Bleeding Zion." [^4]

2nd. Resolved unanimously that, Thomas B. Marsh and Elisha H. Groves be the aforementioned committee.

3rd. Resolved unanimously that, W.W. Phelps, John Whitmer, Edward Partridge, Isaac Morely, and John Corrill be appointed to search out land for the Church to settle upon &c. [^5]

Conference closed with appropriate benedictions.

(Signed) Peter Dustin Clerk.

Date Unknown

At a meeting [^6] pursuant to notice by the Presidency the following: quorums met Viz the high council, two of the Apostles and about 10 of the seventies and the Bishop and one of his councilors together with a numerous body of members.

Opened in prayer by President John Whitmer

Appointed John Corrill, clerk of the meeting

1st. Resolved unanimously that we withdraw our fellowship from James Emmet for unwise conduct until he returns and makes satisfaction

2nd. Resolved unanimously that we will not fellowship any ordained member who will or does not observe the Word of Wisdom according to its litteral reading. [^7]

3rd. Resolved unanimously that we sanction the Litterary Firm and give them our voice and prayers to manage all the concerns of the same as far as it concerns this place according to revelation in the Book Doctrine and Covenants first Edition published at Kirtland Ohio. Page 152, Section 26, given November, 1831. [^8]

4th. Resolved unanimously that John Corrill furnish Bread and Wine [^9] for sacrament each Sabbath and receive for his services out of donations for that purpose

5th. Resolved unanimously that John Whitmer, William W. Phelps, Edward Partridge, Isaac Morley and John Corrill be appointed to sell the town plott and manage the affair of the same.

6th. Resolved unanimously that John Whitmer be the receiver of the money resulting from the sale of the lots of the town Far West.

7th. Resolved unanimously that, the heads of the Church or in other words, that those who have been annointed and set apart to regulate the preaching in the County of Caldwell, and the regions roundabout. and all other matters that concerns the management of the said Church.

Meeting closed by singing: "This earth was once a garden place." and Benediction by President John Whitmer

(Signed) John Corrill Clerk.

April 3, 1837

At a meeting of the High Council in Far West, April 3rd 1837. [^10] Seven of the standing Counsellors were present. John Murdock was appointed Moderator and Elias Higbee Clerk.

Resolved, That, the Council request that President W. W. Phelps and John Whitmer to give explanation of the following items [^11]

1st By what authority was this place pointed out for a city and house of the Lord, and by whom. [^12]

2nd By what authority was a committee appointed and ordained to superintend the building of the house of the Lord.

3rd By what authority was Jacob Whitmer ordained to the High Priesthood.

4th Have two Presidents authority to lay out a City, and build a house of God, independently of the Counsel of the High Council and Bishop and his Council.

5th By what authority was one of the High Counsellors disfellowshipped in the name of the H. Council without their knowledge

6th Have any individual or individuals a right to prefer a charge to the Presidency in Kirtland against any High Counsellor, without the knowledge of the Council or individual.

7th Should not the High Council and Bishop of Zion who are appointed to do business for Zion, receive their inheritance in the core of the City in preference to one who is not particularly called to labour for Zion, or an unbeliever.

8th Shall any intelligence relative to the building up of Zion be withheld from the council of Zion.

9th Are the two Presidents entitled to the profits arising from the sale of lands on which the City is to be built in this place, independent of the authorities who have been appointed to labor with them for Zion and have suffered like tribulation with them.

The Council then agreed to invite prests. W. W. Phelps & John Whitmer, also, the Bishop E. Partridge and his counsellors. Also, the two Apostles, viz. T. B. Marsh & D. W. Patten to meet with them on the 5th inst. that the above named Presidents might explain the foregoing questions, and that the subject might be investigated. The Council then adjourned to the 5th at 10 O'clock.

April 5-6, 1837

Far West April 5. 1837. [^13]

The Council convened agreeable to adjournment with the aforementioned Presidents. The Bishop & Counsel; also the 2 Apostles. The Council opened by prayer, but previous to proceeding to business, the said Presidents proposed that the Bishop and his counsel, with the abovenamed Apostles, leave the Council, which was objected to by the Council, the Bishop and Apostles. The Presidents still insisted on having a private Council in the absence of the Bishop & his Counsel & Apostles; when all opposed the two Presidents. The Bishop & two Apostles gave them to understand that they had a right to remain and that they therefore should remain.

Prest. Phelps then said he would disolve the Council, upon which T. B. Marsh declared that if the council should be disolved he would prefer a charge against the two Presidents, before the Bishop & 12 High Priests. The Presidents then said they were willing to let all present remain in the house. [^14] The Council then proceeded to the investigation of the above named questions. They were not generally satisfactorily answered, which led the Council & others to strongly rebuke the late improper proceedings of the Presidents. D. W. Patten spoke against them with apparent indignation: stating that these proceedings had been iniquitous & fradulent in the extreme, in the unrighteously appropriating Church funds to their own emolument [^15] which had been plainly proven. April 6th was occupied in like discussions.

April 7, 1837

April 7th Council convened agreeable to adjournment. [^16] The Bishop & Counsil present, also the two Apostles. The above named Presidents agreed to give up the Town Plott of Far West with 4 eighties on the Commons [^17] to be disposed of by the High Council, the Bishop & his Counsil & the said Apostles. After which, on motion, the Council adjourned. The Council met in Far West to take into consideration the affairs relative to the Town Plott; at which the Council resolved, (it being agreed to by all parties,) to make over, or that W. W. Phelps & John Whitmer make over, or transfer the Town Plott with 4 eighties, which are on the Commons, into the hands of the Bishop of Zion, & that the avails arising from the sale of said lands should be appropriated to the benefit & upbuilding of "POOR BLEEDING ZION." See Pages 69 & 70. [^18] In the above resolve, W. W. Phelps & John Whitmer acquiesced. Also, resolved that whereas W. W. Phelps & John Whitmer had subscribed $1,000 each to the House of the Lord to be builded in this place, which they were before intending to pay out of the avails of the Town Plott, be considered exempt from paying that subscription [^19]

April 24, 1837

April 24, 1837. [^20] A High Council held in the Town of Far West. Presided John Whitmer & W. W. Phelps.

Case Charge preferred against Lyman for teaching erronious doctrine by D W Patten. Counsellors as follows.

Simeon Carter No 1

John Murdock 2

Thomas B Marsh 3

Levi Jackman 4

George M. Hinkle, 5

Elias Higbee 6

Calvin Bebee 7

Solomon Hancock 8

Jacob Whitmer 9

King Follett 10

Charles C. Rich 11

Edmund Fisher 12

Council opened by prayer by W. W. Phelps

Case most difficult

Witnesses

Seymour Brunson testifies that Lyman Wight said that we the Church were under a telestial law, because God does not whip in a Celestial, or under a Celestial law; therefore he took us the Church out doors to whip us—as a parent takes his children out of doors to chastise them. And that the Book of Covinants and Doctrine was a telestial law and the Book of Commandments (a part of the Revelations which were printed in Jackson County,) were a Celestial law. [^21]

George P. Dykes witnesses to the same, and George Johnson testifies the same also—

The above is only a sketch of the erroneous doctrine Lyman Wight taught, as proven by the above witnesses—

Descided by the presidency that Lyman has taught erroneous doctrine and that he make acknowledgement to the Council and also that he go and acknowledge to the Churches where he preached such abominable doctrine. The above was unanimously sanctioned by the Councellors. Council closed by singing: "This earth was once a garden place &c." and benediction by John Whitmer.

(Signed) Nathan West, Clerk.

May 22, 1837

High Council convened at the Town of Far West, May 22, 1837. [^22]

Present, Presidents W. W. Phelps and John Whitmer.

Presiding Counsillors

John Murdock No. 1.

Simeon Carter 2.

Elias Higbee ,, 3.

D. W. Patten ,, 4.

E. H. Groves ,, 5.

Lyman Wight ,, 6.

Jacob Whitmer ,, 7.

Levi Jackman ,, 8.

G. M. Hinkle ,, 9.

T. B. Marsh ,, 10.

Isaac Higbee ,, 11.

Thomas Grover ,, 12.

Council opened, prayer by President J. Whitmer

After which an appeal was handed to the council from the Bishop's council by John Patten and was rejected because of its illegality

Therefore the former complainants Viz Joshua Fairchilds David Pettigrew Benjamin Johnson and Sheffield Daniels entered the following complaint against the defendant John Patten for not fulfilling his contracts or covenants in consequence of which they were materially injured [^23]——

Four of the councillors spoke on the subject. John Murdock, Elias Higbee, Simeon Carter, and D. W. Patten

Testimonies, Lyman Wight, John Killion and Abigail Daniels

The above testimonies plainly manifested that John Patten did break covenant &c After long investigation by the councillors and parties the Presidency decided that both accuser and accused should be disfellowshiped if they did not settle their difficulty—

Jesse Hitchcock's case was then taken into consideration and was cut off from the high council [^24]

James Emmet's case was brought into question who had previously been disfellowshiped. [^25] He made satisfaction and was restored to his former fellowship. The Presidency, then nominated John Corrill for an agent to the Church and Keeper of the Lord's Store House Which was seconded and carried unanimously by the High Council and multitude

Council Closed

(Signed) Harvey Green Clerk)

May 28, 1837

High Council met at the Committee Store at Far West May 28 1837 [^26]

Presidents, John Whitmer, and Wm. W. Phelps,

High Councillors

Simeon Carter 1

Elias Higbee 2

G. M. Hinkle 3

T. B. Marsh 4

E. H. Groves 5

Lyman Wight 6

Thomas Grover 7

Calvin Bebee 8

Thomas Gorden 9

Jacob Whitmer 10

Levi Jackman 11

Alva L. Tippets 12

Opened in prayer by W. W. Phelps

Charge again preferred against John Patten for not complying with his agreement &c. by John Corrill. John Killian Lyman Wight, John Corrill, W W. Phelps, Gr M. Hinkle, Abigail Daniels The charge was sustained. And Presidency decided and was sanctioned by the Councillors that John Patten, be disfellowshiped until he makes satisfaction

Closed by benediction by John Whitmer

(Signed) Harvey Green (Clerk)

June 11, 1837

High Council met at committee Store in Far West [^27]

Presidents John Whitmer, and W. W Phelps,

High Councillors

Lyman Wight 1

Levi Jackman 2

Gr M Hinkle [^28] 3

Calvin Bebee 4

E H Groves 5

Simeon Carter 6

Jacob Whitmer 7

Elias Higbee 8

Isaac Higbee 9

Harvey Green 10

John Murdock 11

Samuel Thompson 12

John Corrill appointed Clerk.

Council opened in prayer by W. W. Phelps.

Resolved by the Council and all present, that the building Committee be upheld in the mercantile business by our prayers. also that Lyman Wight, Simeon Carter and Elias Higbee, be upheld in a leather Store &c. [^29] Also that John Corrill and Isaac Morley, and also that Calvin Bebee, that they engage in the mercantile business if they choose to engage in it. also,

Resolved that the right of no man shall be infringed to do as he choose according to law of God or man. also,

Resolved, that the above named men shall be upheld in purchasing goods as other men.

Resolved, that we will not uphold any man or men to take a partner out of the Church to trade or traffic in this line of business, nor sell for any man or men out of the Church in his name, or on commission.

Resolved that the following request be granted to D. W. Patten:

"I am in debt and want to go away, will the Church pay my debts and take me for the same and let me go and preach the Kingdom of God. D. W. Patten." [^30]

Resolved that br. Musick's [^31] request concerning dealing in mercantile business, be defered until next Council

Resolved that D. W. Patten & T. B. Marsh receive each of them a lot in the Town of Far West free of pay, and that the Bishop Edward Partridge be hereby authorized to convey a title to them if he concurs with us in this thing.

Adjourned. Sang Adam on di Ahmon &c. And benediction by John Whitmer.

(Signed) John Corrill Clerk—

July 29, 1837

High Council met at the School house in Far West, July 29. 1837.

Presidents David [^32] & John Whitmer and W. W. Phelps.

Organized as follows:

John Murdock No. 1.

E. H. Groves 2.

Elias Higbee ,, 3.

Lyman Wight 4.

Simeon Carter ,, 5

Jacob Whitmer 6.

Solomon Hancock 7

Thomas Grover 8

G. M. Hinkle 9

Lyman Johnson 10

Luke Johnson 11

Isaac Higbee 12

Opened by John Whitmer as usual.

Application for ordination of Levi Stewart to the office of Elder—and was objected by Bishop, Edward Partridge.

(Signed) Nathan West, Clerk.

August 1, 1837

At a general meeting of the Presidency, High Council, Bishop and Council & multitude, August 1st 1837. [^33]

David Whitmer John Whitmer & W. W. Phelps Presidents

Simeon Carter No. 1.

E. H. Groves 2.

Thomas Grover ,, 3.

Calvin Bebee ,, 4.

Levi Jackman ,, 5.

Solomon Hancock ,, 6.

George Morey ,, 7.

Newel Knight ,, 8.

G. M. Hinckle ,, 9.

Lyman Wight ,, 10.

Elias Higbee ,, 11.

John Murdock ,, 12.

Opened by David Whitmer as usual and gave the counsellors charge in an appropriate manner, also all the authorities.

Voted unanimously by the High Council, that Thomas Grover be a High Counsellor in the place of Jesse Hitchcock—and George Morey in the place of Peter Whitmer jr. deceased. [^34]

Voted unanimously that Titus Billings be a Bishop's counsellor instead of John Corrill. [^35]

Voted unanimously by the authorities present & the audience—that in the absence of the presidents, Counsillors, Bishop and Counsillors, [^36] were at Kirtland the Elders had no authority consequently their acts in that space of time are considered null and void.

Resolved unanimously that every President of High Priests and Elders be ordained by some higher authority, and he the president of any quorum when Counsellors are needed may ordain his Counsellors himself and the Bishop shall take charge of the Lesser Priesthood.

The Presidents appointed the 15th inst. for the High Priests and Elders to meet and choose their respective Presidents.

Council adjourned until 10 O'clock next Saturday.

Council dismissed as usual by D. Whitmer.

(Signed) John Corrill, Clerk.

August 5, 1837

At a meeting of the authorities of the Church at the School house of Far West, August 5. 1837. [^37]

David Whitmer John Whitmer & W. W. Phelps, Presidents, and High Counsellors as follows:

Simeon Carter No. 1

E. H. Groves No. 2

Thomas Grover ,, 3

Calvin Bebee ,, 4

Isaac Higbee ,, 5

Solomon Hancock ,, 6

George Morey ,, 7

Samuel Bent ,, 8

G. M. Hinkle ,, 9

Lyman Wight ,, 10

Elias Higbee ,, 11

John Murdock ,, 12

Edward Partridge, Bishop, Isaac Morley and Titus Billings his Counsellors.

Meeting by D. Whitmer as usual, [^38] and also gave an appropriate charge. Also a multitude of Highpriests Elders &c. were present.

Voted unanimously by the authorities present, that we go on moderately and build a house unto the name of the Lord in this place. (Far West), as we have means.

Voted that Edward Partridge be treasurer to receive all the donations and subscriptions for the erection of the house of the Lord.

Voted that Isaac Morley be appointed Secretary for E. Partridge in his business of treasury.

Voted that the Committee stand, viz: Jacob Whitmer E. H. Groves & G. M. Hinkle, until President David Whitmer goes to and returns from Kirtland.

Voted that the building Committee of the house of the Lord have no store connected with the building the house. But that every firm or individual that embarks in that business—have, own and claim such property as their own private individual property and stewardship.

August 20, 1837

This certifies that Charles C. Rich was duly elected a president of the Highpriesthood in Zion [^39] and was ordained to that office under the hand of John Whitmer and William W. Phelps presidents. Also Harvey Green to the presidency of Elders in Caldwell Co. Mo. at the same time.

August, 20. 1837 [^40] John Whitmer, Recorder.

November 6, 1837

Far West Mo. Nov. 6. 1837. [^41]

A number of members of the Church of the Latter Day Saints met to take into consideration some of the affairs of said Church; consisting of the Presidency of the Church here, [^42] and President J. Smith jr. Sidney Rigdon & Hyrum Smith. With Elders T. B. Marsh, Wm. E. Mclellin, L. E. Johnson, Wm. Smith & Vinson Knight (from Ohio.) The High Counsellors of the Church here, and some other Elders.

Opened by prayer by W. W. Phelps—

Several topics were discussed, when it was unanimously voted, that it be reccommended to the proprietors of the Corporation of Far West, to petition the Trustees of said Corporation, to alter the streets or lessen them so as to make each block contain four acres of ground and each block be divided into four lots. [^43]

Secondly: Voted unanimously, that it is the opinion of the Council, that there is sufficient room in this country, for the Churches [^44] to continue gathering from abroad.

Third Voted unanimously, that the building of the house of the Lord in this place be postponed till the Lord shall reveal it to be his will to be commenced. [^45]

On motion of S. Rigdon the meeting was adjourned until early candlelight.

Council met according to adjournment.

Remarks by John Corrill, Isaac Morley, W. W. Phelps and John Whitmer, and Edward Partridge, Thomas Grover, John Murdock, Wm. Smith, T. B. Marsh, Hyrum Smith, Joseph Smith jr., Sidney Rigdon, upon the previous disposition of the Town Plot and the purchase of land &c. &c.

All difficulties were satisfactorily settled except a matter between J. Smith jr. Oliver Cowdery and T. B. Marsh which was referred to themselves with the agreement that their settlement of the affair should be sufficient for the Council. [^46]

W. W. Phelps

President.

Attest.

Oliver Cowdery, Clerk.

November 7, 1837

Far West. Mo. Tuesday Nov 7 1837 [^47]

At a general assembly of the Church of Latter Day Saints, assembled at Far West, to take into consideration and transact the business of said Church,

Elder Thomas B. Marsh was chosen Moderator and Oliver Cowdery Clerk.

After singing, the Moderator addressed the Throne of Grace in prayer, after which Prest. Sidney Rigdon explained the object of the meeting, giving a relation of the recent reorganization of the Church in Kirtland; the minutes of said meeting were read by the Moderator, [^48] who also nominated Joseph Smith jr. the first President of the whole Church, to preside over the same. All were requested (males and females,) to vote—who was unanimously chosen. He then made a few remarks, accepting the appointment requesting the prayers of the Church in his behalf.

President Smith then nominated Prest. Sidney Rigdon to be one of his counsellors—who was unanimously chosen.

He then nominated Frederick G Williams to be his next counsillor who was objected to by Elder Lyman Wight in a few remarks referring to a certain letter written to this place by the said Frederick G Williams Also Elder Marsh objected to Prest Williams Elder James Emmet also objected to Prest Williams [^49]

Bishop Edward Partridge said he seconded Prest. William's nomination and should vote for him; and as to said letter, he had heard it, and saw nothing so criminal in it.

President David Whitmer also made a few remarks in Prest. Williams' favor.

Elder Marsh made further remarks.

Elder Thomas Grover also objected to Prest. Williams.

Prest. S. Rigdon then nominated Prest. Hyrum Smith to take Prest. Williams' place. He then called for a vote in favor of Prest. Williams' who was rejected. [^50] He then called for a vote in favor of Prest Hyrum Smith, which was carried unanimously.

Some few remarks were made by Prests. David Whitmer and S. Rigdon.

David Whitmer was then nominated as the first President of this branch of the Church, and was objected to by Elder Marsh. Bishop Partridge said he should vote for prst. Whitmer—also Elder King Follet.

Elder Caleb Baldwin spake against pres't. Whitmer: also Elder Seymour Brunson.

Elder Elisha H. Groves spake in favor of Pres't. Whitmer. Further remarks from Elder Mc.lellin, by request of Pres't. Whitmer, who made satisfaction for him. Remarks from Pres't. Joseph Smith jr. who called for an expression, which was carried by almost a unanimous vote. [^51]

Pres't. Joseph Smith jr. then nominated John Whitmer for an assistant President, who was objected, and Elder Marsh spake in opposition to him, and read a list of charges from a written document against him, and Pres't. Phelps. Pres't. John Whitmer then spake a few words by way of confession, and was followed by Elder Isaac Morley.

The vote was called and carried unanimously.

The meeting adjourned for one hour.

Meeting convened according to adjournment, a hymn was sung and a prayer offered up by the Moderator. Wm W. Phelps was nominated for an assistant President, for this Church, by Pres't Joseph Smith jr. He rose and made certain remarks on the subject of the charges referred to above, by way of confession also, when the vote was put by Pres't. S. Rigdon, and passed unanimous.

Elder John Murdock, Solomon Hancock, Elias Higbee, Calvin Bebee, George Morey, Thomas Grover, and Simeon Carter, were unanimously chosen High Counsellors, and Lyman Wight was objected by John Anderson, who went aside to converse. Newel Knight was unanimously chosen. George M. Hinkle was nominated and was objected by Elder James Emmet because he was to noisy [^52]—By King Follet because of his military office, and by James Durfee because he was a merchant—Elder H. [^53] made a few remarks, the vote was called and was unanimous. Levi Jackman and Elisha H. Groves were unanimously chosen. John Anderson then took the stand and made his objections to Lyman Wight, after which Elder Wight also spake the vote was called and he unanimously chosen.

The twelve were then called, viz: Thomas B. Marsh, David W Patten, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, William E. Mc.Lellin, Parley P. Pratt, William Smith, Luke Johnson, Orson Pratt, John F. Boynton and Lyman E. Johnson, and were unanimously chosen. [^54]

Bishop Edward Partridge was then nominated to still act as Bishop, and was unanimously chosen. Who then nominated Isaac Morley and Titus Billings for his Counsellors who were unanimously chosen.

Elder Isaac Morley was then unanimously appointed Patriarch of this Branch of the Church. [^55]

Elder John Corrill was chosen to be Keeper of the Lord's Storehouse.

Elder Isaac Morley was then ordained to the office of Patriarch under the hands of Pres'ts. Joseph Smith, jr. Sidney Rigdon and Hyrum Smith.

The congregation then after a few remarks from Pres't. Rigdon, unanimously voted not to support Stores and Shops selling spirituous liquors, Tea, Coffee or Tobacco.

A vote was called on the subject of the Presidents of the Seventies—and those who have been recently appointed to that office, were unanimously received.

The Congregation then united with Pres't. Rigdon who, in the closing prayer, called upon the Lord to dedicate this land for the gathering of the Saints, and their inheritances.

Attest. Thomas B. Marsh, Moderator.

Oliver Cowdery Clerk

November 10, 1837

Far West, Tuesday, Nov. 10, 1837. [^56]

At a general meeting of the ordained members of the Church of Latter Day Saints in this place, Elder Thomas B. Marsh opened the meeting by prayer, and Pres't. S. Rigdon read the memorial of the Bishop of Kirtland, and his counsellors, to the Churches abroad of Sept. 18th 1837. [^57] He then laid before the meeting the subject of laying off cities, of consecrating for public purposes, and for remunerating those who appoint and lay them off, &c. When it was unanimously voted that all city plotts hereafter laid off, after remunerating those for their labors, who may be engaged in appointing and laying off the same, shall be consecrated for the public benefit of the church—for building houses for public worship, or such other purposes as the Church shall say. [^58]

President Rigdon then read the prospectus of the "Elder's Journal"—which was unanimously received. [^59] It was then also unanimously voted that the persons present use their exertions to support said paper.

It was then voted that the town of Far West be enlarged so that it contain four sections—that is, two miles square. [^60]

Voted, that Bishop Edward Partridge and his counsellors be appointed a committee to appraise the land adjacent to the present Town Plott, see that it is enlarged according to the above vote, provided the present holders of the lands will take such price for the same, as the above appraisers shall think worth, and that the same be then disposed of as is voted above.

A call was then made for those whose circumstances were such as to permit, to go out to preach, to present themselves. There were twenty-three who arose.

Sylvester H. Earl, Henry Jackson, Harrison Sagers and John W. Clark, were ordained Elders, and William J. Lemans was ordained a Priest.

President Rigdon then closed the meeting by prayer. [^61]

Oliver Cowdery Clerk.

December 6, 1837

Far West, Wednesday, Dec. 6, 1837. [^62]

The High Council and Bishop and Council met for the purpose of transacting the business of the Church. The Council was organized and opened by prayer of Pres't. David Whitmer.

Several subjects were discussed by the Council when Elias Higbee, Simeon Carter, and Elisha H. Groves were nominated a committee to take into consideration a certain price for services for the Church, the propriety of proposing to the Church to pay the Council a certain price for services for the Church when met for that purpose. Elder Marsh made a few remarks on an other Subject and was followed by Pres't. D Whitmer. The above three were appointed said Committee.

Bisho Bishop Partridge, John Corrill and Isaac Morley were appointed a committee to take into consideration and report upon the subject of raising a revinue to defray the expenses of the Church

David Whitmer was nominated and appointed to Sign Lisences of Elders, as, Chairman, and William W Phelps as Clerk And Frederick G Williams to sign Lisences as Chairman pro Tempore, in the absence of Pres't. D. Whitmer and John Whitmer, as Clerk pro Tempore, in the absence of Pres't Phelps and Oliver Cowdery as Recording Clerk

Oliver Cowdery was then appointed standing Clerk for the Counsil

Council adjourned for two hours

Council met pursuant to adjournment

Philo Dibble requested a hearing in a certain case wherein he had been disfellowshiped before a council of Elders: Charles Hewlet being complainant—dismissed from the council by recommending to the parties to choose two brethren to assist in settling the difficulty. Without troubling the Council. [^63] Oliver Cowdery was then nominated and appointed recorder to record the Patriarchal blessing of this branch of the church. The following report was then presented and read by the clerk three times and was accepted—We the undersigned committee chosen by the high council of Zion on this 6th day of December A. D. 1837 to take into consideration the expediency of remunerating the Presidency and high council and also the bishop and his council for their services when employed in doing the business of the church of Latter day-saints having met agreeably to appointment and after taking the aforesaid business into consideration it is out united opinion that the aforesaid officers togegher with the clerk of the council [^64] the Patriarch [^65] and also the agent of the Church [^66] (as also any other person who may be employed in the same or the like business) receive per day each one dollar and fifty cents. [^67]

Elias Higby

Simeon Carter

Elisha H. Groves Bishop E. Partridge then presented the following petition—

To the high council in the land of Zion: Wheras the undersigned has paid six hundred dollars to Lawyers to carry on suits with the Jackson County mob And has also paid three hundred dollars costs in carrying on said suits; For which he has never received any remuneration; In paying the above he has involved himself: having had to borrow it for which, in part, at least, he is now paying ten percent interest, Having a large family to support and no means whereby he can at present extricate himself from these debts He therefore asks the high council whether they are willing that he should pay the said $900. and the interest that has accumulated thereon, out of the property consecrated for the benefit of the church. And charge the Church for the same.

Farwest Dec 6th 1837 E. Partridge

Unanimously voted that said petition be received and and our Bishop Partridge be directed to use the properties of the church for said purposes as requested in said petition. [^68]—

Unanimously voted that the the recorder of Licenses and Patriarchal blessings receive for each hundred records $10. for his services.

Council adjourned till tomorrow at 9 O'clock A.M.

Prayer by Prest Phelps.

December 7, 1837

Thirsday Dec 7th 1837 [^69]

Council met pursuant to adjournment and was opened by prayer by Prest John Whitmer. Yesterdays proceedings were read by the Clerk.

The committee on Church revinue made the following report which was read by their chairman Bishop E. Partridge and once by the clerk and was then engrossed for a third reading.

Far West Dec. 7th 1837

We the undersigned a committee appointed yesterday by a general council in the Land of Zion for the purpose of adopting a plan wherby the church of Latter Day Saints may voluntarily raise means by tithing [^70] themselves to be a fund ready at all times to assist the poor with. and also to compensate the Servents of the Lord for their services in attending to the business of the church. and for other necessary purposes. Having investigated the subject as fully as the time would permit, make the following report.

First. We believe that a voluntary freewill offering from year to year will not only be pleasing in the sight of the Lord but will be in some degree fullfilling the law of consecration.

Secondly. We believe that a per centage on what a man is worth, is a more equal mode of raising funds than the tithing of what a man raises or his income from year to year.

Thirdly. We believe that widows generally and all other families not worth over seventy five dollars each, should not be required to tithe themselves and yet retain an honorable standing in the church [^71]

Resolved first, That it is expedient that every man renders an inventory to the Bishop Edward Partridge or his successor in office yearly of what he is worth after deducting his honest debts.

Resolved secondly. That about the commencement of every year the high council together with the Bishop and his Council shall agree upon, and make known to the church the amount of per centage necessary to be raised the following year. And that the same shall be paid over in the course of the following year to the agent of the church John Corrill or his successor in office subject to the order of Bishop Edward Partridge or his successor in office.

Resolved third: That every man in paying the amount of his donation should either deed the same by gift or sign the amount by upon a subscription paper like or similar to the one presented with his report.

This year being nearly spent we have thought that if five mills could be raised upon the dollar which every man is worth it would be sufficient to try the experiment: Therefore we recommend that the Elders holding meetings about among the saints in this region of country read this report to the Churches and instruct them about the necessity of forthwith makeing an estimate of what they are worth and of paying the above named percentage as soon as they conveniently can and let the same be paid in any valuable commodity: We have estimated that two cents upon the dollar for what every man shall be worth when he renders his inventory to the Bishop will raise a sum sufficient for the A. D. 1838. We recommend that the Elders also circulate copies of the subscription paper accompanying this report so that all who are willing to thithe themselves may have an opportunity of manifesting their generosity.

We are of the opinion that if any are not willing to comply with the mode above pointed untill a better one is suggested of raising the means to meet the necessary expenses of the church: they must to say the least of them be considered weak in the faith and also under the influence of covetousness to that degree that their case must be considered hopeless unless they repent: for the scripture informs us that a covetous man who is an idolator hath [not] any part in the kingdom of God.

To close we are of the opinion that this report and subscription paper should not be circulated to obtain funds beyond the bounds of what is attached to this stake of Zion. neither should the funds raised be expended out of the bounds of the same

Isaac Morley

Edward Partridge

John Corril

The Subscription paper

We the undersigned subscribers feeling a deep interest in the prosperity of the Church of Latterday Saints and believing that the prosperity of the Church in some degree depends upon our providing a fund for the purpose of defraying the expenses of the church: In assisting the poor, in remunerating the officers of the church for the time which they are necessarily employed in doing the business of the same: in building houses of publick worship and all such other expenses as shall be deemed necessary by the authorities of the church for the good of the same, And believing that voluntary tithing is better than Forced taxes; [^72] We therefore each of us agree to pay to into the hand of the agent of the church John Corril or his successor in office. Subject to the order of Edward Partridge the Bishop or his successor in office: to be expended for any or all of the above named purposes: two cents on the dollar or one fiftieth of what we are worth after deducting what we owe. We further agree that we will furnish the Bishop with furnish a scedule or inventory of our property at or before the time we pay to the agent of the church the above named percentage which we agree shall be done in the course of the year eighteen hundred and thirty eight.

Far West Dec 1837.

The first and second items were read and passed But an amendment was offered to the third by elder Marsh and others which was withdrawn. The Item then passed.

Much discussion was had and the Item of church revinue dismissed till one week from Saturday next and Prest's D. Whitmer, J. Whitmer, W. W. Phelps and O. Cowdery were added to that committee and were ordered to make a further report on (if time would allow) on said day. [^73]

Council adjourned till candle light.

Council met pursuant to adjournment. O. Cowdery and D. W. Patten of the committee sent to explore the north country made a verbal report. [^74] Their labours so far as performed were accepted by the council and the subject further laid over till the bills of surveys could be had. F. G. Williams was also added to said committee now consists of O. Cowdery, D. W. Patten, Lyman Wight and F. G. Williams.

It was the unanimous voice of the council that George Grant be allowed a location for his aged father [^75] near the one allotted to himself in consideration of past services rendered the expedition in staying behind to bring in the camp utensils with the teams.

Edward Partridge Isaac Morley and John Corril were appointed a committee to take into consideration the services of the committee previously appointed to obtain subscriptions and build a house for publick worship and to report thereon.

On Motion council adjourned till Saturday. The 16th instant.

Pray by the Clerk.

Oliver Cowdery clerk.

December 23, 1837

The following is recorded by Hosea Stout [^76] Clerk for the High Council of Nauvoo Illinois Dec. 23rd 1837. The High Council met according to adjournment.

Councillors Present.

Simeon Carter No 1

E. H. Groves No 2

Dr. McCord [^77] 3.

hos. Grover 4

L. Jackman 5

Benjamin Benson 6

G. Morey 7.

M. C. Allred 8

G. M. Hinkle 9.

John Patten 10

E. Higbee 11.

John Murdock 12

Business concerning the committee to build the house of the Lord

Elisha H. Groves presented his bill as follows

To the Presidents and High Council of Zion I have served as one of the committee to build a house to the name of the Lord in the City Far West nine months and have spent one hundred dollars in traveling—sixteen dollars in boarding hands at work in the stone quarry which money I owe and being destitute of means to support my family I ask of them whether they will grant to me orders on the Bishop for the money and one dollar and fifty cents per day for my services. Elisha H Groves

G. M. Hinkle presented his [^78] verbally.

Jacob Whitmer presented his as folows—

To the Presidency & High Council of Zion

Will the High Council allow me for my time & expense for serving as a committee for the purpose of building a house to the Lord.

I calculate the time one hundred and twenty days for which I think I ought to have one dollar per day for time and expense.

Dec 23rd 1837—Jacob Whitmer.

Two were selected on each side to speak after which G. M. Hinkle spoke.

Decided that the brethren Elisha H. Groves G. M. Hinkle and Jacob Whitmer be allowed one dollar per day and be found while journeying and while at home and in the employment of the committee business one dollar per day and find themselves. This to be laid before the Bishop and his Counsellors Adjourned

John Whitmer Clerk W. W. Phelps Chm.

Footnotes

While an immediate removal was planned as scores of families were arriving in Missouri, Jackson County suits delayed the move until August. The meeting mentioned in the text appointed the named brethren to locate a settlement where the Saints could gather. But interestingly enough, they did not decide to lay out a city on any of the properties previously purchased, but rather upon a section purchased on August 8, 1836—Far West, Missouri. (See Edward Partridge Journal, The Book of John Whitmer, and John Murdock Journal, Church Archives; and History of the Church 2:444-45.)

Referring to this meeting, Thomas B. Marsh wrote: "[W. W. Phelps and J. Whitmer] generally did their business, independently of the aid, or council of either the bishop or High Council. This gave some uneasiness to the two authorities of Zion: not only because they purchased land with Church funds, in their own name, for their own agrandisement, but because they selected the place of the City Far West and appointed the spot for the House of the Lord to be built on, drew the plan of said house, and appointed and ordained a committee to build the same, without asking or seeking council, at the hand of either Bishop, High Council, or first presidency." (See Thomas B. Marsh to Wilford Woodruff, April 30, 1838, Church Archives.)

8George M. Hinkle.

---
Notas:
[^1] Simeon Carter Here, the high council, this time in the company of two Apostles, met to bring charges against the Missouri presidency. (See pages 107-8.) Oliver did not know about plural marriage and, therefore, assumed Joseph Smith was committing adultery.
[^2] David and John Whitmer said tea and coffee were not hot drinks and, therefore, using them was not in violation of the Word of Wisdom. The Saints were still defining the Word of Wisdom. Hyrum Smith's statement on tea and coffee was made in Nauvoo. (See Times and Seasons 3[June 1842]:800.) Oliver did know about plural marriage but was not granted permission to practice it, and, seeking revenge, charged the prophet with adultery.
[^3] Resolved—That the High Council recommend to all those who hold licences, between the age of 18 and 45, and do not officiate in their respective offices, be subject to military duty. [^29] The council did not wish to accept full responsibility for action against the presidents, and, therefore, called for a vote of the Church membership on this matter, in a general assembly and in meetings with each branch. Oliver knew about plural marriage and entered the practice himself without authorization. (See George Q. Cannon, Juvenile Instructor 16 [September 15, 1881]:206, and 20[December 1, 1885]:360; Joseph F. Smith, Journal of Discourses 20:29; and Danel W. Bachman, "A Study of the Mormon Practice of Plural Marriage before the Death of Joseph Smith," M.A. thesis, Purdue University, 1975.)
[^4] Resolved That the High Council recommend George W. Harris to the office of a High Priest. The name of the Church in its complete form indicates that these minutes were recorded in the Far West Record after April 1838, when the official name was given by revelation.
[^5] See History of the Church 3:3.
[^6] This revelation is found in History of the Church 2:511. The date in History of the Church is September 3, 1837, not September 4, 1837.
[^7] See History of the Church 2:127 for an additional reference to this appeal.
[^8] In reference to this meeting and the selling of their lands in Jackson County, Oliver Cowdery has written: "Messrs W. W. Phelps J. Whitmer and myself had a partial claim to a few lots in Independence, Mo. [which] we sold some time since on some of the Jackson suits costs. We quit claimed our interest in and to the same for a small sum (and glad to get that) which has caused considerable stir. Not long since, Messers D and J Whitmer, W. W. Phelps and myself were waited upon by (as they said) a committee of the High Council who said the church were dissatisfied with our conduct, &c. in selling those lots and not keeping the word of wisdom, and also in not teaching the church to fulfil the consecration law. I told them that if I had property, while I lived and was sane, I would not be dictated, influenced or controlled by any man or set of men by no tribunal of ecclesiastical pretences what ever . . . .
[^9] Resolved—that this Council adjourn to meet next Saturday at 9 o'clock A. M. Note that the bishops (Partridge, Corrill, and Billings) believed that only a common council could try the presidents in Missouri (see Doctrine and Covenants 107:82). The opinion of the high council in Missouri, however, was that it had the authority to try the presidents. This discussion underscores the confusion in the minds of Church leaders regarding the true role of the Missouri presidency.
[^10] The letter from Joseph Smith to Bishop Partridge was dated, Kirtland, January 7, 1838.
[^11] The Prophet's January 7, 1838, letter to Partridge mentioned the "wolf": "Brother Partridge, Thus saith the Lord, my servant Edward and his house shall be numbered with the blessed and Abraham their father, and his name shall be had in sacred rem[em]brance. And again thus saith the Lord, let my people be aware of dissensions among them lest the enemy have power over them, Awake my shepherds and warn my people! for behold the wolf cometh to destroy them! receive him not. Now I would inform you that my health is good and also that of my family, and it is my earnest prayer to God that health, peace, and pleanty may crown your board and blessings of Heaven rest upon the head of him in whom the Lord hath said there is no guide." (Edward Partridge, Jr., Family Record, page 52, Church Archives.)
[^12] Note again the uncertainty of Church leaders on this issue.
[^13] Simeon Carter.
[^14] February 1838.
[^15] This letter was written by the Prophet at New Portage, Ohio.
[^16] Oliver Cowdery writes: "They call loudly for help from this place: for many waggons to help them forward. There is a council today [February 24, 1838], I expect, on the subject—what will be the result I am not able to say, but presume messengers will be sent to meet them." (See letter of Oliver Cowdery, February 24, 1838, Huntington Library, microfilm at Church Archives.)
[^17] See History of the Church 3:8-10. John P. Barnard, a blacksmith, traveled to Huntsville, Missouri, with his carriage to bring Joseph and his family to Far West. (Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young [Salt Lake City: Elden Jay Watson, 1968], page 27.)
[^18] This is the first time the word stake is used in the Far West Record to refer to a Church unit in Missouri. In this case the stake was located at Far West.
[^19] Doctrine and Covenants 20:53-59.
[^20] See Doctrine and Covenants 20:81-82. In addition to the membership list called for in Doctrine and Covenants 20, the teachers are now instructed to bring a report of the status of the branch.
[^21] See Doctrine and Covenants 20:47. This sixth article was voted null and void on March 15, 1838. (See page 151.)
[^22] Doctrine and Covenants 59.
[^23] The space here represents a space in the Far West Record manuscript. Hosea Stout had undoubtedly intended to list those present.
[^24] See History of the Church 3:6. Some of this account has been omitted from the History of the Church version.
[^25] Although John Murdock was the senior member of the high council, he is listed as number twelve. These numbers were assigned, apparently at each meeting, by casting lots.
[^26] See Doctrine and Covenants 20:61-62.
[^27] Doctrine and Covenants 20:84. Note the desire to bring the Church organization into harmony with the revelations.
[^28] This was a case appealed from the elders quorum. Evidence indicates that each quorum had authority to try its own members. Decisions of these quorum cases could be appealed.
[^29] B. H. Roberts notes: "The law of Missouri excused from military duty all licensed ministers of the Gospel, and as nearly all the adult members of the Church who were worthy had received ordination to the Priesthood, it left the community in Far West, then a frontier country and liable to be raided by warlike tribes of Indians, without militia companies and state arms for its protection; hence the recommendation of the Council that the brethren within the ages specified, and not actively employed in the ministry, place themselves in a position to accept militia service." (See History of the Church 3:6.)
[^30] March 10, 1838.
[^31] This letter summarizes the position of the presidents. From this point of view they had been treated unjustly. They objected to Marsh and Patten's convening the council in their absence, and claimed that these two Apostles were committed to removing them from the Church.
[^32] See History of the Church 3:7-8.
[^33] Lyman Leonard.
[^34] See the explanation given by Thomas B. Marsh in Elders Journal 1(July 1838):37-38.
[^35] Possibly William Fry.
[^36] See page 110.
[^37] On April 21, 1838, the Church agreed not to pay the mortgage. (See page 182.)
[^38] Concerning this matter Oliver Cowdery wrote: "A day or two since past D and J. Whitmer and W W Phelps were notified by Marsh that a charge had been prepared before the High Council then, and that to day their case would be taken into consideration. Accordingly the following was drawn up, signed & c. And Marcellus is now gone to present it to Marsh in their new fangled council. . . . Whether this little document will cause those hotheaded men to consider their ways I know not, I suppose however they will plead Smith's instructions and justify themselves in trying Presidents of the church before a rabble and call it legal. Be this as it may, when it becomes us to speak we shall probably be heard." (See Oliver Cowdery Letter, March 10, 1838, Huntington Library, microfilm copy at Church Archives.)
[^39] This action against Marcellus Cowdery shows the prejudiced nature of the council in this matter. This was a desperate time for the Church. (See F. Mark McKiernan, "Mormonism on the Defensive," The Restoration Movement [Lawrence, Kansas: Coronado Press, 1973], pages 121-40.)
[^40] Joseph Smith and company, including Brigham Young, had arrived in Far West the previous day.
[^41] See page 143.
[^42] See pages 72-73. See also D. Michael Quinn, "The Mormon Succession Crisis of 1844," Brigham Young University Studies 16(Winter 1976):187-233.
[^43] Reference is made to (1) dropping the Presidency in Missouri, and (2) the excommunication of Phelps and John Whitmer.
[^44] It appears that the conference did not actually convene until two days later.
[^45] Joseph Smith opened and closed with prayer and presided in the meeting, indicating the need he perceived to take full charge of affairs in Far West. This was a very important meeting.
[^46] A brother-in-law of Charles C. Rich.
[^47] Note that the council changed composition, that is, it had different members, every time it met in this period.
[^48] John Murdock.
[^49] James Newberry.
[^50] Mary Gates.
[^51] This whole episode shows the puritanical attitudes of the Saints as well as their serious concern for education.
[^52] Joseph Outhouse.
[^53] John Murdock.
[^54] Means "reproach."
[^55] Once or twice.
[^56] Note the responsibility of one to speak to an offender before making the issue public knowledge. (See Doctrine and Covenants 28:11.)
[^57] Lyman Leonard.
[^58] Abigail Leonard.
[^59] Also referred to as Alonzo. (See page 154.)
[^60] Note that a procedure was established in which high councilors who were frequently absent would be replaced.
[^61] History of the Church 3:13. The practice of holding general conferences semiannually began in 1838. In accordance with Doctrine and Covenants 20:61, regular Church conferences had previously convened quarterly. An abbreviated report of this meeting is found in the Scriptory Book of Joseph Smith, page 29, Church Archives.
[^62] Note again the use of the official name of the Church by the clerk prior to April 26, 1838. (See page 140, note 1.)
[^63] Here they are consciously holding their conference to coincide with the anniversary of the founding of the Church.
[^64] The two "historians" were John Corrill and Elias Higbee.
[^65] This record, called "The Scriptory Book of Joseph Smith," was kept by George W. Robinson.
[^66] This record, known as the Far West Record, was kept by Ebenezer Robinson.
[^67] Thomas B. Marsh, Brigham Young and David W. Patten were chosen as presidents, pro tem. (See page 141.)
[^68] Note that the sacrament was administered and children were blessed at this quarterly conference, which was the first such conference held at Far West.
[^69] See History of the Church 3:14.
[^70] Charles C. Rich was president of the high priests quorum. Joseph Young was senior president of the seventies; the other six presidents at this time were Levi Hancock, James Foster, Daniel Miles, Josiah Butterfield, Henry Harriman, and Zera Pulsipher. Harvey Green was president of the elders quorum (124 in number). Edward Partridge was senior bishop and president of the priests quorum. Albert Perry was president of the teachers quorum. The president of the deacons quorum is not known.
[^71] Note the custom of speaking in a public meeting about the strengths and weaknesses of the brethren, reflecting the open, democratic nature of the Church. All of the men whom Patten could not recommend, with the exception of William Smith, were excommunicated in 1838, some in Missouri, some in Kirtland.
[^72] The use of the title president was to indicate Murdock's seniority in the high council.
[^73] See History of the Church 3:15. On this day Joseph Smith sent a letter to John Whitmer in consequence of his withholding Church records.
[^74] See page 119 for his appointment.
[^75] In the pages of the Far West Record and other early Church records, the Word of Wisdom is frequently questioned and debated. Here, in contrast, the Prophet stresses that it should be observed.
[^76] See History of the Church 3:16-18. The History of the Church notes that the bishop and high council assembled at the bishop's office. This tribunal, with Bishop Partridge presiding, was constituted as a common council, appropriately organized to try Oliver Cowdery, one of the presidents of the Church. George W. Robinson included an abbreviated account of this trial in the Scriptory Book of Joseph Smith, pages 29-31, Church Archives.
[^77] There was a Church moratorium on collecting debts incurred by the failure of the Kirtland Safety Society. Cowdery, in violation of this moratorium, pressed civil lawsuits against Church members concerning indebtedness.
[^78] This charge was finally rejected by the council.
