Lyndon W. Cook, Donald Q. Cannon, Far West Record: Minutes of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1830-1844 ( 1983)

January 20, 1838

January 20th 1838 Far West

At a social meeting held at the house of Thos B. Marsh. Two of the apostles T. B. Marsh and David W. Patten also High Councellors John Murdock, Simeon Carter Elias Higbee G M. Hinkle Thos Grover Levi Jackman and George Morey were present.

We took into consideration the proceeding of the Presidents in this place viz David Whitmer W. W. Phelps John Whitmer and Oliver Cowdery and we being grieved at their doings after varie various discussions appointed a committee to visit them and enquire into their feelings and determinations viz G. M. Hinkle Thos Grover and George Morey

Resolved that Thomas B. Marsh and John Corril draft a petition, to hand in at the next term of court, for the alteration and regulation of the Town Plot of Far-West. Adjourned meeting till the 26th inst. at 10 o'clock A. M.

January 26, 1838

Far West, January 26, 1838—

Agreeable to adjournment the above named Apostles and High Councilors and Lyman Wight in Company with Samuel Bent, High Priest, and some others met at the house of Br. John Anderson. [^1]

John Murdock being the most aged in Council presided and Samuel Bent was chosen clerk of the meeting. The meeting being organized proceeded to business and heard the report of the Committee as follows viz. Respecting their selling their lands in Jackson County, they, the Presidents, declared they had not broken revelation or law or Law of God in so doing and further if they were deprived of that privilege they would sell their possessions in Far-West and move out of the place and W. W. Phelps said he would move out of the accursed place and further they declared they would not be controlled by an ecclesiastical power or revelation whatever in their temporal concerns. And respecting the word of wisdom, W. W. Phelps said he had not broken it but had kept it. O Cowdery said he had drank tea three times a day this winter on account of his ill health. David and John Whitmer said they did use tea and coffee but they did not consider them to come under the head of hot drinks. [^2]

The Council Resolved as follows:

1st That under existing circumstances we no longer recieve them as Presidents.

2nd That the case be laid before the Church at different meetings held for that purpose by seven of the High Councellors viz. John Murdock, Simeon Carter, Elias Higbee, Levi Jackman, G. M. Hinkle, George Morey, and Lyman Wight but as it was inconsistent for Elias Higbee and Levi Jackman to leave home it was afterward voted that Thomas B. Marsh should take the place of E. Higbee and Thos. Grover that of L. Jackman. [^3]

3rd That Elias Higbee and G. M. Hinkle write to the several neighbourhoods and give notice of the times and places of holding meetings.

4th That Thomas B. Marsh give written notice to David Whitmer and W. W. Phelps and John Whitmer of the proceedings of the meeting.

Council Adjourned till February 3rd next

Samuel Bent, Clerk John Murdock, Moderator

February 5-9, 1838

The following are the minutes of the proceedings of a general assembly of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, [^4] assembled at the following places, to transact the business of said Church

1st. At Far-West. Feb. 5th, 1838: [^5] Thomas B Marsh was chosen Moderator, and John Cleminson Clerk.

The Moderator addressed the throne of grace in prayer, after which he laid before the assembly the object of the meeting, giving a relation of the recent organization of the Church here, and in Kirtland. He also read a certain revelation given in Kirtland, Sept 4th, 1837; [^6] which made known that John Whitmer and William W. Phelps were in transgression, and if they repented not, they should be removed out of their places. Also, read a certain clause contained in the appeal, [^7] published in the old Star, under the 183rd page, as follows:—"And to sell our lands would amount to a denial of our faith, as that is the place where the Zion of God shall stand according to our faith and belief in the revelations of God." [^8]

Elder John Murdock then took the stand, and showed to the congregation why the High Council proceeded thus, was, that the Church might have a voice in the matter; and that he considered it perfectly legal, according to the instructions of President Joseph Smith jr.

Elder G. M. Hinkle then set forth the way in which the Presidency of Far West had been labored with, that a committee of three, of whom he was one, had labored with them. He then read a written document containing a number of accusations against the three Presidents. He spake many things against them, setting forth in a plain and energetic manner, the iniquity of Phelps & Whitmer, in using the moneys which were loaned for the Church. Also D. Whitmer's wrong, in persisting in the use of tea, coffee, and tobacco.

Bishop Partridge then arose, and endeavored to rectify some mistakes of minor importance made by Elder Hinkle. Also, the Bishop spake against the proceedings of the meeting, as being hasty and illegal, for he thought they ought to be had before the common council: [^9] and said, that he could not lift his hand against the presidency at present: he then read a letter from President Joseph Smith jr. [^10]

A letter was then read by T. B. Marsh from William Smith, who made some comments on the same, and also on the letter read by E. Partridge.

Elder G. Morey, who was one of the committee sent to labor with the Presidency, then spake, setting forth in a very energetic manner, the proceedings of the Presidency as being iniqutous.

Elder Grover also, being one of the committee, spake against the conduct of the Presidency and O. Cowdery, on their visit to labor with them.

Elder David W. Patten, then spake with much zeal against this Presidency, and in favor of Br. Joseph Smith jr and that the wolf alluded to in his letter, was the dissenters in Kirtland. [^11]

Elder Lyman Wight next stated that he considered that all other accusations were of minor importance compared to their selling their lands in Jackson County, that they (Phelps & Whitmer) had set an example which all the members were liable to follow: he said that it was a hellish principle, and that they had flatly denied the faith in so doing. Elder Elias Higbee then sanctioned what had been done by the council speaking against the Presidency.

Elder Murdock again took the stand, and stated that sufficient had been said to substantiate the accusations against them

Elder Solomon Hancock plead in favor of the Presidency, stating that he could not rais his hand against them.

Elder John Corrill then spake against the High Council in regard to their proceedings, and labored hard to show that the meeting was illegal, and that the Presidency ought to be had before a proper tribunal, which he considered to be a Bishop and twelve High Priests: he labored in favor of the Presidency, and said that he should not raise his hands against them at present, although he did not uphold them in their iniquity

Elder Simeon Carter, next arose and spake against the meeting as being hasty.

Elder Groves followed brother Carter, in like observations and of like nature.

Elder Patten again took the stand in vindication of the cause of the cause meeting.

Elder Morley then spake against the Presidency, at the same time pleading mercy.

Titus Billings said that he could not vote until they had a hearing in the common council.

Elder Marsh said that the meeting was according to the directions of Br Joseph. he, therefore, considered it legal

Elder Moses Martin then took the stand & with great energy spake in favor of the legality of the meeting and against the conduct of the Presidency of Zion, alleging that the present corruptions of the church here, were owing to the wickedness and mismanagement of her leaders.

The Moderator then called the vote in favor of the present Presidency. The negative was then called, and the vote against David Whitmer, John Whitmer, and William W. Phelps was unanimous, excepting eight or ten and this minority only wished them to continue in office a little longer, or untill Joseph Smith jr came up. [^12]

In S. Carter's [^13] settlement, the Saints assembled agreement agreeable to appointment, on the 6th inst [^14] When they unanimously rejected the three above named Presidents.

Also, on the 7th inst the Saints assembled at Edmund Durfee's agreeable to appointment, where the above named Presidents were unanimously rejected.

Also, on the 8th, at Nahum Curtis' dwelling house, they were unanimously rejected by the assembly.

Also, at Hauns' Mill, on the 9th the Saints unanimously rejected them.

February 10, 1838

At a meeting of the High Council, the Bishop & his Council. February 10, 1838, it was moved, seconded & carried, that Oliver Cowdery, William W. Phelps and John Whitmer stand no longer as Chairman & Clerk, to sign and record liceces [licenses].

Also, voted that Thomas B. Marsh, and David W. Patten be Presidents, pro. tempor. of the Church of Letter Day Saints in Missouri, or until Presidents Joseph Smith jr and Sidney Rigdon arrives in the Land of Zion

Also, voted that Thomas B Marsh and David W. Patten be authorized to attend to the afforsaid business of Recording and signing licence for the time being.

T. B. Marsh, Clerk. John Murdock, Moderator.

February 24, 1838

At a meeting of the High Council & Bishoprick convened at the new school house in Far West Feb 24th 1838

Present Thos. B. Marsh, President.

Calvin Beebee, Thomas Grover, Isaac Higbee, William Snow, Jefferson Hunt, and John Murdock, on the right of the president.

Simeon Carter, Levi Jackman, George W. Harris, George Morey, G. M. Hinkle and Elias Higbee on the left of the president.

Also, Edward Partridge Bishop and Titus Billings Bishop's councellor.

Council opened by singing and prayer by S. Carter. Prest Marsh then called on the Bishop for a letter [^15] written to W. W. Phelps from Prest. Joseph Smith jr, the Bishop then read the letter after which Brs Isaac Higbee, William Snow, and G. W. Harris, G. Morey were appointed to speak on the case, who urged the necessity of assisting the Brethren Joseph Smith Jr and Sidney Rigdon up here. [^16] The Bishop and council acquiesed in the same and urged it. Prest. Marsh then urged the same

1st Resolved—that by the High Council, Bishoprick and all the assembly, that E. Partridge, G. W. Harris, and Isaac Morly, be a committee to obtain two waggons and teams and money to go and meet the Brethren J. Smith jr & S. Rigdon and assist them on way hither and also to raise three hundred dollars if consistent [^17]

2nd. Resolved, by the High Council that it be considered that no High Priest, Elder or Priest (except the Presidency, High Council and Bishoprick) has any right or authority to preside over or take the charge of any Branch, Society or neighbourhood within the bounds of this Stake: [^18] but that the teachers, assisted by the deacons, be considered the standing ministry to preside each over his respective branch of the Stake agreeable to the covenants [^19]

3rd Resolved that we recommend to all High Priests, Elders and Priests who are in good standing & friends to Joseph Smith jr, the Prophet that they do not take the lead of nor appoint meetings in any branch or neighbourhood of Saints within the bounds of this Stake without the invitation or consent of the Presiding officer of that branch. We also, consider that the teacher, who is the presiding officer, has a right to object to any official character, who may come among them to officiate, who is not in good standing or a friend to the true cause of Christ. And also, that the teacher report, to the High Council, such as are unruly or teach corrupt doctrine among them 4th Resolved that the High Council recommend to each neighbourhood or settlement of Saints, within the bounds of this Stake, to choose for themselves a teacher, who is skilled in the word of God, faithful in his ministry, full of the Holy Ghost, and a friend to Joseph Smith jr, the Prophet of God, to take the wachcare over them, and preside agreeably to the covenants, who shall be assisted by the other teachers and deacons in the Branch.

5th Resolved, that each branch of this Stake send one or more teachers once in three months to the Quarterly conference of this Stake, with a written account of the true situation of his Branch, agreeably to the Covenants. [^20]

6 Resolved—that the High Council recommend and consider it the duty of priests to labor from house to house, each in his respective neighbourhood agreeably to the covenants. [^21]

7th Resolved, that this High Council recommend to each neighbourhood or settlement of Saints within the bounds of this stake to go to the house of prayer on the Lord's holy day and offer up their sacraments &c. agreeable to the Sabbath's day commandment and also, that they meet together oft for preaching and prayer. [^22]

8th Resolved that Bro Elias Higbee, G. M. Hinkle and George Morey, be appointed, a committee to notify the several Branches with in the bounds of this Stake of the above proceedings and furnish each Branch with a copy of the same.

Closed by prayer by Br Calvin Beebee.

John Corrill Clerk

March 3, 1838

At a meeting of the High Council of Zion on the 3rd of March convened according to adjournment.

Present.

Presidents [^23]

Bishop Partridge laid the following before the Council for their approval or disaproval namely.

"To the High Council in Zion, Far West Feb 24th 1838

Is the Council willing for me to furnish Br Sidney Rigdon with the North East corner of Block No 6. in Far West, containing Lots No 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, & 6, apprised at $285, free of expense. Also, for me to furnish Br. Joseph Smith jr with the South East corner of Block No 7, containing Lots No 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 apprised at $220, free of expense. There is a house and a claim upon one of these lots that I may have to buy Also for me to furnish free of expense Br. Joseph Smith jr with the North East corner of Block No 7, containing Lots No 1 & 4 apprised at $100 claim and betterments cost $135 amounting to $235 (in all) Also, for me to furnish, free of expense, Br Hyrum Smith with the North West corner of Block No 8, containing Lots No 2 and 3 apprised at $100

Edward Partridge Voted by the High Council that they are willing that the Bishop (Partridge) shall hold the above named property for the benefit of the persons therein named and that he remove all incumbrances thereon

E. Robinson Clerk

March 10, 1838

The High Council of Zion, met in Far West, on Saturday, March 10th, 1838, [^24] Agreeable to adjournment;

The council was organized in the following order viz

Thos B. Marsh and David W. Patten Presidents.

2 Jared Carter

3 Isaac Higbee

4 Thos Grover

5 Levi Jackman

6 Samuel Bent

7 George Morey

8 Newel Knight

9 G. M. Hinkle

10 George W. Harris

11 Elias Higbee

12 John Murdock [^25]

Opened by singing and prayer by Elder Grover after which President Marsh read a clause in the Book of Covenants respecting the dutys of Elders in holding Conferences, and made a few remarks upon the same. [^26]

Instructions were then given to the Council from Prest Patten and Marsh

1st Resolved—That the H Council recommend to the branches, of this Church, that they receive no members of this Church, who may come among them, unless they bring a certificate of their standing. [^27] An appeal case was presented, [^28] pending between John Lemons and Solomon Wixom, which was put over untill the last Saturday in April next.

2nd Resolved—That the High Council recommend, by writing, to the various branches of this Church, that all those who wish to receive an ordination, procure a recommend from the branch to which he belongs, & have it pass through the hands of the different quorums for inspection, previous to his ordination.

Council adjourned one hour till 2 o'clock P. M.

At 2 o'clock Council met persuant to adjournment. opened by singing and prayer [^30]

A charge was then preferred against William W. Phelps and John Whitmer, for persisting in unchristian-like conduct.

George M. Hinkle was the plaintiff

It was considered a difficult case therefore six councellors were appointed to speak, namely, Simeon Carter, Isaac Higbee, and Levi Jackman, on the part of the plaintiff.

Jared Carter, Thomas Grover and Samuel Bent, on the part of the defendant. After which the following letter was read by Br. Marcellus Cowdery, bearer of the same, belonging to Thomas B. Marsh, previous to giving it to its rightful owner.

"Far-West, March 10, 1838.

Sir: It is contrary to the principles of the revelations of Jesus Christ, and his gospel, and the laws of the land, to try a person for an offence, by an illegal tribunal, or by men prejudiced against him or by authority that has given an opinion, or decision beforehand or in his absence.

Very Respectfully,

we have the honor to be,

David Whitmer,

W. W. Phelps,

John Whitmer:

Presidents of the Church of Christ in Mo. [^31]

To T. B. Marsh,

one of the travelling Councellors.

Attest: Oliver Cowdery,

Clerk of the High Council of the Church of Christ in in Mo.

I certify the foregoing to be a true copy from the original.

Oliver Cowdery, Clerk

of High Council."

All the effect the above letter had upon the Council, was to convince them, still more, of the wickedness of these men, by endeavoring to palm themselves upon the Church as her Presidents, after the Church had by a united voice, removed them from their presidential office, for their ungodly conduct; and the letter was considered no more, nor less, than a direct insult, or contempt, cast upon the authorities of God, and the Church of Jesus Christ, therefore, the Council proceeded to business [^32]

Witnesses

Albert Perry testifies that he loaned some money to W. W. Phelps and J. Whitmer, telling them, he would want it to enter some land with, after a short time

After some time he went to J. Whitmer and told him he wanted to enter a piece of land on which there was some timber; to which he replied that he could enter the land, but the benefit of the timber was all he could have, as it was on the commons; but shortly after this entered the land himself

Br. Newberry testifies that he talked with J. Whitmer respecting the word of wisdom; to which he replied that a man could drink liquor once in a while, but not make a free use of it &c.

Bro. Leonard [^33] testifies that he was in company with W. W. Phelps, on his way to Lexington, last fall, when he (W. W. Phelps) remarked that if he (Leonard) wanted to be a man of God in full he must by land of him

Edward Partridge testifies that he spake to those brethren to come in and settle—to which they complied the second invitation, when Br. Phelps said the Bishop should not complain of his not living to his covenant, therefore, endorsed on the mortgage, fifty dollars for his lot: but John Whitmer thought the lots which had been appropriated for the benefit of certain individuals ought to be granted &c. also, that if the house of the Lord was not built, the $2,000 which they had subscribed ought to come to them and they seemed to claim it on the ground that others withdrew their subscriptions. The above sums are the avails of the profits of the Town Plot. [^34]

The Bishop further testifies that he understood that the land which was purchased with the Fry money [^35] was to be transfered into his hands instead of land purchased with money obtained in the South for "Poor Bleeding Zion" with this reserve that they have pay for their services &c. and that 2,000 dollars be applied to the purpose of building a house to the Lord out of the avails of this land.

They required the Bishop to pay them for their labors in the Church more than six hundred dollars also, to pay the purchase money.

W. Snow testifies that he was at a Council in which the Town Plot was spoken of and concluded to go into the hands of the Bishop, when W. W. Phelps and J. Whitmer said they had subscribed $2,000 for the building a house to the Lord and they had depended upon the profits of the Plot to pay the amount mentioned when one of the Councellors said it was as easy for the Church to pay it out of the profits as for them [^36]

A number of charges were sustained against those men; the principal of which, was, for claiming $2,000 Church funds which they had subscribed for the building an house to the Lord in this place, when they held in their possession the City Plot, and were sitting in the Presidential chair, which subscription they were intending to pay from the avails of the town lots; but when the town plot was transfered into the hands of the Bishop, for the benefit of the Church, it was agreed that the church should take this subscription from off the hands of W. W. Phelps & John Whitmer, but in the transactions of the business they bound the Bishop in a heavy mortgage, [^37] to pay them the above $2,000 in two years from the date thereof; a part of which they have already received, & claim the remainder.

The six councellors made a few appropriate remarks, none of whom felt to plead for mercy, as it had not been asked on the part of the accused, but all, with one consent, declared that justice ought to have his demands.

After some remarks by Presidents Marsh & Patten, setting forth the iniquity of those men, in claiming the $2,000 spoken of, which did not belong to them any more than any other person in the church; it was decided that William W. Phelps and John Whitmer be no longer members of the church of Christ of Latter Day Saints, & be given over to the buffetings of Satan, until they learn to blaspheme no more against the authorities of God, nor fleece the flock of Christ.

The Council were then asked if they concured with the decision; if so, to manifest it by rising, when they all arose. The vote was then put to the congregation which was carried unanimous; the negative was then called but no one voted.

Mr Marcellus Cowdery arose & said he wished to have it understood that he did not vote either way, because he did not consider it a legal tribunal; [^38] he also offered insult to the High Council & to the Church, by reading a letter belonging to Thomas B. Marsh before giving it to him, & in speaking against the authorities of the Church.

A motion was then made by President Patten, that fellowship be withdrawn from Marcellus Cowdery, [^39] until he make satisfaction, which was seconded and carried unanimous. Ebenzer Robinson

Clerk of High Council

Thomas B. Marsh,

David W. Patten,

Presidents

March 15, 1838

The High Council of Zion, together with the Bishoprick met in Far West, on Saturday Thursday March the 15th 1838, [^40] agreeable to appointment and was organized as follows. President Joseph Smith jr took the charge of the Council.

Simeon Carter No 1

Jared Carter No 2

Brigham Young ,, 3

Thomas Grover ,, 4

Levi Jackman ,, 5

Thomas Gates ,, 6

Stephen Winchester ,, 7

Moses Martin ,, 8

George M. Hinkle ,, 9

George W. Harris ,,10

Elias Higbee ,,11

John Murdock ,,12

The Council opened by singing "This earth was once a garden place &c." and prayer by Prest Joseph Smith jr.

The minutes of some previous Councils were read by the Clerk

First. The minutes of a Council held on Saturday the 24th of February 1838, when it was voted. First, That the 6th article of the said minutes be null & void & also, that a new article be put in the place of it (which was done) [^41]

President Joseph Smith jr gave a history of the ordination of David Whitmer, which took place in July 1834, to be a leader, or a prophet to this Church, which (ordination) was on conditions that he (J. Smith jr) did not live to God himself. [^42]

President J. Smith Jr. approved of the proceedings of the High Council, after hearing the minutes of the former Councils. [^43]

The Council adjourned for one hour.

7 o'clock P. M. The Council and Bishoprick convened agreeably to adjournment and was organized, Joseph Smith jr presiding, when it was opened by prayer by John Murdock, after which Br John Corrill made some remarks respecting his former conduct, by way of confession, but not to the satisfaction of the Council after which Thomas B. Marsh made a few remarks, followed by George M. Hinkle and others, when Br Corrill made perfect satisfaction.

The Council adjourned until tomorrow at 1 o'clock. [^44]

Benediction by President Joseph Smith jr [^45]

Ebenezer Robinson Clk.

March 17, 1838

The High Council and Bishop of Zion met, agreeable to adjournment, in the school house in Far West March the 17th 1838.

The Council was organized as follows:

Thomas B. Marsh, President

Simeon Carter No. 1

Samuel Bent No 2

Peter Dustan ,, 3

Thomas Grover ,, 4

Levi Jackman ,, 5

Solomon Hancock ,, 6

George Morey ,, 7

Newel Knight ,, 8

Isaac Higbee ,, 9

George W. Harris ,,10

Elias Higbee ,,11

John Murdock ,,12 [^46]

The council was opened by singing "How firm a foundation" &c. and prayer by N. Knight.

A letter was read, from Charles C. Rich respecting the ordination of Asa C. Earl, [^47] who had been ordained a Priest, by his brother, while on a visit to another State, without a Conference, but afterwards gave up his license, there being some dissatisfaction expressed, after he got home, by the branch to which he belonged.

The question was whether the the ordination was legal or not.

The case was not considered difficult, therefore, two Councellors were appointed to speak, viz: George Morey on the part of the Church and N. Knight on the part of the defendant, after which a few remarks by the councellors, it was decided that the ordination was not legal. The Council adjourned until next Saturday at 9 o'clock.

Closing prayer by Elder John Murdock.

Ebenezer Robinson Clerk

March 24, 1838

The High Council of Zion met pursuant to adjournment, Saturday, March 24th 1838.

Council was organized as follows; Presidents Joseph Smith jr. David W. Patten and Thos B. Marsh.

Simeon Carter No 1

Jared Carter No 2

Calvin Beebee ,, 3

Thos Grover ,, 4

Levi Jackman ,, 5

Solomon Hancock ,, 6

George Morey ,, 7

Newel Knight ,, 8

George M. Hinkle ,, 9

George W. Harris ,,10

Elias Higbee ,,11

Isaac Higbee ,,12 [^48]

The Council was opened by prayer by Prest David W. Patten.

A Charge was preferred against John Murdock for unchristian-like conduct, in speaking reproachfully of youngsters, by James Newberry.

After a short deliberation it was considered a most difficult case, therefore six councellors were appointed to speak on the case, viz: George M. Hinkle, Elias Higbee and Simeon Carter, on the part of the Church and George W. Harris, Isaac Higbec, and Jared Carter on the part of the accused.

Jacob Gates testifies that Br. Murdock was at his house, the subject of spelling schools, in the evening was introuduced, which he [^49] disapproved of also, mentioned about a young man's [^50] undertaking to hug a girl in an evening meeting but mentioned no names, he disapproved of evening schools and meetings on account of the young people being light minded & tended to draw away their minds from the studies.

Sister Gates [^51] testifies that B. Murdock was at her house and disapproved of evening schools &c she concurs with the testimony of her husband.

Br. Outhouse testifies that he labored with Br. Murdock together with Br Newberry when Br Murdock denied making a motion to show James Newberry undertook to hug the girl. [^52]

He [^53] was then cross examined and says Br. Murdock said in meeting that in making the motion to show how J. W. Newberry undertook to hug the girl, he did not intend to hit Orlando Carter as hard as he did as he was the one to whom he made the motion.

Alonzo Herrick testifies that he was at school one day when the Master [^54] & James Newberry got to disputing about hugging the girl, the boy denied undertaking to hug the girl & Mr. Murdock made a motion to show how he done the thing when the boy said it was not so, he also says that he never heard Br Murdock twit [^55] the boys of being with the girls, also, that he believes Br Murdock used his best endeavors for the good of the school; also, saw one of the schollars shake his fist at the master; also, that he saw some verses in the hands of James W. Newberry, Joseph Outhouse & Edward Prindall, which served to tantalize the master.

George P. Dykes testifies that the Elders were called together & Br. Murdock presented a case which was investigated, but he thought proper weight was not put upon the testimony

Edward Prindal testifies that he saw Br Murdock make a motion to show how James Newberry undertook to hug the girl in meeting which James Newberry denied, saying he never done any such thing also that he heard the master say that he did not like to have spelling schools because there was too much going home with the girls also he shook his fist at the master because he thought the master meddled with that which was none of his business in correcting them for going home with the girls, also, that he thinks James W. Newberry was not in the habit of running about more than common, also, that it was rumoured about by Br Murdock one or two [^56] before being mentioned in school that some of the boys had hugged a girl in meeting. also, Br Murdock said in the meeting of Elders that he had not taken the regular steps with James W. Newberry, and he was sorry that he had not.

A testimony was presented from Orlando Carter, in writing, which was read.

John Lowrie testifies he was at a meeting where Br Murdock requested the Elders to take a separate [room] as he had a matter to have investigated, he made his statement to the Elders & in it he said that he had done wrong in speaking of the matter of James W. Newberry's hugging the girl in meeting before going to him and laboring with him, [^57] for which he was sorry, also, testifies that he thought the young men did not treat Br Murdock with that respect with which they ought.

Lyman Leonard testifies that he was at the meeting of the Elders before mentioned when Br Murdock and James W. Newberry laid before them their aggrievances and the matter was investigated. Br Murdock made confession, saying that he had done wrong in mentioning about the young man's attempting to hug the girl, before laboring with him. Also that a decision was had, and a settlement took place between the parties. also, that he [^58] did not approve of the treatment of the young men towards Br Murdock and reproved them for it. also, that the Court of Elders was called by mutual consent as far as he knew, and both made their statements.

Sister Leonard [^59] concurs with the testimony of her husband and that she was at the meeting in which the young man was accused of attempting to hug the girl & she saw James Newberry wink and smile when the girl went to get water, which she did not like.

Elizabeth Legg testifies that she attended the school & she did not hear Br. Murdock twit the boys of going home with the girls, also, she saw the boys shake their fists at Br Murdock when his back was turned, viz: James W. Newberry and Joseph Outhouse.

Simeon Carter testifies that he was pleased with the conduct of the young men while before him on account of their steadiness.

James W. Newberry testifies that he did not have any hand in writing or composing the verses spoken of in Orlando Herrick's [^60] testimony.

The Councellors made a few veryy appropriate remarks, all of whom thought the charge was not sustained, but rather the accuser was in the fault

Decided that the charge was not sustained, but Br James W. Newberry was in the fault in treating Br Murdock as he did.

The questions was then put to the Council if they concured with the decision if so to manifest it by saying aye. which was done unanimous.

Council adjourned one hour to meet at the Bishops office.

Ebenezer Robinson Clk.

6 o'clock P. M. The council met pursuant to adjournment & was organized as follows:

Simeon Carter No 1

Elisah H. Groves No 2

Calvin Beebee " 3

Thomas Grover " 4

Levi Jackman " 5

Solomon Hancock " 6

George Morey " 7

Newel Knight " 8

G. M. Hinkle " 9

George W. Harris " 10

Elias Higbee " 11

John Murdock " 12

The Council opened by prayer by Solomon Hancock.

The subject of absent Councillors was discussed when it was decided that those who cannot attend the Councils, resign their seats and let others fill them who will be able to attend punctually. [^61]

Adjourned Ebenezer Robinson Clk.

April 6, 1838

Far West April 6th 1838 [^62]

Agreeable to a resolution passed the High Council of Zion, March 3rd, 1838, the Saints of in Missouri assembled at this place, to hold the anniversary of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints [^63] and to transact Church buisness. [^64]

The meeting was opened by singing and prayer by David W. Patten—After which President Joseph Smith jr read the order of the day as follows;—

"The doors will be opened at 9 o'clock A. M. & the meeting will commence by singing and Prayer.

A sexton will then be appointed for a door keeper & other services in the house of the Lord.

Two historians will then be appointed to write and keep the Church history. [^65]

Also a general recorder to keep the records of the whole Church, & be the Clerk of the First Presidency [^66]

And a clerk will be appointed for a High Council and to keep the Church records of this Stake. [^67]

And three Presidents will be appointed to preside over this Church of Zion. [^68]

After which an address will be delivered by the presidency:

Then an intermission of one hour will take place,—

When the meeting will again convene & open by singing & prayer.

The Sacrament will then be administered and the blessing of infants attended to:

The meeting then proceeded to buisness George Morey was appointed sexton & Dimic Huntington assistant. John Corrill and Elias Higbee were appointed historians;

George W. Robinson was appointed general Church Recorder and Clerk for the First Presidency:

Ebenezer Robinson was appointed Church Clerk & Recorder for the Stake of Zion and Clerk of the high Council;

Thomas B. Marsh was appointed President Pro tempore of the Church in Zion, and Brygum Young and David W. Patten his assistant Presidents.

The meeting was adjourned for one hour—& again opened by David W. Patten—After which the bread and wine was administered, & 95 infants were brought froward and blessed. [^69]

When on motion the meeting closed.

E. Robinson Clerk Joseph Smith jr

President.

April 7, 1838

Conference Minutes. April 7th 1838 [^70]

Agreeable to a resolution of the high Council, assembled at Far West, on saturday the 3rd of March, 1838, the general authorities of the Church met, the to hold the first quarterly Conference of the Church of Latter Day Saints of Zion, at Far West on the 7th of April 1838.

Presidents Joseph Smith jr, Sidney Rigdon, T. B. Marsh, D. W. Patten, and B. Young took the stand; after which the several quorums the High Council, the High Priests, the Seventies, the Elders, the Bishop, the Priests, the Teachers, and the Deacons, were organized by their Presidents. [^71]

President Joseph Smith jr made some remarks, also gave some instruction respecting the order of the day. The Conference was then opened by singing "O God our hope in ages past" and prayer by Prest B. Young. Also, a hymn was sung "How firm a foundation"—After which President Joseph Smith jr arose and addressed the congregation, at considerable length, on some important items. President Rigdon continued the subject for a length of time, after which, on motion, the meeting adjourned for the space of twenty minutes.

Pursuant to adjournment the Conference convened, and opened by Prayer by D. W. Patten, who also made a few remarks respecting the twelve apostles.

He spake of T. B. Marsh, B. Young, Orson Hyde, H. C. Kimball, P. P. Pratt, and O. Pratt as being men of God, whom he could recommend with cheerful confidence.

He spake somewhat doubtful of William Smith from something which he had heard respecting his faith in the work. He also spake of William E. McLellin, Luke Johnson, Lyman Johnson, and John F. Boynton as being men whom he could not recommend to the Conference. [^72]

President [^73] John Murdock, then represented the high council. The report was favorable. He stated that the seats of Elisha H. Groves, Calvin Beebee, and Lyman Wight was vacant in consequence of their having moved away so far that they could not attend the Council

Thomas B. Marsh then nominated Jared Carter to fill the seat of Elisha H. Groves which was recieved unanimously.

He then nominated John P. Green, to fill the seat of Calvin Beebee, who was received unanimously.

Also George W. Harris to fill that of Lyman Wight, who was recieved unanimously—

The Presidency then ordained him to the office of High Priest.

On motion Conference adjourned to the 8th at 9 o'clock A.M.

April 8, 1838

Sunday April 8th [^74]—Pursuant to adjournment the conference convened and opened by singing & prayer by President B. Young.

President Joseph jr made a few remarks respecting the Kirtland Bank—who was followed by by Brigham Young, who gave a short history of his travels to Massachusetts and New York

President Charles C. Rich, [^75] who was is president of the high priests in Zion: represented his quorum, he read the names of those who belonged to his quorum the principal part of which were in good standing.

The seventies were represented by Presidents Daniel Miles and Levi Hancock.

The quorum of Elders were represented by president Harvey Green—Their number was 124, in good standing.

President Joseph Smith jr next made a few remarks on the word of wisdom, giving the reason of its coming forth, saying it should be observed. [^76] On motion, the Conference adjourned for one hour.

The Conference convened, agreeable to adjournment, and opened by singing and prayer, after which Bishop Partridge, represented the lesser Priesthood, and his council.

He gave an account of the incomes and out goes of the Church property which had passed through his hands.

It was then motioned seconded, and carried that the first Presidency be appointed to sign the licences of the official members of the Church—After which on motion, the conference adjourned until the first Friday in July next.

Ebenezer Robinson Clerk Joseph Smith, Jr. President.

April 12, 1838

The High Council and Bishoprick of Zion, met according to appointment in Far West, April 12 1838 [^77] Edward Partridge presiding

The Council was organized as follows:

Samuel H. Smith No 1

Jared Carter No 2

Thomas Grover " 3

Isaac Higbee " 4

Levi Jackman " 5

Solomon Hancock " 6

George Morey " 7

Newel Knight " 8

George M. Hinkle " 9

George W. Harris " 10

Elias Higbee " 11

John Murdock " 12

Voted unanimously that John Murdock be a President of the High Council, whose duty it shall be to receive charges and give notice to the defendant, also, to call the Council together and organize them &c.

The Council opened by prayer by E. Partridge

After some remarks by Edward Partridge, several charges were read by him prefered against Oliver Cowdery which are as follows;

"To the Bishop and Council of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter day Saints in Missouri.

I do hereby prefer the following charges against President Oliver Cowdery.

1st, For stirring up the enemy to persecute the brethren by urging on vexatious Lawsuits [^78] and thus distressing the inocent.

2nd, For seeking to destroying the character of President Joseph Smith jr by falsly insinuating that he was guilty of adultry &c.

3rd For treating the Church with contempt by not attending meetings.

4th For virtually denying the faith by declaring that he would not be governed by any ecclesiastical authority nor Revelation whatever in his temporal affairs [^79]

5th, For selling his lands in Jackson County contrary to the Revelations. [^80]

6th For writing and sending an insulting letter to President T. B. Marsh while on the High Council, attending to the duties of his office, as President of the Council and by insulting the whole Council with the contents of said letter [^81]

7th, For leaving the calling, in which God had appointed him, by Revelation, for the sake of filthy lucre, and turning to the practice of the Law.

8th, For disgracing the Church by Lieing being connected in the 'Bogus' buisness as common report says.

9th For dishonestly Retaining notes after they had been paid and finally for leaving or forsaking the cause of God, and betaking himself to the beggerly elements of the world and neglecting his high and Holy Calling contrary to his profession.

Far West April the 7th 1838. Seymour Brunson"

It was not considered a difficult case, therefore, two one spake on a side, viz Samuel H. Smith on the part of the Church and Jared Carter on the part of the defendant. [^82]

A letter was then read by Edward Partridge from O. Cowdery which reads as follows: [^83]

Far West Mo April 12th 1838

Dear Sir,

I received your note of the 9th inst on the day of its date, containing a copy of nine charges preferred against before yourself and Council, against me, by Elder Seymour Brunson.

I could have wished, that those charges might have been defered until after my interview with President Smith; but as they are not, I must waive the anticipated pleasure with which I had flattered myself of an understanding on those points which are grounds of different opinions on some Chur Church regulations, and others which personally interest myself

The fifth charge reads as follows: "For selling his lands in Jackson County contrary to the revelations" so much of this charge, "For selling his lands in Jackson County" I acknowledge to be true, and believe a that a large majority of this Church have already spent their Judgements on that act, [^84] and pronounced it sufficient to warrant a disfellowship; and also that you have concured in its correctness—consequently, have no good reason for supposing you would give any decision contrary

Now sir the lands in our Country are allodial [^85] in the strictest construction of that term, and have not the least shadow of feudal tenours attached to them, consequently, they may be disposed of by deeds of conveyance without the consent or even approbation of a superior.

The fourth charge is in the following words, "For virtually denying the faith by declaring that he would not be governed by any ecclesiastical authority nor revelation whatever in his temporal affairs."

With regard to this, I, think, I am warranted in saying, the judgment is also passed as on the fifth matter of the fifth charge, consequently, I have no disposition to contend with the Council; this charge covers simply the doctrine of the fifth, and if I were to be controlled by other than my own judgment, in a compulsory manner, in my temporal interests, of course, could not buy or sell without the consent of some real or supposed authority. Whether that clause contains the precise words, I am not certain—I think however they were these "I will not be influenced, governed, or controlled, in my temporal interests by any ecclesiastical authority or pretended revelation whatever, contrary to my own judgment" such being still my opinion shall only remark that the three great principles of English liberty, as laid down in the books, are "the right of personal security; the right of personal liberty, and the right of private property" My venerable ancestor [^86] was among that little band, who landed on the rocks of Plymouth in 1620—with him he brought those maxims, and a body of those laws which were the result and experience of many centuries, on the basis of which now stands our great and happy Government: and they are so interwoven in my nature, have so long been inculcated into my mind by a liberal and intelligent ancestry, that I am wholly unwilling to exchange them for any thing less liberal, less benevolent, or less free.

The very principle of which I conceive to be couched in an attempt to set up a kind of petty government, controlled and dictated by ecclesiastical influence, in the midst of this National and State Government. You will, no doubt say this is not correct; but the bare notice of those charges, over which you assume a right to decide, is, in my opinion, a direct attempt to make the secular power subservient to Church dictation—to the correctness of which I cannot in conscience subscribe—I believe that principle never did fail to produce Anarchy & confusion.

This attempt to controll me in my temporal interests, I conceive to be a disposition to take from me a portion of my Constitutional privileges and inherent rights. I only, respectfully, ask leave, therefore to withdraw from a society assuming they have such right.

So far as relates to the other seven charges, I shall lay them carefully away, and take such a course with regard to them, as I may feel bound by my honor, to answer to my rising posterity.

I beg you, sir, to take no view of the foregoing remarks, other than my belief on the outward government of this Church. I do not charge you, or any other person who differs with me on those points, of not being sincere; but such difference does exist, which I sincerely regret.

With considerations of the highest respect, I am,

Your obedient servent.

O Cowdery.

Rev. [^87]

Edward Partridge

Bishop of the

Church of Latter

Day Saints

John Corrill testifies that some time last fall Marcellus Cowdery came to him and requested him to pay certain notes, against Joseph Smith jr but he declined, soon after a writ was served on him; he supposed that it was through the influence of O. Cowdery that the writ was served. From circumstances, he is of the impression that O. Cowdery has used his influence to urge on lawsuits, which have taken place of late in this place. Also, that O. Cowdery said to him "the law is my theme.

John Anderson testifies that, from circumstances, he believes that O. Cowdery had been influential in causing lawsuits in this place, as a number more lawsuits have taken place since he came here than before

Dimic B. Huntington, testifies, that O. Cowdery called to him one day evening as he was passing through the street, and said that he smelt a skunk (an enemy &c.) and if he knew who it was he would put the screws to him, and also informed D. B Huntington if he heard any guns fired in town to put the screws (I.E. the law) to him who done it, this was after he was appointed to attend the suits of the Corporation [^88] and also went on to urge lawsuits as even to issue a writ on the Sabbath day also, that he heard him say that he intended to form a partnership with Donaphon who is a man of the world and a wicked man [^89]

George M. Hinkle, testifies that O. Cowdery wanted to become a secret partner in the store as he would be able to collect the debts & act as an Aterny [^90] and thereby be able to get his fees or living which was verbally agreed to, when he traded a considerable and finally they got sick of him and got rid of him the best way they could, which they did do, but still solicited for buisness in the law line, and has frequently solicited for buisness in collecting debts, as he was an Aterny in the place, also testifies that he has seen him urge on lawsuits with others.

George W. Harris testifies that one evening last fall [^91] O. Cowdery was at his house together with Joseph Smith jr, and Thomas B. Marsh, when a conversation took place between Joseph Smith jr & O. Cowdery, when he seemed to insinuate that Joseph Smith jr was guilty of adultery, but when the question was put, if he (Joseph) had ever acknowledged to him [^92] that he was guilty of such a thing; when he [^93] answered No. Also he believes him to be instrumental in causing so many lawsuits as had taken place of late

David W. Patten testifies, that he went to Oliver Cowdery to enquire of him if a certain story was true respecting J. Smith's committing adultery with a certain girl, [^94] when he turned on his heel and insinuated as though he [^95] was guilty; he [^96] then went on and gave a history of some circumstances respecting the adultery scrape stating that no doubt it was true. Also said that Joseph told him, he had confessed to Emma, Also that he has used his influence to urge on lawsuits.

Thomas B. Marsh testifies that while in Kirtland last summer, David W. Patten asked Oliver Cowdery if he Joseph Smith jr had confessed to his wife that he was guilty of adultery with a certain girl, when Oliver Cowdery cocked up his eye very knowingly and hesitated to answer the question, saying he did not know as he was bound to answer the question yet conveyed the idea that it was true. Last fall [^97] after Oliver came to this place he heard a conversation take place between Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery when J. Smith asked him if he [^98] had ever confessed to him that he was guilty of adultery, when after a considerable winking &c. he said No. Joseph then asked him if he ever told him that he confessed to any body, when he answered No.

Joseph Smith jr testifies that Oliver Cowdery had been his bosom friend, therefore he intrusted him with many things. [^99] He then gave a history respecting the girl buisness. Also that Oliver Cowdery took him one side and said, that he had come to the conclusion to get property and if he could not get it one way he would another, God or no God, Devil or no Devil, property he must must have and since that he has dealt dishonest with him that he has taken a printing press and type from Kirtland for which he was to give up some notes which he had against Joseph Smith jr and Sidney Rigdon which he did not do, nor had to this day.

The Council adjourned one hour.

The Council convened according to adjournment opened by prayer by B. Young.

Sidney Rigdon testifies that in January 1837 Oliver Cowdery offered to sell out his share in the printing office at Kirtland Ohio, which they Joseph Smith jr & Sidney Rigdon bought and gave their notes, after which say in the spring following he wished to get a press & some of the type which they granted him on conditions that he should give up the notes above refered to, he then went into the office and took whatever he pleased & so completely stripped the office, as he (Rigdon) was informed by D. C. Smith, [^100] that there was scarcely enough left to print the "Elders Journal," whereas, before there was a sufficient quantity to print a weekly and monthly paper, the book of Covenants, Hymn Book, Book of Mormon &c. but the notes he did not give up

F. G. Williams testifies that Oliver Cowdery told him that there was a certain man in the Church who could compound metal and make dies, that he could make money so that it could not be detected and if it was the case it was no harm to take that money and pass it. The man's name was Davis. Also three men came to him to take out a writ to take some persons who had passed some Bogus (counter feit) money, viz: John Boynton, Warren Parrish and Burton H. Phelps. Also that it was reported that Oliver was engaged in the Bogus money business. Also he did not disapprove of the principle of Davis' making the dies and money.

Joseph Smith jr testifies that Mr Sapham a man who did not belong to the Church came to him and told him that a warrant was about to be isued against Oliver Cowdery for being engaged in making a purchase of Bogus money & dies to make the counterfeit money with. after which himself and President Rigdon went to see him, (Oliver) and talked with him about it, when he denied it after which they told him if he was guilty he had better leave the country; but if he was inocent to stand a trial & he should come out clear; but that night or the next he left the country.

Sidney Rigdon concurs with the foregoing testimony.

John Corrill testifies that Oliver Cowdery has neglected attending meeting.

George W. Harris concurs in the same

The fourth and fifth charges were rejected by the Court. The 6th charge was withdrawn.

After some remarks by the Councellors, it was decided by the Bishop and his Council that the 1st, 2nd, & 3rd charges were sustained, the 7th was sustained, also the 8th charge was sustained satisfactoryly by circumstantial evidence. The ninth charge was sustained. he was, therefore, considered no longer a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. [^101]

The decision was sanctioned by the High Council.

The Council adjourned untill tomorrow at 9 o'clock.

Closed in prayer by Isaac Morley.

Ebenezer Robinson Clerk

April 13, 1838

The High Council of Zion met in Far-West on Friday April 13th 1838 [^102]

Thomas B. Marsh, David W. Patten and Brygham Young Presiding.

The Council was organized as follows:

Simeon Carter No. 1

Jared Carter No. 2

Thomas Grover " 3

John P. Green " 4

Levi Jackman " 5

Solomon Hancock " 6

George Morey " 7

Newel Knight " 8

George M. Hinkle " 9

George W. Harris " 10

Elias Higbee " 11

John Murdock " 12

The Council was opened by singing and prayer by President David W. Patten after which several charges were preferred against Lyman E. Johnson which are as follows:

"To the Council of the Church of Christ of Latter day Saints in Missouri.

I prefer the following charges before your honorable body against Lyman E. Johnson.

1st, For persecuting brethren by stiring up people to prosecute them, and urging on vexatious lawsuits against them and thereby bringing distress upon the inocent. [^103]

2nd For virtually denying the faith of the Church of Christ of Latter Day saints, by vindicating the cause of the enemies of this Church, who are dissenters from us, now in Kirtland, and speaking reproachfully of the Church and High Council, by saying their proceedings were illegal and that he never would acknowledge them to be legal, these assertions were without foundation and truth, also, treating the Church with contempt by absenting himself from meetings on the sabbath, by not observing his prayers in the season thereof and by not observing the word of wisdom.

3rd. For seeking to injure the character of Joseph Smith jr by reporting that he had a demand against him of one thousand dollars, when it was without foundation in truth

4th For laying voilent hands on our Brother Phineas Young, and by kicking and beating him, thereby throwing contempt on the Church of Christ of Latter-Day Saints in Missouri

5th. And by saying that he would appeal the suit between him & Brother Phineas Young and take it out of the County, saying that he could not get justice done him, thereby speaking reproachfully of the authority of Caldwell County.

6th For telling a falshood.

7th For taking whiskey and making Weldon [^104] drink & then cheating him out of his property

A Ripley" [^105]

After which a letter was read from the defendant by John Murdock as follows:

"Far West, Mo April 12th 1838

Sir Yours of the 9th inst. containing a copy of six charges, preferred, before the Council by A. Ripley, against me has been received, and it appears to me to be a novel document, assuming a right to compel me under pain of religious sensure and excommunication not to appeal a lawsuit or change the venue of the same in which I am deeply interested, without the consent of a religious body.

This assumption of power being manifest in the fifth Charge, I should not condescend to put my constitutional rights at issue upon so disrespectful a point; as to answer any other of those charges until that is withdrawn & untill then shall withdraw my self from your society and fellowship.

Yours

Lyman E. Johnson

Mr John Murdock

The case was not considered difficult, therefore, two spake on the case; viz Thomas Grover, on the part of the Church and John P. Green on the part of the defendant.

George M. Hinkle testifies he knew Lyman E. Johnson has been active in urging on lawsuits, also, that L. E. Johnson told him he had a note against him (Hinkle) which he procured in Clay County, which was not the case, as he had no note of the description, therefore, he had lied.

Thos Grover testifies that Mr Gilbert had a claim upon a piece of land, after which Lyman E. Johnson entered it from under him, after being told that Mr Gilbert had claim upon it.

Alanson Ripley testifies, that Lyman E. Johnson had been told that there was a claim upon the piece of land which was referred to above, also he heard Lyman E. Johnson say he had a note against J. Smith jr.

Simeon Carter, testifies, that Lyman E. Johnson inquired of him if there was any land to be entered, when he told him he thought there was none except it was some which poor brethren had a claim on, and that he must not enter that, as it was contrary to the decision of the High Council; afterwards he did enter a forty upon which one of the brethren had made some improvement.

Arthur Morrison testifies that it was the understanding that Lyman E. Johnson acted as an Atterney for Mr. Bennor in commencing a suit against George M. Hinkle, & took a very active part in the case.

David W. Patten testifies, that Lyman E. Johnson had told him in conversation at different times, that while God sat upon his throne or his face the color it now was, he never would sanction the proceedings of the High Council in this place, because he said they were illegal and as for coming to this Council he would not, also he used tea and coffee while living at D. W. Patten's and did not tend family prayers while living at his house, also had used his influence against certain brethren especially against the Smith family, also he had a correspondence with the dissenters at Kirtland and vindicated their cause and spoke against the First Presidents of the Church, also made light of the word of wisdom, also Lyman E Johnson reported he had a thousand dollar note against Joseph Smith jr

Joseph Smith jr testifies that he, Lyman E. Johnson vindicated the cause of the dissenters, both in publick and private and spoke against the Saints while in Kirtland, also heard Lyman E. Johnson say that while God sat upon his throne and his face was the color it now was he never would sanction the proceedings of the Church and Council, in this place also Lyman E. Johnson told him he had a thousand dollar note against him (J. Smith) which was not the case, but the note which he pretended to have was one given to Joseph Smith jr while acting as cashier in the Kirtland Bank Absolom Scritch field testifies, that he has seen Lyman E. Johnson come to Mr. Musick's [^106] (tavern) and drink liquor, say brandy. [^107]

George W. Harris testifies that he has neglected to attend meeting on the Sabbath days.

George Morey concurs with the above testimony.

The Council adjourned for one hour.

The Council convened agreeable to adjournment.

Opened in prayer by President B. Young.

Brigham Young, testifies that Phineas Young came to Br. Green's [^108] a few mornings since, with his head cut the blood running out of his ears, also his stomach was injured, & Phineas said Lyman E. Johnson had fought him; which was proved in court afterwards.

John P. Green concurs with the above testimony.

Dimic B. Huntington, testifies that Lyman E. Johnson told him that he had given Phines Young a pounding, because he had given him the lie, and if any other man should give him the lie, he would not promise that he would not get the same sauce.

Also testifies that Lyman E. Johnson told him, previous, to a decision, being had by civil authority, that he would not begrudge paying five dollars for whipping a man as he did Phineas, but if the judgment was any wise high, he would change the venue and take it out of the County.

David W. Patten, testifies that Lyman E. Johnson told him that he would change the venue and take the suit out of the County, previous to the time that the warrant was issued.

George Morey, testifies, that previous to decision being given on the case of Phineas Young, Lyman E. Johnson told him he intended to get bail and take a change of venue and take it out of the County.

Thomas B. Marsh testifies that Lyman E. Johnson told him, that he had learned the nack of traveling on Steam Boats without paying his fare, by slipping from place to place in the Boat when they were calling for the fare, and when they would ask him for his pay, he would tell them he had paid it, when he had not. [^109]

Edward Partridge, testifies that in purchasing a lot for father Smith, he turned out a note against Lyman E. Johnson, which he rather declined paying at the first presentation, but afterwards said, he had paid taken it up when he had, therefore, told a falshood.

George M. Hinkle testifies that Lyman E. Johnson told him, after he returned from the North, when he purchased his farm of Weldon, the history is as follows: "Before we got there, as we understood, he was fond of liquor, so we got some, lumborum (as Bump [^110] called it) and went to Mr Weldon's and got him tolerably well shaved, before we introduced the trade, when we purchased a large farm with great improvements together with five hundred head of hogs, a good stock of horses and cattle, also, a flock of sheep, the plows belonging to the farm &c. for twenty-two hundred dollars and fifty dollars."

Thomas B. Marsh concurs with the above testimony and, also David W. Patten.

After some few appropriate remarks, by the Councellors, it was decided by the President that Lyman E Johnson be no longer considered a member of the Church of Christ of Latter Day Saints, nor a member of the quorum of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb and also be given over to the buffetings of Satan untill he learns to blaspheme no more against the authorities of God.

Ebenezer Robinson Clerk

A charge was then prefered against David Whitmer, [^111] by Alonson Ripley, as follows:

"To the High Council of the Church of Latter day Saints in Missouri.

I prefer the following charges before your Honorable body against David Whitmer.

Charge First. For not observing the word of wisdom, for unchristian-like conduct [^112] in neglecting to attend to meetings, in uniting with, and possessing the same spirit with the Dissenters, in writing letters to the Dissenters in Kirtland unfavorable to the cause and to Br Joseph Smith jr.

3rd [^113] For neglecting his the duties of his calling.

4th. For seperating himself from the cause and the Church while he has a name among us.

5 For signing himself President of the Church of Christ in an insulting letter to the High Council.

A. Ripley."

After which a letter was read from D. Whitmer in words as follows:

"Far West Mo April 13th 1838.

John Murdock

Sir I received a line from you bearing date the 9th inst. requesting me as a High Priest to appear before the High Council and answer to five several charges on this day at 12 o'clock.

You sir with a majority of this Church have decided that certain Councils were legal by which it is said I have been deprived of my office as one of the Presidents of this Church I have thought and still think they were not agreeable to the revelations of God, [^114] which I believe and by my now attending this Council, and aswering to charges as a High Priest, should be acknowledging the correctness and legality of those former assumed Councils, which I shall not do.

Believing as I verily do, that you and the leaders of the Councils have a determination to persue your unlawful course at all hazards, and bring others to your standard in violating of the revelations, to spare you any further trouble I hereby withdraw from your fellowship and communion—choosing to seek a place among the meek and humble, where the revelations of Heaven will be observed and the rights of men regarded.

David Whitmer."

After the reading of the above letter it was not considered necessary to investigate the case, [^115] as he had offered contempt to you Council by writing the above letter; but let the Councellors speak what they had to say and upon the case and pass decision

The councellors then made a few remarks in which they spoke warmly of the contempt offered to the Council in the above letter, therefore, thought he was not worthy a membership in the Church.

When Prest Marsh made a few remarks and decided that David Whitmer be no longer considered a member of the Church of Christ of Latter day Saints.

Voted by the high Council that Oliver Cowdery be no longer a Committee—man to search out locations for the gathering of the saints.

Council adjourned until tomorrow morning 9 o'Clock.

Closed in Benediction by President Joseph Smith jr

Ebenezer Robinson, Clerk.

April 14, 1838

The High Council of Zion met agreeable to adjournment on Saturday the 14th of April 1838.

Being organized as follows:

Joseph Smith jr Thomas B. Marsh and Brigham Yound, Presiding.

Simeon Carter No 1

Jared Carter No 2

Thomas Grover ,, 3

Isaac Higbee ,, 4

Levi Jackman ,, 5

Solomon Hancock ,, 6

George Morey ,, 7

Newel Knight ,, 8

George M. Hinkle ,, 9

George W. Harris ,,10

Elias Higbee ,,11

John Murdock ,,12

Council opened in prayer by Elder John Murdock.

An appealed case was then presented to the Council, pending between Eders Wait and West, [^116] from the Elders quorum, when the proceedings of the Elders quorum were read also the charges which reads as follows:

"Far West March 27th 1838.

To the High Council,

I, in appealing the case between me and Elder West, to the High Council, prefer the first charge contained in the original charges, namely; A spirit of dissension, in that he declared publickly that he did not believe in the vote of the General Assembly, last Nov. 7th, "not to support stores and shops selling spirito us liquors, tea, coffee, and tobacco." [^117] And also I shall bring any testimony I can find to the same effect and connect it with the foregoing charge.

And also, the first item of the second charge contained in the original, namely; Teaching incorrect doctrine in that he said the word of wisdom did not concern our Spiritual Salvation. [^118]

Truman Wait, Complainant."

The case was not considered difficult, therefore, two Councellors were to spak on the case, viz: George Morey, on the part of the Church, and Newel Knight, on the part of the part of the defendant.

Some remarks were made by the defendant, in which he acknowledge a part of the first charge.

Darwin Chase, testifies that he heard Nathan West say that he would not believe the decision of the High Council if it did not coincide with the Book of Covenants.

Also, he heard Mr West say that he did not covenant to not uphold stores and shops, which sold liquor, tea, coffee and tobacco, because he had already made as many covenants as he kept &c but if any persons had made any such covenants, he would say to them 'for God's sake to keep them.'

William Hulet, testifies that he heard Elder West say that if he had his mind made up on any a certain item of Revelation and the High Council should decide contrary his mind upon that item, he would not believe the decision except they would bring proof to substantiate it. Also that he never did hear Elder West say any thing against Joseph Smith jr but heard him say that he considered him the Prophet as much as ever.

The Council adjourned one hour.

Council convened according to adjournment.

Silas Maynard testifies, that he heard Elder West say one evening last winter that he did not acquiece in the proceedings of the High Council and Church in cutting off W. W. Phelps & John Whitmer from the Presidents office.

Thomas Grover, testifies, that at the General Conference last winter, when the case of W. W. Phelps & John Whitmer was investigated, Elder West voted to have them continue in the office of Presidents.

Elder West confesses, that at the time of the Conference above referred to, he did think the move two too hasty and did not coincide with them the proceedings of the Council at that time, but now saw the matter different and does coincide with them &c.

Elder Wait, testifies that Elder West said in a Conference of Elders that he did not consider the word of Wisdom given by Commandment or Constraint.

After a few remarks by the Councellors and parties it was decided by the President, that considering the case, Br. West had erred in spirit, therefore, feel to admonish him, but do not find anything in him worthy of death or bonds.

Council adjourned until next Saturday at 9 o'clock.

Closed in prayer by President Br Harris. [^119]

Ebenezer Robinson Clerk

April 21, 1838

High Council met according to adjournment on Saturday the 21st of April 1838.

After singing a hymn, a prayer was offered by Br. Joseph Smith jr.

A charge was then preferred against Lyman Wight by John Anderson which, charge was put over until Thursday the 24th of May next, at 9 o'clock A. M.

1st Resolved, that the "Elders Journal" be published monthly as it was commenced.

2nd Resolved that President Thomas B. Marsh be the publisher of the "Elders Journal."

3rd Resolved, that the printing press, type and furniture which was purchased of John Whitmer with all the furniture pertaining to the establishment, be sold by the Committee to Edward Partridge, and that he be authorized to pay for the same out of the avails of the City lots or donations

4th Resolved, that Edward Partridge do not pay to W. W. Phelps and John Whitmer a certain mortgage, [^120] which they hold against him, and that this Council uphold him in not paying the the above mortgage.

5th Resolved—that this Council authorize Edward Partridge to assist, in making houses on, and fencing the lots in this City which are appropriated to the use of Joseph Smith jr. and Sidney Rigdon, with the avails arising from the town plot.

6th Resolved—that Edward Partridge make an appropriation of not more than one hundred dollars to this Schoolhouse, out of the avails of the town plot. [^121]

7th Resolved that this Council support Thomas B. Marsh as the publisher of the "Elders Journal" and use their influence to obtain subscriptions for the same.

8th Resolved that this Council, the Bishop and his Council use their influence to cause the people to consecrate to the Lord, for the support of the poor and needy.

9th Resolved that the Bishop be authorized to obtain or build a sufficient storehouse or houses to recieve all the concie consecrations of the people, to be paid for out of the avails of the town plot

10th Resolved that this High Council and Clerk publish the minites of the High Council, from time to time as they shall deem proper [^122]

11th Resolved that the aforesaid record commence at the time of the last Council held in Clay County.

Adjourned till Saturday the 28th inst

John P. Green Clk pro. tem.

April 28, 1838

The High Council of Zion met in Far West April 28 1838 [^123] agreeable to adjournment.

Thomas B. Marsh and David W. Pattern, Presiding.

The Council was organized as follows:

Simeon Carter No. 1

Jared Carter No. 2

Levi Jackman ,, 3

Zechariah Wilson ,, 4

Sidney Rigdon ,, 5

Joseph Smith jr ,, 6

George Morey ,, 7

Newel Knight ,, 8

George M. Hinkle ,, 9

George W. Harris ,,10

Elias Higbee ,,11

John Murdock ,,12

After which it was voted that Joseph Smith jr and Sidney Rigdon act in the places of NO. 9 & 10.

The Council was opened by in prayer by in Prest Marsh

An appeal case [^124] was presented pending between Jackson and Lyons, when the minutes of an Elder's meeting was read by Councellor Hinkle in which the above case had been tried, also the charges and the appeal. The several charges were read when the accused confessed the 1st, 2nd 3rd 4th the 5th he denied also the 6th, 7th 8th, 9th, 10th & 11th.

The Case was considered difficult, therefore, four were to speak on it viz: George M. Hinkle and Sidney Rigdon on the part of the Church and George W. Harris and Joseph Smith jr on the part of the defendant.

The Council adjourned for one hour.

The Council met agreeable to adjournment.

Opened in singing "This Earth was once a garden place" &c and Prayer by President David W. Patten.

Peter Dustan was appointed to fill the seat of No. 2 pro. tempore.

Voted by the High Council that the proceedings of the Elder's Conference held to investigate the case of J. Lemons and S. Wixom [^125] are null and void, as they kept no regular minutes or records of them.

Br. Best [^126] testifies that he heard Br Lyons [^127] prophecy at Br Wheeler's [^128] that some one would be heard to mourn, after that Lyons told him that he had a wife selected and she was in the house, they were then at Br Curtis', [^129] and she was Sister Jackson and Lyons requested him to tell her that her husband was dead, also, Lyons told him, the Lord had shown her to him for his wife, also heard Lyons say that if she broke her covenant she would be miserable, because he had seen her future state, also, when he told Sister Jackson what Lyons requested him, she cried and said she hoped the Lord would be merciful to her in her afflictions

At another time, he heard Sister Jackson say that Lyons told her the Lord had revealed to him that she was to be his wife and she believed that she had a testimony that he told the truth. Sister Jackson had been absent from her husband about five months, but he returned soon after, which was some time in November last. Also, was knowing to Lyons walking to and from meetings with her, both in night and day time, as she lived at his house.

Shadrach Roundy—testifies that Lyons had some conversation with him respecting getting a wife, saying he was going to have a wife and that by revelation, because the Lord was going to let him have a wife with whom he could live in peace &c.

At another time Lyons told him that he enquired of the Lord respecting a companion, when Sister Jackson was presented before him, when he said to the Lord "She is pregnant by another man;" when the Lord replied "wait my time & it will all come right" Lyons generally took the lead of meetings in that Branch. [^130]

John P. Barnam [^131] testifies that, Lyons told him he had a revelation and it was of God, he should be married in a few days, but seemed to almost doubt of its truth, but soon after he enquired of the Lord to know whether it was of God or not, when the reply was, "I know all things," therefore Lyons Concluded it was of God, also that Lyons was a man of great influence in the Church, and when he spoke in the name of the Lord, the brethren had great confidence in it &c

Thomas Guyman concurs in the testimony previously given, also he heard Sister Jackson say she was afraid of the curses of God falling upon her, therefore she consented to have Br Lyons but was soon sorry for it also after Lyons said her husband was dead she was considerably troubled about it and frequently requested the Church to pray for her husband that he might return &c but after some time she expressed her fears that he was dead & was inclined to think she had a testimony to that effect, also Lyons told him Brother Best had given him liberty to come to his house to see Sister Jackson.

Br Jackson testifies that his wife was not pregnant when he returned (See Sister Jackson's letter on Pages 157 and 158 & 159. [^132])

Br Benjamin testifies that, Calvin Reed, a boy of about 15 years of age, said he had a revelation or vision, in which he saw, Br Jackson dead or preaching to the spirits in prison &c.

After some lengthy remarks by the Councellors, and very good instruction given by Councellor Smith, [^133] the accused made confession to the satisfaction of the Council, when it was decided that Br Lyons be retained in the Church, but his license be taken from him, as it is not considered that he is not qualified to hold an office in this Church

The Council concurred with the foregoing decision.

The Council adjourned until two weeks from today.

Closed in prayer by Sidney Rigdon.

Ebenezer Robinson Clerk

May 13, 1838

The High Council of Zion met in Far West May 13th 1838. [^134]

Thomas B. Marsh presiding.

The Council was organized as follows:

Simeon Carter No 1

Isaac Higbee No 2

James McCord [^135] ,, 3

John P. Green ,, 4

James Emmett ,, 5

Solomon Hancock ,, 6

Simeon Gardner ,, 7

Ebenezer Robinson ,, 8

George M. Hinkle ,, 9

George W. Harris ,,10

Elias Higbee ,,11

John Murdock ,,12

The Council was opened by prayer by Prest. T. B. Marsh

A case was then presented pending between Samuel Kimball, plaintiff and John L. Butler, James Emmett, and James Hendrix defendant, which was put over until the last Thursday in June next.

1st Resolved—That the High Council hold monthly sessions, to be the last Thursday in each month, the first to commence the last Thursday in June next [^136]

2nd Resolved—That Sidney Rigdon be appointed to correct the matter for the "Elders Journal" (that is) the Orthography and Prosody of the different letters &c.

3rd Resolved That the High Council authorize the Bishop to set apart eighty acres of land for the benefit of Sidney Rigdon and also, 80 acres for Joseph Smith jr. [^137]

4th Resolved That the High Council use their influence to have the Church consecrate their properties for the benefit of the poor.

5th Resolved That Elias Higbee, Simeon Carter, & George W. Harris be a committee to converse with Joseph Smith jr and Sidney Rigdon, to agree upon some particular price or wages for their services in the printing office & their saleries for the coming year. [^138]

6th Resolved That the Committee be authorized to instruct the Bishop to pay the First Presidency, J. Smith, & Sidney Rigdon, whatever sum they agree with them for. [^139]

The Council adjourned untill a week from next Thursday, the 24th inst

Ebenezer Robinson Clerk

May 24, 1838

The High Council of Zion met in Far-West on Thursday the 24th of May 1838

Brygum Young, Presiding.

The Council was organized as follows:

Reynalds Cahoon No 1

Jared Carter No 2

Thomas Grover ,, 3

John P. Green ,, 4

Daniel Carn ,, 5

Solomon Hancock ,, 6

James McCord ,, 7

Ebenezer Robinson ,, 8

George M. Hinkle ,, 9

George W. Harris ,,10

Brigham Young ,,11

John Murdock ,,12

The Council was opened in prayer by Prest Young.

A Charge was then read by John Murdock against Lyman Wight, which had been prefered by John Anderson. [^140]

After which another charge was read against Lyman Wight prefered by Daniel Avery.

Also another charge was read against Lyman Wight prefered by William Wirick, which were all put over untill the last Thursday in June. [^141]

Council Adjourned untill the last Thursday in June next.

Ebenezer Robinson, Clerk.

June 23, 1838

The High Council of Zion met in Far West June 23rd 1838. [^142]

Presidents Marsh and Patten Presiding

The Council was organized as follows

Simeon Carter No 1

Jared Carter No 2

Thomas Grover ,, 3

John P. Green ,, 4

Levi Jackman ,, 5

Sampson Avard ,, 6

John Greg ,, 7

Guyman [^143] ,, 8

Reynalds Cahoon ,, 9

George W. Harris ,,10

Chase [^144] ,,11

Sylvester Hulett ,,2

The Council was opened by singing by Prest Marsh

After much consultation it was,

1st Resolved That Thomas B. Marsh be sole proprietor of the printing establishment.

2nd Resolved—That every order, sent from Kirtland upon Joseph Smith jr, Sidney Rigdon, and Hyrum Smith, shall be rejected, untill a bill of particulars be recieved from their agents at Kirtland. [^145]

3rd Resolved That the Clerk be authorized to inform those agents, of the proceedings of the Council, by writing.

4th Resolved—That the High Council authorize the Bishop, to give President David W. Patten an acre of land upon which he now lives, also, give up the obligation he now holds against him. [^146]

5th Resolved—That the Bishop take the Musick house from off the hands of Joseph Smith jr and dispose of it as he pleases.

6th Resolved That a committee be appointed to labor with John Burke, Adam Lightner, and Joseph Smith jr, keepers of publick houses, that they keep a good orderly houses, and have no drinking, swearing, gambling, and debauchery carried on therein.

7th Resolved—That Benjamin Benson & Daniel Shearer, be the aforesaid committee. [^147]

8th Resolved That the High Council use their influence to have Br Marsh dispose of his land, [^148] to obtain money to further on the printing business.

The Council adjourned.

E. Robinson Clerk.

June 28, 1838

Far-West June 28th 1838

The High Council of Zion met according to adjournment.

Thomas B. Marsh President

Simeon Carter No 1

Jared Carter No 2

Harlow Redfield ,, 3

John P. Green ,, 4

Levi Jackman ,, 5

Solomon Hancock ,, 6

Isaac Higbee ,, 7

Newel Knight ,, 8

John Killion ,, 9

George W. Harris ,,10

Elias Higbee ,,11

John Murdock ,,12

The Council was opened by singing "How Now let us rejoice in the day of Salvation," &c. and prayer by President Patten.

The following report was then read by the Clerk & accepted by the Council.

"To the Presidency and High Council of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints in Zion, Greeting.

We the undersigned, being a committee to wait upon the public houses and groceries in this place, Far West, and inform the keepers of the same, of the determination and desire of the spiritual authorities of this Stake to improve the moral condition of the same, do respectfully report, that we attended to that duty, and found Mr J. Smith jr, Mr. J. Burke and families manifested a perfect willingness to comply with the request of your Honorable body. Mr Adam Lightner, [^149] grocer manifested the same spirit and agreed that if it was requested he would not keep any more ardent spirits in the place &c. June 28th 1838."

Daniel Shearer.

Benjamin Benson."

The following charges were then read prefered and read "To the Presidency and High Council.

This may certify that I prefer a charge against James Emmett, John L. Butler and James Hendrix for forbiding me to commune under a pretence that I was not a member of the Church, and for trying to defraud me in deal, and for lying & slander &c. April 23rd 1838.

Samuel Kimball."

The case was not considered difficult, therefore, two councellors spake, on viz: Simeon Carter on the part of the accuser, and Don C. Smith pro. tem. on the part of the accused.

Simeon Gardner, testifies that he heard Emmett say, in preaching that there was thieves in the Church & he would forbid some from partaking the sacrament & call some names after awhile but did not call any names in his hearing. Emmett seemed to convey the idea that he knew this thing by spirit. Some time after this he heard Emmett forbid, Kimball to partake the sacrament.

H. Gardner testifies that he heard Emmett say, in preaching, that there were thieves in the Church and hereafter he should mention names, this he knew by the Spirit of God, the next Sunday he was at meeting again, and heard Emmett say that there was theft in the family of Kimball, he also said that Butler knew there was iniquity in the Church and he (Butler) had neglected to see to it but would hereafter. He heard Emmett forbid Kimball to partake of the sacrament also that he is acquainted with the family of Kimball & knows nothing against them, also, knows nothing against the defendants.

Charity Butler testifies that she heard Emmett say Kimball had forbid his boys going to meeting and it would be well for the brethren to keep their children from Kimball's, as he kept them from meeting, also, she had heard Kimball speak hard against John Butler and James Hendrix, but his family was respectable people

Julia Hendrix testifies that Emmett and her husband entered a forty of land and were to share equally in the timber, also, Kimball and Butler entered a forty apiece, and the understanding was, that they were to share equally in the timber, but she does not know as they have divided the timber, also, she was at a meeting where fellowship was withdrawn from Kimball by the members of the branch to which he belonged and he was not as yet restored.

Isaac Higbee testifies that he was one of the company who was appointed to divide the timber between four brethren above named, which they did, as he thought to their satisfaction. The time they attended to this buisness was after the parties had been before the Bishop, in which decision they justified Kimball instead of criminating him.

Also heard Emmett forbid Kimball to partake the sacrament and he understood it was because he did not comply with the Bishop's decision.

Simeon Gardner concurs with the foregoing testimony.

Council adjourned one hour.

Council convened agreeable to adjournment.

Opened by singing "The Spirit of God like a fire is" &c. and prayer by President Patten.

As the parties had agreed to join issue and come to trial and prove what they could against each other, therefore, it was voted that two more speak upon the case, viz: Harlow Redfield, on the part of the accuser and John P. Green on the part of the accused, after which the following charges were prefered against Samuel Kimball by John L. Butler.

"I prefer a charge against Samuel Kimball for slandering myself and others, and destroying other people's property, and rendering his family unhappy.

June 28th 1838

J. L. Butler."

Julia Hendrix testifies that she has heard Kimball call his family lazy & trifling &c.

Charity Butler, testifies that she has heard Kimball say he would never consecrate to Bishop Edward Partridge, also heard him say his children were lazy.

Malinda Porter testifies that she has heard Kimball scold at his family (i.e.) children, also has heard him speak against Emmett & Butler, calling them rascals, villians, scape gallows, &c., also heard him speak against the Bishop, saying his Council would counsel for hire and he would judge for reward

Jerome Benson testifies that he has heard Kimball say that the Bishop give in a partial decision in his case.

Warner Porter testifies that he heard Kimball say that Emmett and Butler had acted the rascal and scounderal long enough, &c

Lavina Gardner testifies that Kimball scolds his family at a harsh rate and will say that he will leave them, if they do not obey him he will never come back, but they might starve for ought he cared, also accused his family of being priestridden, because they would go to meeting when Emmett and Butler took the lead; also testifies that he is a very industrious man, and provides for his family as well as he possibly can, and always taught his children to act in righteousness, and not lie nor commit any sin of the kind & be industrious

Rebecca Kimball testifies that her father is rather fretful, but his children did not mind him as they had ought, and when he was most fretful, it would be when he would get most discouraged about getting along and supporting his family, and that his children did not help him as they might, also, he taught his children to be industrious.

The Council decided that the decision, of the Bishop, was illegal, consequently, null and void, and therefore that Samuel Kimball was a member of the Church. [^150]

After some remarks by the Councellors, and the plaintiff, the Council adjourned untill tomorrow morning at 8 o'clock.

June 29, 1838

June 29th 1838 Far West Mo

The High Council met according to adjournment and was organized. President Marsh opened by prayer.

James Emmett then came forward and plead his own cause, by justifying himself also John L. Butler and James Hendrix.

President Marsh then arose and addressed the Council and decided that Hendrix was not criminated.

He then addressed Emmett by chastising him for his course of conduct and condemned the Spirit he was of.

He then chastised Kimball for speaking against the Bishop and his Council and then proceeded to give the following decision.

"That Samuel Kimball confess his faults to those individuals whom he has slandered, and walk before his family as a man of God, or he could not have a standing in the Church: this confession to be made in the publick congregation.

That James Emmett should confess to the Council that he had insulted them, and should make satisfaction to them, and also that he should publickly confess, that he had been exercised with a delusive spirit, and that he come out publickly and denounce it forever, also confess that he had unlawfully slandered the family of Samuel Kimball, and that unless he humbly confess these things, he could not hold a standing in the Church.

That John L. Butler was in the fault and he was also requested to confess to Samuel Kimball."

The Council unanimously sanctioned the decision of the President

Adjourned for one hour.

High Council met according to adjournment.

George M. Hinkle took his seat in the place of John Killion, pro. tem.

President Marsh opened by prayer.

The charge against Lyman Wight by John Anderson (prefered the 24th of May) was then presented by John Anderson, viz:

"For fellowship, for unjust deal and for abuse to me and for defamation of character.

Voted that two speak on a side, viz: Jackman [^151] and I. Higbee for the plaintiff and Hancock and Knight for the defendant.

Henry Sabrisky, states that Anderson sold Wight a certain mill seat for the benefit of the Church and that Wight was to give one hundred dollars for the mill seat, to be paid in one year.

The President decided that the above charge could not bear in this Council, the plaintiff then withdrew his suit.

A charge was then taken up against Lyman Wight for intoxication and thereby disgracing the Church (prefered the 24th of May) by Daniel Avery. William Wirick

Edward Larkey states that he was going by the house of the defendant and saw him leaning over the fence and had the appearance of intoxication, but did not see him drink any thing, also that he was in Liberty [^152] and saw Wight call for liquor, but saw him drink nothing.

Daniel Avery states that he saw the defendant leaning over the fence and hardly able to speak and to appearance intoxicated

Arthur Morrison says he went to Liberty with the defendant and that his breath smelt of whiskey and was hardly capable of managing himself and he considered him intoxicated with liquor.

L Gibbs [^153] says last summer Wight called at his shop a number of times and drank wine, but did not know that he was drunk

After the foregoing testimony a number more was presented in writing, after which the defendant agreed that he was intoxicated.

The President then decided that Lyman Wight must confess this sin with in one month or not be considered a member of the Church [^154]

July 6, 1838

The High Council and Bishop of Zion met in Far West. July 6th 1838, [^155] to transact certain Church buisness.

George M. Hinkle laid before the Council the circumstances of his moving to De Witt, [^156] therefore he wished to sell his house to Bishop Partridge for President Joseph Smith jr when it was,

1st Resolved—That the High Council instruct the Bishop to purchase Br Hinkle's house for Prest J. Smith jr

2nd Resolved, that the Bishop be instructed to purchase a cook stove for Prest Joseph Smith jr.

3rd Resolved That the Bishop be instructed to prepare the house, aforesaid, and make it comfortable to dwell in.

Council adjourned.

Ebenezer Robinson, Clerk

July 6, 1838

Conference

Far-West Mo. Friday July 6th 1838.

The authorities of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, opened at this City to hold the Second Quarterly Conference, in this City of Zion and to transact Church buisness.

The conference opened by singing "The Spirit of God like a fire is burning" and prayer by President D. W. Patten, after which another hymn was sung, "Now let us rejoice in the day of Salvation."

Presidents Joseph Smith jr. & Sidney Rigdon, Presiding.

The Presidents of the different Quorums proceeded to organize their respective Quorums, as follows:

First the High Council.

Second, the High Priests.

Third the Seventies by King Follett acting as President as the Presidents were absent.

Fourth, the Elders, by Ralph Cox, acting President in the absence of the President.

Fifth the Bishop and Council.

Sixth the Priests.

Seventh the Deacons Teachers by T. B. Clark [^157] acting President of the day.

Eighth, the Deacons, by Isaac Hamblin acting President for the day.

When the following hymn was sung "Oh happy souls who pray."

The Conference adjourned for one hour.

The Conference convened agreeable to adjournment, opened by singing, "He died the great Redeemer died."

After which President Sidney Rigdon made a few remarks respecting the officers in the Church saying, each officer must stand in his place, and perform his duty as it is required at his hand, and in so doing, he would be willing to predict, that there would be no difficulty in the Church untill the coming of Christ, also that the foundation of the happiness of the Church rests upon the heads of the Teachers and Deacons, whose duty it is to go from house to house and see that each family in the Church is kept in order, and that the children are taught the principles of righteousness; and also that the time had come when it was required at the hands of the Deacons, Teachers, & Priests to render an account of their stewardship, the standing of the various branches to which they belonged, &cc. [^158] he also gave much good instruction to the Upper Priest-hood—He then addressed all the quorums present on the subject of speaking lightly of each other, thinking, perhaps, he had not much influence, when at the same time some one might be present who had great confidence in you, and it would soon lead to a great difficulty, because all the Officers in the Church has more influence in than he may suspect, therefore, when you speak, let your words be seasoned with grace.

He then addressed the Elders, saying they were called to convert the world, and admonished them to put away ambition and go and perform the duty which is required at their hands—he compared the Elders to quarriers of stone, who merely quarried the stones and brought them to the building, where the Priests, Teachers, and Deacons, are polishers, whose duty it is to prepare them for the building.

After which several recommends were read and passed the Conference, viz:

Elisha Everett To the office of a Teacher

William Davis & John Buckhannan also Deacons

Norvil Head to the office of an Elder.

Allen Rathburn to the office of a Deacon.

John Lytle, who had been ordained a Priest was reordained by the Conference.

Ahisa Young was recommended to the office of Teacher.

Truman Brace, was ordained a Deacon in Jackson County but has not as yet received his licence, therefore, it was voted, by the Conference that he receive a licence.

Voted that Hezekiah Peck receive a licence as a Priest. Voted that William Gregory receive a renewal of his licence.

Voted that Alvin C. Graves recieve a new licence as a Teacher.

Voted that John S. Higbee recieve a new licence as a Deacon.

Voted that Jackson Smith recieve a new licence as an Elder.

Voted that Robert B. Thompson recieve a new licence as an Elder.

Voted that Orin Rockwell recieve a licence as Deacon

The Bishop, Edward Partridge represented the Lesser Priesthood, also gave an account of the temporal affairs of the Church.

President Marsh gave some instructions to the Teachers, respecting their returns of their branches.

President Rigdon made some remarks respecting the names of the different Creeks in this vicinity, in which he altered the names of some, as follows:

Steer Creek, he called Silver Creek, Log Creek he called Walnut Creek, Marrow-bone Creek he called Ambrosia. Poor Tom Creek he called Prairie Creek. [^159]

After which he confessed the sins of George Walters, [^160] who is considered a dangerous man in society, as being a man who harbors wicked and ungodly men in his house both night & day.

The Conference adjourned untill tomorrow at 10 o'clock A.M.

Benediction by Prest Joseph Smith jr

Ebenezer Robinson Clerk.

July 7, 1838

Far-West, Mo. Saturday July 7th 1838. [^161]

The Conference convened agreeable to adjournment.

Opened by Prayer by President Sidney Rigdon.

When the following brethren, who came up in the Camp in 1834 received their blessing, also ordained as Seventies:

Horace Evans,

Chandler Holbrook,

Jackson Smith,

Joseph Holbrook

James R. Ivie

James Dunn,

Justus Morse,

Thomas Turner,

Lewis Sabriskie

John C. Annis

Alanson Ripley,

John Fawsett,

Ebenezer Miller,

Horace Cowan,

After which several recommends passed the Conference as follows:

William Martin, presented but rejected by the Conference.

Johnathan T. Packer, to the office of Teacher.

Pleasant Ewell to the office of Deacon

Uziel Corey to the office of Deacon.

George Walters came forward and to make confession but did not give satisfaction.

After some remarks by President Rigdon, & On Motion, the Conference adjourned untill the first Friday in October next.

Benediction by President Rigdon.

Ebenezer Robinson, Clerk.

July 26, 1838

The High Council of Zion met in Far-West, Thursday, July 26th 1838 [^162]

When it was ordered by the Council, that the Bishop be authorized, to furnish the Clerk of this Stake with a Blank Book for him to keep the record of the names of the members of this Stake in.

Ebenezer Robinson, Clk.

August 31, 1838

The High Council of Zion met in Far West, Thursday, August 31st 1838.

Presidents Sidney Rigdon and Hyrum Smith, Presiding.

The Council was organized as, follows:

Simeon Carter No. 1

Jared Carter ,, 2

Orson Hyde ,, 3

John P. Green ,, 4

Isaac Higbee ,, 5

George W. Robinson ,, 6

George Morey ,, 7

Amasa Lyman ,, 8

Harlow Redfield ,, 9

George W. Harris ,, 10

Elias Higbee ,, 11

Samuel Bent ,, 12

The Council was opened by prayer by President Hyrum Smith

An application was made by Orson Hyde in favor of Br Russel; [^163] to receive a City lot in Far-West, gratis, which was not granted.

Also an application for a lot in the City Far-West, to be give to Almon Babbitt, which was not granted

An appealed case was presented by John Patten against certain Brethren as follows:

"To the Presidency and High Council of Far-West, Greeting.

The undersigned, feeling very much agrieved, by the report of a committee of Elders, appointed by the quorum of Elders, of Far-West, to investigate a cause of complaint presented to said quorum, by David Frampton, aginst the subscriber, and now, whereas said committee (composed of Daniel Shearer, Ralph Cox, and David Juda) have made a report which I consider very unjust and oppressive and intolerable, contrary to most positive testimony, both oral and written, and which I consider setting a precident dangerous if imitated and subversive of the rights and liberties of free men, and deciples of our Lord and Saviour: I therefore, appeal to your sacred quorum to take unto reconsideration the above; refered to matter of complaint; and also to call to account the above named committee for reporting such a harsh and uncalled for decree, contrary to all known and justly established usages of law and equity in civilized nations and the subscriber as in duty bound will ever pray for the salvation of men.

Dec. 18th 1837. John Patten."

The above appeal having been not attended to by the then existing Presidency of Far West, for a number of causes the above appeal is made to the present Presidency for their investigation

August 11th 1838. John Patten."

After which the report of the above committee was read by the Clerk, as follows:

"To the President, Council and Quorum of Elders in Zion, assembled in Far-West,

We, the undersigned, being appointed a committee to attend at the house of John Patten, to hear and investigate the cause of complaint, that was lodged before this quorum by David Frampton against John Patten, beg leave to, and do, report that we did attend to that duty, and found John Patten and Sheffield Daniels, and Abigail Daniels under transgression and are of the opinion that they ought not to be admitted to the Sacrament untill there is a better understanding and more union between them, and we further believe, that the ground work of all this contention originated from John Patten, directing those men, to wit: Daniels, Johnson, Pettigrew, Fairchild &c to purchase claims to cover a certain 40 acres of land, and then, before they laid their claims before the Committee, he, the said Patten secured to himself the land, and wanted those men to have their claims laid on some other piece or parcel of land & herein they were dissatisfied, & thus the contention arose, and we further believe, that Br John Patten's conduct is of such a nature towards Br Sheffield Daniels and his wife, and others, that unless he makes satisfaction to this Conference at our next meeting, that his licence be called for by the President and be requested to give them up."

Dec 16th 1837. Daniel Shearer

Ralph Cox Committee

David Judy

After some consultation, the record of former Councils were read which were had on the head of John Patten in 1837. Also the proceedings of the Elders quorum were read by the Clerk of the Elders quorum.

After some consultation, it was decided by the High Council, that the proceedings of the Elders quorum were not legal, therefore the matter was quashed and John Patten have his standing as before the decision of the Committee of the Elders quorum:

Resolved That Seymoure Brunson fill the seat of Harlow Redfield, and William Snow fill the seat of Amasa Lyman during the remainder of this session

Several charges were read, prefered by Alexander Williams, against sundry individuals, also one prefered against Alexander Williams by Josiah Fuller.

The charges generally were rejected, by the Council as it was buisness belonging to the Bishop, however there was a charge against Elder Williams for teaching erronious doctrine which he confessed that he had done in a degree.

It was decided by the Council that Elder Williams be no longer a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. [^164]

Resolved—That the charges prefered by Alexander William be not considered worthy of notice by any Court of this Church.

Resolved That the Bishop, Edward Partridge be instructed to pay a certain debt of 14 dollars & 50 cents which President Rigdon has been under the necessity of borrowing to purchaseing provisions with. Council adjourned untill the last Thursday in September next. Closed in prayer by Samuel Bent.

Ebenezer Robinson, Clerk.

April 28, 1838

The following letter of Sarah Jackson should have been inserted on Page 139, in the minutes of a Council, on the 28 of April 1838, but was not in consequence of its being mislaid and did not come to hand until the recording had been done thus far. (See page 139) [^165]

"It came to pass in the year of our Lord 1837, That I having lately came into this work, my husband sent me to this country some time months previous to his coming. [^166] I was here some time and he did not come.

I, believing Elder Lyon to be a man of God, asked him to inquire of the Lord concerning my husband and what had was the cause of his not coming.

Sometime after that, he held a prayer meeting at Br Wheelers here he prophesied and said some one now in the room shall be led to mourn before three weeks unless there was a speedy repentance, & who it was he did not know. So on returning from meeting, he told me, that he had inquired of the Lord, and that my husband was dead and preaching to the spirits in prison, and that I was the one that should be led to mourn.

The next morning he passed by where I was and began to tell of his restlessness and that the Lord had appointed him a wife, by revelation, and he knew her name, and if he did not have her in less than six months he would never prophesy in the name of Jesus again.

At another time, he told me that he would tell me the whole of his mind, saying that when he inquired of the Lord, that the Lord told him that my husband was dead and preaching to the spirits in prison, and that I was presented before him, and that the Lord told him that I was to be his wife. "Lord is it so?" "Yes for I know all things." He said he went again to inquire of the Lord and I was presented before him again "Why Lord she won't have me." "Yes she will" said the Lord, "and if she don't I'll place another in her stead that shall be more beautiful to the eye than she is.

He told me that if I refused this I should be forever miserable, for he had a complete view of my future state and he would write it down, for he knew, just how it would be. Said he you are young and I am old I am afraid some one will try to persuade you off.

Moreover if this is not all true I will deny that there is a God in Heaven. I said, I doubt it. He then accused me of unbelief saying when a man of truth told me anything I was hard to believe when it is of God.

Furthermore he said, he was then in the same spirit that he was when he cursed that man and he died, and when he saw the death of his wife, [^167] and that he had proved it by living testimony and why should you not as well believe me now as to believe that, for I would not tell you anything to injure you, for them that are ordained to this high authority are ordained of God and you have as much right to believe me as to believe Paul; yes, and a better right for it is not handed down so far.

He said Br Joseph told him to be cautious who he cursed in the name of the Lord, for who he cursed was cursed, and who he blessed was blessed.

And at another time he told me that Lord had told him, that I did not care as much for him as he thought I did and that I need not try to hide anything from him, for the Lord would reveal it to him.

And he led me to believe that the vengeance of God was about to be poured speedily upon me if I did not agree to his evil designs.

This I send to the honorable High Council of Far-West, as testimony against Elder Lyon as being true testimony.

Given under my hand, this 27th day of April 1838."

Sarah Jackson.

October 5, 1838

Conference.

The 3rd Quarterly conference of the authorities, of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, assembled in Far-West on Friday, October 5th 1838. [^168]

President Brigham Young presiding.

Conference opened by singing, "O! happy souls who pray." &c and prayer by the President—

After which the following hymn was sung: "Now let us rejoice in the day of salvation." &c

As there were not a sufficency of members present to make a quorum to do buisness, therefore, the Conference adjourned untill 2 o'clock P.M.

The Conference convened agreeable to adjournment.

Opened by singing and prayer by Elder Kimball.

Presidents Young and Marsh presiding.

As there were not a sufficient number of the High Council and other ordained members, to form quorums, to do buisness as a quarterly Conference, yet there were some some recommends for ordination which were read and one passed the Conference in the name of the Church, viz: Brother Isaac Laney, as he was about to go on a visit to his friends in the South.

Br Horace Alexander made a request to have an Elder accompany him to Indiana and Ohio, also requested an ordination to the office of an Elder, which was granted by the Conference & Elder Ebenezer Page was appointed to accompany him.

A recommend was handed to the Conference by the Clerk of the Elder's Quorum, recommending Stephen Chase to be ordained as President of the Elder's Quorum which was read by the Clerk and passed unanimously.

Emanuel M. Murphy made a request to have an Elder accompany him to South Carolina this season, when Almon Babbitt was appointed to be his Companion, if it met his feelings.

After some remarks by various members of the Conference, it was, Moved, Seconded and Caried—

That Brs Isaac Morley, John Buchanan, and James Allred be ordained or not to the Bishopric, by the First Presidency, as they see proper.

The Conference adjourned untill tomorrow at 10 o'clock.

Closed in prayer by Isaac Morley.

October 6, 1838

Saturday, October 6, 1838. [^169]

Conference convened agreeably to adjournment.

Opened by singing, "To him that made the sun and moon and stars" &c. and prayer by President B. Young.

Prests Marsh and Young presiding.

Elder Benjamin L. Clapp gave a statement of this travels in Kentucky, as he had just returned from there, many doors were opened in that part of the country, and calls for preaching continually. He wished some Elders to go to that country.

A call was then made for volunteers to go forth and preach the gospel, when several Elders offered themselves, also a call for volunteer members, who wished to be ordained and go into the vineyard to make it manifest, when Br. Albert Sloan made a request to be ordained to the office of an Elder, after some remarks it was moved, seconded, and carried that he be ordained as aforesaid.

The following are the names of the Elders who volunteered to go forth into the vineyard this season.

James Carroll, James Galliher, Luman A. Shirtliff, James Dunn, Ahaz Cook, Isaac Decker, Cornelius P. Lott, and Alphius Gifford.

President Marsh gave some very good instructions to the Elders who have volunteered requesting them not to go forth boasting of their faith, or of the judgments of the Lord; but to go in the Spirit of meekness and preach repentance unto the children of men. [^170]

Elder John Taylor, from Canada, by request, gave a statement, of his feelings respecting his being appointed as one of the Twelve. [^171] He said he was willing to do anything, which God would require of him, by the assistance of the Lord.

After which it was voted by the Conference that Br John Taylor fill the vacancy of one of the Twelve.

After which Stephen Chase came forward and was ordained a President to preside over the Quorum of Elders, in this Stake of Zion.

The following persons then came forward and were ordained to the office of Elders under the hands of the Presidents, viz: Isaac Laney, Horace Alexander, and Albert Sloan.

Voted by the Conference that Samuel Bent and Isaac Higbee fill the seats of John Murdock and George M. Hinkle, in the High Council who have moved to De Witt.

Elder Kimball made a few appropriate remarks to the Elders respecting their duty.

Bishop E. Partridge made a Report of the temporal affairs of the Church.

Conference adjourned until the first Friday and Saturday in January next at 10 o'clock A. M.

Closed in benediction by Prest Marsh.

Ebenezer Robinson, Clerk.

December 10, 1838

Note by the Recorder. It was thought proper to insert the following memmorial, [^172] of the citizens of Caldwell County, Missouri, in this place, as it contains a Synopsis of our unparalleled suffering and the persecution which was waged against us, by the authorities, as well as the citizens, of that State. The memmorial was not granted by the Legislature, therefore, it will also show the reason why we have come to this place. (Nauvoo, January 30th, 1843. Hosea Stout, Recorder.)

"To the Honorable Legislature of the State of Missouri, in Senate and house of Representatives, convened.—

We the undersigned petitioners, inhabitants of Caldwell County Missouri, in consequence of the late calamity that has come upon us, taken in connexion with former afflictions, feel it a duty we owe to ourselves and our country, to lay our case before your Honorable Body for consideration.

It is a well known fact, that a Society of our people commenced settling in Jackson County, Missouri in the summer of 1833, [^173] where they according to their ability purchased lands and settled upon them, with the intention and expectation of becoming permanent citizens in common with others.

Soon after the settlement began, persecution began, and as the society increased, persecution also increased; untill the society at last was compelled to leave the County. And others although an account of these persecutions has been published to the world, yet we feel that it will not be improper to notice a few of the most prominent items in this memmorial.

On the 20th of July 1833, a mob convened at Independence a committee of which called upon a few of the leading men of our Church there, and stated to them, that the store, printing office, and indeed all other machanick shops, must be closed forthwith; and the society leave the country immediately; these propositions were so unexpected, that a certain time was asked for, to consider upon the subject before an answer should be returned, that being refused and our men being individually interrogated, each one answered, that he could not consent to comply with their propositions. One of the mob replied, that he was sorry, for the work of destruction would commence immediately. In a short time, the printing office, which was a two story brick building, was assailed by the mob and soon down and with it much valuable property destroyed. Next they went to the store for the same purpose, but Mr. Gilbert, one of the owners, agreeing to close it, they abandoned their design. Their next move was their dragging off Bishop Partridge from his house and family, to the publick square, when surrounded by hundreds, they partially stripped him of his cloths and tared and feathered him from head to foot. A man, by the name of Allen, was also tared and feathered at the same time. This was Saturday, and the mob agreed to meet on the following Tuesday, to accomplish their purpose, of driving or massacreing the society. Tuesday came and and the mob also bearing with them a red flag, in token of blood. Some two or three of the principal men of the society offered their lives if that would appease the wrath of the mob, so that the rest of the society might dwell in peace upon their lands: answer was that, unless the society would consent to leave en masse, every man should die for himself. Being in a defenceless situation, to save a general massacre, it was agreed that one half of the society should leave the county by the first of next January, and the remainder by the first of the following April; a treaty was entered into and ratified and all things went on smoothly for awhile; but sometime in October the wrath of the mob began again to be kindled, insomuch that they shot at some of our people, whipped others, and threw down their houses and also committed many other depredations: indeed the society of Saints, were harrassed for sometime both day and night, their houses were brickbatted and broken open, women and children insulted &c—the store house of A. S. Gilbert & Company was broken open, ransacked and some of the goods strewed in the street these abuses with many others of a very aggravated nature so stired up the indignant feeling of our people that a party of them, say about 30 met a company of the mob, of about double their number, when a battle took place in which, some two or three of the mob and one of our people were killed. This raised as it were the whole County in arms, and nothing would satisfy them but an immediate surrender of the arms of our people, and they forthwith to leave the County. Fifty-one guns were given up, which have never been returned, or paid for to this day. The next day parties of the mob, from 30 to 70, headed by priests, went from house to house threatening women and children with death if they were not off before they returned. This so alarmed them, that they fled in different directions, some took shelter in the woods, whilst others wandered on the prairies, till their feet bled; in the mean time the weather being very cold, their sufferings, in other respects, were very great.

The society made their escape to Clay County, as fast as they possibly could, where the people received them kindly & administered to their wants, After the society had left Jackson County, their buildings, amounting to about 200, were either burned or otherwise destroyed; much of their crops, as well as stock, furniture &c. were also destroyed.

The loss of property, added to the trouble and expence of moving, if properly estimated, would make a large sum for which they have not yet, received any remuneration.

The society remained in Clay County, nearly 3 years, when, at the suggestion of the people there, they removed to that section of country, now known as Caldwell County. Here the people purchased out most of the former inhabitants and also entered much of the wild lands, many soon owned a number of Eighties each, whilst there was scarcely a man but what secured to himself at least a Forty. Here we were permitted to enjoy peace for a season; but as our society increased in numbers and settlements were made in Davis [^174] & Carroll Counties, the mob spirit showed itself again.

For months previous to our giving up our arms to Genl Lucas' army, we heard little else, than rumors of mobs being collecting in different places, and threatening our people. It is well known, that the people of our Church, who had located themselves at De Witt, had to give up to a mob, and leave the place, notwithstanding the milita were called out for their protection.

From De Witt the mob went towards Davis County and whilst on their way there, they took two of our men prisoners, and made them ride upon the cannon, and told them, that they would drive the Mormons from Davis to Caldwell, and from Caldwell to H E L L; and that they would give them no quarters, only at the canon's mouth.—The threats of the mob induced some of our people to go to Davis to help to protect their brethren, who had settled at Diahman on Grand River.—The mob soon fled from Davis County & after they were dispersed, and the canon taken during which time no blood was shed, the people from Caldwell returned to their homes in hopes of enjoying peace and quiet; but in this they were disappointed, for a large mob was soon found to be collecting on the Grindstone, from ten to fifteen miles off, under the command of C. Giliam; [^175] a scouting party of which came within about four miles of Far-West, and drove off stock belonging to our people in open day light.—About this time word came to Far-West, that a party of mob had come to into Caldwell County to the South East of Far-West, that they were [stealing] horses and Cattle,—that they were burning houses, and ordering the inhabitants to leave their homes immediately; and that they had then actually in their possession three men prisoners; this report reached Far-West in the evening and was confirmed about midnight.—A company of about sixty men went forth under the command of David W. Patten, to disperse the mob, as they supposed.—A battle was the result, in which Captain Patten and two of his men were killed & others wounded; Bogart, [^176] it appears, had but one killed, [^177] and others wounded and notwithstanding the unlawful acts committed by Capt Bogart's men previous to the battle, it was now asserted and claimed that he was regularly ordered out as a Militia Captain to preserve the peace along the line of Ray and Caldwell Counties.—That battle was fought four of five days previous to the arrival of General Lucas [^178] and his army.—About the time of the battle with Capt Bogart a number of our people, who were living near Haun's mill, on Shoal Creek, about 20 miles below Far West; together with a number of emigrants, who had been stopped there in consequence of the excitement, made an agreement with the mob, which was about there, that neither party should molest the other but dwell in peace.—Shortly after this agreement was made, a mob party of from 2 to 300 many of whom are supposed to be from Chariton County, some from Davis, and also those who had agreed to dwell in peace, came upon our people there, whose number in men were about 40, at a time they little expected any such thing; and without any cerimony, notwithstanding they begged for quarters, shot them down as they would Tigers or Panthers; some few made their escape by fleeing. Eighteen were killed & a number more severely wounded.

This tragedy was conducted in the most brutal and savage manner. An old man, [^179] after the massacre was partially over, threw himself into their hands & begged for quarters, when he was instantly shot down, that not killing him, they took an old corncutter and litterally mangled him to pieces.—A lad of seven years of age, [^180] after being shot down also begged to be spared; when one of them placed the muzzle of his gun to his head and blew out his brains.—The slaughter of these people, not satisfying the mob, they then proceeded to rob and plunder the people.—The scene that presented itself after the massacre, to the widows and orphans, of the killed, is past discription!!!

It was truly a time of weeping, of mourning, and of lamentation!!!!—As yet, we have not heard of any being arrested for these murders, notwithstanding, there are men boasting about the country, that they did kill, on that occasion, more than one Mormon, whereas all our people who were in the battle with Capt Patten against Bogart, that can be found, have been arrested, and are now confined in jail, to await their trial for murder.

When Genl Lucas arrived near Far West, and presented the Governor's order, [^181] we were greatly surprised, yet we felt willing to submit, to the Authorities of the State.—We gave up our arms without reluctance, we were then made prisoners and confined to the limits of the town, for about a week; during which time the men from the country were not permitted to go to their families many of whom were in a suffering condition, for the want of food and fire-wood; the weather being very cold and stormy.—Much property was destroyed by the troops in town, during their stay there; such as burning house-logs, rails, corncribs, boards, &c. the using of corn and hay, the plundering of houses; the killing of cattle, sheep and hogs, and also the taking off horses not their own; and all this without regard to owners; or asking leave of any one.—

In the meantime men were abused, women insulted and ravished by the troops; and all this, while we were kept prisoners.—Whilst the town was guarded, we were called together by the order of General Lucas, and a guard placed close around us; and in that situation were compelled, to sign a deed of trust, for the purpose of making our individual property all holden, as they said, to pay off the debts of every individual belonging to the Church, and also to pay for all damages, the old inhabitants of Davis may have sustained, in consequence of the late difficulties in that County.— [^182]

Genl Clark [^183] was now arrived, and the first important move by him was the collecting our men together on the square and selecting out about 50 of them; whom he immediately marched unto a house and confined close, this was done, without the aid of the sheriff; or any legal process. The next day 46 of those taken, were driven like a parcel of menial slaves, off to Richmond, not knowing why they were taken; or what they were taken for. After being confined in Richmond more than 2 weeks, about one half were liberated the rest after another week's confinement, were most of them recognized to appear at Court and have since been let to bail. Since Genl Clark withdrew his troops from Far-West, parties of armed men have reconoitered the County, driving off horses, sheep, and cattle, and also plundering houses.—The barbarity of Genl Lucas' troops ought not to be passed over in silence, they shot down our cattle and hogs merely for the sake of destroying them, leaving them for the ravens to eat. They took prisoner an aged man by the name of Tanner [^184] and without any reason for it, he was struck over the head with a gun, which laid his skull bare.—Another man by the name of Carey, [^185] was also taken prisoner by them, and without any provocation, had his brains dashed out with a gun; he was laid in a waggon, and there permitted to remain, for the space of 24 hours, during which time no one was permitted to administer to him comfort and consolation; and after he was removed from that situation, he lived but a few hours.—The destruction of property, at, and about Far-West, is very great, many, yes a large portion are stripped bare as it were, and others partially so; indeed take us as a body, at this time, we are a poor and afflicted people; and if we are compelled to leave the State in the spring many; yes a large portion of our society, will have to be removed at the expense of the State, as those who otherwise might have helped them, are now debarred that privilege, in consequence of the deed of trust we were compelled to sign, which deed so operates upon our real estate that it will sell for but little or nothing at this time.—

We have now made a brief statement of the most prominent features of the troubles that have befallen our people since their first settlement in this State; and we believe that these persecutions have come in consequence of our religious faith; and not for any immorality on our part.—

That instances have been of late, where individuals have trespassed upon the rights of others, and thereby broken the law of the land, we will not pretend to deny; but yet we do believe, that no crimes can be substantiated against any of the people who have a standing in our Church of an earlier date than the difficulties in Davies County. And when it is considered, that, the rights of this people have been trampled upon from [time] to time with impunity, and abuses heaped upon them almost innumberable; it ought in some degree, to paliate for any infraction of Law which may have been made on the part of any of our people.

The late order of Governor Boggs to drive us from this State, or exterminate us, is a thing so novel, unlawful, tyrannical and oppressive, that we have been induced to draw up this memmorial and present this statement of our case to your Honorable Body, praying that a law may be passed resinding the order of the Governer to drive us out of from the State; and also giving us the sanction of the Legislature to inherit our lands in peace we ask an expression of the Legislature, disapprobating the conduct of those who compelled us to sign a deed of trust and also disapproving of any man or set of men, in taking our property in consequence of that deed of trust, and appropriating it to the payment of debts not contracted by us; or for the payment of damages sustained in consequence of tresspasses committed by others.

We have no common stock; our property is individual property, and we feel willing to pay our debts as other individuals do; but we are not willing to be bound to pay other people's debts also.

The arms which were taken from us here, which we understand to be about 630, besides swords and pistols we care not so much about, as we do the pay for them; only we are bound to do military duty, which we are willing to do, and which we think was sufficiently manifested; by the raising of a volunteer Company last fall at Far-West, when called upon by General Parks [^186] to rais troops for the frontier.

The arms given up by us, we considered were worth between twelve and fifteen thousand dollars; but we understand they have been greatly damaged since taken, and at this time probably would not bring near their former value; and as they were both here and in Jackson County taken by the Militia; and consequently by the authority of the State; we therefore, ask your Honorable Body to cause an appropriation to be made by law, whereby we may be paid for them; or otherwise have them returned to us, and the damages made good.

The loss sustained by our people, in leaving Jackson County, are so situated, that it is impossible to obtain any compensation for them by law because those who have sustained them are unable to prove those trespasses upon individuals.

That the facts do exist that the buildings, crops, stock, furniture, rails, timber, &c. of the society have been destroyed in Jackson County, is not doubted by any at this time acquainted in this upper country; and since those trespasses cannot be proved upon individuals, we ask your Honorable Body to consider this case; and if in your liberality and wisdom, you can conceive to be proper, and make an appropriation by law to compensate those sufferers.—The State we think would never feel the loss, whereas those sufferers, many of whom, are still pressed down with poverty, in consequence of those losses, would be enabled to pay their debts, and also in some degree relieved from poverty and woe, whilst the widow's heart would be made to rejoice & the orphan's tear measureably dried up, and the prayer of a grateful people ascend on High with thanksgiving and praise to the author of our existence of that beneficient act.—

In laying our case before your Honorable Body, we say that we are willing and ever have been to conform to the Consitution and laws of the United States and of this State. We ask, in common with others, the protection of the laws. We ask for the privileges guaranteed to all free citizens of the United States and of this State, to be extended to us; we may be permitted to settle and live where we please, and worship God according to the dictates of our own consciences, without molestation;—And whilst we ask for ourselves this privilege, we are willing all others should enjoy the same

We now lay our case at the feet of your Legislature & ask your Honorable Body to consider it, and do for us after mature deliberation, that which your wisdom, patriotism and Philanthropy may dictate.—And as in duty bound will ever pray.

Far West Caldwell County,

Missouri. Dec. 10th 1838

Edward Partridge

Heber C. Kimball

John Taylor

Theodore Turley

Brigham Young

Isaac Morley

George W. Harris

John Murdock

John M. Burk

A committee appointed by the citizens of Caldwell County to draft this memmorial and sign it in their behalf

December 13, 1838

Far West Wednesday (Dec. 13 1838 [^187]

Agreeable to appointment the standing High Councillors met, when it was found that several were absent, who, (some of them) have had to flee for their lives, therefore it being necessary that those vacancies be filled the meeting was called for that purpose, and, also, to express each others feelings respecting the word of the Lord.

President Brigham Young Presiding. [^188]

The Council was opened by prayer by Elder Kimball

After prayer Prest Young made a few remarks saying he thought it all important to have the Council reorganized, and prepared to do buisness. He advised the councellors to be wise and judicious in all their movements and not hasty in their transactions; as for his faith it was the same as ever, and he fellowshiped all such as loved the gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ in act as well as deed word.

Elder Kimball arose and said he felt as formerly for he had endeavored to keep a straight forward course; but wherein he had been out of the way, in any manner, he ment to mend in that thing, and he was determined to do as much as possible, as he would be done by, and his faith was as good as ever, he was in fellowship with all who wanted to do right.

Simeon Carter said as to his faith in the work it was the same as ever, he did not think that Joseph was a fallen prophet; [^189] but he believed in every revelation that had come through him: Still he thought that perhaps Joseph had not acted in all things according to the best wisdom yet how far he had been unwise he could not say; he did not think that Joseph would be removed and another planted in his stead; but he believed he would still perform his work, he was still determined to persevere and act in righteousness in all things so that he might at last gain a crown of glory and reign in the Kingdom of God

Jared Carter responded with Prest Brigham Young's feelings and wished still to walk with the brethren

Thos Grover said that he was firm in the faith and he believed the time would come when Joseph would stand before kings and speak marvelous words &c.

David Dort expressed his feelings in a similar manner. Levi Jackman says his faith is the same as ever and he has confidence in Br Joseph as ever.

Solomon Hancock says he is a firm believer in the Book of Mormon and Doctrine & covenants and that Br. Joseph is not a fallen Prophet, but will yet be exalted and become very high.

John Badger says his confidence in the work is the same as ever, and his faith, if possible is stronger than ever he believes that it was necessary that these scourges should come.

George W Harris says that as it respects the scourge which has come upon us that the hand of God was in it &c.

Samuel Bent says that his faith is as ever and that he feels to praise God in prisons and in dungeons and in all circumstances whatever he may be found.

After some consultation it was thought expedient to nominate High Priests to fill the vacancies.

The Council was organized as follows:

Simeon Carter No 1

Jared Carter No 2

Thos Grover ,, 3

David Dort ,, 4

Levi Jackman ,, 5

Solomon Hancock ,, 6

John Badger ,, 7

John Murdock ,, 8

John E. Page ,, 9

George W. Harris ,,10

John Taylor ,,11

Samuel Bent ,,12

Voted that John Murdock fill the vacancy of John P. Green No. 4. and David Dort the place of Elias Higbee No. 11. and John Badger the place of George Morey No. 7. and Lyman Shearman the place of Newell Knight untill he returns Council adjourned till Friday evening at 6 o clock

Closed in prayer by Prest Young.

E Robinson, Clerk.)

December 19, 1838

The High Council of Zion met in Far West Wednesday December 19th 1838. [^190] The Council was organized as follows:

Ebenezer Robinson No. 1

Jared Carter No 2

Thomas Grover ,, 3

Reynolds Cahoon ,, 4

Theodore Turley ,, 5

Solomon Hancock, ,, 6

John Badger ,, 7

John Murdock ,, 8

Harlow Redfield ,, 9

George W. Harris ,, 10

David Dort ,, 11

Samuel Bent ,, 12

The Council was opened by prayer by President B. Young who presided over the Council Harlow Redfield gave a statement of his feelings—he said his faith was as good as it ever was, notwithstanding, he did not feel to fellowship all the proceedings of the brethren in Daviess County. He thought they did not act as wisely as they might have done &c

Voted by the Council that John E. Page and John Taylor be ordained to the apostleship to fill vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve.

When they came forward and received their ordination under the hands of Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball. [^191]

Voted that we send a petition to the general Government and send it by mail

Voted that Edward Partridge and John Taylor be a committee to draft the above mentioned petition; also it is their privilege to chose another person to assist them.

Council adj untill next Wednesday at 1 o'clock at this place

E. Robinson Clerk).

December 26, 1838

The High Council of Zion met agreeable to adjournment, in Far West on Wednesday Dec. 26th 1838 [^192] and was organized as follows:

Simeon Carter No. 1

Jared Carter No 2

(No 3, 4, and 5 absent)

Solomon Hancock ,, 6

John Badger ,, 7

John Murdock ,, 8

Harlow Redfield ,, 9

George W. Harris ,,10

David Dort ,,11

Samuel Bent ,,12

The Council was opened by prayer by Prest B Young who presided over the Council, after which a hymn was sung.

Voted that the Council are satisfied with Br Redfield. [^193]

Voted that E. Robinson be appointed to write communications to an Editor in Michigan, who has requested it.

Council adjourned untill next Wednesday at 10 o clock A.M.

E. Robinson Clerk

Footnotes

"The . . . council met again and resolved not to have those men (the 3) [David Whitmer, W. W. Phelps and John Whitmer] to be their Presidents, and to call on the church to know if they would consent in the same. They [the High Council] say they have no legal accusation against them, but don't want them to preside over the church any longer. Tomorrow [February 5, 1838] is appointed for the first meeting of the church: the brethren [Whitmers and Phelps] wont go. They will not bend to the principle enough to go and answer to a tribunal which is no tribunal. . . . The council have concluded they have nothing to do with me." (See Oliver Cowdery to Warren Cowdery, February 4, 1838, Cowdery Letters, Henry E. Huntington Library and Art Gallery, San Marino, California; microfilm at Church Archives.)

This day the first presidency, High Council & Bishops Court, met to take into concideration, the disposing of the publick properties in the hands of the Bishop, in Zion, for the people of Zion have commenced liberally to consecrate agreeably to the revelations, and commandments of the Great I Am of their Surpluss properties &c.

It was agreed that the first presidency keep all their properties, that they can dispose of to their advantage and Support and the remainder be put into the hands of the Bishop or Bishops, agreeably to the commandments, and revelations.

1st Mooved Seconded & carried unanymously, That the first presidency Shall have their expences defrayed in going to Adam Ondi Awman, and also returning therefrom That the Bishop of Zion pay one half, and the Bishop of Adam Ondi Awman the other half

2nd Mooved Seconded & carried unanymously that all the traveling expences of the first presidency Shall be defrayed in traveling at any time or place

3rd Mooved Seconded & carried unanymously That the Bishop be authorised to pay orders coming from the East inasmuch as they will consecrate liberally, but this to be done under the inspection of the first presidency

4th That the first presidency Shall have the prerogative to say to the Bishop whose orders Shall or may be paid by him in this place or in his jurisdiction. Carried unanymously

5th Mooved Seconded and carried That the Bishop of Zion receive all consecrations, East, West, & South, who are not in the Jurisdiction of a Bishop of any other stake.

6th Mooved & carried that we use our influence to put a stop to the Selling of Liquor in the City Far West or in our midst. That our streets may not be filled with drunkness and that we use our influence to bring down the price of provisions.

7th Mooved Seconded & carried unanymously that br. Wm. W. Phelps, be requested to draw up a petition to remove the County Seat to Far West.

---
Notas:
[^1] These are the last minutes from Missouri in the Far West Record.
[^2] David and John Whitmer said tea and coffee were not hot drinks and, therefore, using them was not in violation of the Word of Wisdom. The Saints were still defining the Word of Wisdom. Hyrum Smith's statement on tea and coffee was made in Nauvoo. (See Times and Seasons 3[June 1842]:800.) Oliver did know about plural marriage but was not granted permission to practice it, and, seeking revenge, charged the prophet with adultery.
[^3] Resolved—That the High Council recommend to all those who hold licences, between the age of 18 and 45, and do not officiate in their respective offices, be subject to military duty. [^29] The council did not wish to accept full responsibility for action against the presidents, and, therefore, called for a vote of the Church membership on this matter, in a general assembly and in meetings with each branch. Oliver knew about plural marriage and entered the practice himself without authorization. (See George Q. Cannon, Juvenile Instructor 16 [September 15, 1881]:206, and 20[December 1, 1885]:360; Joseph F. Smith, Journal of Discourses 20:29; and Danel W. Bachman, "A Study of the Mormon Practice of Plural Marriage before the Death of Joseph Smith," M.A. thesis, Purdue University, 1975.)
[^4] Resolved That the High Council recommend George W. Harris to the office of a High Priest. The name of the Church in its complete form indicates that these minutes were recorded in the Far West Record after April 1838, when the official name was given by revelation.
[^5] See History of the Church 3:3.
[^6] This revelation is found in History of the Church 2:511. The date in History of the Church is September 3, 1837, not September 4, 1837.
[^7] See History of the Church 2:127 for an additional reference to this appeal.
[^8] In reference to this meeting and the selling of their lands in Jackson County, Oliver Cowdery has written: "Messrs W. W. Phelps J. Whitmer and myself had a partial claim to a few lots in Independence, Mo. [which] we sold some time since on some of the Jackson suits costs. We quit claimed our interest in and to the same for a small sum (and glad to get that) which has caused considerable stir. Not long since, Messers D and J Whitmer, W. W. Phelps and myself were waited upon by (as they said) a committee of the High Council who said the church were dissatisfied with our conduct, &c. in selling those lots and not keeping the word of wisdom, and also in not teaching the church to fulfil the consecration law. I told them that if I had property, while I lived and was sane, I would not be dictated, influenced or controlled by any man or set of men by no tribunal of ecclesiastical pretences what ever . . . .
[^9] Resolved—that this Council adjourn to meet next Saturday at 9 o'clock A. M. Note that the bishops (Partridge, Corrill, and Billings) believed that only a common council could try the presidents in Missouri (see Doctrine and Covenants 107:82). The opinion of the high council in Missouri, however, was that it had the authority to try the presidents. This discussion underscores the confusion in the minds of Church leaders regarding the true role of the Missouri presidency.
[^10] The letter from Joseph Smith to Bishop Partridge was dated, Kirtland, January 7, 1838.
[^11] The Prophet's January 7, 1838, letter to Partridge mentioned the "wolf": "Brother Partridge, Thus saith the Lord, my servant Edward and his house shall be numbered with the blessed and Abraham their father, and his name shall be had in sacred rem[em]brance. And again thus saith the Lord, let my people be aware of dissensions among them lest the enemy have power over them, Awake my shepherds and warn my people! for behold the wolf cometh to destroy them! receive him not. Now I would inform you that my health is good and also that of my family, and it is my earnest prayer to God that health, peace, and pleanty may crown your board and blessings of Heaven rest upon the head of him in whom the Lord hath said there is no guide." (Edward Partridge, Jr., Family Record, page 52, Church Archives.)
[^12] Note again the uncertainty of Church leaders on this issue.
[^13] Simeon Carter.
[^14] February 1838.
[^15] This letter was written by the Prophet at New Portage, Ohio.
[^16] Oliver Cowdery writes: "They call loudly for help from this place: for many waggons to help them forward. There is a council today [February 24, 1838], I expect, on the subject—what will be the result I am not able to say, but presume messengers will be sent to meet them." (See letter of Oliver Cowdery, February 24, 1838, Huntington Library, microfilm at Church Archives.)
[^17] See History of the Church 3:8-10. John P. Barnard, a blacksmith, traveled to Huntsville, Missouri, with his carriage to bring Joseph and his family to Far West. (Elden J. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young [Salt Lake City: Elden Jay Watson, 1968], page 27.)
[^18] This is the first time the word stake is used in the Far West Record to refer to a Church unit in Missouri. In this case the stake was located at Far West.
[^19] Doctrine and Covenants 20:53-59.
[^20] See Doctrine and Covenants 20:81-82. In addition to the membership list called for in Doctrine and Covenants 20, the teachers are now instructed to bring a report of the status of the branch.
[^21] See Doctrine and Covenants 20:47. This sixth article was voted null and void on March 15, 1838. (See page 151.)
[^22] Doctrine and Covenants 59.
[^23] The space here represents a space in the Far West Record manuscript. Hosea Stout had undoubtedly intended to list those present.
[^24] See History of the Church 3:6. Some of this account has been omitted from the History of the Church version.
[^25] Although John Murdock was the senior member of the high council, he is listed as number twelve. These numbers were assigned, apparently at each meeting, by casting lots.
[^26] See Doctrine and Covenants 20:61-62.
[^27] Doctrine and Covenants 20:84. Note the desire to bring the Church organization into harmony with the revelations.
[^28] This was a case appealed from the elders quorum. Evidence indicates that each quorum had authority to try its own members. Decisions of these quorum cases could be appealed.
[^30] March 10, 1838.
[^31] This letter summarizes the position of the presidents. From this point of view they had been treated unjustly. They objected to Marsh and Patten's convening the council in their absence, and claimed that these two Apostles were committed to removing them from the Church.
[^32] See History of the Church 3:7-8.
[^33] Lyman Leonard.
[^34] See the explanation given by Thomas B. Marsh in Elders Journal 1(July 1838):37-38.
[^35] Possibly William Fry.
[^36] See page 110.
[^37] On April 21, 1838, the Church agreed not to pay the mortgage. (See page 182.)
[^38] Concerning this matter Oliver Cowdery wrote: "A day or two since past D and J. Whitmer and W W Phelps were notified by Marsh that a charge had been prepared before the High Council then, and that to day their case would be taken into consideration. Accordingly the following was drawn up, signed & c. And Marcellus is now gone to present it to Marsh in their new fangled council. . . . Whether this little document will cause those hotheaded men to consider their ways I know not, I suppose however they will plead Smith's instructions and justify themselves in trying Presidents of the church before a rabble and call it legal. Be this as it may, when it becomes us to speak we shall probably be heard." (See Oliver Cowdery Letter, March 10, 1838, Huntington Library, microfilm copy at Church Archives.)
[^39] This action against Marcellus Cowdery shows the prejudiced nature of the council in this matter. This was a desperate time for the Church. (See F. Mark McKiernan, "Mormonism on the Defensive," The Restoration Movement [Lawrence, Kansas: Coronado Press, 1973], pages 121-40.)
[^40] Joseph Smith and company, including Brigham Young, had arrived in Far West the previous day.
[^41] See page 143.
[^42] See pages 72-73. See also D. Michael Quinn, "The Mormon Succession Crisis of 1844," Brigham Young University Studies 16(Winter 1976):187-233.
[^43] Reference is made to (1) dropping the Presidency in Missouri, and (2) the excommunication of Phelps and John Whitmer.
[^44] It appears that the conference did not actually convene until two days later.
[^45] Joseph Smith opened and closed with prayer and presided in the meeting, indicating the need he perceived to take full charge of affairs in Far West. This was a very important meeting.
[^46] A brother-in-law of Charles C. Rich.
[^47] Note that the council changed composition, that is, it had different members, every time it met in this period.
[^48] John Murdock.
[^49] James Newberry.
[^50] Mary Gates.
[^51] This whole episode shows the puritanical attitudes of the Saints as well as their serious concern for education.
[^52] Joseph Outhouse.
[^53] John Murdock.
[^54] Means "reproach."
[^55] Once or twice.
[^56] Note the responsibility of one to speak to an offender before making the issue public knowledge. (See Doctrine and Covenants 28:11.)
[^57] Lyman Leonard.
[^58] Abigail Leonard.
[^59] Also referred to as Alonzo. (See page 154.)
[^60] Note that a procedure was established in which high councilors who were frequently absent would be replaced.
[^61] History of the Church 3:13. The practice of holding general conferences semiannually began in 1838. In accordance with Doctrine and Covenants 20:61, regular Church conferences had previously convened quarterly. An abbreviated report of this meeting is found in the Scriptory Book of Joseph Smith, page 29, Church Archives.
[^62] Note again the use of the official name of the Church by the clerk prior to April 26, 1838. (See page 140, note 1.)
[^63] Here they are consciously holding their conference to coincide with the anniversary of the founding of the Church.
[^64] The two "historians" were John Corrill and Elias Higbee.
[^65] This record, called "The Scriptory Book of Joseph Smith," was kept by George W. Robinson.
[^66] This record, known as the Far West Record, was kept by Ebenezer Robinson.
[^67] Thomas B. Marsh, Brigham Young and David W. Patten were chosen as presidents, pro tem. (See page 141.)
[^68] Note that the sacrament was administered and children were blessed at this quarterly conference, which was the first such conference held at Far West.
[^69] See History of the Church 3:14.
[^70] Charles C. Rich was president of the high priests quorum. Joseph Young was senior president of the seventies; the other six presidents at this time were Levi Hancock, James Foster, Daniel Miles, Josiah Butterfield, Henry Harriman, and Zera Pulsipher. Harvey Green was president of the elders quorum (124 in number). Edward Partridge was senior bishop and president of the priests quorum. Albert Perry was president of the teachers quorum. The president of the deacons quorum is not known.
[^71] Note the custom of speaking in a public meeting about the strengths and weaknesses of the brethren, reflecting the open, democratic nature of the Church. All of the men whom Patten could not recommend, with the exception of William Smith, were excommunicated in 1838, some in Missouri, some in Kirtland.
[^72] The use of the title president was to indicate Murdock's seniority in the high council.
[^73] See History of the Church 3:15. On this day Joseph Smith sent a letter to John Whitmer in consequence of his withholding Church records.
[^74] See page 119 for his appointment.
[^75] In the pages of the Far West Record and other early Church records, the Word of Wisdom is frequently questioned and debated. Here, in contrast, the Prophet stresses that it should be observed.
[^76] See History of the Church 3:16-18. The History of the Church notes that the bishop and high council assembled at the bishop's office. This tribunal, with Bishop Partridge presiding, was constituted as a common council, appropriately organized to try Oliver Cowdery, one of the presidents of the Church. George W. Robinson included an abbreviated account of this trial in the Scriptory Book of Joseph Smith, pages 29-31, Church Archives.
[^77] There was a Church moratorium on collecting debts incurred by the failure of the Kirtland Safety Society. Cowdery, in violation of this moratorium, pressed civil lawsuits against Church members concerning indebtedness.
[^78] This charge was finally rejected by the council.
[^79] The council also dropped this charge.
[^80] This charge was withdrawn.
[^81] It is interesting that this case was not considered difficult and, therefore, only two councilors spoke, in view of Cowdery's prominent role in the Church. Cowdery's view of this matter follows: "The circumstances under which I left Far West, in June 1838, and immediately following are familiarly known to you all, no doubt. Those circumstances connected with myself and family are always painful to reflect on; but you will be reminded again that I do not charge or believe that either of you contributed anything to render my situation or circumstances, then or afterwards, in the least afflicting; and for this reason, I speak the more freely . . . . There is another circumstance to which I must now refer in which you as members and principals in a great and increasing society, are interested; and in which also, whether in or out of that society, I must continue to feel sensibley and keenly . . . . Now what I have to say concerning all the difficulty between myself and your church . . . is simply this: I believed at the time, and still believe, that ambitious and wicked men, envying the harmony existing between myself and the first elders of the Church, and hoping to get into some other men's birthright, by falsehoods, the most foul and wicked, caused all this difficulty from the beginning to end. They succeeded in getting myself out of the Church; but since they themselves have gone to perdition, ought not old friends—long tried in the furnace of affliction, to be friends still, even laying out of view any and all religious considerations." (See letter of Oliver Cowdery to Brigham Young, December 25, 1843, Huntington Library, microfilm copy in Church Archives.)
[^82] This letter of Oliver Cowdery, while relegated to a footnote in History of the Church is an eloquent statement of constitutional law, property rights, and Cowdery's English heritage.
[^83] Here Cowdery expressed his feeling that the council was prejudiced against him and had already determined his guilt.
[^84] In law, land owned independently; freehold state as opposed to feudalism.
[^85] Edward Fuller.
[^86] Possibly Cowdery is taunting Partridge in using the title Reverend.
[^87] 87. The corporation of the city of Far West. (See page 119.)
[^88] 88. Although generally regarded by present day Latter-day Saints as a hero and friend of the Saints, Alexander W. Doniphan was regarded by some members in Missouri as an enemy of the Church.
[^89] 89. Attorney.
[^90] 90. November 6, 1837. (See page 119.)
[^91] 91. Cowdery.
[^92] 92. Cowdery.
[^93] 93. The girl referred to here is Fanny Alger, Joseph Smith's first plural wife. (See Oliver Cowdery to Warren Cowdery, January 21, 1838, Huntington Library, microfilm copy at Church Archives and Benjamin F. Johnson to Elder George S. Gibbs," 1911, typewritten copy, Brigham Young University.) The fact that the Prophet was practicing polygamy in Kirtland provides insight into Oliver's accusation of adultery. There are at least three possibilities for Cowdery's charges:
[^94] 94. Joseph Smith.
[^95] 95. Oliver Cowdery.
[^96] 96. November 1837.
[^97] 97. Joseph Smith.
[^98] 98. Specifically, plural marriage.
[^99] 99. Don Carlos Smith.
[^100] 100. Cowdery was rebaptized November 12, 1848.
[^101] 101. See History of the Church 3:20. Also the Scriptory Book of Joseph Smith, page 31, Church Archives.
[^102] 102. This is the same charge as the one preferred against Oliver Cowdery. Early Church leaders were suspicious of lawyers.
[^103] 103. Possibly Micah B. Welton.
[^104] 104. Alanson Ripley.
[^105] 105. Samuel Musick.
[^106] 106. Sabbath violation, neglect of prayers, drinking brandy, and so on would now be subjects of a temple recommend interview, not grounds for excommunication.
[^107] 107. John P. Greene.
[^108] 108. Note the Church's interest in honesty.
[^109] 109. Jacob Bump.
[^110] 110. April 13, 1838. An abbreviated account of these proceedings is found in the Scriptory Book of Joseph Smith, page 31, Church Archives.
[^111] 111. This charge covered a multitude of sins.
[^112] 112. Note that the second charge may have been omitted.
[^113] 113. Doctrine and Covenants 107.
[^114] 114. Considering the stature of David Whitmer in the Church, the failure of the council to investigate the charges and hold a court is remarkable. (See Ebenezer Robinson, "Items of Personal History of the Editor," The Return [Davis City, Iowa], September 1889.)
[^115] 115. Truman Wait and Nathan West.
[^116] 116. See page 124.
[^117] 117. Another case of the Word of Wisdom being challenged and tested.
[^118] 118. George W. Harris.
[^119] 119. See pages 109, 147-49.
[^120] 120. Much of the business of the high council was secular in nature, such as decisions to publish, to buy property, and to appropriate money for schools.
[^121] 121. Some high council minutes had previously been published in the Elders Journal.
[^122] 122. See History of the Church 3:25-26.
[^123] 123. Another account of this trial, in the hand of George W. Robinson, is found in the Scriptory Book of Joseph Smith, pages 34-37, Church Archives. This record notes that this appeal case came from a branch of the Church near Guymon's Mill, Missouri. See also History of the Church 3:25.
[^124] 124. John Lemon and Solomon Wixom.
[^125] 125. Henry Best.
[^126] 126. Aaron Lyons.
[^127] 127. Possibly Baldwin Wheeler.
[^128] 128. Probably Nahum Curtis.
[^129] 129. Known as the Salem Branch.
[^130] 130. Probably John P. Barnard.
[^131] 131. See pages 206-8.
[^132] 132. Joseph Smith.
[^133] 133. See History of the Church 3:31-32. In History of the Church, the date of this meeting is given as May 12, 1838.
[^134] 134. Probably not Dr. McCord who left the Church on May 11, 1838. See History of the Church 3:31.
[^135] 135. The high council had been meeting at random. Now a decision was made to have it meet on a regular schedule.
[^136] 136. These large parcels were located outside the original city plot.
[^137] 137. A more detailed account of this meeting, found in the Scriptory Book of Joseph Smith (pages 41-42), gives insight into this resolution: "The presidency laid before the high Council, their Situation, as to maintaining their families in the Situation & relation they Stood to the Church, Spending as they have, for eight years, their time and tallents & property in the Service of the Church, and are now reduced as it were, to absolute begery, and Still were detained in Service of the Church, and it now become[s] necessary that Something Should be done for their Support either by the Church, or else they must do it themselves, of their own labour, and if the Church Said help yourselves they would thank them, and immediately do So, but if the Church Said Serve us then Some provision must be made for them. The Subject was taken into concideration, by the Council (who acts for the Church), and thoroughly investigated. Thereupon the Council voted to authorize the Bishop to give or make over to Prest. Joseph Smith Jr. & Sidney Rigdon each an eighty of land Situated adjacent to the City Corporation which land is the property of the Church allso voted that a committee of three be appointed of the Council, to contract with Said presidency to their sattisfaction, for their Services this present year not for preaching or for receiving the word of God by revelation neither for instructing the Saints in righteousness, but for Services rendered in the printing establishment in translating the ancient records &c. &c. The committee, which consisted of Geo. W. Harris, Elias Higbee & Simeon Carter who agreed that Prest Smith & Rigdon should be entitled to & receive for this year [$1,100 each] as a just remuneration for their services." (See also History of the Church 3:32.)
[^138] 138. See Ebenezer Robinson, "Items of Personal History of the Editor," The Return (Davis City, Iowa), October 1889. Robinson stated that such an uproar followed the decision to pay the First Presidency annual wages that the request was finally dropped.
[^139] 139. See page 195.
[^140] 140. See page 196.
[^141] 141. On the previous Sabbath, June 17, 1838, Sidney Rigdon had preached his "Salt Sermon" which ad monished local dissenters to withdraw from Far West, Missouri. The Scriptory Book of Joseph Smith, page 47, gives the context for the speech: "I [George W. Robinson] would mention or notice something about O. Cowdery David Whitmer Lyman E. Johnson and John Whitmer who being guilty of bace iniquities and that to manifest in the ages of all men, and being often entreated would continue in their course Seeking the Lives of the First Presidency and to overthrow the Kingdom of God which they once testified off, Prest Rigdon preached one Sabbath upon the Salt that had lost its Savour that it is hence forth good for nothing but to be cast out, and troden under foot of men, And the wicked flee when no man pursueth. These men took warning, and Soon they were Seen bounding over the prairie like the Scape Goat to carry of[f] their own Sins we have not Seen them Since, their influence is gone, and they are in a miserable condition. So also it with all who turn from the truth to Lying Cheating defrauding & Swindeling."
[^142] 142. Stephen or Darwin Chase.
[^143] 143. Thomas Guyman.
[^144] 144. The agents were Newel K. Whitney, Oliver Granger, and William Marks.
[^145] 145. See page 115.
[^146] 146. See page 191.
[^147] 147. Marsh had extensive landholdings in and around Far West.
[^148] 148. Lightner's willingness to comply with this request is interesting since he was a nonmember.
[^149] 149. Note that an appeal to a higher court resulted in overturning the lower court's decision.
[^150] 150. Levi Jackman.
[^151] 151. Liberty, Clay county, Missouri.
[^152] 152. Luman Gibbs.
[^153] 153. Note that Wight was not taken directly to court, but given a period of time to confess his error.
[^154] 154. On July 4, 1838, two days earlier, Sidney Rigdon delivered his inflammatory Fourth of July speech, which aroused the ire of the Missourians. George W. Robinson, the Prophet's clerk, recorded the following in the Scriptory Book of Joseph Smith: "This day was Spent in Cellebrating the 4th of July in commemoration of the declaration of Independence of the United States of America, and also to make our decleration of Independence from all mobs and persecutions which have been inflicted upon us time after time untill we could bear it no longer being driven by ruthless mobs and enimies of the truth. from our homes our property confiscated our lives exposed and our all jeopardized by such conduct. We therefore met on this day in Far West Mo. to make our declaration of independance, and to lay the cornerstones of the house of the Lord agreeably to the commandment of the Lord unto us given April 26th 1838. . . . An address was delivered by Prest. S. Rigdon. . . . The order of the day was most splendid and beautiful Several thousand of Spectators were present to witness the S[c]ene. The address was delivered on the public square under the hoisted flagg representing the Liberty and independence of these United States of America."
[^155] 155. George M. Hinkle and John Murdock, high councilors in Far West, were sent by the high council to establish a Mormon settlement in DeWitt, Carroll County, Missouri. The site, located at the confluence of the Grand and Missouri Rivers, was an ideal port of entry for Mormon goods to be shipped to Adam-Ondi-Ahman. Hinkle and Murdock purchased half of the town plat from Henry Root on June 23, 1838, for $500. Bishop Partridge signed the note. In July 1838 families began gathering to DeWitt, and by October 1838 some seventy Mormon families were residing there. The increasing Mormon population, however, excited the citizens of Carroll County, and by October 1838 they were forced to leave. In February 1839 both Hinkle and Murdock sold their interest in the town plat.
[^156] 156. Timothy B. Clark.
[^157] 157. In his discourse on duties of officers of the Church, Sidney Rigdon gave good counsel to "hometeachers."
[^158] 158. Sidney Rigdon, in an attempt to introduce dignity and refinement into frontier Missouri, renamed local streams. This attempt, however, failed, because the streams now bear the former names.
[^159] 159. Walters, a temporary convert, owned large tracts of land in Caldwell County and remained there after the Mormons' expulsion.
[^160] 160. During this conference, on Sunday, July 8, 1838, the revelation concerning the law of tithing was received, as well as several other revelations, some not published. (See Doctrine and Covenants, sections 117-120, and unpublished revelation to William W. Phelps and Frederick G. Williams in Kirtland Revelation Book, Church Archives.)
[^161] 161. A more detailed account of this meeting is found in the Scriptory Book of Joseph Smith, pages 59-60:
[^162] 162. Isaac Russell.
[^163] 163. Note that Alexander Williams was excommunicated for teaching false doctrine. This action seems harsh by present standards.
[^164] 164. See page 185; 139 is the manuscript page.
[^165] 165. Sarah Jackson had come to western Missouri from Alton, Illinois. See the Scriptory Book of Joseph Smith, page 35, Church Archives.
[^166] 166. Roxana Palmer Lyon.
[^167] 167. See History of the Church 3:156.
[^168] 168. See History of the Church 3:153-55.
[^169] 169. Marsh's advice may have resulted from the difficulties they had experienced in Missouri.
[^170] 170. See Doctrine and Covenants 118.
[^171] 171. See History of the Church 3:217-24 for a printed version of the memorial. A handwritten manuscript copy is located in the Joseph Smith Collection, Church Archives. This memorial was presented to the Missouri legislature by John Corrill on December 19, 1838. (See History of the Church 3:238, 242.) The Missouri Legislature appointed a committee to investigate the matter. The committee reported on May 4, 1840, well after all Mormons had left Missouri. The decision of the committee was that the Mormons could not be helped by the legislature. (See History of the Church 4:90.) Since this memorial has been published elsewhere, only limited editing has been done here.
[^172] 172. Should be 1831.
[^173] 173. "Davis" should read "Daviess."
[^174] 174. Cornelius Gilliam.
[^175] 175. Samuel Bogart.
[^176] 176. Moses Rowland.
[^177] 177. Samuel D. Lucas.
[^178] 178. Thomas McBride.
[^179] 179. Sardius Smith, who is usually listed as ten years of age.
[^180] 180. Governor Lilburn W. Boggs.
[^181] 181. Although many of the Saints did sign away their property, the State of Missouri did not follow through on this intention.
[^182] 182. John B. Clark.
[^183] 183. John J. Tanner.
[^184] 184. William Carey.
[^185] 185. Hiram G. Parks.
[^186] 186. See History of the Church 3:224-26. After Far West was taken by the Missourians (October 31, 1838), no meetings were to be held. Therefore, there is a break in meetings from October 6, 1838, to December 13, 1838. (See Anson Call Journal, Church Archives.)
[^187] 187. Thomas B. Marsh had left the Church, and David W. Patten had been killed in battle, and the First Presidency was in jail. Brigham Young assumed command, conducting a reorganization of the high council.
[^188] 188. The fall of Far West, the imprisonment of the Prophet, and other problems led to the disaffection of many of the Saints and the charge that Joseph Smith was a fallen prophet.
[^189] 189. See History of the Church 3:240.
[^190] 190. Here the high council is conducting general Church business, that is, matters which are now handled only by General Authorities.
[^191] 191. See History of the Church 3:242.
[^192] 192. History of the Church 3:242 identifies this man as David Redfield However, a later reference (History of the Church 3:287) indicates that this might be Harlow Redfield.
