Lyndon W. Cook, Donald Q. Cannon, Far West Record: Minutes of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1830-1844 ( 1983)

June 1, 1844

Nauvoo June 1st 1844 [^1]

The High Council of the Church of Latter day Saints met at the Seventies Hall [^2] agreeably to adjournment on the 1st of June 1844 at 2 o clock P. M.

Present William Marks President

Counsellors George W. Harris

James Allread

Alpheus Cutler

William Huntington

Leonard Sobey

Aaron Johnson

Peter Haws in place Sal Bent

Henry G. Sherwood

Lewis D. Wilson

William C. Perry in place of D. Fullmore

Newell Knight

Robert Stone in place of Thos. Grover

Prayer by President William Marks——Voted unanimously on Motion of William Marks that Joseph M. Cole be and is hereby appointed Clerk of the High Council [^3]—

Case 1st Complaint brought by James Ivins against Alphonzo Green for damages done by said Greens horses to J Ivins' grass field—By advice of President Marks the parties agreed to submit their differences to arbitrators and proceeded to choose said arbitrators [^4]—J Ivins chose Josiah Ells, and A. Green choose brother Gates these two were to choose the third person by whose descision the parties agreed to abide——

Case 2d Moses Daily

vs

Conference of Highland Branch

At a conference of the Highland Branch on the 3rd day of May 1844 Moses Daily was cut off from said Branch, from which said Daily took an appeal before this Council. H. W. Miller stated that Daily refused to be tried by said conference in consequence of the difficulty then before the conference having been submitted to arbitrators by whose descision he was willing to abide H Kimball Testified to the same in substance—-John W. Archey Testified in substance the same as the other two and further said that the other said Conference withdrew the hand of fellowship from said Daily by reason of his having refused to be tried by said Conference——H. W. Miller stated that said Daily and Brt over} Willkins both agreed to abide the descision of the above named arbitrators; said Miller was one of the arbitrators.

Michael Stoken saith that he was one of the arbitrators as above named by H. W. Miller that Daily refused to be tried by said conference for several reasons; first they had no right to try him but he would submit to a trial before the high Priest

Quorum. 2d that he had not the proper witnesses and 3d that he had agreed to submit his said difference to arbitrators——Kenedy states the same in substance as Stoken

The case was duly sumed up by Counsellor Sobey of the part of Moses Daily and Couselor Sherwood for the Conference decided by a unanimous vote of this council that the descision of the highland Conference against Moses Daily be reversed and said Daily be restored to a standing in the church—— [^5]

On motion of George W. Harris Resolved That John Scott and Younger Green be cut off from this church for Apostacy——

Case of Samuel C Brown

vs

Branch at New Orleans [^6]

Fellowship having been withdrawn from Samuel C. Brown by a conference held at New Orleans on the 14th day of January 1844 from which descision said Brown took an appeal to this council——Resolved that this council sustain the descision of the New Orleans Conference against said Samuel C Brown—

Signed William Marks President

Joseph M. Cole Clerk

June 15, 1844

Nauvoo June 15th 1844 [^7]

High Council Met agreeably to adjournment at the Seventies Hall on the 15th of June 1844 at 2 o clock P. M.

Present William Marks President

Councellors Shadrach Roundy

Lewis D. Willson

Josiah Smith for

D. Fullmore

Edmund Fisher " Grover

Ezra Parrish " Knight

Leonard Sobey Henry G. Sherwood

James Allread

Alpheus Cutler

George W Harris

Aaron Johnson

William Huntington

Case 1st David M. Gamet

vs

Libius T. Coons

vs

Joseph Pennock

S. Roundy counsellor for L. T. Coons Jas. Allread Councellor for D. M. Camet Joseph Pennock L. T. Coons made some introductory remarks upon the charges prefered against Pennock which were Lying, dishonesty, rude contempt. L. T. Coons introduced some affidavits which were not received by the Council—David M Gamet. stated that if the branch would give him Joseph Pennock three days time he could bring witnesses to impeach witnesses the Testimony of the two Binghams the time was granted and at the next meeting Joseph Pennock denied having asked for an adjournment on the account of witnesses. [^8]

Daniel E Loveland states the same things as D M Gamet Charles Webb stated that J Pennock said he thought he could produce witnesses that would impeach the Binghams. That he Pennock did not deny asking for an adjournment—At this stage of the proceedings for the want of Witnesses and by an agreement of the parties the case was adjourned till Saturday two weeks from today at 2 oclock P. M.

Case 2d Ethan Pettit

vs

Elder David Bennett

For want of certain witnesses the case togeather with the council be adjourned till next Saturday at 2 oclock P. M. June 22d at 2 oclock P. M.

J M Cole Clk

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] These high council minutes differ from the others in the Far West Record in that they were not transcribed at a later date, but apparently were recorded at the time of the meetings. They are also unique in being a record of events that transpired in Nauvoo as opposed to Missouri or other places. These notes were not included in the official typescript of the Far West Record, and are available only in handwritten manuscript form.
[^2] Note that the high council had a more suitable meeting place than they had in Missouri, where they met in homes, stores, and so on.
[^3] Joseph M. Cole, who served as a recorder of baptisms for the dead, was appointed as clerk of the high council and began his minutes at this time. The minutes in the Far West Record are in his hand.
[^4] Here the high council is using an alternative to Church court action by referring the case to impartial mediators.
[^5] Here the high council, acting as a court of appeals, actually reversed a decision of a lower court, a high priests' court.
[^6] The high council was acting as a court of appeals, not only for Nauvoo, but for the entire Church.
[^7] These final notes were recorded just twelve days prior to the Prophet's death. This was a momentous period in Church history. The whole Nauvoo Expositor incident, which led to the incidents at Carthage, transpired in the days surrounding this meeting.
[^8] The procedures of the high council court were becoming more formalized as time went on. There is possibly a borrowing from the Church's involvement in the municipal court process.
