Lyndon W. Cook, Donald Q. Cannon, Far West Record: Minutes of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1830-1844 ( 1983)

Appendix A

Oliver Cowdery to Joseph Smith

Independence, Missouri

January 28, 1832

Original located in Joseph Smith Collection,

Church Archives

Bro. Joseph

According to promise I transmit to you the proceedings of the confrences held 23-24, and 27th. which are as follows.

Minuets of a General Confrence held in the land of Zion (Kaw Township Jackson County Mo.) at the dwelling house of bro. Newel Knight 23 First Month (Jan.) AD. 1832. 3 o clock P.M.

Names of Elders Present who were ordained to the H.P.H.

Edward Partrage

John Carrell

Isaac Morley

John Whitmer

John Murdock

Wm W Phelps

Lyman Wight

Harvey Whitlock

Newel Knight

Parley Pratt

Oliver Cowdery

Names of Elders who were not ordained to the H.P.H.

Levi Hancock Zebedee Coltrin

Selah J. Griffin

Calvin Bebee

Peter Dustin

Joshua Fairchild

Daniel Cathcart

Priests

Hezekiah Peck

Teacher

Isaac Bebee

Edward Partrage appointed moderator and Oliver Cowdery Clerk. Prayer by bro. John Murdock.

By joint resolution commandments read relative to various subjects. Resolution offered by bro. Lyman Wight to take into consideration the circumstances of two brethren present. (Isaac & George Bebee) who desired to preach the Gospel.

Commandment read by the Clerk certain remarks made by him and bro. Wm W. Phelps relative to the subject.

Commandment read and remarks made by bro. Edward Partrage concerning the duties of Priests Teachers and deacons their duties read by bro. John Whitmer from the Articles and Covenants. remarks by bro. John Carrell stating the office of a Priest Teacher or Deacon to be as important as that of a High Priest. Resolved therefore that there be no person ordained in the churches in the land of Zion to the office of Elder Priest Teacher or Deacon without the united voice of the Church in writing in which such individual resides.

The above Resolution adopted by unanimous vote. Records of the church which came from Chardon Geauga Co. ohio received and laid on the Table. Presented by their Teacher Isaac Bebee.

The Bishop brought forward a statement of the lands purchased for inheritances for the saints amounting to nearly twelve hundred acres. After a long discussion upon the expediency of mechanics immediately moving to this land for the benefit of the Church, the following resolution was proposed. Resolved that the Bishop be instructed to request the Churches in the east to send to this land a blacksmith, two shoemakers, a carpenter one joiner and mason one waggon and plow maker one tanner and currier one millwright one hatter one chair & cabinet maker, one silver Smith and one wheelwright. The last Resolution adopted by unanimous vote upon motion of the Clerk. Confrence adjourned until half past 8 o clock A.M. closed.

Prayer by brother Daniel Cathcart. Oliver Cowdery Clerk of Confrence 4 O clock. eve

[January 24, 1832]

Confrence convened according to adjournment names called and prayer by the Clerk. Minuets of yesterdays proceedings read. The Bishop brought forward his account of moneys received from the churches and also a statement of the expenditures of the same. The Bishop made certain remarks relative to the subject now before the Confrence stating that in consequence of not making minuets at the time of paying out moneys last summer while traveling to this land and after arriving he could not account for nearly sixty dollars and after presenting the account bro. Wm W Phelps arose and said that he was knowing to the Bishops paying at one time, more than thirty dollars last summer for passage to this land which was not on the account presented. By unanimous vote the above sum allowed the Bishop. The following is a list of the Bishops account.

Amount of funds paid over to the Bishop

to Jan 24 1832 including moneys of his own $9508.24

Amount of disbursements on the lands and

other necessares for the church up to January

24, 1832 $8449.90

Total amount of funds now remaining in

the Bishops hands at this date Jan 24. 1832 $1058.24

By unanimous vote the above account accepted.

Resolved that the Bishop lay before each General con held by the Elders in this land a regular account of moneys and properties received and expended for the use and benefit of this church. The above carried by unanimous vote. The con. then proceeded to take into consideration the subject of Schools. After deliberate discussion the following Resolution passed by unanimous vote. Resolved that this Confrence appoint Brs. Oliver Cowdery William W. Phelps and John Correll to superintend Schools in the Churches in this land. The records of the Church which came from Colesville N.Y. received and laid on the Table. presented by their Priest Hezekiah Peck. Upon motion of bro John Murdock bro John Carrell appointed by unanimous vote to keep the General Church Record of names of the Desiples in this land. According to the Church Covenants. Resolved that the Bishop be instructed to establish a house of entertainment in the Town of Independence to accommodate the traveling Elders of this Church and other brethren whose circumstances may require. Also inquirers from a distance &c. to be supported out of the General Church fund a regular return of its expenditures and income to be made to each General Confrence held in this land Said establishment to be put in operation as soon as circumstances may permit. Carried by unanimous vote. Confrence adjourned until 3 oclock P.M. Oliver Cowdery Clerk of Confrence.

Con. convened according to adjournment 3 oclock P.M. Quotation from the Lord. "And it shall come to pass that the Bishop of my church after that he has received the properties of my Church that it cannot be taken from the Church" &c. The Confrence therefore Resolved that the Bishop of this Church at the time of receiving moneys or other properties for the use and benefit of this Church of any member of the same shall give a receipt to the person at the time covenant for himself and his heirs that such moneys or properties shall be expended for the use and benefit of this church according to the covenants and Laws of the same and that whatever amount of such moneys or properties may be in his possession should he be removed from his said office of Bishop by death or otherwise shall be handed over to his successor By unanimous vote the above resolution passed.

Bro. Edward Partrage brought forward certain letters written by bro. Sidney Rigdon one addressed to himself bearing date Kirtland September 10th 1831. another addressed to bro. John Carrell and Isaac Morley, bearing date Hiram Portage Co. Ohio 14th Nov. 1831. After a few remarks a motion was carried to have the said letters read by the Clerk After deliberate discussion it was Resolved that Wharas this Confrence has been made acquainted with certain difficulties existing between the Bishop of this Church (Edward Partrage) and bro. Sidney Rigdon and Wharas the said Sidney has prefered certain charges against the said Bishop (Edward Partrage) detrimental to his character and standing as a Bishop in the church of Christ. Therefore we the Confrence having no legal right to proceed to a trial of the same in the absence of one of the parties Recommend that the Elders stationed in this land converse with the said Bishop (Edward Partrage) on this subject and write the said Sidney a friendly humiliating letter advising that this difficulty be settled and thereby the wound of the Church be healed. By unanimous vote. General Confrence adjourned to tuesday the 3d of 4 month (April) 1832. Closed. Singing Prayer by bro. Edward Partrage. Oliver Cowdery Clerk of Confrence.

In consequence of the ill health and crowd of business our bro. Sidney Gilbert was unable to attend the General Confrence for which cause we thought proper to hold a special one to examine his accounts &c. by his request.

Minuets of a Special Confrence held at the dwelling house of bro. Sidney Gilberts Independence Jan. 27, 1832 (evening) Edward Partrage appointed moderator., and Oliver Cowdery Clerk Names of Elders present

John Whitmer

William W. Phelps

Edward Partrage

John Carrell

Sidney Gilbert

Selah Griffins

John Correll

Oliver Cowdery

Prayer by Bro John Carrell. Brother Sidney Gilbert brought forward the following account of moneys received of N.K.

Whitney & co. Received of N.K. Whitney agent of the churches at the east and sundry brethren on the way to this land $1692.00. The following is the amount of disbursements

Paid out for Gilbert & Whitney for goods

and transportation to this place $ 827.94

Paid for transportations for families and

bagage from ohio to this place $ 804.89

Other necessaries for the use and benefit

of the Church $1045.00

————

$2677.83

$1002.70

1692.00

————

Total amount received $2694.70

Total amount paid out $2677.83

Sums remaining 16.87

By unanimous vote the above account accepted.

After certain remarks from bro. Sidney Gilbert relative to the store in this place it was Resolved that a letter be addressed by brs. Edward Partrage Sidney Gilbert and Oliver Cowdery on the subject of the store in this place to the Agent of the Disiples in the east (NK Whitney) requesting a special confrence to sit upon the contents of said letter. By unanimous vote. Singing. Prayer by bro. Wm Phelps. Closed. Oliver Cowdery Clerk of Confrence

The following items I insert to accompany the foregoing documents by request of the Bishop which I copy from his own hand. "Although the Bishop has reported that there is nearly twelve hundred acres of land purchased that you may have a better understanding we think propper to state that it is mostly woodland & not in a situation to be improved this season even if it should be thought advisable to clear it faster than what is wanted for timber. And further we would state that one piece of the land is not as yet paid for which when added to what has been now paid to the Elders who go east will reduce the amount of funds in the Bishops hands more than 200 dollars. We would further state that provisions are scarce & dear nearly double what they were one year ago. We have not a large supply on hand probably not more than enough for the brethren here. The store not getting opened as soon as we expected has injured us verry much in the purchase of provisions. According to instructions sent here it was expected to be opened about the middle of Oct. & thinking that purchases might be made with goods & the money saved in the Church we neglected to buy expecting bro. Gilbert would certainly be here soon. From the funds in the Bishops hands you will redily perceive that we are not in a situation to buy much more land & procure a stock of provisions & cows for those who are coming here this spring. For the foregoing reasons we have sent only for mechanics knowing that others are commanded to come & believing that others will come without a command not knowing but what that they may. We do not expect that all the mechanics will be found & sent but we have sent for those most needed." Among the mechanics sent for it is expected that one blacksmith one shoemaker and one mason will come in the Church from Nelson. and brother Elliott Babit Kingsberry and Stebbens, and a brother from Winchester Indiana who is a tanner. Advise the brethren by all means to come by land and thus obey the command of the Lord. We think that it would be well for the brethren to bring one barrell buckwheat, and one of clover seed, or half a bbl clover seed if possible.

Ten of our brethren have started to proclaim the Gospel namely (John Murdock & Lyman Wight) (Parley Pratt & Levi Hancock) these four are going on the south side of the Missouri to St. Lewis Cincinnati and Bethany Virginia. (Calvin Bebee & Peter Dustin) through the more settled parts of Illinois & Indiana Michigan into Ohio. Daniel Cathcart & Joshua Fairchild through the north part of this state through Ill. Indi. to Ohio.

Say to brother Oliver Olney that if he can send a carding machine and clothiers tools this spring by water we think that it will be well, which can be put in operation as soon as circumstances may permit. Also say to brother Ashley of Strongsville that the Bishop says if he can send the leather up to this land as he talk to me last Oct as Confrence in Orange it will be of great worth to the Desiples.

The brethren are generally well and rejoicing in the Lord. The Bishop and all the Elders with all the brethren send love to the eastern churches.

I remain your brother in the Lord Oliver Cowdery

Joseph Smith Jun.

P.S. We expect soon to be ready to print and hope that brother Martin can supply with paper at present you can tear off the bottom of this sheet which will serve him for a bill you see if ten thousand copies are struck it will take double the amount of the first mentioned Ream and we feel anxious that it may be so for I think there is no fear of sale O.C.
