Lyndon W. Cook, Donald Q. Cannon, Far West Record: Minutes of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1830-1844 ( 1983)

Appendix B—Church Courts

Latter-day Saints have always regarded their Church court system as the most equitable judicial system in the world. Speaking in a nineteenth-century conference session, Heber C. Kimball said, "I believe that there never was a more correct organization of a court on earth than our High Councils." [^1]

The origins of the Church court system antedated the organization of the Church. In the revelation presently known as Doctrine and Covenants section 20, teachers of the Church were instructed in a judicial role. Less than one year later, an elders' hearing with a bishop present was added. By August of that year, bishops were designated as judges in Israel. At Kirtland, Ohio, on February 13, 1833, a council of high priests met to investigate charges against Burr Riggs. Within two weeks, another council of high priests had excommunicated Riggs from the Church. In May 1833, the First Presidency acted in the capacity of a court of review or appeals court. In the next month, judicial activities were engaged in by a council of high priests, the First Presidency, and a council of elders. The first formal bishop's court was organized in December 1833.

With all of these developments as background, the first high council was organized February 17, 1834, superseding the council of high priests as a court. As the revelation on Church courts, section 102, says, "the high council was appointed by revelation for the purpose of settling important difficulties." (V.2.) Building on the basic high council court jurisdiction, other courts were developed. By March 1835, the following additional judicial bodies were operational:

Thus, within five years of the organization of the Church, a well-developed court system had been established. [^2]

As the Church court machinery developed, legal principles and procedures also took shape. In section 42 of the Doctrine and Covenants, one of the earliest principles of Church law was established, namely: any member who sincerely repented and corrected his conduct was, and is, usually pardoned. In the same revelation another principle was established. Two witnesses were required before a person could be brought to trial in a Church court. In Doctrine and Covenants 102, the high council court was not to act as three judges and jury of twelve, but as a judge with two assistants (his counselors) and a panel of six spokesmen for the defendant and six for the Church in any case. The procedure was that lots would be drawn to ascertain who would speak for whom, and to determine the order of speaking. The odd numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11 were to speak on behalf of the Church, while the even numbers 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 were to speak on behalf of the accused. In reaching a decision, the majority of the council concurring with the president was sufficient, but dissenting counselors could require a new trial in the light of new evidence.

Within the context of Church history, it is obvious that Church courts were once held more frequently than they are today. Many of the early Church members, including their leaders, faced discipline at the hands of the courts. Reminiscing on his early experiences in the Church, George A. Smith recalled, "We had High Council upon High Council, Bishop's trial upon Bishop's trial; and labor and toil constantly to settle difficulties and get our minds instructed in principle and doctrine, and in power that we had to contend with." [^3]

Courts in the early Church had more options in terms of possible types of discipline than they have now. Church courts at the time the Far West Record was being recorded could:

In contrast to the options open to a court in those days, Church courts today have only four options available:

It is apparent that the Church courts of the early nineteenth century had more courses of action available to them than do Church courts of today. While it is true that a greater percentage of Church members were involved in Church courts then, the courts had more freedom in dealing with the cases that came under their jurisdiction.

At the time the events recorded in the Far West Record were taking place, many important and long-lasting precedents relating to Church courts were being established. The Far West Record is at once a historical record of those events and a reference book on Church courts. Those involved in holding Church courts today may certainly benefit from studying the court proceedings contained in the Far West Record.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The bishop's court. Dismiss the charges. Exoneration. Journal of Discourses 10:63.
[^2] Priesthood quorum courts. Forgive. Probation. Several excellent studies on the history of the Church court system are available. See, for example: James R. Moss, "Historical Development of the Church Judicial System, 1830-1835," The First Annual Church Education System Religious Educators' Symposium; CES Church History Symposium (August 19, 20, 1977, Brigham Young University); Joseph B. Keeler, The Bishop's Court (n.p. 1902); C. Paul Dredge, "Dispute Settlement in the Mormon Community: The Operation of Mormon Courts," unpublished paper dated January 31, 1972, Church Archives; Stephen J. Sorensen, "Civil and Criminal Jurisdiction of L.D.S. Bishop's and High Council Courts, 1847-1852," Task Papers in L.D.S. History, no. 17 (April 1977).
[^3] The standing high council. (See Doctrine and Covenants 107.) Admonish. Disfellowshipment. Journal of Discourses 11:7.
