Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Preface

The ancient prophet Enoch was privileged to behold things Âwhich were not visible to the natural eye; and from thenceforth came the saying abroad in the land: A seer hath the Lord raised up unto his peopleÂ (Moses 6:36). As the past is but a pattern for the future, so too in our day has God raised up a seer, a Âchoice seerÂ in the land, one who indeed was allowed entrance within the veil and was enabled to see things Âafar offÂ (D&C 101:54).

Joseph Smith was called of God in this final dispensation to stand as a prophet, a seer, a revelator of sacred matters, a covenant spokesman among modern Israel. He was called to stand as a dispensation head, as the preeminent prophetic witness of Jehovah-to proclaim the divine Sonship of Christ and reaffirm the eternal verity that salvation comes to men and women only in and through the atoning blood of the sinless Son of Man. He was called to set forth and put into effect the principles, doctrines, sanctifying truths, and divine powers that comprise what we know as the gospel, the plan of salvation, the plan of redemption, the great plan of happiness.

ÂBeware of false prophets,Â the Master warned, Âwhich come to you in sheepÂs clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits.Â (Matt. 7:15Â16; see also 3 Ne. 14:15Â16.) Indeed, the only way to ascertain the truth of those who claim prophetic status, in addition to knowing by direct and immediate revelation, is by their fruits-what comes of their labor, what works and blessings flow from their ministry. In this book we will focus on the fruits of Joseph SmithÂs ministry in terms of three phases of his calling:

In assessing the marvelous impact of the Choice SeerÂs work on this dispensation, we will turn first and foremost to the doctrinal teachings of Joseph Smith as set forth in his sermons, letters, revelations, translations, and narrations. In addition, we will rely occasionally on the clarifications and expansions of those who knew Brother Joseph firsthand and studied at his feet, as well as those apostolic and prophetic successors to whom is given the divine mandate to build on the doctrinal foundation he laid.

Both of the authors came to the writing of this book with an absolute assurance that Joseph Smith was and is a prophet of God and that, as John Taylor explained, Joseph Smith has done more, save the Savior only, for the salvation of men and women in this world than any other man (see D&C 135:3). There was never any question whatsoever in our minds about that. But in the hours and weeks and years of preparing this manuscript-in the quiet moments of personal reflection, as well as the animated conversations that ensued as we pondered aloud on the ProphetÂs remarkable contributions-there has been reaffirmed and broadened in our minds and hearts a certitude that impels us to bear testimony with all of the fervor of our souls of the divine calling and unique ministry of Joseph Smith the Prophet, the Choice Seer of the latter days.

The editor of the Millennial Star wrote of Joseph Smith:

Conscious of possessing a knowledge of the most profound principles of truth, virtue, and happiness, that were ever revealed to man, he dealt out unsparing giant blows against the Goliath of error, and smiled alike at the formidable front of his antagonist. . . . He contemplated, without a shadow of doubt, the complete and triumphant success of that system of truth that God had revealed through him, for the temporal, spiritual, and eternal safety of man; and although his days were cut short by the cruel hands of assassins, yet he lived to accomplish the work to which he was sent. This work he finished-the foundation of the millennial reign was fully laid by him. (Millennial Star 9:104; 1 April 1847.)

In order that each chapter might stand as an independent witness of the divine calling of the Prophet Joseph Smith, some doctrinal concepts will receive brief mention in more than one chapter. Hopefully that repetition will prove helpful rather than tedious. As a service to the reader, in the back of the book we have included three accounts of the First Vision. These are often hard to find elsewhere.

In the preparation of this work we are indebted to many, particularly our parents and teachers, who bore a sound and solid witness and nurtured and encouraged the same within us. We are indebted to faculty colleagues and students who have challenged us in our thinking and motivated us to articulate the reason for the hope within us. We express special thanks to Lori Soza, a conscientious and sensitive secretarial assistant, for her effort in preparing the manuscript for publication. To Cory Maxwell at Bookcraft Publishers we offer appreciation for his encouragement in this project over several years. Chris Bigelow and Rebecca Taylor offered invaluable editorial assistance. Though we owe so much to so many, we alone are responsible for the conclusions drawn from the evidence cited. This book is a private endeavor and thus not an official publication of either The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints or of Brigham Young University.

Prologue: Joseph Smith Among the Prophets

Joseph Smith the Prophet was little understood by the people of the nineteenth century and may even be more of an enigma to those who live in our own time. Even the Saints of God, those who stand and bear witness of the ProphetÂs divine calling-those who acknowledge that he was raised up and anointed of God-little understand what manner of man he was. ÂNo man knows my history,Â he said once. ÂI cannot tell it: I shall never undertake it. I donÂt blame any one for not believing my history. If I had not experienced what I have, I would not have believed it myself.Â (History of the Church 6:317.)

Like his Master, Jesus Christ, Joseph Smith was called upon to endure a life of loneliness. It was a life characterized not only by persecution and suspicion but also by an isolation known only to those who walk in the glorious light of noonday sun, who know with an absolute certainty and yet must minister among others who seem content to walk and talk in the fading rays of dusk, those who struggle with faith, those who doubt, and even those who dare not believe. The farm boy who grew to become a prophetÂs prophet was also, to some degree at least, Âa man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefÂ (Mosiah 14:3), one who knew firsthand the costs of Christian discipleship. ÂGod is my friend,Â he wrote to his wife, Emma, at a difficult time. ÂIn him I shall find comfort. I have given my life into his hands. I am prepared to go at his call. I desire to be with Christ. I count not my life dear to me, only to do his will.Â (The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, p. 239; punctuation modernized.) Such expressions enable us to discern the soul of Joseph Smith, to discover the underlying secret of his success, his humility. But he was the prophet of the Almighty; God knew it, and he knew it.

Known by the Ancients

The dispensation of the fulness of times was destined to bring to consummation the works, designs, and purposes of the Lord. Because this era would be a time when God would gather together all things in Christ, both in heaven and on earth (see Eph. 1:10), it was a day anticipated and longed for by the former-day Saints. This day was known and spoken of by them, as was the man who would lead the final dispensation. President Brigham Young thus observed concerning Joseph Smith:

It was decreed in the counsels of eternity, long before the foundations of the earth were laid, that he should be the man, in the last dispensation of this world, to bring forth the word of God to the people, and receive the fulness of the keys and power of the Priesthood of the Son of God. The Lord had his eye upon him, and upon his father, and upon his fatherÂs father, and upon their progenitors clear back to Abraham, and from Abraham to the flood, from the flood to Enoch, and from Enoch to Adam. He has watched that family and that blood as it has circulated from its fountain to the birth of that man. He was foreordained in eternity to preside over this last dispensation, as much so as . . . was Jesus to be the Saviour of the world. (In Journal of Discourses 7:289Â90.)

We would suppose that Adam and Enoch and Noah and Abraham knew of the coming of Joseph Smith in the last days and of the vital role he would play in the winding-up scenes. We do know that almost four millennia before Joseph SmithÂs birth, Joseph of old, the great-grandson of Abraham, spoke specifically of him who would be his namesake. His prophecies, of which Nephi recorded Âthere are not many greaterÂ (2 Ne. 4:2), spoke of the coming of a Âchoice seerÂ out of the fruit of his loins (2 Ne. 3:7). We learn of these prophecies from Joseph SmithÂs translation of Gen. 50:24Â38, and we presume that Lehi, in speaking to his last-born son, Joseph, of these things, drew upon the ancient prophetic words on the plates of brass that Jehovah had spoken through Joseph: ÂHe shall be esteemed highly among the fruit of thy loins. And unto him will I give commandment that he shall do a work for the fruit of thy loins, his brethren, which shall be of great worth unto them, even to the bringing of them to the knowledge of the covenants which I have made with thy fathers.Â (Ibid.) We read further: ÂUnto him will I give power to bring forth my word [the Book of Mormon] unto the seed of thy loins-and not to the bringing forth my word only, saith the Lord, but to the convincing them of my word, which shall have already gone forth among them [the Bible]. . . . He shall be like unto me.Â (vv. 11, 15.) Joseph of old continued: ÂFor the thing, which the Lord shall bring forth by his handÂ-the Book of Mormon, and, by extension, the fulness of the everlasting gospel-Âby the power of the Lord shall bring my people unto salvationÂ (2 Ne. 3:15). The Lord, speaking through Joseph, said: ÂI will raise up [a man] unto the fruit of thy loins.Â Could he here mean Mormon, the great prophet-editor? ÂAnd I will make for him a spokesman.Â Could this not refer to Joseph Smith? ÂAnd I, behold, I will give unto himÂ-Mormon-Âthat he shall write the writing of the fruit of thy loins, unto the fruit of thy loins; and the spokesman of thy loinsÂ-Joseph Smith-Âshall declare it.Â (V. 18; see also Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, pp. 425Â26.)

The resurrected Savior explained to the Nephites concerning the latter-day ensign: ÂIn that day, for my sake shall the Father work a work, which shall be a great and a marvelous work among them; and there shall be among them those who will not believe it, although a man shall declare it unto them. But behold, the life of my servant shall be in my hand; therefore they shall not hurt him, although he shall be marred because of them. Yet I will heal him, for I will show unto them that my wisdom is greater than the cunning of the devil.Â The Master then went on to declare that those who reject the words of this servant-obviously Joseph Smith-would receive the same condemnation as those who reject his word: ÂThey shall be cut off from among my people who are of the covenant.Â (3 Ne. 21:9Â11.)

Speaking of the surpassing worth of the Book of Mormon record, Moroni said that Ânone can have power to bring it to light save it be given him of God.Â He continued: Â. . . And blessed be he that shall bring this thing to light; for it shall be brought out of darkness unto light, according to the word of God; . . . and it shall be done by the power of God.Â A few verses later, Moroni added: ÂThose saints who have gone before me, who have possessed this land, shall cry, yea, even from the dust will they cry unto the Lord; and as the Lord liveth he will remember the covenant which he hath made with them. And he knoweth their prayers. . . . And he knoweth their faith. . . . And behold, their prayers were also in behalf of him that the Lord should suffer to bring these things forth.Â (Morm. 8:14Â16, 23Â25.)

These oracles concerning the call and work of the choice seer seem to have been transmitted from generation to generation on both continents. By the meridian of time, the Jews in the Eastern Hemisphere were still aware of the coming of a great prophet. John wrote: ÂAnd this is the record of John [the Baptist], when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem, to ask him; Who art thou? And he confessed, and denied not that he was Elias; but confessed, saying; I am not the Christ.Â That is, John the Baptist denied that he was the Messiah, the anointed prophet like unto Moses that was to be raised up among the children of Israel. (See Deut. 18:15, 18Â19.) ÂAnd they asked him, saying; How then art thou Elias? And he said, I am not that Elias who was to restore all things. And they asked him, saying, Art thou that prophet? And he answered, No.Â (JST, John 1:20Â22.) In a journal entry of George Laub, we find the following report of a sermon given on 12 May 1844 by Joseph Smith: ÂBrother Joseph Smith was chosen for the last dispensation or seventh dispensation. [At] the time the grand council [sat] in heaven to organize this world, Joseph was chosen [as] the last and greatest prophet, to lay the foundation of GodÂs work of the seventh dispensation. Therefore the Jews asked John the Baptist if he was Elias, or Jesus, or that great prophet that was to come.Â (The Words of Joseph Smith, p. 370; spelling and punctuation modernized.)

Joseph Smith was the final great Elias before the Messiah; he was an Elias of restoration. As Jesus descended the Mount of Transfiguration with his Apostles Peter, James, and John, he was asked: ÂWhy then say the scribes that Elias [meaning in this case Elijah] must first come?Â (Matt. 17:10.) ÂAnd Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias [meaning in this case a forerunner] truly shall first come, and restore all things, as the prophets have written. And again I say unto you that Elias has come already, concerning whom it is written, Behold, I will send my messenger and he shall prepare the way before me; and they knew him not, and have done unto him, whatsoever they listed. Likewise shall also the Son of Man suffer of them. But I say unto you, Who is Elias? Behold, this is Elias, whom I send to prepare the way before me. Then the disciples understood that he spake unto them of John the Baptist, and also of another who should come and restore all things, as it is written by the prophets.Â (JST, Matt. 17:10Â14.)

As a part of his Olivet discourse, Christ spoke of the latter days: ÂAnd again,Â he said, Âthis Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come, or the destruction of the wickedÂ (Joseph SmithÂMatthew 1:31). In May of 1844, the Prophet and Seer rendered a literal translation of this passage from his German Bible: ÂAnd it will be preached, the Gospel of the kingdom, in the whole world, to a witness over all people: and then will the end come.Â Offering a type of prophetic commentary, a commentary which seems to point up his own role in the latter dispensation, Joseph Smith then said: ÂThe Savior said when these tribulations should take place, it [the gospel of the kingdom] should be committed to a man who should be a witness over the whole world: the keys of knowledge, power and revelations should be revealed to a witness who should hold the testimony to the world.Â (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, cited hereafter as Teachings, p. 364.) The Lord and his chosen servants have, from the beginning, known and spoken of the great latter-day seer.

Joseph Smith was also known to the ancients in another sense: he was schooled and tutored by them during his own mortal ministry. Save Jesus Christ only, the world has never known a more competent scriptural authority than Joseph Smith. A library containing everything the world knows about the Bible, for example, would not rival his understanding. It is one thing to read a book of scripture but quite another to be personally instructed by its authors. Who among the worldÂs scholars or divines can boast of having stood face-to-face with Adam, Enoch, Noah, Moses, Elijah, John the Baptist, and Peter, James, and John? Who can speak with authority about life in ancient America because of lessons personally learned from Nephi, Alma, Mormon, Moroni, and no doubt other ancient American Hebrews? (See Journal of Discourses 13:47; 17:374; 21:161Â64; 23:362.) While religious leaders were claiming that the heavens were sealed to them, Joseph Smith was being personally tutored by these ancient prophets. Many of them laid their hands on his head and conferred their priesthoods, keys, and authorities (see D&C 128:20). In summarizing this point, let us turn to the words of President John Taylor, who spoke so eloquently and with such loyalty for his beloved prophet-leader:

Joseph Smith in the first place was set apart by the Almighty according to the counsels of the gods in the eternal worlds, to introduce the principles of life among the people, of which the Gospel is the grand power and influence, and through which salvation can extend to all peoples, all nations, all kindreds, all tongues and all worlds. It is the principle that brings life and immortality to light, and places us in communication with God. God selected him for that purpose, and he fulfilled his mission and lived honorably and died honorably. I know of what I speak for I was very well acquainted with him and was with him a great deal during his life, and was with him when he died. The principles which he had, placed him in communication with the Lord, and not only with the Lord, but with the ancient apostles and prophets; such men, for instance, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Noah, Adam, Seth, Enoch, and Jesus and the Father, and the apostles that lived on this continent as well as those who lived on the Asiatic continent. He seemed to be as familiar with these people as we are with one another. Why? Because he had to introduce a dispensation which was called the dispensation of the fulness of times, and it was known as such by the ancient servants of God. (In Journal of Discourses 21:94.)

Joseph Smith knew the scriptures, he knew their precepts, he knew their prophets, and he knew their central character-the Lord Jesus Christ.

A Dispensation Head

When Aaron and Miriam allowed themselves to be embroiled in a critical spirit in regard to their brother Moses, Jehovah declared: ÂIf there be a prophet among you, I the Lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream. My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house. With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?Â (Num. 12:6Â8.) We learn from this exchange an important principle: there are prophets and then there are prophets. The Apostle Paul explained that Âthe spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophetsÂ (1 Cor. 14:32). There is an order and a hierarchy even among those called as chosen oracles and mouthpieces of the Almighty.

Jesus Christ is the presiding high priest. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained that after Christ in the government of the kingdom of God comes Adam and then Noah (see Teachings, p. 157). Elder Bruce R. McConkie observed: ÂYou start out with the Lord Jesus, and then you have Adam and Noah. Thereafter come the dispensation heads. Then you step down, appreciably, and come to prophets and apostles, to the elders of Israel, and to wise and good and sagacious men who have the spirit of light and understanding.Â (ÂThis Generation Shall Have My Word Through You,Â p. 4.) Joseph Smith, like Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, stands as a dispensation head. The dispensation head becomes the means by which the knowledge and power of God are channeled to men and women on earth. He becomes the means by which the gospel of Jesus Christ-the plan of salvation and exaltation-are revealed anew, the means by which divine transforming powers, including saving covenants and ordinances, are extended to people during an age of time we call a dispensation. The dispensation head stands as the preeminent prophetic witness of Christ; he knows firsthand because of what he has seen and heard.

Because of his central place in the plan and because it is by means of the power of his testimony that men and women come to know the Lord and bask in the light of the Spirit, the calling and position of the dispensation head thus become elements about which the LordÂs followers feel to bear witness. Indeed, and appropriately so, men and women of a particular dispensation who stand to express the witness which burns in their bosoms find themselves bearing testimony of Christ and of the dispensation head-the revealer of Christ-in almost the same breath. This is just as it should be. Elder McConkie pointed out: ÂEvery prophet is a witness of Christ; every dispensation head is a revealer of Christ for his day; and every other prophet or apostle who comes is a reflection and an echo and an exponent of the dispensation head. All such come to echo to the world and to expound and unfold what God has revealed through the man who was appointed for that era to give his eternal word to the world. Such is the dispensation concept.Â (Ibid., pp. 4Â5.) Thus, to Joseph Smith the Savior affirmed: ÂThis generation shall have my word through youÂ (D&C 5:10). Thomas B. Marsh was instructed to Âdeclare glad tidings of great joy unto this generation.Â And what did that entail? ÂYou shall declare the things which have been revealed to my servant, Joseph Smith, Jun.Â (D&C 31:3Â4.) If the knowledge and power of God are to be had in this final dispensation, they will be had through the work set in motion and the truths that flowed and the authorities that were transmitted by Joseph Smith, or they will be had not at all. To bear witness that Joseph Smith is a prophet or seer is to testify that (1) he was a revealer of divine truth, and (2) that he was a legal administrator, a conduit by which the keys of the kingdom of God have been conferred upon men after the long night of apostate darkness.

Occasionally we hear people complain that they hear too few testimonies of Christ and too many of Joseph Smith. To be sure, we worship the Father in the name of the Son; Christ our Lord is the way to the Father, and his is the only name under heaven whereby man can be saved. And yet we have seen that the dispensation head is the preeminent prophetic revealer of Christ. Thus to bear witness of Joseph Smith is to bear witness of Jesus Christ who sent him, in the same way that a testimony of Christ also implies clearly a testimony of the Eternal Father who sent him. On the other hand, to deny Joseph Smith outright-to deny the spiritual impressions that attest to his prophetic assignment-is to deny the Lord who sent him. Jesus told his disciples that Âhe that despiseth you despiseth me; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent meÂ (Luke 10:16; compare D&C 1:38; 84:36; 112:20). President Brigham Young testified that Âwhosoever confesseth that Joseph Smith was sent of God to reveal the holy Gospel to the children of men, and lay the foundation for gathering Israel, and building up the kingdom of God on the earth, that spirit is of God; and every spirit that does not confess that God has sent Joseph Smith, and revealed the everlasting Gospel to and through him, is of Antichrist, no matter whether it is found in a pulpit or on a throneÂ (in Journal of Discourses 8:176).

We have observed that there is a power-a supernal power, an unusual spiritual endowment from that Lord we worship-associated with the bearing of a pure and fervent testimony of Joseph Smith and the Restoration. Such outpourings surely signify heavenÂs approbation. President Joseph F. Smith, nephew of the Prophet, declared: ÂI believe in the divinity of Jesus Christ, because more than ever I come nearer the possession of the actual knowledge that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the Living God, through the testimony of Joseph Smith . . . that he saw Him, that he heard Him, that he received instructions from Him, that he obeyed those instructions, and that he today stands before the world as the last great, actual, living, witness of the divinity of ChristÂs mission and [ChristÂs] power to redeem man. . . . Thank God for Joseph Smith.Â (Gospel Doctrine, p. 495.)

Â. . . Save Jesus OnlyÂ

It is not difficult to catch an occasional glimpse of the singular role of Joseph Smith in this final age. In a spirit of tribute, gratitude, and praise, Elder John Taylor, a man not prone to hyperbole, wrote: ÂJoseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in itÂ (D&C 135:3). We ask: More than Enoch? More than Abraham? More than Jacob? More than Moses? What did Elder Taylor mean?

Now, my brethren and sisters, I am not going to confine this prophecy to the members of the Church. The Lord said he would pour out his Spirit upon all flesh. That does not mean that upon all flesh the Holy Ghost should be sent, and that they should be participants in the blessings which those are privileged to receive who have been baptized and endowed and become members of the Church; but the Lord would pour out his blessings and his Spirit upon all people and use them to accomplish his purposes. . . .

. . . There has never been a step taken . . . in discovery or invention, where the Spirit of the Lord (that is, the Spirit of which Joel spoke, the Light of Christ, not the Holy Ghost!) was not the prevailing force, resting upon the individual, which caused him to make the discovery or the invention. The world does not understand that, but it is perfectly clear to me; nor did the Lord always use those who have faith, nor does he always do so today. He uses such minds as are pliable and can be turned in certain directions to accomplish his work, whether they believe in him or not. (Doctrines of Salvation 1:176, 178; emphasis in original.)

President Smith then provided the following insight: ÂThere have been a great many discoveries. In fact, since the establishment of the gospel, these discoveries and inventions have been increasing more rapidly and we have seen more, perhaps, . . . than was seen during all the years from the days of the revival of learning and the reformation down to the visitation of Moroni to the Prophet Joseph Smith.Â (Ibid. 1:179.) In short, the Spirit of God-meaning the light of Christ-has been behind the rapid intellectual, scientific, and technological developments from the time of the Industrial Revolution to our own Information Age. The Modern Seer presides over this age of enlightenment and expansion.

Think of it! Joseph Smith and his successors are responsible for teaching the gospel in the world of spirits and for performing saving ordinances for literally billions of our FatherÂs children. Our colleague Larry E. Dahl has written: ÂWithout diminishing in the least the importance of the work done by earlier prophets and others of the LordÂs servants, clearly in terms of the numbers of souls to whom the saving principles and ordinances of the gospel have been made available, a monumental work has been effected through the instrumentality of ÂJoseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the LordÂ (D&C 135:3)Â (ÂThe Theological Significance of the First Vision,Â p. 321). President Joseph F. Smith taught: ÂThe work in which Joseph Smith was engaged was not confined to this life alone, but it pertains as well to the life to come, and to the life that has been. In other words, it relates to those who have lived upon the earth, to those who are living and to those who shall come after us. It is not something which relates to man only while he tabernacles in the flesh, but to the whole human family from eternity to eternity. Consequently, . . . Joseph Smith is held in reverence.Â (Gospel Doctrine, p. 481.)

In that same spirit, President Brigham Young uttered what to some is a bold and certainly provocative statement:

Joseph Smith holds the keys of this last dispensation, and is now engaged behind the vail in the great work of the last days. I can tell our beloved brother Christians who have slain the Prophets and butchered and otherwise caused the death of thousands of Latter-day Saints . . . something that no doubt will mortify them-something that, to say the least, is a matter of deep regret to them-namely, that no man or woman in this dispensation will ever enter into the celestial kingdom of God without the consent of Joseph Smith. From the day that the Priesthood was taken from the earth to the winding-up scene of all things, every man and woman must have the certificate of Joseph Smith, Junior, as a passport to their entrance into the mansion where God and Christ are-I with you and you with me. I cannot go there without his consent. He holds the keys of that kingdom for the last dispensation-the keys to rule in the spirit world; and he rules there triumphantly, for he gained full power and a glorious victory over the power of Satan while he was yet in the flesh, and was a martyr to his religion and to the name of Christ, which gives him a most perfect victory in the spirit-world. . . .

Should not this thought comfort all people? They will, by-and-by, be a thousand times more thankful for such a man as Joseph Smith, junior, than it is possible for them to be for any earthly good whatever. It is his mission to see that all the children of men in this last dispensation are saved, that can be, through the redemption. You will be thankful, every one of you, that Joseph Smith, junior, was ordained to this great calling before the worlds were. (In Journal of Discourses 7:289.)

A Tribute

We suggested earlier that the life of Joseph Smith was in some degree patterned after that of his Master, Jesus Christ. Extending that concept to its tragic conclusion, we note that Joseph Smith the testator also shed his blood in order that the final testament, the reestablishment of the new covenant, might be in full effect (see Heb. 9:16). Just prior to his death, the Prophet Joseph remarked, according to Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner:

I am tired, I have been mobbed, I have suffered so much. Some of the brethren think they can carry this work out better than I can, far better. I have asked the Lord to take me out of this world. I have stood all I can. I have to seal my testimony to this generation with my blood. I have to do it, for this work will never progress until I am gone, for the testimony is of no force until the testator is dead. People little know who I am when they talk about me, and they never will know until they see me weighed in the balance in the kingdom of God. Then they will know who I am, and see me as I am. I dare not tell them, and they do not know me. (Andrus, They Knew the Prophet, pp. 26Â27.)

The ProphetÂs cryptic comment about his own identity is echoed in an account by Elder Heber C. Kimball in which the Prophet is reported to have said: ÂÂWould to God, brethren, I could tell you who I am! Would to God I could tell you what I know! But you would call it blasphemy, and there are men upon this stand who would want to take my life.ÂÂ (Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 322.) According to Joseph Lee RobinsonÂs account, the Prophet said, ÂIf I should reveal the things that God has revealed to me, there are some on this stand that would cut my throat or take my heartÂs bloodÂ (They Knew the Prophet, p. 164). One day we shall surely see who he was, who he is, and what manner of man has walked among the people of the last days.

George Q. Cannon stated:

Joseph Smith had been a retiring youth-the Spirit made him bold to declare to rulers and potentates and all mankind, the gospel again revealed. He had been a humble farmer lad-divine authority sat so becomingly upon him that men looked at him with reverent awe. He had been unlearned in the great things of art and science-he walked with God until human knowledge was to his eye an open book, the celestial light beamed through his mind.

His lofty soul comprehended the grandeur of his mission upon earth; and with divine fortitude he fulfilled the destiny which God had ordained for him before the world was. (Life of Joseph Smith the Prophet, p. 19.)

President Brigham Young offered this testimonial: ÂWho can justly say aught against Joseph Smith? I was as well acquainted with him, as any man. I do not believe that his father and mother knew him any better than I did. I do not think that a man lives on the earth that knew him any better than I did; and I am bold to say that, Jesus Christ excepted, no better man ever lived or does live upon this earth.Â (In Journal of Discourses 9:332.) He also said, ÂI feel like shouting hallelujah, all the time, when I think that I ever knew Joseph Smith, the ProphetÂ (in ibid. 3:51). Elder Wilford Woodruff observed: ÂThere is not so great a man as Joseph standing in this generation. The Gentiles look upon him and he is like a bed of gold concealed from human view. They know not his principles, his spirit, his wisdom, his virtues, his philanthropy, nor his calling. His mind, like EnochÂs, expands as eternity, and only God can comprehend his soul.Â (Journal History, 9 April 1837.)

One of the significant challenges we face as Latter-day Saints at the close of the twentieth century is to be true and faithful to the legacy of Joseph Smith. The Psalmist declared that in the last days the wicked would strike at the foundations of the faith of believers (see JST, Ps. 11:1Â3) and would seek to undermine those fundamental verities that underlie our commitment to the church and kingdom of God. This may come, for example, in attacks on the historicity or antiquity of the Book of Mormon or Book of Abraham. It may consist in efforts of some to sow doubt and discord in regard to this or that teaching or practice in our history. And, of course, it has entailed and will yet entail attempts-both vicious and subtle-to malign the name and labors of Joseph Smith, the founding prophet of this dispensation. In the words of Elder B. H. Roberts, ÂJoseph Smith . . . claimed for himself no special sanctity, no faultless life, no perfection of character, no inerrancy for every word spoken by him. And as he did not claim these things for himself, so can they not be claimed for him by others. . . . [Y]et to Joseph Smith was given access to the mind of Deity, through the revelations of God to him.Â (A Comprehensive History of the Church 2:360Â61.)

In our day it is fashionable in some quarters to stress the humanity and weaknesses of Joseph Smith and his successors, to cast aspersions on their motives or character, and to reveal historical details, the context and true meanings of which are lacking. Unfortunately, Joseph the Prophet cannot be with us now to answer all charges against him. But be it remembered that the God of heaven has called and approved Joseph Smith; those who attempt to mar the name and image of the Prophet of the Restoration will eventually answer to God himself for their actions. It was President George Albert Smith who observed, ÂThere have been some who have belittled him, but I would like to say that those who have done so will be forgotten and their remains will go back to mother earth, if they have not already gone, and the odor of their infamy will never die, while the glory and honor and majesty and courage and fidelity manifested by the Prophet Joseph Smith will attach to his name foreverÂ (The Teachings of George Albert Smith, p. 45).

We are bold to testify that Joseph Smith was and is a prophet of the living God. We know that the Lord appeared to him, called him, and empowered him to reveal the gods of heaven and the doctrines of salvation to a world that had been wandering for centuries in darkness. Our prayer is that the Lord will endow each of us with the commitment and spiritual strength to live as we believe, in order that we can evidence our appreciation for God our Father, for Jesus Christ his Son, and for their preeminent prophetic witness in these last days, Joseph Smith the Choice Seer.

Part I

Joseph Smith-A Revealer of Truth

Truth is ÂMormonism.Â God is the author of it.

He is our shield. It is by Him we received our birth.

It was by His voice that we were called to a dispensation

of His Gospel in the beginning of the fullness of times.

It was by Him we received the Book of Mormon;

and it is by Him that we remain unto this day;

and by Him we shall remain, if it shall be for our glory.

-Joseph Smith (Teachings, p. 139)

A prophet is a teacher. His subject is Christ and the plan of salvation. The measure of his greatness is found in the length and breadth of what he teaches. The Lord himself gave the test by which we are to measure the ministry of all who profess to labor in his name: ÂBy their fruits ye shall know themÂ (Matt. 7:20; see also 3 Ne. 14:16). The best evidences of the prophetic ministry of Joseph Smith are the doctrines he taught. He was the greatest revealer or teacher of Christ the world has ever known. Through him we have learned more of the plan of salvation than through any other man who ever lived, save Jesus only. Those doctrines all carry within them a witness of their divine origin. Consider these words penned by the Prophet: ÂFor the word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ. And the Spirit giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit.Â (D&C 84:45Â46.)

In those verses we are taught that all men are born with the capacity to know and recognize the truths of salvation. Such truths are not incomprehensible mysteries! They are to be known, to be felt, and to be believed by all of GodÂs children. Their understanding is within the grasp of every soul that desires to know them. No one is justified in rejecting the revelations of heaven. All revelations carry within them the evidence of their authenticity, and all children of God-be their station high or low, be they young or old-are divinely endowed with the capacity to see the light and feel its warmth.

Further, the light that comes from the word of God increases in proportion to the heed and diligence given it. ÂThat which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect dayÂ (D&C 50:24). Thus the full light of gospel truth is seen only by those who live the principles involved. The true profession of faith must be sustained by the labor of faith. The living of a principle is as inseparable from its understanding as James declared faith to be from works (see James 2:14Â26).

The principles revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith invite all who hear them to stand in the light. They are principles with a promise. You cannot live them and not know that they are true. ÂThere is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated-and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicatedÂ (D&C 130:20Â21).

The perfect evidence that Joseph Smith was and is a prophet of God is in the doctrines he taught. In this section we call upon twelve such evidences or doctrines restored to the earth through his ministry. Each doctrine contains a light of its own that attests to its truthfulness, and each contains the promise that in the living of the principle involved even greater light will be found.

Chapter 1

Opening the Heavens

The best way to obtain truth and wisdom is not to ask it from books,

but to go to God in prayer, and obtain divine teaching.

-Joseph Smith (Teachings, p. 191)

Could you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than

you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject.

-Joseph Smith (Teachings, p. 324)

If the Bible is to be believed, then for a period of four thousand years, or from the time of Adam to that of the meridian Apostles, the God of heaven freely conversed with men. The testimony of holy writ is that if the Lord had a people he acknowledged as his own, he revealed his mind and will to them through prophets and Apostles. Following the death of the meridian Twelve, God fell silent and according to Christian tradition has not been heard from since. We have the Bible, they tell us, and that is sufficient.

While maintaining the strongest feelings of reverence for the Bible, we still feel compelled to ask, ÂCan the church and kingdom of God be governed by a book?Â Singularly, the Bible itself does not contain even the vaguest hint that it, rather than living prophets and Apostles, is to assume the role of GodÂs spokesman. Indeed, no injunction finds more frequent expression within its covers than the simple direction that we continue to communicate directly with the heavens and that we sustain those whom God has chosen to minister and speak in his name.

The Spirit of Revelation

The argument on the part of those who have chosen to be governed by a book is that the Spirit of God speaks to them through the ancient text, thus keeping it ever current. The argument is not without some validity. Certainly when scripture is read under the tutorship of the Spirit its message can burn anew in our hearts regardless of how long ago it was written, and of a surety the Spirit can clothe an ancient text in an appropriate modern application. This does not, however, argue for the doctrine of sufficiency. It does not sustain the idea that angels can no longer minister to men, that God no longer speaks directly to us, that there are no prophets, that humble, God-fearing men and women can no longer dream dreams of their own or see visions, that scripture can no longer be penned, that righteous fathers can no longer prophesy to their sons and daughters, or that a mother may no longer speak by the Spirit of revelation to her offspring for their blessing and protection. No biblical text can be brought forth to sustain such conclusions.

Perhaps the greatest revelation of our dispensation is the revelation that revelation is never to cease. None have taught it with greater clarity than the Book of Mormon prophet Nephi when he said: ÂYea, wo be unto him that saith: We have received, and we need no more! . . . For behold, thus saith the Lord God: I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have.Â (2 Ne. 28:27, 30.)

The first great revelation of this dispensation was the revelation that led Joseph Smith to the Sacred Grove. It came from the Bible, but it did not stop with the Bible. Joseph Smith read the words of James that invite all who lack wisdom to ask of God (see James 1:5). James did not implore those seeking wisdom to find it in holy writ or to seek it in the experiences of those who lived in ages past; rather he directed them to find it in the heavens. James himself may have never owned a book of scripture. He had, however, come to know how to obtain the knowledge of heaven. Of JamesÂs injunction to seek wisdom by asking God, Joseph Smith said, ÂNever did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mineÂ (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:12). Here is the perfect example of an ancient text speaking anew by the power of revelation, yet James is not attesting to the sufficiency of a book. He is directing us to the original source of all inspired books. Surely the BibleÂs greatest worth is not in the answers it gives but in its assurance that God gives answers! The Bible is a history of people who had the truths of salvation. Its testimony is that true religion is both immediate and personal. ChristÂs baptism at the hands of John the Baptist opened the heavens for him. We are told that he fulfilled all righteousness in that sacred ordinance (see Matt. 3:15; 2 Ne. 31:6Â7). Yet for us ChristÂs baptism does not remit a single sin. We must have our own baptism. We must open the heavens through our own righteousness. While translating the Book of Mormon, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery learned how Christ reinstituted the ordinance of baptism among the Nephites. Joseph and Oliver did not suppose that some saving grace accrued to them by reading about the baptism of others; rather, they retired to the woods to inquire of the Lord as to how they too could be baptized, and like John and Jesus they witnessed the opening of the heavens.

Returning to the promise of James, Joseph Smith said, ÂIt seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heartÂ (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:12). This is a perfect description of the Spirit of revelation. One way God speaks to us is through our feelings. Revelation need not involve the use of words. Truth must be felt in the depths of our souls before it can properly act upon our minds. These feelings of the heart do not add to the canon of scripture; they simply magnify it. What they never do, however, is demand that our hearts be closed to the audible voice of God.

ÂI reflected on it [the invitation to ask God] again and again,Â Joseph Smith said, Âknowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the BibleÂ (ibid.). Such was the revelation that first unlocked the heavens in our dispensation. It was a private and personal revelation. It contained no words, and yet its expression was clear and undeniable. Like all true revelations, it was but preparation for other and greater revelations to come. ÂThat which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect dayÂ (D&C 50:24).

So it was that the youthful Joseph Smith, led by the Spirit of revelation, sought counsel from God according to the promise of James. According to an early newspaper account, Joseph said, ÂI immediately went out into the woods where my father had a clearing, and went to the stump where I had stuck my axe when I had quit work.Â (In Milton V. Backman, Jr., Joseph SmithÂs First Vision, p. 176; for the 1832, 1835, and Wentworth Letter accounts, see the appendix of this book.) ÂFinding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desires of my heart to GodÂ (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:15.) Young Joseph came with no demands. He had no preconceived notions as to what the answer ought to be. He came clothed in the purity, innocence, and unwavering faith possible to youth. From JosephÂs description of the events that followed, we learn that before he was immersed in the light of heaven he was confronted by the powers of darkness. We see in this a pattern common to virtually all who seek the truths of heaven.

Joseph had scarcely begun to pray when he was Âseized uponÂ by a power which, he said, Âentirely overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction. But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction-not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being-just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me.Â (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:15Â16.)

Only the light of heaven could free him from the powers of darkness with which he was bound. Though that light descended upon him gradually or naturally, its glory was beyond anything earthly. He described it as a Âpillar of lightÂ (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:16) that Âeclipsed the sun at noon-dayÂ (The Papers of Joseph Smith 1:430). In that light he saw Âtwo Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the airÂ (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:16) and Âwho exactly resembled each other in features, and likenessÂ (Backman, Joseph SmithÂs First Vision, p. 169). He also said that he Âsaw many angels in this visionÂ (Papers 1:127).

Calling Joseph by name, one of those Personages said, Âpointing to the other-This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!Â Joseph asked which of all the churches he should join and was answered that he Âmust join none of them, for they were all wrong; and the Personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that: Âthey draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof.ÂÂ (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:17, 19.)

Competent Testimony

Two basic objections exist in the religious world to Joseph Smith or any other man receiving revelation that exceeds that which is now found in the Bible. The first objection is that no private revelation can be proved to others. The second is that to admit that God would appear to someone is to create the possibility of being deceived by either the moral or intellectual lunacy of the one professing such a manifestation. Joseph SmithÂs experiences address both concerns. First, all are invited to do as he did; that is, to ask of God. The theophany in the Sacred Grove need not repeat itself, but the Spirit can be expected in identifiable and unmistakable ways to confirm the truthfulness of JosephÂs claim. This process asks no more of the believer-that he or she have faith-than does the Bible.

As to the second concern that we not gullibly accept what amounts to lunacy of one sort or another, it is argued that only a sign of miraculous knowledge or power could give credence to oneÂs having opened the heavens. To such a conclusion we have no objection. If God was a God of miracles in ancient times, he must be such today. A tangible miracle is indeed in order, and what better way to answer that need than with a book delivered by an angel containing teachings that are directly relevant to our day. The book need come forth in circumstances that defy the possibility of its having been fabricated, in order that it might constitute undisputed evidence of the divine calling of the one producing it. The circumstances in which the Book of Mormon came forth answer the case perfectly. Here we have a young man virtually devoid of education translating an extremely complex story while at the same time creating a doctrinal structure that confounds the doctrinal notions of the day and laying a foundation that bears without strain all the revelations of this, the dispensation of the fulness of times.

Joseph Smith has sustained his claim to the prophetic office according to the ancient order of things-by the mouth of two or more witnesses. First came a volume of scripture containing the testimony of the ancients. Then came the volume of scripture recording revelations of our own day. Each volume constitutes a confirmation of all biblical truths while illuminating them with a marvelous addition of light. Never has the earth known a prophet for whom there is so much evidence of prophetic office as there is for the Prophet Joseph Smith.

In a court of law, oneÂs competence as a witness is predicated on knowledge. If you do not know anything, you cannot testify to anything. The value of a testimony is measured by the amount of light shed on the issue to be decided. So it is in the realm of spiritual things. Witnesses are competent witnesses of Christ and his gospel only to the extent that they stand in heavenÂs light. At issue is what they know and what they are prepared to teach. To be of worth, their testimony cannot be hearsay. Their knowledge must be firsthand. It must be rooted in heaven. Their source must be the opening of the heavens. None have taught that principle better than Joseph Smith. ÂThe best way to obtain truth and wisdom is not to ask it from books,Â he said, Âbut to go to God in prayer, and obtain divine teachingÂ (Teachings, p. 191). And again, ÂCould you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subjectÂ (ibid., p. 324).

We know of no soul in earthÂs history, save our Lord himself, who was as conversant with the doctrines of heaven as the Prophet Joseph Smith. By the power of his priesthood Noah brought forth the rains of heaven to cleanse a corrupt earth of all that was impure. By that same power Joseph Smith called down the rains of revelation, truths that will also cover the earth, even as Isaiah prophesied when he said that Âthe earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the seaÂ (Isa. 11:9). If the stature of a prophet is measured by the knowledge we gain from him, Joseph Smith is without prophetic peer in the earthÂs history. He stands at the head of the dispensation of the fulness of times. This is the period in the earthÂs history in which the fulness of all past dispensations, and a host of glorious truths unknown to any dispensation, are all to be dispensed from the heavens in a mighty flood of light in which the pure in heart will be baptized or immersed in the Spirit of truth.

Speaking of this great work of restoration wrought by the hand of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord said: ÂI have sent mine everlasting covenant into the world, to be a light to the world, and to be a standard for my people, and for the Gentiles to seek to it, and to be a messenger before my face to prepare the way before meÂ (D&C 45:9). It is the saving truths of the gospel that constitute the messenger that prepares the way before the Lord. When prophecy declared that in the last days the Lord would suddenly come to his temple, it did not simply mean a building of mortar and stone. The testimony that Christ is GodÂs Son must also make its appearance in the hearts and minds of men, for this alone is the temple that will endure throughout the eternal worlds.

The earth has not witnessed a greater deluge of revelation than what occurred from the spring of 1820 to the time of the ProphetÂs death in June 1844. Never in such a short period of time have so many revelations been recorded, so many manuscripts from ancient days restored, so many messengers from the unseen world appeared to give instruction and bequeath priesthood, keys, and power. What student of the Bible has not marveled at the doctrines taught and the wonders performed by the prophets and Apostles of ages past? Yet the composite of such experiences cannot surpass the foundational events of this, the greatest of all gospel dispensations. Our dispensation casts the shadow in which biblical prophets longed to stand.

In a marvelous and comprehensive vision, Enoch saw our day, describing it as a time when the Lord would send ÂrighteousnessÂ down out of heaven and when ÂtruthÂ would spring forth out of the earth. This union of heaven and earth was to bear testimony of the Only Begotten, his resurrection, and thus the resurrection of all men. This marvelous union of righteousness and truth, Enoch told us, would then sweep the earth as with a flood to gather the elect from each of its corners to a place God would prepare, Âan Holy City, that my people may gird up their loins, and be looking forth for the time of my coming; for there shall be my tabernacle, and it shall be called Zion, a New JerusalemÂ (Moses 7:62).

It was Joseph Smith who initiated the opening of the heavens of which Enoch spoke, it was Joseph Smith who brought forth the ÂtruthÂ long sealed in the earth to testify of the Only Begotten, and it was Joseph Smith who laid the foundations of Zion, taught us of the New Jerusalem, and commenced the great labor of gathering Israel from the four corners of the earth. Joseph Smith professed no doctrine that did not have revelation as its source. Further, he taught that no doctrine could be taught save it was taught by the Spirit of revelation, for that was the Spirit by which it had come (see D&C 50:10Â25). It is natural, therefore, that virtually every criticism of this great labor of restoration reduces itself to the criticÂs refusal to admit that God can speak and that this generation can enjoy communion with the heavens, as did the ancients.

Conclusion

The issue is fairly set. The great question to be answered in this final age of grace is: Was Joseph Smith called of God? If Joseph Smith is the prophet called of God to stand at the head of the greatest of all gospel dispensations, then he must have received revelations, and those revelations must contain the doctrines, Spirit, and power of heaven. His testimony is what he taught. His position as a prophet must rest on the strength and power of the message that he bore. In this volume we will judge him by that standard. We care no more about what his critics had to say about him than we do about what the critics of Jesus of Nazareth had to say of Him. We were not witnesses of ChristÂs miracles, nor was it our privilege to follow and listen to him, but we have his teachings-a fragment at least-and we know the Spirit by whom they were taught and the fruit they bear. Such was the standard of judgment that the Savior urged upon us, saying, ÂBy their fruits ye shall know themÂ (Matt. 7:20). The reader is now invited to feast on the fruit of the doctrine that was restored to us through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith.
