Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 2

The Everlasting Gospel

I have sent unto you mine everlasting covenant,

even that which was from the beginning.

-D&C 49:9

No more fundamental truth has been delivered through the Choice Seer than the knowledge of an eternal gospel. No verity is more central to what we believe and to what we do as Latter-day Saints than the knowledge that Christian prophets have declared Christian doctrine and administered Christian ordinances from the beginning. We are not taking part in a new program for the salvation of the human family or a system of religion that has evolved; rather, we glory in the truths and rejoice in the powers that belong to the ancient order of things. God is eternal, and his divine plan is eternal and unchanging.

Eternal Plan, Eternal Atonement

We know that God our Father has a plan for his children, a program established to maximize our growth and insure our happiness. That fact alone-that there is some divine plan to life-is not as obvious from the Bible as from latter-day scripture. Knowing what we know, we are able to recognize divine design, but seldom can we turn to a specific Old or New Testament passage that speaks with clarity of a plan. How very different is the Book of Mormon! The Nephite prophets speak with grateful hearts of the Âmerciful plan of the great CreatorÂ (2 Ne. 9:6), the Âplan of our GodÂ (2 Ne. 9:13), the great Âplan of mercyÂ (Alma 42:15, 31), the Âplan of redemptionÂ (Jacob 6:8; Alma 12:25Â26, 30, 32; 17:16; 18:39; 22:13; 29:2; 34:31; 39:18; 42:11, 13), the Âeternal plan of deliveranceÂ (2 Ne. 11:5), the Âplan of salvationÂ (Jarom 1:2; Alma 24:14; 42:5), and the great Âplan of happinessÂ (Alma 42:8, 16). We know that the plan of salvation is Âalways and everlastingly the same; that obedience to the same laws always brings the same reward; that the gospel laws have not changed . . . ; and that always and everlastingly all things pertaining to salvation center in ChristÂ (Bruce R. McConkie, The Promised Messiah, pp. 4Â5).

Jesus is truly the ÂLamb slain from the foundation of the worldÂ (Rev. 13:8; see also Moses 7:47) that is, the atoning sacrifice is not only timely for those of us who regularly need its cleansing powers but also timeless. Though the act of atonement would not take place until Jesus suffered in Gethsemane and on Golgotha in the meridian of time, the earthÂs earliest inhabitants were taught to call upon God in the name of his Beloved Son for deliverance (see Moses 5:5Â8). Again, this central truth is not to be had in Christendom. Indeed, one of the ironic attacks on the Book of Mormon is that it is too Christ-centered! Some critics contend that the Book of Mormon has too much Christ within it long before there was a Christ.

The Latter-day Saints know that God has revealed himself, his plan, and the Mediator of his sacred covenant to men and women from the beginning. The voice of the Father came to Adam: ÂIf thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, . . . which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy GhostÂ (Moses 6:52). Further, Adam was commanded to teach his children that because of the effects of the Fall all men and women Âmust be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal gloryÂ (Moses 6:59).

The Prophet Joseph Smith observed that Âwe cannot believe that the ancients in all ages were so ignorant of the system of heaven as many suppose, since all that were ever saved, were saved through the power of this great plan of redemption, as much before the coming of Christ as since; if not, God has had different plans in operation (if we may so express it), to bring men back to dwell with Himself; and this we cannot believe, since there has been no change in the constitution of man since he fellÂ (Teachings, pp. 59Â60). And so it is that we learn through the scriptures of the Restoration that such prophetic personalities from the Bible as Enoch (see Moses 6, 7), Noah (see Moses 8), Abraham (see JST, Gen. 15:9Â12), and Moses (see Moses 1) had revealed unto them the particulars of the FatherÂs plan and knew and taught of the coming redemption in Jesus Christ. Truly, as the Apostle Peter proclaimed, ÂTo [Christ] give all the prophets witnessÂ (Acts 10:43).

It was no different in the Western Hemisphere. Across the seas with Lehi and his family came the fulness of the gospel, including the holy priesthood and the knowledge of salvation and of the intercessory role of Jesus the Christ. Very early in the Book of Mormon account, Nephi stated that Âsix hundred years from the time that my father left Jerusalem, a prophet would the Lord God raise up among the Jews-even a Messiah, or, in other words, a Savior of the worldÂ (1 Ne. 10:4). Nephi saw in vision that Jesus would be Âlifted up upon the cross and slain for the sins of the worldÂ (1 Ne. 11:33). Almost six hundred years before the birth of Jesus in Bethlehem, Lehi taught his son Jacob that Âredemption cometh in and through the Holy Messiah; for he is full of grace and truth.Â Further, he explained, Âthere is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah, who layeth down his life according to the flesh, and taketh it again by the power of the Spirit, that he may bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, being the first that should rise.Â (2 Ne. 2:6, 8.) Alma taught an erring son that because the souls of men and women who live before the meridian of time are just as precious in the sight of God as those who live during or after that age, it is necessary that redemption in Christ should be made available to people of all ages (see Alma 39:17Â19). Indeed, Ânone of the prophets have written, nor prophesied, save they have spoken concerning this ChristÂ (Jacob 7:11; compare Jacob 4:4 and Mosiah 13:33).

Portions of Eternal Truth Among All Nations

Surely he who is the embodiment of mercy and benevolence does not cease to love those of his children who do not enjoy the fulness of gospel blessings in their lives. Our Father in Heaven will do all in his power to inspire, lift, edify, and encourage individuals, families, communities, and nations. It was to Nephi that the Lord Jehovah spoke on this matter:

Know ye not that there are more nations than one? Know ye not that I, the Lord your God, have created all men, and that I remember those who are upon the isles of the sea; and that I rule in the heavens above and in the earth beneath; and I bring forth my word unto the children of men, yea, even upon all the nations of the earth?

. . . For behold, I shall speak unto the Jews and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the Nephites and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the other tribes of the house of Israel, which I have led away, and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto all nations of the earth and they shall write it. (2 Ne. 29:7, 12.)

Alma explained that Âthe Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they should haveÂ (Alma 29:8). One body of people may be prepared for the fulness of light and knowledge; another body may be prepared only for a glimmer of that ray of truth. God suits his blessings to the bearing capacity of the children of men. Elder B. H. Roberts offered the following counsel on this principle:

While the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is established for the instruction of men; and is one of GodÂs instrumentalities for making known the truth, yet he is not limited to that institution for such purposes, neither in time nor place. God raises up wise men . . . of their own tongue and nationality, speaking to them through means that they can comprehend; not always giving a fulness of truth such as may be found in the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ; but always giving that measure of truth that the people are prepared to receive. Mormonism holds, then, that all the great teachers [those who teach principles of truth and virtue] are servants of God; among all nations and in all ages. They are inspired men, appointed to instruct GodÂs children according to the conditions in the midst of which he finds them. . . . Wherever God finds a soul sufficiently enlightened and pure; one with whom his Spirit can communicate, lo! he makes of him a teacher of men. While the path of sensuality and darkness may be that which most men tread, a few . . . have been led along the upward path; a few in all countries and generations have been wisdom seekers, or seekers of God. They have been so because the Divine Word of Wisdom has looked upon them, choosing them for the knowledge and service of himself. (Defense of the Faith and the Saints 1:512Â13.)

It is but reasonable, therefore, that remnants of truth and pieces of a much larger mosaic should be found throughout the world in varying cultures and among diverse religious groups. As the world has passed through phases of apostasy and restoration, relics of revealed doctrine remain, albeit in some cases in altered or even convoluted forms. Those lacking spiritual insight and the faith that derives from a knowledge of ChristÂs eternal plan of salvation may try to cast doubt on the true gospel by pointing to legends and traditions of creation epics or flood stories that presumably predate the Pentateuch, by eagerly noting similarities between ordinances of the temple and practices in pagan cultures, and thereby suggesting that Christianity has but copied from the more ancient sources.

President Joseph F. Smith had much to say to those who seek to upstage Christianity. Jesus Christ, he taught, Âbeing the fountain of truth, is no imitator. He taught the truth first; it was his before it was given to man.Â Further:

When I read books that are scattered broadcast through the world, throwing discredit upon words and teachings and doctrines of the Lord Jesus Christ, saying that some of the ideas Jesus uttered, truths that he promulgated, have been enunciated before by the ancient philosophers among the heathen nations of the world, I want to tell you that there is not a heathen philosopher that ever lived in all the world from the beginning, that had a truth or enunciated a principle of GodÂs truth that did not receive it from the fountain head, from God himself. . . .

. . . Let it be remembered that Christ was with the Father from the beginning, that the gospel of truth and light existed from the beginning, and is from everlasting to everlasting. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as one God, are the fountain of truth. . . . If we find truth in broken fragments through the ages, it may be set down as an incontrovertible fact that it originated at the fountain, and was given to philosophers, inventors, patriots, reformers, and prophets by the inspiration of God. It came from him through his Son Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost, in the first place, and from no other source. It is eternal.

. . . Men are mere repeaters of what he has taught them. He has voiced no thought originating with man. The teachings of Jesus did not begin with his incarnation; for, like truth, he is eternal. He not only inspired the ancients, from the beginning, but when he came to earth he reiterated eternal, original truth, and added gloriously to the revelations men had uttered. When he returned to the Father, he still took, and does take, an interest in his children and people, by revealing to them new truths, and by inspiring their actions; and, as men grow in the knowledge of God, they shall become more and more like him unto the perfect day, when his knowledge shall cover the earth as the waters cover the deep. (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 30, 395, 398Â400; see also in Journal of Discourses 15:325.)

However, not all forms of religious apostasy began through vicious or nefarious motives. Many false beliefs and practices have devolved over the centuries from a desire on the part of well-meaning individuals to preserve true beliefs and practices. ÂWhat is commonly termed idolatry,Â President Brigham Young pointed out, Âhas arisen from a few sincere men, full of faith and having a little knowledge, urging upon a backsliding people to preserve some customs-to cling to some fashions or figures, to put them in mind of that God with whom their fathers were acquainted, without designing or wishing the people to worship an idol-to worship stocks, stones, beasts, and birds. Idols have been introduced, which are now worshipped, and have been for centuries and thousands of years; but they were not introduced at once. They were introduced to preserve among the people the idea of the true God.Â (In Journal of Discourses 6:194.)

Remnants of the Faith

Knowing what we know concerning God our Father-that he is a personal being, that he has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as our own, that he is an exalted and gloried being, that he was once a man and dwelt on an earth-should we be surprised to find legends and myths concerning gods who have divine powers but human attributes and passions? Knowing that Adam and Seth and Enos and other antedeluvians spoke of the coming of the Messiah and that the Messiah would come to earth as a man but be possessed of the powers of a God, is it too much of a stretch of the imagination to suppose that these early prophets knew also that he would be born of a virgin? Should we then be surprised to find pagan traditions of virgin births and divine humans?

Adam heard the divine voice saying, ÂI am God; I made the world, and men before they were in the fleshÂ (Moses 6:51). That is, men and women in the earliest ages knew of a first estate, a premortal existence. Is it any wonder that several religious traditions should be wedded to an idea of past lives? Inasmuch as the doctrines of rebirth, regeneration, resurrection, and the immortality of the soul were taught to Adam and his posterity, why should we flinch when we discover the doctrines of reincarnation, transmigration of souls, and rebirth in such traditions as Hinduism, Jainism, and Sikhism or when we encounter a people like the ancient Egyptians who are obsessed not with death, as some suppose, but with life after death?

Of particular interest to Latter-day Saints is the resemblance between what goes on in our own temples and events that transpire in the sacred structures of other faiths. In many cases those resemblances may originate with earnest truth seekers who act without authority, even as did Pharaoh, great-grandson of Noah, who, Âbeing a righteous man, established his kingdom and judged his people wisely and justly all his days, seeking earnestly to imitate that order established by the fathers in the first generations, in the days of the first patriarchal reign, even in the reign of Adam, and also of Noah, his fatherÂ (Abr. 1:26).

And what is true of sacred practices and beliefs throughout the ancient non-Christian world is also true in todayÂs modern Christian world. We know there was a great apostasy some years following the deaths of the meridian Apostles and thus that plain and precious truths and priesthood authority were lost. We know that God began the restoration of truths and powers through Joseph Smith and will continue this restoration leading up to and during the Millennium. However, just because Protestants or Catholics do not possess the authority to act in the name of God does not mean they have no truth or that any scriptural interpretation from them is automatically incorrect or corrupt. As we have already suggested, remnants of truth, elements of enlightenment, and aspects of the faith of the former-day Saints may be found in modern Christianity. The Lord loves his children, all of them, and he will reward those who are true to the light they have.

Conclusion

Much of what we know about the present and a significant part of what we anticipate about the future come because of what has been revealed about the past. Ammon taught King Limhi that Âa seer can know of things which are past, and also of things which are to come, and by them shall all things be revealed, or, rather, shall secret things be made manifest, and hidden things shall come to light, and things which are not known shall be made known by themÂ (Mosiah 8:17). It just may be that the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Âchoice seerÂ spoken of by his ancient namesake (2 Ne. 3:7), revealed as much about the past as he did about the future. The past dealings of God with his ancient oracles provide both perspective for the present and prophetic insight for the future.

One of the most important truths made known to Joseph Smith was the dispensation concept, the principle that God has revealed himself and the fulness of his gospel to men and women during designated epochs, eras, or dispensations of time. The head of a dispensation is called to be that time periodÂs preeminent prophetic revealer of God and Christ and the plan of salvation to the world. To such seers and revelators as Enoch and Noah and Abraham and Moses, the God of heaven likely declared, as he did to the head of our own dispensation, that Âthis generation shall have my word through youÂ (D&C 5:10) that is, if the knowledge and power of God are to come to the people of earth during a specific dispensation, they will come through the work and ministry begun by the dispensation head or they will come not at all.

Into that ocean of intelligence we have come to know as the dispensation of the fulness of times flow the rivers of truth and power of earlier dispensations. Those who hold the keys of the priesthood today do so in connection with all those who have received a dispensation at any time from the beginning of creation, and this final dispensation is thereby both a continuation and a culmination of the work and glory of the Father (see D&C 112:30Â32; 128:18, 20). The Prophet thus taught: ÂNow the purpose in Himself in the winding up scene of the last dispensation is that all things pertaining to that dispensation should be conducted precisely in accordance with the preceding dispensations. And again, God purposed in Himself that there should not be an eternal fullness until every dispensation should be fulfilled and gathered together in one, and that all things whatsoever, that should be gathered together in one of those dispensations unto the same fulness and eternal glory, should be in Christ Jesus.Â (Teachings, p. 168.) This work thus fulfills the prophecy of the Apostle Paul, who wrote that in the dispensation of the fulness of times the Lord would gather together all things in one, even in Christ (see Eph. 1:10 and D&C 27:13).

And so we come back to where we began. ChristÂs gospel is eternal. It was delivered to the earthÂs inhabitants in the beginning. It has been preached through the ages by Christian prophets who knew their Lord and sought to be true to divine covenants and ordinances. God loves all men and women and is eager to enlighten them in whatever ways he can. In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints we attend to sacred matters, matters that are ancient and eternal, matters that were discussed and foreordained from before the foundations of the world, matters that will prepare this earth to abide the coming of the King of kings. What the Latter-day Saints believe is what the former-day Saints believed. The doctrine we believe thereby links us to the past and points us to a glorious future.
