Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 3

God the First: The Creator

Everlasting covenant was made between three personages

before the organization of this earth, and relates to their dispensation

of things to men on the earth; these personages, according to

AbrahamÂs record, are called God the first, the Creator; God the second,

the Redeemer; and God the third, the witness or Testator.

-Joseph Smith (Teachings, p. 190)

ÂThree things are necessary,Â said Joseph Smith, Âin order that any rational and intelligent being may exercise faith in God unto life and salvation. First, the idea that he actually exists. Secondly, a correct idea of his character, perfections, and attributes. Thirdly, an actual knowledge that the course of life which he is pursuing is according to his will.Â (Lectures on Faith 3:2Â5; emphasis in original.) Faith, the Prophet taught, cannot be exercised in principles that are false or in that which is unknown (see Alma 32:21; Teachings, p. 58). Faith is the child of knowledge. We cannot exercise faith in God until we know of the existence of God. We must first come to a knowledge of God, then as we learn of him we can exercise faith in him. In so saying, Joseph Smith stood alone, for many within the Christian tradition declared God to be unknowable.

The Key of the Knowledge of God

The key of the knowledge of God is to be had only through the powers of the Melchizedek Priesthood. If the Melchizedek Priesthood is taken from a people, their knowledge of God will be taken also. No more perfect illustration of this principle exists than the description of God found in the creeds of Christendom, as contrasted with the God testified of by those holding the priesthood in Old and New Testament times. The God of scripture is a corporeal and anthropomorphic being who appears face-to-face with his prophets and speaks to them as one man speaks to another. Though our Heavenly Father is worshipped with reverential awe, he is not thought to be unknowable, incomprehensible, or mysterious. The holy priesthood was given to men in this our mortal sphere in order that we might Âenjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of the new covenantÂ (D&C 107:19). This privilege was granted to Adam in the Garden of Eden and subsequently to ÂSeth, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, and all to whom the Priesthood was revealedÂ (Abraham: facsimile no. 2, figure 3). Where the higher or holy priesthood is, there the key of the knowledge of God is also (see D&C 84:19).

Desiring that the righteous residue of his posterity might be brought into the presence of God, Adam gathered them together in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman to instruct and bless them to that end (see D&C 107:53Â57; Teachings, pp. 158Â59). Thus it is that the righteous residue of AdamÂs posterity are gathered to the house of the Lord in our day, that they, like their ancient counterparts, might stand in the divine presence. Jeremiah gave a prophetic description of these events, saying: ÂThis shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; after those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord.Â (Jer. 31:33Â34.)

A God with Body, Parts, and Passions

ÂThat which is without body, parts and passions,Â the Prophet said, Âis nothing. There is no other God in heaven but that God who has flesh and bones.Â (Teachings, p. 181.) The scripture that bears virtually the whole weight of the Christian creeds declaring God to be without corporeality is John 4:24: ÂGod is a spirit.Â Some recent translations have corrected it to read, ÂGod is spirit,Â thereby giving it a meaning similar to such texts as ÂGod is lightÂ (1 Jn. 1:5) or ÂGod is loveÂ (1 Jn. 4:16). Certainly God is Âspirit,Â and he is also ÂlightÂ and ÂloveÂ and any and all other attributes of godliness, but he is not those things alone. His spirit is housed in a tabernacle, his light is a companion to truth, and his love is compatible with the principle of justice. These and all attributes of godliness find their perfect expression in him. Long before modern translators corrected the rendering of John 4:24, Joseph Smith changed it to read: ÂAnd the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth; for the Father seeketh such to worship him. For unto such hath God promised his Spirit. And they who worship him, must worship in spirit and in truth.Â (JST, John 4:25Â26.)

ÂThe teachers of the day say that the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, and they are all in one body and one God,Â observed the Prophet. Yet, ÂJesus prayed that those that the Father had given him out of the world might be made one in them, as they were one [one in spirit, in mind, in purpose]. If I were to testify that the Christian world were wrong on this point, my testimony would be true.Â (Teachings, p. 311.) Joseph SmithÂs argument was based on personal revelation: ÂAny person that had seen the heavens opened knows that there are three personages in the heavens who hold the keys of power, and one presides over allÂ (ibid., p. 312).

ÂThe Father,Â Joseph Smith explained, Âhas a body of flesh and bones as tangible as manÂs; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us.Â (D&C 130:22.) In so saying, not only does the Prophet affirm the corporeal nature of the Father and the Son and that the Holy Ghost is a ÂpersonageÂ of spirit, but he also affirms that they are separate and distinct. ÂI have always declared God to be a distinct personage, Jesus Christ a separate and distinct personage from God the Father, and that the Holy Ghost was a distinct personage and a Spirit: and these three constitute three distinct personages and three Gods,Â the Prophet said. Then he added, ÂIf this is in accordance with the New Testament, lo and behold! we have three Gods anyhow, and they are plural; and who can contradict it?Â (Teachings, p. 370.)

Teaching these principles in the Lectures on Faith, the Prophet said: ÂThere are two personages who constitute the great, matchless, governing, and supreme power over all things, by whom all things were created and made. . . . They are the Father and the Son.Â Joseph Smith left no question about the separate nature of the first two members of the Godhead. He then identified the Father as Âa personage of spirit, glory, and power, possessing all perfection and fullnessÂ and the Son as Âa personage of tabernacleÂ in the likeness of man and in Âthe express image and likeness of the personage of the Father.Â (5:2; see also chapter 34 of the present work.) This expression has caused some to suppose that at the time of these lectures Joseph Smith did not clearly understand that the Father had a body of flesh and bones. However, our study leads us to conclude otherwise. In our judgment what is involved here is simply a matter of emphasis. This lecture appears to be emphasizing the divine nature of the Father, the fact that he is a being of spirit, glory, and power. This is the same concept we read about in John, as discussed previously. The Father is to be worshipped in spirit and truth. In addition, the ProphetÂs expression appears to emphasize the mortal nature of Christ the Son, the fact that while in his second estate he was a being of flesh. In the implementation of the plan of salvation, the defining characteristic of the Son is his tabernacle of flesh, which enables him to accomplish the work to which he was ordained in the councils of heaven.

Abinadi taught essentially the same doctrine with his announcement that Christ was both Father and Son, that the Father and the Son are one God because Âthe flesh [became] subject to the Spirit, . . . the will of the Son being swallowed up in the will of the FatherÂ (Mosiah 15:5, 7). ÂThe flesh,Â meaning Christ, became Âsubject to the Spirit,Â meaning God, or, as Abinadi says in a parallel phrase, Âthe SonÂ became subject Âto the FatherÂ (Mosiah 15:5). Flesh personifies the Son, and Spirit personifies the Father. Thus, each of us, like Christ, obtains salvation when the desires of the flesh are Âswallowed up in the will of the Father.Â

The Fatherhood of God

The revelation of God through Christ in the New Testament is limited to a single concept-the Fatherhood of God. Thus, Christ in virtually every instance referred to Deity as ÂFather,Â Âthe Father,Â or Âour Father.Â Similarly, in addressing Jesus the Father used but one appellation, Âmy Son.Â Christ often referred to himself as Âthe son of man,Â which has caused great confusion among those to whom the key of the knowledge of God has been lost. Many have supposed that this was an admission that Jesus was JosephÂs son. As part of the restoration of all things, however, the knowledge of the gospel as it was had even in the days of Adam has been restored to us, including the following directive given to those of that ancient day: ÂTeach it unto your children, that all men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence; for, in the language of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name, and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ, a righteous Judge, who shall come in the meridian of timeÂ (Moses 6:57). Thus we know-and the Joseph Smith Translation reflects this-that ChristÂs references to himself as the Âson of manÂ should have been rendered ÂSon of Man of HolinessÂ or ÂSon of ManÂ (with capital letters), and that these words constitute his declaration that his Father is indeed a man and in reality a father. Further, it was understood even in the days of Adam that the doctrine of repentance was instituted that we might cleanse ourselves of sin through the atonement of Christ in order that we might return to God and Âdwell in his presence.Â

Our understanding of all gospel principles grows out of our understanding of the doctrine of the Fatherhood of God. The entire Bible-believing world tells us that the declaration in the first chapter of Genesis that man was created in the image and likeness of God (see v. 26) is simply figurative. However, Joseph Smith declared that verse to be literal. Why? Because the scriptures restored through him declared it to be so. ÂIn the image of his own body, male and female, created he them, and blessed them, and called their name AdamÂ (Moses 6:9; emphasis added). We return again and again to the fact that the God of Joseph Smith has a body and thus is not the abstract being spoken of in sectarian creeds but rather has place in time and space. He is a definable being, a personal being, and a loving Father, and as such he can have children who are literally in his image and likeness. Our spirits, which are in the likeness of our physical bodies (see D&C 77:2), were begotten of him in a pre-earth estate. The God of the sectarian creeds is a father only in a metaphorical sense. His creations are ex nihilo, meaning Âout of nothing.Â Other faiths do not share the doctrine of premortal existence with us.

As the idea of a pre-earth life is in our modern day distinctive to Latter-day Saints, so is the doctrine of a corporeal resurrection. The idea that resurrection embraces the inseparable union of body and spirit was restored to us in the Book of Mormon. Resurrection is not defined directly in either the Old or the New Testament. If the joy of life after death has anything to do with being in the presence of God, and yet if God has an undefinable presence, then a corporeal or bodily resurrection would serve no purpose. If the resurrection is not actual and literal, then obviously marriage and the family unit cannot be either. We begin to see that when we rob God of his body we also rob all other gospel principles of their meaning. Thus we stress once again that all gospel principles trace back to the Fatherhood of God.

When the word of God declares that a book of remembrance was kept among the Âchildren of God,Â we understand such language to mean that we are in very deed the children of God, not in a figurative but in a literal sense (see Moses 6:8). When scripture brought forth by the Prophet Joseph Smith says that ÂAdam . . . was the son of God,Â we believe those words to mean precisely what they say (Moses 6:22). When the Lord declares that it is his work and glory Âto bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of manÂ (Moses 1:39), we understand his words to mean that salvation is a family affair.

When the Apostles were taken by death in the meridian dispensation, the key of the knowledge of God was taken with them. Immediately the heavens were declared sealed, prophets became a thing of the past, and God was transformed into an incomprehensible and transcendent being, meaning that in all things he transcended the ability of mortals to comprehend. When God becomes a mystery, the iron rod of his word becomes shrouded in a mist of darkness. No sure or certain path can be known. This makes pure or true faith impossible, for faith cannot be exercised on principles of uncertainty. The truths of salvation can be found only on the tree of everlasting life, not in the dark and miry soils of philosophical speculations. The world loves its own and thus has a high tolerance level for its many systems of worship; after all, if God is unknowable, who can be certain where the truth can be found? That tolerance falls short, however, when it comes to a system of worship that declares the heavens open and testifies of a God who will manifest himself to men and women on earth. The world quickly unites to oppose such a threat. Truth always draws the wrath of error and falsehood. Revelations such as those received by Joseph Smith could not go unopposed.

God Is the Author of All Law

The revelation directing the organization of the Church described God as being Âinfinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God, the framer of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them.Â He it is who created man and woman in his Âown image and in his own likenessÂ and gave them commandments that Âthey should love and serve him, the only living and true God, and that he should be the only being whom they should worshipÂ (D&C 20:17, 18, 19). Joseph Smith stated that God Âis the source from whence proceeds all good; and if man is benefited by law, then certainly, law is good; and if law is good, then law, or the principle of it emanated from God; for God is the source of all good; consequently, then, he was the first Author of law, or the principle of it, to mankindÂ (Teachings, pp. 55Â56). In a marvelous revelation on the nature of both God and man, the Father is described as the source of all light, all life, and the law by which all things are governed (see D&C 88:13). ÂAll kingdoms have a law given,Â we are told, Âand there are many kingdoms; for there is no space in the which there is no kingdom; and there is no kingdom in which there is no space, either a greater or a lesser kingdom. And unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions. All beings who abide not in those conditions are not justified.Â (D&C 88:36Â39.) Further, we are told that God Âcomprehendeth all things, and all things are before him, and all things are round about him; and he is above all things, and in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all things; and all things are by him, and of him, even God, forever and ever. And again, verily I say unto you, he hath given a law unto all things, by which they move in their times and their seasons.Â (D&C 88:41Â42.)

In speaking of premortal times, the Prophet explained that ÂGod himself, finding he was in the midst of spirits and glory, because he was more intelligent, saw proper to institute laws whereby the rest could have a privilege to advance like himselfÂ (Teachings, p. 354). Whereas the God of sectarian religion seeks to be worshipped everlastingly, the God of Joseph Smith seeks instead to exalt his children. The plan of salvation invites Heavenly FatherÂs children to become Âequal in power, and in might, and in dominionÂ with him (D&C 76:95). As Joseph Smith said, ÂGod set the sun, the moon, and the stars in the heavens, and gave them their laws, conditions and bounds, which they cannot pass, except by His commandmentsÂ (Teachings, pp. 197Â98).

Conclusion

We can know God only to the extent that he chooses to allow us to do so. All acceptable knowledge of him must have revelation as its source. Thus the true measure of a prophet rests in his ability not only to teach us of God but to prepare us to find God. Such is the knowledge and testimony that qualifies Joseph Smith to stand at the head of this the greatest of all gospel dispensations. ÂGod himself,Â the Choice Seer testified, Âwas once as we are now, and is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens! That is the great secret. If the veil were rent today, and the great God who holds this world in its orbit, and who upholds all worlds and all things by his power, was to make himself visible,-I say, if you were to see him today, you would see him like a man in form-like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form as a man; for Adam was created in the very fashion, image and likeness of God, and received instruction from, and walked, talked and conversed with him, as one man talks and communes with another.Â (Ibid., p. 345.)
