Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 4

God the Second: The Redeemer

Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth,

and rejoice ye inhabitants thereof, for the Lord is God,

and beside him there is no Savior.

-D&C 76:1

At the heart of the doctrine restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith is the doctrine of Christ. ÂThe fundamental principles of our religion,Â the modern Seer once observed, Âare the testimony of the Apostles and Prophets, concerning Jesus Christ, that He died, was buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven; and all other things which pertain to our religion are only appendages to itÂ (Teachings, p. 121). The reality is that Adam fell and we are subject to the effects of that fall. The glorious news and glad tidings are that Christ our Lord has come to earth, offered himself as a ransom for sin, and made available deliverance from death, hell, and endless torment. We rejoice in the message of redemption that fell from the lips of Old and New Testament prophets. More especially, we exult in the realization that knowledge and truth and light and understanding concerning Jesus Christ-who he was, who he is, and what marvels have come to pass through him-have been delivered to the Latter-day Saints through additional scriptural records and modern prophetic utterances. Like Jacob, we thrill in the mercy, wisdom, goodness, and greatness of the Holy One of Israel. (See 2 Ne. 9:8Â13.)

The Cosmic Christ

There are many voices in the world today-enticing voices, voices that beckon for our attention. On the left we hear the tauntings of the unbelievers, those who decry religion and belittle the simple faith. On the right are the discordant tones of those possessed of excessive zeal, the spiritually unstable ones who strive to be truer than true. Others cry out that there is no God, that all is a product of chance occurences, that men and women are but animals, and that success comes only to the fittest who survive in the jungle of the world. All about us we behold the various Christian denominations, some crying out ÂLo, here is Christ, or thereÂ (Matt. 24:23). Many of these are well-meaning, sincere men and women who earnestly seek to discover and then to know their Savior.

In the midst of the babble of voices and the confusion generated by conflicting claims, Joseph Smith the Prophet stands as the preeminent prophetic revealer of Jesus Christ to the world in this final age of the earthÂs history. By means of the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, Joseph SmithÂs translation of the Bible, the clarifying certitude that comes from prophetic lips, and the power of the Holy Ghost, Latter-day Saints are enabled to know their Lord. Primarily through latter-day revelation in conjunction with the Bible, we testify of the cosmic Christ, of the Lord and Savior whose names and titles are myriad and whose roles are many. We shall now set forth a few of those roles.

So very much confusion exists in the Christian world today in regard to grace and works-what we must do and what only the Savior can do. Some see anything beyond a verbal confession of faith in Christ as a work, a human labor that actually evidences a lack of faith. On the other end of the theological spectrum are those who become so conscious of works that they seem to be almost striving to save themselves. As is often the case, the whole truth takes a road between the two extremes. Especially as found in the Book of Mormon, the gospel covenant consists of two parts-what we must and are expected to do and what things God must do for us, things we could not do for ourselves. Modern revelation states that we are indeed saved by the grace of Christ. We cannot resurrect ourselves any more than we can create ourselves. We cannot change our nature and cause ourselves to become new creatures in Christ without divine assistance. We cannot find contentment in gospel living by willpower, self-control, or personal grit; the peace and joy of gospel living are fruits of the Spirit. On the other hand, we are expected to receive the ordinances of salvation, deny ourselves of ungodliness, and do our very best to keep the commandments all our days. These efforts evidence our willingness to remain in the gospel covenant. Thereafter we learn to rely Âwholly upon the meritsÂ of Christ (2 Ne. 31:19; see also Moro. 6:4), to realize that we are redeemed Âbecause of the righteousness of [our] RedeemerÂ (2 Ne. 2:3), to know that we are in the end saved by the grace of Christ, Âafter all we can doÂ (2 Ne. 25:23). The Saints of God are thus called upon to Âbelieve the gospel and rely upon the merits of Jesus Christ, and be glorified through faith in his nameÂ (D&C 3:20).

The Infinite Atonement

Through Joseph Smith has come the mind-expanding and soul-stirring reality that the atonement of Jesus Christ is infinite in scope. The Atonement is infinite in the sense that it covers all sins with the exception of murder and the sin against the Holy Ghost and thus makes redemption possible for all people (see A of F 1:3). In chapter 2 we discussed briefly the matter of ChristÂs atonement being timeless-it reaches from a distant past to the distant future, and its effects were, are, and will be felt by all on this globe from Adam through the end of the earth. Second, ChristÂs atonement is infinite in that it circumvents the ever-present mortal commonality-physical death. ÂSave it should be an infinite atonement,Â Jacob explained, Âthis corruption could not put on incorruption.Â In such an eventuality, Âthis flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more.Â (2 Ne. 9:7.)

Third, the SaviorÂs atonement is infinite in the sense that he is an infinite being. Jesus was able to do for us what we simply could not have done for ourselves. To begin with, his was a sinless offering, an act performed by one who was Âin all points tempted like as we are, yet without sinÂ (Heb. 4:15). In addition, and perhaps most important, Christ was able to do what he did-to suffer in Gethsemane and on Calvary, as well as to rise from the tomb in glorious immortality-because of who and what he was. ÂTherefore doth my Father love me,Â Jesus said, Âbecause I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down [mortality], and I have power to take it again [immortality]. This commandment have I received of my Father.Â (John 10:17Â18.)

Helaman bore another witness that the Savior Âhath power given unto him from the Father to redeem [people] from their sins because of repentanceÂ (Hel. 5:11). Amulek also bore witness of the Messiah, testifying that Âthere is not any manÂ-meaning a mere mortal, one not possessed of the powers of God-Âthat can sacrifice his own blood which will atone for the sins of another. Now, if a man murdereth, behold will our law, which is just, take the life of his brother? I say unto you, Nay. But the law requireth the life of him who hath murdered; therefore there can be nothing which is short of an infinite atonement which will suffice for the sins of the world.Â Indeed, Âthat great and last sacrifice will be the Son of God, yea, infinite and eternal.Â (Alma 34:11Â12, 14.)

Fourth, the atonement of Christ is infinite in the sense that its influence extends to all the worlds Christ has created. What he creates, he redeems. The gospel of Jesus Christ is Âthe glad tidings . . . [t]hat he came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness; that through him all might be saved whom the Father had put into his power and made by himÂ (D&C 76:40Â42). In speaking to Moses on the mount, God declared: ÂAnd by the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth. And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten. . . . For behold, there are many worlds that have passed awayÂ-that is, gone on to their glory-Âby the word of my power.Â (Moses 1:32Â33, 35.)

In an expression of testimony of the Master, the Prophet affirmed Âthat he lives! For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father-That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God.Â (D&C 76:22Â24.) In a poetic version of these verses from the vision of the glories, Joseph Smith wrote:

And I heard a great voice, bearing record from heavÂn,

HeÂs the Savior, and only begotten of God-

By him, of him, and through him, the worlds were all made,

Even all that career in the heavens so broad,

Whose inhabitants, too, from the first to the last,

Are savÂd by the very same Saviour of ours;

And, of course, are begotten GodÂs daughters and sons,

By the very same truths, and the very same powÂrs.

(ÂThe Answer,Â Times and Seasons 4:82Â83.)

Conclusion

Jesus Christ is the central figure in the doctrine and practice of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He is ÂGod the second, the RedeemerÂ (Teachings, p. 190). We center our worship in and direct our prayers to God the Eternal Father (see 2 Ne. 25:16; Jacob 4:5). God gave commandments to our first parents Âthat they should love and serve him, the only living and true God, and that he should be the only being whom they should worshipÂ (D&C 20:19; see also 18:40; JST, John 4:24). This, as with all things-sermons, testimonies, prayers, and ordinances-we do in the name of Jesus Christ (see 3 Ne. 18:19; Moses 5:8).

We worship Christ the Son as we acknowledge him as the source of truth and redemption, as the light and life of the world, as the way to the Father (see John 14:6; 2 Ne. 25:29; 3 Ne. 11:11). We worship him in that we look to him for deliverance and seek to emulate his matchless life (see D&C 93:11Â20). Truly, as Nephi proclaimed, ÂWe talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ, . . . that our children may know to what source they may look for a remission of their sinsÂ (2 Ne. 25:26). Joseph Smith stands as the preeminent prophetic witness of Christ to this dispensation. Through what the Prophet has made known, we are invited to come unto Christ-to learn of him, to listen to his words, to Âwalk in the meekness of [his] SpiritÂ (D&C 19:23)-and thereby grow into a meaningful spiritual union with that Lord whose we are.
