Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 5

God the Third: The Witness or Testator

The Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones,

but is a personage of Spirit.

Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us.

-D&C 130:22

God the Third is the Holy Ghost, also known as the Witness or Testator. The Holy Ghost is the minister or messenger for the Father and the Son, in whom our worship and the plan of salvation center. His role is to bear record of the first two members of the Godhead. Joseph Smith declared the Holy Ghost to be a spirit man in the image and likeness of Elohim, his Father. The question is often asked among Latter-day Saints concerning the destiny of the Holy Ghost. On this matter the scriptures are silent. Joseph Smith did, however, make the following comment: ÂThe Holy Ghost is yet a spiritual body and waiting to take to himself a bodyÂ (The Words of Joseph Smith, p. 382; capitalization modernized). Thus the Godhead consists of three separate and distinct personages, two of whom have corporeal bodies while one, the Holy Ghost, is a personage of spirit.

In All Ages

The righteous of all ages have enjoyed the companionship of the Holy Ghost. From the Joseph Smith translation of Genesis we learn that from the days of Adam the gospel has been Âdeclared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy GhostÂ (Moses 5:58). Nephi described the Holy Ghost as Âthe gift of God unto all those who diligently seek himÂ and added that such had always been the case Âin times of old.Â He also said that this same gift was to be enjoyed by those to whom Christ would manifest himself during his mortal ministry. Nephi reasoned that the Holy Ghost Âis the same yesterday, to-day, and forever; and the way is prepared for all men from the foundation of the world, if it so be that they repent and come unto him. For he that diligently seeketh shall find; and the mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto them, by the power of the Holy Ghost, as well in these times as in times of old, and as well in times of old as in times to come; wherefore, the course of the Lord is one eternal round.Â (1 Ne. 10:17Â19.) Further, Nephi said that the Holy Ghost Âbeareth recordÂ of the Lamb of God Âfrom the beginning of the worldÂ to his day and from his day Âhenceforth and foreverÂ (1 Ne. 12:18).

Joseph Smith taught that Adam was the first to enjoy the companionship of the Holy Ghost (see Moses 5:9), which gift he retained throughout his life (see also D&C 107:53Â57). As with Adam, Joseph Smith told us, all the holy prophets Âspake as they were inspired by the gift of the Holy GhostÂ (D&C 20:26). That testimony of Christ, he taught, must be held in common by all who have claim on a place in the kingdom of God. ÂNo man can know that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost,Â he said (Teachings, p. 223). In his marvelous revelation on the degrees of glory, we are instructed that in order to enter the celestial kingdom we must first receive the testimony of Jesus, believe on his name, be baptized by proper authority, keep the commandments, be washed and cleansed from sin, and Âreceive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the handsÂ by one who holds that authority (D&C 76:51Â52).

The Priesthood and the Holy Ghost

Without the Holy Ghost there can be no revelation, and without revelation there can be no priesthood, for the priesthood is the authority to speak for God. Having discussed the various orders of the priesthood, the Prophet said: ÂThe Holy Ghost is GodÂs messenger to administer in all those priesthoodsÂ (Teachings, p. 323). Thus we find Moroni saying, ÂAnd after this manner did they [the Apostles of Christ in the New World] ordain priests and teachers, according to the gifts and callings of God unto men; and they ordained them by the power of the Holy Ghost, which was in themÂ (Moro. 3:4). Similarly, the revelation that lays the foundation of the government of the Church in this dispensation states: ÂEvery elder, priest, teacher, or deacon is to be ordained according to the gifts and callings of God unto him; and he is to be ordained by the power of the Holy Ghost, which is in the one who ordains himÂ (D&C 20:60). ÂIt always has been given,Â the Lord explains, Âto the elders of my church from the beginning, and ever shall be, to conduct all meetings as they are directed and guided by the Holy SpiritÂ (D&C 46:2). Teaching this principle, Moroni said: ÂAnd their meetings were conducted by the church after the manner of the workings of the Spirit, and by the power of the Holy Ghost; for as the power of the Holy Ghost led them whether to preach, or to exhort, or to pray, or to supplicate, or to sing, even so it was doneÂ (Moro. 6:9).

Having said that without the Holy Ghost there can be no priesthood, let us now say, conversely, that without the priesthood there can be no gift of the Holy Ghost. This is so simply because the gift of the Holy Ghost can be obtained only by the laying on of hands through the administration of those holding the priesthood. ÂWe believe in the gift of the Holy Ghost being enjoyed now, as much as it was in the ApostlesÂ days,Â the Prophet explained. ÂWe believe that it . . . is necessary to make and to organize the Priesthood, that no man can be called to fill any office in the ministry without it.Â (Teachings, p. 243.)

When John the Baptist restored the Aaronic Priesthood and its keys to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, he explained that it did not possess Âthe power of laying on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost,Â which power they would receive when the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood was restored (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:70, 72.) Those who have been properly baptized by the authority restored by John the Baptist in this dispensation are then to Âreceive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, even as the apostles of oldÂ (D&C 35:6).

The Roles of the Holy Ghost

ÂThere is a difference between the Holy Ghost and the gift of the Holy Ghost,Â Joseph Smith explained.

Cornelius received the Holy Ghost before he was baptized, which was the convincing power of God unto him of the truth of the Gospel, but he could not receive the gift of the Holy Ghost until after he was baptized. Had he not taken this sign or ordinance upon him, the Holy Ghost which convinced him of the truth of God, would have left him. Until he obeyed these ordinances and received the gift of the Holy Ghost, by the laying on of hands, according to the order of God, he could not have healed the sick or commanded an evil spirit to come out of a man, and it obey him; for the spirits might say unto him, as they did to the sons of Sceva: ÂPaul we know and Jesus we know, but who are ye?Â (Teachings, p. 199.)

Men are expected, prior to baptism, to obtain the witness of the Spirit by the power of the Holy Ghost that the restored gospel is true. After baptism and the laying on of hands, we receive the companionship of the Holy Spirit, or the right to its continuous companionship. The first experience could be likened to a flash of light on a dark night, while the second, which follows the laying on of hands, could be likened to a constant torch or light by which one can travel through the darkness of this mortal probation.

The Holy Ghost does not dwell in men in a literal sense. Were that the case, only one person at a time could enjoy that divine presence, which is hardly the case. Because the Holy Ghost is a personage of spirit and also possesses all the powers of the Godhead, he can reveal things and impress them upon the soul in an indelible manner that exceeds even a vision or visitation of the other members of the Godhead. ÂNo member of the Godhead dwells in us in the literal sense of the word, but all of them dwell in us figuratively to the extent that we are like them. If we have Âthe mind of ChristÂ (1 Cor. 2:16), which we receive by the power of the Holy Ghost, then Christ dwells in us. If the love of God abides in our souls, which love is a gift of God that comes by the power of the Holy Ghost, then God dwells in us. In some way beyond our comprehension, all of this is possible by the power of the Holy Ghost.Â (McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, pp. 271Â72; see also p. 70.) In addition, his is the power to sanctify our souls, to baptize with fire, and to edify and enlighten.

Joseph Smith said that Âno man can receive the Holy Ghost without receiving revelations. The Holy Ghost is a revelator.Â (Teachings, p. 328.) Servants of the Lord, the Prophet taught, were to speak by the Holy Ghost: ÂAnd whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvationÂ (D&C 68:4). ÂSpeak the thoughts that I shall put into your hearts, and you shall not be confounded before men; for it shall be given you in the very hour, yea, in the very moment, what ye shall say. But a commandment I give unto you, that ye shall declare whatsoever thing ye declare in my name, in solemnity of heart, in the spirit of meekness, in all things. And I give unto you this promise, that inasmuch as ye do this the Holy Ghost shall be shed forth in bearing record unto all things whatsoever ye shall say.Â (D&C 100:5Â8.) To enjoy the companionship of the Holy Ghost is to enjoy the Spirit of revelation (see D&C 8:2Â3). Those who sincerely and prayerfully seek this knowledge are promised that everything expedient will be revealed to them (see D&C 18:18).

The Holy Ghost is a sanctifier. Because that which is unclean cannot dwell in a kingdom that is celestial or dwell in the presence of the divine (see 3 Ne. 27:19), the whole process of salvation centers in the process of sanctification. In the language of the Book of Mormon, after one has been baptized he must be Âwrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy GhostÂ (Moro. 6:4) in order that his garments be made white, that he might stand pure and spotless before God and no longer Âlook upon sin save it were with abhorrence.Â Such are they who have been prepared to enter Âinto the rest of the Lord.Â (Alma 13:12.)

The Holy Ghost is a teacher. All knowledge that appertains to our salvation must be obtained through the Holy Ghost. The things of the Spirit can be understood only by the Spirit, and they can be taught only by the Spirit (see D&C 50:11Â24). ÂYe are not sent forth to be taught,Â the Savior told the early missionaries of this dispensation, Âbut to teach the children of men the things which I have put into your hands by the power of my Spirit; and ye are to be taught from on high. Sanctify yourselves and ye shall be endowed with power, that ye may give even as I have spoken.Â (D&C 43:15Â16.) Describing the influence of the Holy Ghost as it fell upon him and Oliver Cowdery, the Prophet said: ÂWe were filled with the Holy Ghost, and rejoiced in the God of our salvation. Our minds being now enlightened, we began to have the scriptures laid open to our understandings, and the true meaning and intention of their more mysterious passages revealed unto us in a manner which we never could attain to previously, nor ever before had thought of.Â (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:73Â74.)

The Joseph Smith translation of the Sermon on the Mount and its Book of Mormon equivalent both give a more prominent place to the role of the Holy Ghost as a teacher than do traditional Bible translations. In these restored texts the Savior places the entire sermon in the context of the covenant gospel rather than of an ethical discourse. He immediately introduces the doctrine of baptism and promises those who are baptized with water that he will also baptize them Âwith fire and with the Holy Ghost.Â These he said would Âreceive a remission of their sins.Â Where the King James Version simply says they would be filled, these inspired renderings announce that they would Âbe filled with the Holy Ghost.Â (3 Ne. 12:1Â6; JST Matt. 5:4Â8.)

The title ÂHoly Spirit of PromiseÂ is descriptive of one of the specific functions of the Holy Ghost as a member of the Godhead. It is his role to ratify or approve Âall covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectationsÂ that are to be of Âefficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection from the deadÂ (D&C 132:7). For instance, in order to lay claim to the blessings associated with the holy ordinance of baptism, a proper baptism must have been performed by one holding the necessary authority and accomplished under the direction of the keys or directing power associated with that ordinance. The one being baptized must have complied with the conditions of the ordinance-faith, repentance, and a covenant to endure to the end. When these conditions are properly met, the Holy Ghost, who is the judge of such matters, will place his ratifying seal upon that ordinance, thereby affirming its validity. No promise that is without this seal of the Holy Spirit will be honored. It may be possible for the unworthy to deceive earthly agents of the Lord, but none can do so with the third member of the Godhead. The ultimate manifestation of the Holy Spirit of Promise is in connection with having oneÂs calling and election made sure-that is, receiving Âthe more sure word of prophecy,Â the sacred revelation assuring that an individual is Âsealed up unto eternal lifeÂ (D&C 131:5; see also D&C 88:3Â4 and chapter 34 of the present work).

ÂThe gift of the Holy Ghost,Â in the language of Parley P. Pratt, a loyal disciple of the Prophet Joseph,

quickens all the intellectual faculties, increases, enlarges, expands, and purifies all the natural passions and affections, and adapts them, by the gift of wisdom, to their lawful use. It inspires, develops, cultivates, and matures all the fine-toned sympathies, joys, tastes, kindred feelings, and affections of our nature. It inspires virtue, kindness, goodness, tenderness, gentleness, and charity. It develops beauty of person, form, and features. It tends to health, vigor, animation, and social feeling. It invigorates all the faculties of the physical and intellectual man. It strengthens and gives tone to the nerves. In short, it is, as it were, marrow to the bone, joy to the heart, light to the eyes, music to the ears, and life to the whole being. (Key to the Science of Theology, p. 61.)

Conclusion

When asked by Martin Van Buren, then the president of the United States, how Mormonism differed from other religions of the day, the Prophet Joseph Smith is reported to have said, ÂWe [differ] in mode of baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands.Â All other considerations, the Prophet said, are Âcontained in the gift of the Holy Ghost.Â (History of the Church 4:42.) The ProphetÂs statement suggests that the distinctive characteristic of the LordÂs people-and this would be so in all generations of time-has been the companionship of the Holy Ghost and the attendant manifestation of the gifts of the Spirit. Where that gift and its fruits are found, there the truths and authority of salvation are found; where that gift and its attendant fruits are lacking, there the church and kingdom of God are yet to be established.

Some time after the Prophet JosephÂs death, he appeared to Brigham Young and pleaded:

Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and be sure to keep the Spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right. Be careful and not turn away the small still voice; it will teach them what to do and where to go; it will yield the fruits of the kingdom. Tell the brethren to keep their hearts open to conviction, so that when the Holy Ghost comes to them, their hearts will be ready to receive it. They can tell the spirit of the Lord from all other spirits; it will whisper peace and joy to their souls; it will take malice, hatred, strife and all evil from their hearts; and their whole desire will be to do good, bring forth righteousness and build up the kingdom of God. Tell the brethren if they will follow the spirit of the Lord, they will go right. (Journal History, 23 February 1847.)
