Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 6

The Meaning and Source of Truth

The Spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not.

Wherefore, it speaketh of things as they really are,

and of things as they really will be.

-Jacob 4:13

Joseph Smith taught that we come to earth to be Âadded uponÂ (see Abr. 3:26)-to gain a physical body, to learn to bring our desires and passions under control, to develop eternal relationships, and to increase in light and truth. ÂIn knowledge there is power,Â he explained. ÂGod has more power than all other beings, because he has greater knowledge; and hence he knows how to subject all other beings to Him. He has power over all.Â (Teachings, p. 288.) Further, ÂA man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge, for if he does not get knowledge, he will be brought into captivity by some evil power in the other world, as evil spirits will have more knowledge, and consequently more power than many men who are on the earth.Â It was not, however, the learning of men to which the Prophet referred. Rather, we need Ârevelation to assist us, and give us knowledge of the things of God.Â (Ibid., p. 217.) ÂThe glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth,Â Joseph Smith recorded in May 1833. ÂLight and truth forsake that evil one.Â (D&C 93:36Â37.)

Growing in Truth

In our first estate-a period that lasted for eons-we prepared for life on earth. In that unembodied state we learned by both observation and faith (see Alma 13:3). It was needful in that world that we study and learn, and, from what has been revealed, we presume that the environment was conducive to such learning and growth. Our minds and spirits are thus adapted to learning, open to the acquisition of new insights, and prepared to be taught. The Prophet observed: ÂThe organization of the spiritual and heavenly worlds, and of spiritual and heavenly beings, was agreeable to the most perfect order and harmony: their limits and bounds were fixed irrevocably, and voluntarily subscribed to in their heavenly estate by themselves, and were by our first parents subscribed to upon the earth. Hence the importance of embracing and subscribing to principles of eternal truth by all men upon the earth that expect eternal life.Â (Teachings, p. 325.)

The Prophet Joseph pointed out that truth spans time and eternity, that what is true at the present was true ages ago and will be true eons from now. ÂTruth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to comeÂ (D&C 93:24). In one sense, to grow in truth is to grow in the knowledge of Christ. ÂThe Spirit of truth is of God. I am the Spirit of truthÂ (D&C 93:26), the Master said. We can come to know about the Lord through study. We come to know the Lord only when that study is coupled with faith. Christ did not just bring light into a darkened and fallen world; he is the Light (see 3 Ne. 11:11). He did not just show us the way; he is the Way (see John 14:6). He did not just make the resurrection available; he is the Resurrection (see John 11:25). And Jesus of Nazareth did not just reveal the truth and teach the truth; he is the Truth (see John 14:6). To possess such truth is to possess a knowledge of eternal things, for, as Jacob proclaimed, Âthe Spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not. Wherefore, it speaketh of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be; wherefore, these things are manifested unto us plainly, for the salvation of our souls.Â (Jacob 4:13.)

Surely we are put here on earth to learn as much as we can in the sciences, in the arts, in languages, in history and foreign culture, and so on. And, to the degree that we become competent in some of these fields, we are better able to present the gospel and its truths in a manner that would be acceptable to more and more people.

Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand;

Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms-

That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you (D&C 88:78Â80; compare 90:15; 93:53).

But all truths are not of equal worth. It is valuable to know of gravity or of the laws of motion; it is vital to know of the reality of a Redeemer. It is helpful to know the laws of thermodynamics; it is essential to know how to repent and call upon God in the name of his Son for forgiveness. Further, some things are relative; their composition or our perspective on them may change with new discoveries or new directions. Social trends and fads or novel worldviews may constitute such Âtruths.Â Other things are absolute: they are forever fixed, immutable, and unchangeable. Their innate truthfulness is not determined by popularity or consensus. Policies, procedures, and practices may be altered to fit the needs of a changing world and a living Church: ÂThis is the principle on which the government of heaven is conducted-by revelation adapted to the circumstances in which the children of the kingdom are placedÂ (Teachings, p. 256). But the doctrines and precepts within the plan of salvation-the saving truths, ordinances, and powers by which the world was created, by which men and women are regenerated and renewed in Christ, and by which they are raised from the dead and readied for a kingdom of glory-are absolute and eternal.

We may for the time being value the discoveries of science and the impressions of men, but we hold tenaciously to the revealed word. Hugh Nibley has reminded us:

The words of the prophets cannot be held to the tentative and defective tests that men have devised for them. Science, philosophy, and common sense all have a right to their day in court. But the last word does not lie with them. Every time men in their wisdom have come forth with the last word, other words have promptly followed. The last word is a testimony of the gospel that comes only by direct revelation. Our Father in heaven speaks it, and if it were in perfect agreement with the science of today, it would surely be out of line with the science of tomorrow. Let us not, therefore, seek to hold God to the learned opinions of the moment when he speaks the language of eternity. (The World and the Prophets, p. 134.)

Breadth and Certitude

The Prophet Joseph Smith struck the delicate balance between a willing acceptance of truth as found in the world and the Spirit-motivated certitude associated with knowing eternal things. On the one hand, the Prophet had a mind and heart that, like EnochÂs, Âswelled wide as eternityÂ (Moses 7:41). He sought out and acknowledged and welcomed truth, whatever its source. ÂHave the Presbyterians any truth?Â he asked. ÂYes. Have the Baptists, Methodists, etc., any truth? Yes. They all have a little truth mixed with error. We should gather all the good and true principles in the world and treasure them up, or we shall not come out true ÂMormons.ÂÂ (Teachings, p. 316.) ÂOne of the grand fundamental principles of ÂMormonismÂ is to receive truth, let it come from whence it mayÂ (ibid., p. 313). Coming into the faith of the Latter-day Saints did not require one to jettison truth; instead, coming to the fulness of truth resulted in an even deeper appreciation for all truth. ÂWe donÂt ask any people to throw away any good they have got; we only ask them to come and get more. What if all the world should embrace this Gospel? They would then see eye to eye, and the blessings of God would be poured out upon the people, which is the desire of my whole soul.Â (Ibid., p. 275.)

On the other hand, Joseph Smith was bold to testify that the work that had come through him was true, of God, and absolutely essential to the salvation of all men and women. Of his own experience in the Sacred Grove, he affirmed: ÂI had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two Personages, and they did in reality speak to me. . . . I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation.Â (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:25.) The Prophet exulted: ÂTruth is ÂMormonism.Â God is the author of it. He is our shield. It is by Him we received our birth. It was by His voice that we were called to a dispensation of His Gospel in the beginning of the fullness of times. It was by Him we received the Book of Mormon; and it is by Him that we remain unto this day; and by Him we shall remain, if it shall be for our glory.Â (Teachings, p. 139.)

Joseph knew that although truth from all ways of life is to be cherished, there is in reality Âone Lord, one faith, one baptismÂ (Eph. 4:5). In his preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord referred to the restored church as Âthe only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth, with which I, the Lord, am well pleasedÂ (D&C 1:30). Likewise, in a revelation to Sidney Rigdon, the Lord declared: ÂAnd there are none that doeth good except those who are ready to receive the fulness of my gospel, which I have sent forth unto this generationÂ (D&C 35:12). After speaking of the power of the light of Christ to lead men and women to the covenant gospel, the Savior stated: ÂAnd the whole world lieth in sin, and groaneth under darkness and under the bondage of sin. And by this you may know they are under the bondage of sin, because they come not unto me.Â (D&C 84:49Â50.) In short, the Prophet and the Saints knew and testified that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was the LordÂs Church, that it was the custodian of the fulness of the everlasting gospel, and that it was preparing a people for the second coming of the Son of Man.

The doctrine of the Âonly true and living churchÂ surely led to dissension and difficulties for the early Saints, just as it does in our own day. ÂShould we not then make one accommodation,Â a modern Apostle asked,

and set this doctrine aside? Would it not be better to have more accept what would be left of the gospel than the relatively few who are converted now? . . .

Some have recommended that we confine ourselves strictly to evidences of the gospel: happy family life, and temperate living, and so on.

Could we not use the words better or best? The word only really isnÂt the most appealing way to begin a discussion of the gospel.

If we thought only in terms of diplomacy or popularity, surely we should change our course.

But we must hold tightly to it even though some turn away. . . .

We know there are decent, respectable, humble people in many churches, Christian and otherwise. In turn, sadly enough, there are so-called Latter-day Saints who by comparison are not as worthy, for they do not keep their covenants.

But it is not a matter of comparing individuals. We are not baptized collectively, nor will we be judged collectively.

Good conduct without the ordinances of the gospel will neither redeem nor exalt mankind; covenants and the ordinances are essential. We are required to teach the doctrines, even the unpopular ones.

Yield on this doctrine, and you cannot justify the Restoration. The doctrine is true; it is logical. The opposite is not. (Boyd K. Packer, in Conference Report, October 1985, pp. 104, 105.)

President Gordon B. Hinckley sounded a similar warning: ÂIf the Latter-day Saints, as individuals, ever lose that certitude, the Church will dwindle as so many other churches have.Â He then added a note of hopeful optimism: ÂBut I have no fear of that. I am confident that an ever-enlarging membership will seek for and find that personal conviction which we call testimony, which comes by the power of the Holy Ghost, and which can weather the storms of adversity.Â (Faith, the Essence of True Religion, pp. 5Â6.)

Learning by Faith

We learn many of the things pertaining to this world by trial and experience. Through the medium of the physical senses, we grasp realities because of what we touch and hear and see and taste and smell. These things we know. The message of the Restoration is that the things of God may likewise be known, albeit through different senses, but known ever so surely. ÂThe things of God are of deep import,Â the Prophet wrote from Liberty Jail, Âand time, and experience, and careful and ponderous and solemn thoughts can only find them outÂ (Teachings, p. 137).

There is a discipline by which we come to understand the temporal, and there is a discipline by which we come to understand the spiritual. The two disciplines are related but are acquired in different ways. The Prophet knew from experience and instructed the Saints that coming to understand the things of God opens one to a deeper appreciation of all worthwhile endeavors. ÂWe consider that God has created man with a mind capable of instruction, and a faculty which may be enlarged in proportion to the heed and diligence given to the light communicated from heaven to the intellect; and that the nearer man approaches perfection, the clearer are his views, and the greater his enjoyments, till he has overcome the evils of his life and lost every desire for sin; and like the ancients, arrives at that point of faith where he is wrapped in the power and glory of his Maker and is caught up to dwell with HimÂ (ibid., p. 51.) To the School of the Prophets, Joseph Smith taught that Âafter any portion of the human family are made acquainted with the important fact that there is a God, who has created and does uphold all things, the extent of their knowledge respecting his character and glory will depend upon their diligence and faithfulness in seeking after himÂ (Lectures on Faith 2:55).

Truth is the foundation for faith, and faith is built on evidence. Faith does not come by signs or outward manifestations alone (see D&C 63:7Â12), though tangible evidences may fan the flame of oneÂs faith. Faith comes, first of all, by hearing or encountering the word of God as that word of God is delivered by the LordÂs legal administrators, a testimony that Âis always attended by the Spirit of prophecy and revelationÂ (Teachings, p. 148; see also Rom. 10:17). Internal evidence comes by and through the power of the Spirit, for, as the Apostle Paul wrote, the things of God are known only by the power of the Spirit of God (see 1 Cor. 2:11Â14) that is, God and his ways stand revealed or they remain forever unknown. Alma knew, for example, not because he was struck down by an angel but because of the spirit of revelation that came thereafter through his own fasting and prayer (see Alma 5:45Â47). Brigham Young bore witness of his own conversion:

If all the talent, tact, wisdom, and refinement of the world had been sent to me with the Book of Mormon, and had declared, in the most exalted of earthly eloquence, the truth of it, undertaking to prove it by learning and worldly wisdom, they would have been to me like the smoke which arises only to vanish away. But when I saw a man without eloquence, or talents for public speaking, who could only say, ÂI know, by the power of the Holy Ghost, that the Book of Mormon is true, that Joseph Smith is a Prophet of the Lord,Â the Holy Ghost proceeding from that individual illuminated my understanding. . . . I knew for myself that the testimony of the man was true. (In Journal of Discourses 1:90.)

So often, acquiring spiritual truths is much less a process of learning than of relearning or recognizing. ÂMy sheep hear my voiceÂ (John 10:27; compare Mosiah 26:21), the Good Shepherd explained. The early missionaries of this dispensation were told: ÂYe are called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect; for mine elect hear my voice and harden not their heartsÂ (D&C 29:7). President Joseph F. Smith, nephew of the Prophet Joseph, wrote: ÂAll those salient truths which come home so forcibly to the head and heart seem but the awakening of the memories of the spirit. Can we know anything here that we did not know before we came? . . . [I]n coming here, we forgot all, that our agency might be free indeed, to choose good or evil, that we might merit the reward of our own choice and conduct. But by the power of the Spirit, in the redemption of Christ, through obedience, we often catch a spark from the awakened memories of the immortal soul, which lights up our whole being as with the glory of our former home.Â (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 13Â14.) At one time, Elder John Taylor instructed a woman concerning where she came from, why she was here, and where she was going after death. As pertaining to this life, she was told that she would be Âsubject to sickness, pain, tears, mourning, sorrow and death. But when truth shall touch the cords of your heart they will vibrate; then intelligence shall illuminate your mind, and shed its lustre in your soul, and you shall begin to understand the things you once knew, but which had gone from you; you shall then begin to understand and know the object of your creation.Â (In Lundwall, The Vision, p. 147.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that faith has its own type of discipline. The discipline of faith, the concentrated and consecrated effort to become single to God, has its own reward, a reward that includes the expansion of the mind and the acquisition of saving truth. In a revelation given in Kirtland, Ohio, after instructing the Saints to call a solemn assembly the Lord continued: ÂAnd as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; . . . seek learning, even by study and also by faithÂ (D&C 88:118). We note that the counsel to seek learning out of the best books is prefaced by the negative clause, ÂAnd as all have not faith . . .Â (emphasis added). One wonders whether the Master intended something like the following: Since all do not have sufficient faith, then they must seek learning by study, or the use of the rational processes alone. In other words, if all did have the requisite faith, then what? Perhaps learning by studying from the best books would then be greatly enhanced by revelation. Honest truth seekers would learn things in this way that they could not know otherwise.

The Choice Seer pointed out that Âthe best way to obtain truth and wisdom is not to ask it from books, but to go to God in prayer, and obtain divine teachingÂ (Teachings, p. 191). It is surely in this same context that another of the ProphetÂs statements finds meaning: ÂCould you gaze into heaven five minutes,Â he declared, Âyou would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subjectÂ of life after death (ibid., p. 324). ÂI believe in study,Â President Marion G. Romney stated. ÂI believe that men learn much through study. As a matter of fact, it has been my observation that they learn little concerning things as they are, as they were, or as they are to come without study. I also believe, however, and know, that learning by study is greatly accelerated by faith.Â (Learning for the Eternities, p. 72.)

As a prophetic commentary upon this passage in D&C 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants, President Harold B. Lee expressed the following: ÂThe acquiring of knowledge by faith is no easy road to learning. It will demand strenuous effort and continual striving by faith. In short, learning by faith is no task for a lazy man. Someone has said, in effect, that, Âsuch a process requires the bending of the whole soul, the calling up from the depths of the human mind and linking the person with God. The right connection must be formed; then only comes knowledge by faith, a kind of knowledge that goes beyond secular learning, that reaches into the realms of the unknown and makes those who follow that course great in the sight of the Lord.ÂÂ (ÂBe Loyal to the Royal Within You,Â p. 91.) On another occasion, President Lee taught that Âlearning by faith requires the bending of the whole soul through worthy living to become attuned to the Holy Spirit of the Lord, the calling up from the depths of oneÂs own mental searching, and the linking of our own efforts to receive the true witness of the SpiritÂ (The Teachings of Harold B. Lee, pp. 92Â93.)

Learning by faith seems to entail something else as well. An episode in the Book of Mormon highlights a very important principle. ÂNow it came to pass,Â Mormon writes, Âthat there were many of the rising generation that could not understand the words of king Benjamin, being little children at the time he spake unto his people; and they did not believe the tradition of their fathers. They did not believe what had been said concerning the resurrection of the dead, neither did they believe concerning the coming of Christ.Â And now note this powerful statement: ÂAnd now because of their unbelief they could not understand the word of God; and their hearts were hardened.Â (Mosiah 26:1Â3.) Because of their unbelief-their refusal to believe, to accept the true but unseen, to surrender and yield to God-they denied themselves the right to understanding. ÂMen are in the habit,Â the Prophet observed, Âwhen the truth is exhibited by the servants of God, of saying, All is mystery; they have spoken in parables, and, therefore, are not to be understood. It is true they have eyes to see, and see not, but none are so blind as those who will not see.Â (Teachings, p. 96.) One who approaches the reading of the Book of Mormon, for example, with a cynical eye is not likely to mine its doctrinal pearls or to gain a witness of its truthfulness; there must be a willful suspension of disbelief, an inclination to accept the truth when confronted with it, and an openness to the possibility that something just might be true.

A modern revelation thus counsels us to Âsearch diligently, pray always, and be believing,Â with the promise that all things shall thereafter work together for our good (D&C 90:24; emphasis added; compare 100:15; Rom. 8:28). The prophets have taught that neither ignorance nor blind obedience add strength to the kingdom. Instead, the Omniscient One simply asks of his Saints that they believe and that they be willing to trust in him, in his plan, and in those who direct the destiny of his church. Some knowledge may come by study, but intelligence or the glory of God requires Âdiligence and obedienceÂ (D&C 130:19). Purity, patience, and humility-not intellect alone-are the prime requisites for the knowledge of God. Knowledge that can be obtained independent of purity or humility is without the power of salvation. Only that knowledge that comes from God through the medium of the Holy Spirit has the power to sanctify the soul and prepare one to stand in the divine presence. In a revelation to President Brigham Young, the Savior explained: ÂLet him that is ignorant learn wisdom by humbling himself and calling upon the Lord his God, that his eyes may be opened that he may see, and his ears opened that he may hearÂ (D&C 136:32). Such is the Spirit of truth, a spirit which Âthe world cannot receiveÂ (John 14:17). Truly, those who keep the LordÂs commandments receive light and truth, until they are, at that Âperfect dayÂ we know as the resurrection, glorified in truth and know all things (D&C 50:24; see also 93:28).

Conclusion

Joseph Smith, an unlearned farm boy, was called of God and ordained to restore the truths of salvation to the earth. His strength and his trust were in his Master, for in him is all power and knowledge. The Prophet stands as a mighty illustration of how knowledge comes. No one, save Jesus only, can match him in regard to knowledge that saves and exalts human souls. His understanding came not from university courses, not from formal theological training, not from other men, but rather from God in heaven. The head of this dispensation was an inquirer after truth, a searcher, and a delver, one who studied and learned of things of this earth. But he also knew the source of timeless and everlasting verities. The restored gospel of Jesus Christ contains the truths and powers needed to instruct and edify and empower men and women, to make of earth a heaven and of man a god. The religion of Jesus Christ is built on truth, diamond truth, infinite and eternal and absolute truth. Such truth-that which unillumined eye has not seen nor uninspired ear heard (see 1 Cor. 2:9)-cannot be discovered in laboratories or made known through surveys. Elder Bruce R. McConkie testified:

True religion deals with spiritual things. We do not come to a knowledge of God and his laws through intellectuality, or by research, or by reason. . . .

. . . When contrasted with spiritual endowments, [intellectual accomplishments] are of but slight and passing worth. From an eternal perspective what each of us needs is a Ph.D. in faith and righteousness. The things that will profit us everlastingly are not the power to reason, but the ability to receive revelation; not the truths learned by study, but the knowledge gained by faith; not what we know about the things of the world, but our knowledge of God and his laws. (In Conference Report, April 1971, p. 99.)

The members of the household of faith, the people of the covenant, do not know all things, for there are Âmany great and important thingsÂ yet to be revealed (A of F 1:9). But we know what we know. Many vital matters have been revealed, and those things we cherish and preach with certitude. They are given to bless and uplift the world. ÂIf I esteem mankind to be in error,Â the Mormon Prophet noted, Âshall I bear them down? No. I will lift them up, and in their own way too, if I cannot persuade them my way is better; and I will not seek to compel any man to believe as I do, only by the force of reasoning, for truth will cut its own way.Â (Teachings, p. 313.)
