Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 7

The Nature of Man

Ye were also in the beginning with the Father; that which is Spirit,

even the Spirit of truth; . . . For man is spirit.

-D&C 93:23, 33

The natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam,

and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the

Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man.

-Mosiah 3:19

What is the nature of man? Is he prone to choose the right, serve others, and make noble contributions to society? Or, on the other hand, is man a depraved creature, a sinful infidel who seeks only the gratification of the flesh? Is he or she prone to promote self, oppress others, and yield to the enticements of the carnal, sensual, and devilish? In short, what is man? Is he a being prone to good, or is he prone to evil? There are proponents on both sides of this issue. Some Latter-day Saints contend that Joseph SmithÂs view of man was positive-that man is a child of God and thus has the capacity to become as God is. Others point to the many scriptures that say all are fallen, all are lost as a result of the actions of our first parents. Which is it? Many Latter-day Saints have not grown up into the length and breadth of the Prophet JosephÂs teachings on this matter. To resolve this dilemma, we must first recognize that some prophetic utterances speak of manÂs eternal nature while others speak of his mortal or fallen nature. In this chapter we shall consider both sides of this equation and rejoice in the clarifying light that has come through the message of the restored gospel.

Eternal Man

The Lord revealed through Joseph Smith that man is an eternal being. The Prophet Joseph declared that the intelligence of man Âis not a created being; it existed from eternity, and will exist to eternity. Anything created cannot be eternal.Â (Teachings, p. 158; see also p. 181.) In his marvelous King Follett discourse delivered less than three months before his martyrdom, the Prophet said:

We say that God is a self-existent being. Who told you so? It is correct enough; but how did it get into your heads? Who told you that man did not exist in like manner upon the same principles? Man does exist upon the same principles. . . .

The mind or the intelligence which man possesses is co-equal [meaning coeternal or coeval] with God himself. . . .

. . . The intelligence of spirits had no beginning, neither will it have an end. . . . There never was a time when there were not spirits. . . .

. . . I take my ring from my finger and liken it unto the mind of man-the immortal part, because it has no beginning. Suppose you cut it in two; then it has a beginning and an end; but join it again, and it constitutes one eternal round. So with the spirit of man. (Teachings, pp. 352Â54.)

More specifically, the revelations set forth the profound truth that men and women Âwere also in the beginning with the Father; that which is Spirit, even the Spirit of truthÂ (D&C 93:23). During the administration of President Joseph F. Smith, an official doctrinal pronouncement by the First Presidency stated that all men and women are in the similitude of the universal Father and Mother, and are literally the sons and daughters of Deity. Further, ÂThe doctrine of the pre-existence,-revealed so plainly, particularly in latter days, pours a wonderful flood of light upon the otherwise mysterious problem of manÂs origin. It shows that man, as a spirit, was begotten and born of heavenly parents, and reared to maturity in the eternal mansions of the Father, prior to coming upon the earth in a temporal body to undergo an experience in mortality. It teaches that all men existed in the spirit before any man existed in the flesh, and that all who have inhabited the earth since Adam have taken bodies and become souls in like manner.Â (In Clark, Messages of the First Presidency 4:203, 205.)

There is much discussion and debate in the world today about gender and sexuality. Some claim that a gender disorientation takes place because their body and spirit do not agree on their specific gender. This, however, is nonsense. We were male and female even before we were born. This dimension of our nature and identity is not alone a physiological phenomenon. Elder James E. Talmage, building upon those elements of truth restored in our day, wrote:

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints affirms as reasonable, scriptural, and true, the doctrine of the eternity of sex among the children of God. The distinction between male and female is no condition peculiar to the relatively brief period of mortal life; it was an essential characteristic of our pre-existent state, even as it shall continue after death, in both the disembodied and resurrected states.

That birth or even its antecedent, conception, in no wise marks the creation of a being who before that event did not exist, is abundantly attested by the revealed word; it is positively declared that every child born to earth lived as an individual spirit, male or female, in the primeval world. There is no accident or chance, due to purely physical conditions, by which the sex of the unborn is determined; the body takes form as male or female according to the sex of the spirit whose appointment it is to tenant that body as a tabernacle formed of the elements of earth, through which means alone the individual may enter upon the indispensible course of human experience, probation, and training. (ÂThe Eternity of Sex,Â p. 600.)

Being gods in embryo means that the attributes, powers, and capacities possessed by our Father and Mother in heaven have been transmitted to us; they are a part of us. ÂWe believe that we are the offspring of our Father in heaven,Â President Lorenzo Snow observed, Âand that we possess in our spiritual organizations the same capabilities, powers and faculties that our Father possesses, although in an infantile state, requiring to pass through a certain course or ordeal by which they will be developed and improved according to the heed we give to the principles we have receivedÂ (in Journal of Discourses 14:300; see also p. 302.) Thus there is a sense in which we might say that men and women, being spiritual heirs to godhood, are good by nature; that is, they are good because they are related to and products of the Highest Good. God is good, even the embodiment and personification of all that is noble, upright, and edifying, and we are from him.

Lorenzo Snow set forth this mighty truth-gleaned from the teachings of Joseph Smith-that men and women are in the lineage of the gods. In responding to the Apostle John regarding JohnÂs statement that we may become the sons and daughters of God (see 1 Jn. 3:1Â3), President Snow wrote:

Dear Brother:

Hast thou not been unwisely bold,

ManÂs destiny to thus unfold?

To raise, promote such high desire,

Such vast ambition thus inspire?

Still, Âtis no phantom that we trace

ManÂs ultimatum in lifeÂs race;

This royal path has long been trod

By righteous men, each now a God:

As AbraÂm, Isaac, Jacob, too,

First babes, then men-to gods they grew.

As man now is, our God once was;

As now God is, so man may be,-

Which doth unfold manÂs destiny.

For John declares: When Christ we see

Like unto him weÂll truly be.

And he who has this hope within,

Will purify himself from sin.

Who keep this object grand in view,

To folly, sin, will bid adieu,

Nor wallow in the mire anew;

Nor ever seek to carve his name

High on the shaft of worldly fame;

But here his ultimatum trace:

The head of all his spirit-race.

Ah, well, that taught by you, dear Paul,

Though much amazed, we see it all;

Our Father God, has opeÂd our eyes,

We cannot view it otherwise.

The boy, like to his father grown,

Has but attained unto his own;

To grow to sire from state of son,

Is not Âgainst NatureÂs course to run.

A son of God, like God to be,

Would not be robbing Deity;

And he who has this hope within,

Will purify himself from sin.

YouÂre right, St. John, supremely right:

WhoeÂer essays to climb this height,

Will cleanse himself of sin entire-

Or else tÂwere needless to aspire.

(The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow, pp. 8Â9.)

Those who contend that man is basically good and that his inherent inclination is to choose righteousness enjoy quoting a statement from President Brigham Young: ÂIt is fully proved in all the revelations that God has ever given to mankind that they naturally love and admire righteousness, justice and truth more than they do evil. . . . Paul says, in his Epistle to the Corinthians, ÂBut the natural man receiveth not the things of God,Â but I say it is the unnatural Âman that receiveth not the things of God.Â . . . That which was, is, and will continue to endure is more natural than that which will pass away and be no more. The natural man is of God.Â (In Journal of Discourses 9:305.) In light of a belief in human depravity held by so many in the nineteenth century, there is no question that the doctrines of the Restoration were as a refreshing breeze in a dry and arid spiritual climate. The revealed word that God had forgiven AdamÂs transgression, as well as the corollary principle that little children who die before the age of accountability are saved-these beliefs served to set the Latter-day Saints apart from much of the Christian world and certainly painted a more positive and optimistic picture in regard to the nature of man. Obviously President Young is using the phrase Ânatural manÂ differently than did King Benjamin (see Mosiah 3:19) or the Apostle Paul (see 1 Cor. 2:14). His reference is to the spirit of man, the willing and striving eternal agent who is a child of God. His point is a good one: man can choose good as well as evil and can, through the proper exercise of his God-given moral agency, become a spiritual man or woman before the Almighty.

Fallen Man

And yet the spirit, the eternal part of us, can be and is influenced by our fallen nature, our flesh. ÂNow, I want to tell you,Â President Young pointed out, Âthat [Satan] does not hold any power over man, only so far as the body overcomes the spirit that is in a man, through yielding to the spirit of evil. The spirit that the Lord puts into a tabernacle of flesh, is under the dictation of the Lord Almighty; but the spirit and body are united in order that the spirit may have a tabernacle, and be exalted; and the spirit is influenced by the body, and the body by the spirit. In the first place the spirit is pure, and under the special control and influence of the Lord, but the body is . . . under the mighty influence of that fallen nature that is of the earth.Â (In Journal of Discourses 2:255Â56.) Hence the debate between those who argue for manÂs nobility and those who argue for manÂs ignobility is resolved by asking the question, With which nature do we concern ourselves? Man is basically good, or at least his eternal nature is. Yet man is basically fallen, or at least his mortal nature is.

We know that because Adam and Eve transgressed by partaking of the forbidden fruit, they were cast from the Garden of Eden and from the presence of the Lord, which means spiritual death. As a result came blood, sweat, toil, opposition, bodily decay, and finally physical death. Even though the Fall was a vital part of the great plan of the Eternal God-as much a foreordained act as ChristÂs intercession-our state, including our relationship to and contact with God, changed dramatically. Early in the Nephite record, Lehi Âspake concerning the prophets, how great a number had testified of . . . [the] Redeemer of the world. Wherefore, all mankind were in a lost and in a fallen state, and ever would be save they should rely on this Redeemer.Â (1 Ne. 10:5Â6.)

Joseph Smith wrote to John Wentworth, ÂWe believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for AdamÂs transgressionÂ (A of F 1:2). The Lord affirms this principle in this statement to Adam: ÂI have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of EdenÂ (Moses 6:53). This declaration must, however, be understood in the proper doctrinal context. Although God forgave our first parents their transgression, and although there is no Âoriginal sinÂ entailed upon Adam and EveÂs children, and although Âthe Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the childrenÂ (Moses 6:54), we must not minimize the effects of the Fall.

To say that we are not condemned by the fall of Adam is not to say that we are unaffected by it. Jehovah explained to Adam, ÂInasmuch as thy children are conceived in sin, even so when they begin to grow up, sin conceiveth in their hearts, and they taste the bitter, that they may know to prize the goodÂ (Moses 6:55; emphasis added). Joseph Smith did not believe, as John Calvin did, in the moral depravity of humanity. He did not believe, as Martin Luther did, that human beings, because of intrinsic carnality and depravity, do not even have the power to choose good over evil. And he did not believe that children are born in sin, that they inherit the so-called sin of Adam either by sexual union or by birth. Rather, children are conceived in sin, meaning first that they are conceived into a world of sin and second that conception is the vehicle by which the effects of the Fall (not the original sin, which God has forgiven) are transmitted to Adam and EveÂs posterity. To be sure, there is no sin in sexual union within the bonds of marriage, nor is conception itself sinful. Rather, through conception the fallen nature-mortality, what the scriptures call the flesh-originates; through the process of becoming mortal one inherits the effects of the fall of Adam-both physical and spiritual.

Thus to say that men and women are not punished for the transgression of Adam is not to say that we are not subject to or affected by it. In fact, Lehi taught Jacob that in the beginning God Âgave commandment that all men must repent; for he showed unto all men that they were lost, because of the transgression of their parentsÂ (2 Ne. 2:21; compare Alma 22:14). Thus we all need to repent, since we all have the ability and propensity to sin because we inherited Adam and EveÂs fallen nature. ÂWe know that thou art holy,Â the brother of Jared confessed to the Almighty, Âand dwellest in the heavens, and that we are unworthy before thee; because of the fall our natures have become evil continually; nevertheless, O Lord, thou hast given us a commandment that we must call upon thee, that from thee we may receive according to our desiresÂ (Ether 3:2).

Again, conception, which clothes us in the flesh, is the mechanism of transmission and the means by which Adam and EveÂs fallen nature (both physical and spiritual death) is transferred from generation to generation. The propensity for and susceptibility to sin are implanted in our nature at conception, just as death is. Both death and sin are present only as potentialities at conception, and therefore neither is fully evident at birth. Death and sin do, however, become actual parts of our nature as we grow up. Sin comes spontaneously, just as death does. In the case of little children, responsibility for the results of this fallen nature (sinful actions and dispositions) are held in abeyance by virtue of the Atonement until they reach the age of accountability. When children reach the time of accountability, however, they become subject to spiritual death and must thereafter repent and come unto Christ by covenant and through the ordinances of the gospel.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie summarized the effects of the Fall as follows:

Adam fell. We know that this fall came because of transgression, and that Adam broke the law of God, became mortal, and was thus subject to sin and disease and all the ills of mortality. We know that the effects of his fall passed upon all his posterity; all inherited a fallen state, a state of mortality, a state in which spiritual and temporal death prevail. In this state all men sin. All are lost. All are fallen. All are cut off from the presence of God. . . . Such a way of life is inherent in this mortal existence. . . . Death entered the world by means of AdamÂs fall-death of two kinds, temporal and spiritual. Temporal death passes upon all men when they depart this mortal life. It is then that the eternal spirit steps out of its earthly tenement, to take up an abode in a realm where spirits are assigned, to await the day of their resurrection. Spiritual death passes upon all men when they become accountable for their sins. Being thus subject to sin they die spiritually; they die as pertaining to the things of the Spirit; they die as pertaining to the things of righteousness; they are cast out of the presence of God. It is of such men that the scriptures speak when they say that the natural man is an enemy to God. (The Promised Messiah, pp. 244, 349Â50.)

ÂI have learned in my travels,Â the Prophet Joseph Smith observed, Âthat man is treacherous and selfish, but few exceptedÂ (Teachings, p. 30). ÂMen have been ever prone to apostasy,Â Elder John Taylor pointed out; Âour fallen nature is at enmity with a godly life.Â (The Mediation and Atonement, p. 197.)

In setting forth the doctrine of atonement, King Benjamin taught: ÂThe natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the LordÂ (Mosiah 3:19). What is King Benjamin saying about humanity? What is the natural man, and how may he be characterized? Simply stated, natural men and women are unregenerated beings who remain in their fallen condition, living without God and godliness in the world. They are unredeemed creatures without comfort, beings who live by their own light. On the one hand, natural men and women may be people bent on lechery and lasciviousness; they may love Satan more than God and therefore be Âcarnal, sensual, and devilishÂ (Moses 5:13). After having preached to and pleaded with his son Corianton and having taught him that Âwickedness never was happiness,Â Alma said, ÂAnd now, my son, all men that are in a state of nature, or I would say, in a carnal state, are in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity.Â Now note AlmaÂs explanation of how such persons are enemies to God: ÂThey are without God in the world, and they have gone contrary to the nature of God; therefore, they are in a state contrary to the nature of happiness.Â (Alma 41:10Â11.)

In the same vein, Abinadi warned the priests of Noah of that day wherein natural men and women-in this case the vile and wicked-would receive their just rewards: ÂAnd then shall the wicked be cast out, and they shall have cause to howl, and weep, and wail, and gnash their teeth; and this because they would not hearken unto the voice of the Lord; therefore the Lord redeemeth them not. For they are carnal and devilish, and the devil has power over them; yea, even that old serpent that did beguile our first parents, which was the cause of their fall.Â (Mosiah 16:2Â3.) And then Abinadi explained how the Fall opened the way for people to reject the Spirit and choose sin: ÂWhich [fall] was the cause of all mankind becoming carnal, sensual, devilish, knowing evil from good, subjecting themselves to the devil. Thus all mankind were lost; and behold, they would have been endlessly lost were it not that God redeemed his people from their lost and fallen state.Â (Vv. 3Â4.)

At this point we might be prone to sit back, let out a sigh of relief, and offer gratitude to God that because of the atoning work of Christ, the battle is over. However, Abinadi continued his warning: ÂBut remember that he that persists in his own carnal nature, and goes on in the ways of sin and rebellion against God, remaineth in his fallen state and the devil hath all power over him. Therefore he is as though there was no redemption made, being an enemy to God; and also is the devil an enemy to God.Â (Mosiah 16:5.) Sons of perdition experience this exclusion to its fullest at the time of the Judgment, while all others except celestial candidates will experience much of it. We should attend carefully to the fact that the phrase Âpersists in his own carnal natureÂ implies that individuals, in spite of the Atonement, have such a nature in which to persist.

Natural men and women need not, however, be what we would call degenerate. They may well be moral and upright men and women, bent upon goodness and benevolence. However, they operate in and are acclimated to the present fallen world. Such persons do not enjoy the enlivening powers of the Holy Ghost. They have not received the revealed witness of the truth, and they have not enjoyed the sanctifying powers of the blood of Christ. Although their behavior is proper and appropriate according to societal standards, these natural men and women have not hearkened sufficiently to the light of Christ to be led to the covenant gospel (see Mosiah 16:2; D&C 84:45Â48). ÂThe whole world lieth in sin,Â the Savior declared in a modern revelation, Âand groaneth under darkness and under the bondage of sin. And by this you may know they are under the bondage of sin, because they come not unto me.Â (D&C 84:49Â50; see also 35:12.)

And what of the members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints? Are any of us natural men or women? We certainly qualify for that title if we are guilty of gross wickedness, if we have sinned against gospel light and have not thoroughly repented. And yes, we are relatively guilty, too, if we persist in a nature which leads us to exist in twilight when we might bask in the light of the Son. Brigham Young declared to the people of the Church: ÂThere is no doubt, if a person lives according to the revelations given to GodÂs people, he may have the Spirit of the Lord to signify to him His will, and to guide and to direct him in the discharge of his duties, in his temporal as well as his spiritual exercises. I am satisfied, however, that in this respect, we live far beneath our privileges.Â (In Journal of Discourses 12:104.) Members of the Church who refuse to climb toward greater spiritual heights, who have no inclination to further anchor themselves in the truth, who have become satisfied with their present spiritual state-these are they who are natural men and women, persons generally of goodwill who do not understand that through their smugness and complacency they are aiding and abetting the cause of the enemy of all righteousness. Joseph Smith taught that Âall men are naturally disposed to walk in their own paths as they are pointed out by their own fingers, and are not willing to consider and walk in the path which is pointed out by another, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, although he should be an unerring director, and the Lord his God sent himÂ (Teachings, pp. 26Â27).

Redeemed Man

Because of the Fall, all men and women are lost, fallen, and alienated from God and things of righteousness; they suffer spiritual death (see Alma 12:16; 40:26; 42:9; D&C 29:41). This is the harsh reality of our second estate. The glad tidings and good news are that redemption from the Fall and reconciliation with the Father are possible. Redemption and reconciliation come Âthrough the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy MessiahÂ (2 Ne. 2:8), through the mediation of Jesus. Through the atoning blood of Christ shed in Gethsemane and on Golgotha, we may be forgiven of our sins and enjoy the peace and comfort of the Holy Ghost once again (see Mosiah 4:1Â3). Through the Atonement, we are ransomed from the devil and death and hell and endless torment (see 2 Ne. 9:10Â12), bought with a price, Âwith the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spotÂ (1 Pet. 1:19). Thus we are a peculiar, a purchased people. The worth of souls is great because an infinite price has been paid; the Lord our Redeemer gave himself for us-he suffered death in the flesh and thereafter rose from the dead unto immortality and eternal life, thus making the same blessings available for us (see D&C 18:10Â16).

In addition to forgiveness of sin, the Atonement makes available the sanctification of our heart, the purging of our motives and desires. Not only may we be cleansed from sin but also from the effects and pull of sin (see Mosiah 5:2; Alma 13:12). Joseph Smith taught that deliverance from spiritual death comes not through education alone, not through a social gospel or ethical programs; men and women must be changed, renewed, brought back to life spiritually, born again. ÂThe Son of God came into the world to redeem it from the fall,Â he taught.

But except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. This eternal truth settles the question of all menÂs religion. A man may be saved, after the judgment, in the terrestrial kingdom, or in the telestial kingdom, but he can never see the celestial kingdom of God, without being born of water and the Spirit. . . . [H]e can never come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels; to the general assembly and Church of the Firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, unless he becomes as a little child, and is taught by the Spirit of God. (Teachings, p. 12.)

The Prophet echoed the words and teachings of his Master that Âexcept a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.Â In the meridian of time, the Savior went on to explain to Nicodemus that Âexcept a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.Â (John 3:3, 5.) Joseph the Prophet added that Âit is one thing to see the kingdom of God, and another thing to enter into it. We must have a change of heart to see the kingdom of God, and subscribe the articles of adoption to enter therein.Â (Teachings, p. 328.) In further discussing the new birth-and particularly the importance of seeing and entering the kingdom-the Prophet observed:

The birth here spoken of [John 3:3] was not the gift of the Holy Ghost, which was promised after baptism, but was an illumination of the mind by the Spirit which attended the preaching of the gospel by the elders of the Church. The people wondered why they had not previously understood the plain declarations of scripture as explained by the elders, as they had read them hundreds of times. When they afterward read the Bible, it was a new book to them. This was being born again to see the kingdom of God. They were not in it, but could see it from the outside, which they could not do until the Spirit of the Lord took the veil from before their eyes. It was a change of heart, but not of state. . . . Although Cornelius had seen an holy angel [Acts 10], and on the preaching of Peter the Holy Ghost was poured out upon him and his household, they were only born again to see the kingdom of God. Had they not been baptized afterwards they would not have been saved. (In Andrus, They Knew the Prophet, p. 50; emphasis in original.)

A large segment of the Christian world today believes that being born again consists of receiving the sacraments of the church. Another segment of Christendom believes that being born again consists of having a personal spiritual experience with Jesus, of being saved through accepting him as Lord and Savior. Joseph Smith, the Choice Seer, taught clearly and repeatedly that the regeneration of the soul requires both submission to the required rites of salvation and the sanctifying powers of the Spirit. In short, ÂBeing born again, comes by the Spirit of God through ordinancesÂ (Teachings, p. 162).

Those who have been born again have crucified their Âold manÂ of sin; they who are Âin ChristÂ represent a new creation of the Holy Ghost (Rom. 6:6; 2 Cor. 5:17). One who is born again does not continue in sin (see JST, 1 Jn. 3:8), for such a one has Âno more disposition to do evil, but to do good continuallyÂ (Mosiah 5:2). To be born again is to be converted. This conversion entails what the scriptures describe as being Âquickened in the inner man.Â In describing the spiritual renewal of father Adam in the opening dispensation of this worldÂs history, Moses wrote: ÂAnd it came to pass, when the Lord had spoken with Adam, our father, that Adam cried unto the Lord, and he was caught away by the Spirit of the Lord, and was carried down into the water, and was laid under the water, and was brought forth out of the water. And thus he was baptized, and the Spirit of God descended upon him, and thus he was born of the Spirit, and became quickened in the inner man.Â (Moses 6:64Â65.) To be born again is to gain a heightened sensitivity to things that matter.

For example, because much of the time the Holy Ghost works with members of the Church through their consciences, to be born again is to gain a deeper sensitivity to right and wrong, to enjoy greater manifestations of the gift of discernment, to develop more refined and educated desires. Since being born again means being adopted into GodÂs royal family and thus gaining godly attributes and qualities, experiencing the new birth entails feeling a deeper compassion and empathy for those who mourn or suffer or reach out for succor. The quickening in the inner man peels away the film and facade of sin, makes unnecessary the rigors and taxing labors of ostentation and superfluity; those who are born again see things clearly and sharply and are able to sift and sort out the sordid or even the insignificant. They have less inclination to labor in secondary causes and a consuming but patient passion to occupy themselves with that which brings light and life and love. They come to treasure the simple pleasures in life and rejoice in the goodness of their God.

The Holy Ghost is a revelator, and he makes known the things of God to those who are ready to bear them. The Holy Ghost reveals matters that man cannot teach and that manÂs wisdom cannot convey (see 1 Jn. 2:27; Moro. 10:5; D&C 43:15Â16). The Spirit brings certitude and conviction and banishes the darkness of doubt. Cyprian, a great defender of the faith after the Apostolic period, spoke of his own conversion. ÂInto my heart,Â he recounted, Âpurified of all sin, there entered a light which came from on high and then suddenly, and in a marvelous manner, I saw certainty succeed doubtÂ (Quoted in Harold B. Lee, Stand Ye in Holy Places, p. 57). Those persons who have been born again begin to see things in perspective, from an elevated perspective; they have Âgreat views of that which is to comeÂ (Mosiah 5:3). It is not that they never have questions or doubts; rather, they know for a certainty by the power of the Holy Ghost that the fundamental verities of the faith are true-that God is in his heaven, that the Church and kingdom of God have been restored to earth with all keys and powers, and that those who have been chosen and anointed to lead the Church are divinely called. Questions and uncertainties are placed on the shelf. They may not immediately disappear, but they do not disturb. As President John Taylor explained, the Holy Ghost Âis not something that affects the outward ear alone; it is not something that affects simply his judgment, but it affects his inner man; it affects the spirit that dwells within him; it is a part of God imparted unto man, if you please, giving him an assurance that God livesÂ (in Journal of Discourses 11:23). Those who have been born of the Spirit are not free from the vicissitudes of this life; rather, because they have gained new vision, they have gained new strength and new resources with which to deal with their challenges.

As we submit to God through the gospel covenant, as we yield our hearts unto him (see Hel. 3:35) and commit to obey his statutes, as we open ourselves to truth through squelching cynicism and dispensing with arrogance, the Âdark veil of unbeliefÂ (Alma 19:6) is taken away from our minds and we begin to see things as they really are. Men and women begin to see the kingdom of God when they feel the convincing power of testimony, when they recognize and acknowledge the servants of the Lord, and when they agree to enter that kingdom through baptism. The Prophet explained that in order to enter the kingdom people must comply with the Âarticles of adoptionÂ-the first principles and ordinances of the gospel, the means whereby we are adopted into the family of the Lord Jesus Christ (Teachings, p. 328).

A redeemed man is a man who has partaken of the powers of Christ through the Atonement, repented of his sins, and been renewed through the Sanctifier, who is the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost is the midwife of salvation. He is the agent of the new birth, the sacred channel and power by which men and women are changed and renewed, made into new creatures. This new birth, which comes in process of time, brings membership in the family of God; such persons are redeemed from the Fall, reconciled to the Father through the Son, and made worthy of the designation of sons and daughters of God. They come to see and feel and understand things that the spiritually inert can never know. They become participants in the realm of divine experience.

Conclusion

A significant part of the Ârestitution of all thingsÂ (Acts 3:21) was the revelation to Joseph Smith concerning the nature of man. We know from the scriptures of the Restoration and from prophetic utterances that man is a dual being. On the one hand, Âman is spiritÂ (D&C 93:33), an offspring of Deity, one who has unlimited eternal possibilities. Truly, man was created as a spirit a little lower than the Elohim, the gods (see Ps. 8:5, including footnote 5a). On the other hand, man is housed in flesh and is the rightful inheritor of a fallen nature, a nature subject to desires, appetites, and passions. Thus Âwe are called mortal beings because in us are the seeds of death, but in reality we are immortal beings, because there is also within us the germ of eternal life. Man is a dual being, composed of the spirit which gives life, force, intelligence and capacity to man, and the body which is the tenement of the spirit and is suited to its form, adapted to its necessities, and acts in harmony with it, and to its utmost capacity yields obedience to the will of the spirit.Â (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, p. 14.)

The spirit joined with the body constitutes the soul of man (see D&C 88:15), and it is the redemption of the soul, not just the body, that is accomplished through the sufferings and death and rise to glory of the Holy One of Israel. For Âspirit and element, inseparably connectedÂ in the resurrection, Âreceive a fulness of joyÂ (D&C 93:33). Indeed, to understand man we must understand the source from whence he sprang, for, in the words of the Seer, ÂIf men do not comprehend the character of God, they do not comprehend themselvesÂ (Teachings, p. 343).
