Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 8

Worlds Without Number

Were it possible that man could number the particles of the earth,

yea, millions of earths like this,

it would not be a beginnng to the number of thy creations.

-Moses 7:30

In the process of learning of the things of God pertaining to life on this planet, the Choice Seer who communed with Jehovah became privy to sacred truths concerning life throughout the cosmos. He came to know that our GodÂs influence is universal and his reach and scope truly infinite. ÂI am the Lord God Almighty,Â God said to Moses, Âand Endless is my name; for I am without beginning of days or end of years; . . . for my works are without end, and also my words, for they never cease.Â Further: ÂWorlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten.Â (Moses 1:3Â4, 33.)

The Concept of Eternity

Joseph Smith learned and taught his people that the dayÂs prevailing doctrine that creation had taken place ex nihilo, out of nothing, was false. ÂAnything created,Â he explained, Âcannot be eternal; and earth, water, etc., had their existence in an elementary state, from eternityÂ (Teachings, p. 158). He said further, ÂThat which has a beginning will surely have an endÂ (ibid., p. 181). Thus the gods took chaotic matter and formed or organized the world. The Prophet further explained: ÂElement had an existence from the time [God] had. The pure principles of element are principles which can never be destroyed; they may be organized and re-organized, but not destroyed. They had no beginning, and can have no end.Â (Ibid., pp. 351Â52.) Joseph Smith also clarified that Âinsubstantial substanceÂ or Âimmaterial matterÂ are contradictions in terms. ÂThere is no such thing as immaterial matter,Â he taught near Nauvoo. ÂAll spirit is matter, but it is more fine or pure, and can only be discerned by purer eyes; we cannot see it; but when our bodies are purified we shall see that it is all matter.Â (D&C 131:7Â8.) On an earlier occasion the Prophet declared that Âspirit is a substance; that it is material, but that it is more pure, elastic and refined matter than the body; that it existed before the body, can exist in the body; and will exist separate from the body, when the body will be mouldering in the dust; and will in the resurrection, be again united with itÂ (Teachings, p. 207).

The Prophet set forth the important verity that although our Father and God was once a man and dwelt on an earth like we do, yet he is possessor of all truth, all knowledge, all power and is the embodiment of every godlike attribute in perfection. He is not a student god, is not experimenting in the laboratory of the universe; rather, he is God Almighty, the Father of heaven and earth, the Author of law, and the beginning and the end of all things as pertaining to us. ÂGod is the only supreme governor and independent being in whom all fullness and perfection dwell,Â Joseph taught in the School of the Prophets.[Â[He] is omnipotent, omnipresent and omniscient; without beginning of days or end of life; and that in him every good gift and every good principle dwell; and that he is the Father of lights; in him the principle of faith dwells independently, and he is the object in whom the faith of all other rational and accountable beings center for life and salvation.Â (Lectures on Faith 2:2.)

The Prophet Joseph is reported to have taught that our God has been involved in the creation and redemption of worlds for some two billion five hundred fifty-five million years (see ÂThe Answer,Â Times and Seasons 5:758), a period so unfathomably long that we speak of it as eternity or infinity. Jehovah, our Elder Brother in the spirit, was and is under the direction and command of the Father the Creator of worlds without number (see Moses 1:33; 7:30) and, as we have seen heretofore, the Redeemer of those same orbs. JesusÂ saving labor is truly Âfrom everlasting to everlastingÂ (D&C 132:20), meaning that his influence is known and felt from one premortal existence to the next (see Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation 1:12; Bruce R. McConkie, The Promised Messiah, p. 166). Jesus Christ lived and ministered and suffered and died and rose from the tomb on this earth; he Âdied unto sin onceÂ (Rom. 6:10). However, the parable of the Lord visiting his servants in the field, found in modern revelation (see D&C 88:51Â61), sets forth the principle that our Lord will visit each of those planets for which he has a saving stewardship, for truly what he creates, he redeems.

Law and Light

The power by which this earth and all earths are held in their orbit, the power by which one sphere moves at a precise angle and at a prescribed distance from other bodies-these things are governed by law. It is not, however, some abstract law, some independent power, some force of Mother Nature that governs but rather the power of God Almighty. Joseph Smith the Prophet made known to the Latter-day Saints that law and light are manifestations of that divine influence we know as the light of Christ or the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

Our God is an exalted man and Âhas a body of flesh and bones as tangible as manÂsÂ (D&C 130:22). He occupies space and has form, parts, and passions. As an actual physical being, he can be in only one place at a time. We thus speak of GodÂs corporeal nature, the ways in which he is like man. But there are things about our God that make him very different from man. He is possessed of a divine nature, a nature that describes the light and glory and power associated with his exalted and immortal state. As a celestial resurrected being, our God is a Âdevouring fireÂ (Isa. 33:14) he dwells in Âeverlasting burningsÂ (Teachings, pp. 347, 361, 367, 372). Those phrases represent our limited attempts as mortals to describe in Deity that which in many respects is for now beyond our comprehension. The boy prophet Âsaw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all descriptionÂ (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:17). Orson Pratt explained concerning the First Vision: ÂHe [Joseph] continued praying, while the light appeared to be gradually descending towards him; and as it drew nearer, it increased in brightness and magnitude, so that, by the time that it reached the tops of the trees, the whole wilderness, for some distance around was illuminated in a most glorious and brilliant manner. He expected to have seen the leaves and boughs of the trees consumed, as soon as the light came in contact with them; but perceiving that it did not produce that effect, he was encouraged with the hope of being able to endure its presence.Â (Quoted in Backman, Joseph SmithÂs First Vision, p. 172.)

The Lord has made known through Joseph Smith that the light or glory that emanates from God and fills the immensity of space is the light of Christ, again a manifestation of GodÂs divine nature. It is the law by which all things are governed, the light by which all things move and act and have their being. It is the means by which our Heavenly Father, who is a physical being, is omnipresent and can be in and through and round about all things (see D&C 63:59; 88:41). Thus the revelations attest: ÂThe elements are the tabernacle of God; yea, man is the tabernacle of God, even templesÂ (D&C 93:35). It is the power of God, called in scripture the light of Christ or the Spirit of Jesus Christ. In the words of Parley P. Pratt: ÂThis is the true light that in some measure illuminates all men. It is, in its less refined existence, the physical light that reflects from the sun, moon, and stars [see D&C 88:6Â13], and other substances, and, by reflection on the eye, makes visible the truths of the outward world.Â (Key to the Science of Theology, p. 25.)

The light of Christ in its higher or, to use Elder PrattÂs language, Âmore refinedÂ existence serves a redemptive mission as well; it works upon the human soul and leads men and women to greater light. This Spirit Âgiveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit. And every one that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit cometh unto God, even the Father. And the Father teacheth him of the covenant which he has renewed and confirmed upon you,Â the gospel covenant. (D&C 84:46Â48.) The light of Christ is that light within each of us planted by an omniloving God as a moral monitor, a spiritual sextant to lead us back to our heavenly home (see Moro. 7:12Â19). It prepares us to receive the greater light of the Holy Ghost, which comes only after baptism into the covenant gospel (see Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, pp. 67Â68). In short, this light Âis also in its higher degrees the intellectual light of our inward and spiritual organs, by which we reason, discern, judge, compare, comprehend, and remember the subjects within our reach.Â Elder Pratt went on to explain that its inspiration Âconstitutes instinct in animal lifeÂ and Âreason in man.Â (Key to the Science of Theology, p. 25.)

The light of Christ thus serves as a source of reason and conscience and discernment. It is a directing and guiding influence that will strive with men and women and lead them to do good and choose righteousness, if they will but acknowledge and respond to the soft inner impressions of this light. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has described the relationship of the light of Christ to the Holy Ghost as follows:

The light of Christ (also called the Spirit of Christ and the Spirit of the Lord) is a light, a power, and an influence that . . . is everywhere present and accounts for the omnipresence of God. It is the agency of GodÂs power and the law by which all things are governed. It is also the agency used by the Holy Ghost to manifest truth and dispense spiritual gifts to many people at one and the same time. For instance, it is as though the Holy Ghost, who is a personage of spirit, was broadcasting all truth throughout the whole universe all the time, using the light of Christ as the agency by which the message is delivered. But only those who attune their souls to the Holy Spirit receive the available revelation. It is in this way that the person of the Holy Ghost makes his influence felt in the heart of every righteous person at one and the same time. (A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, p. 70.)

One Thing Above Another

Through his translation of the Egyptian papyri by which we acquired the message of the book of Abraham, the Prophet Joseph Smith came to know something of GodÂs system of government. Abraham explained that Âthe records of the fathers, even the patriarchs, concerning the right of Priesthood, the Lord my God preserved in mine own hands; therefore a knowledge of the beginning of the creation, and also of the planets, and of the stars, as they were made known unto the fathers, have I kept even unto this day, and I shall endeavor to write some of these things upon this record, for the benefit of my posterity that shall come after meÂ (Abr. 1:31). From Abraham, who had access to a Urim and Thummim (see Abr. 3:1), we learn that a countless number of planets and stars have been organized and made by our God. ÂAnd I saw the stars,Â Abraham said, Âthat they were very great, and that one of them was nearest unto the throne of God; and there were many great ones which were near unto it; and the Lord said unto me: These are the governing ones; and the name of the great one is Kolob, because it is near unto me, for I am the Lord thy God: I have set this one to govern all those which belong to the same order as that upon which thou standestÂ (Abr. 3:2Â3). Abraham went on to say that Kolob, the governing planet or star, was Âafter the manner of the Lord, according to its times and seasonsÂ (Abr. 3:4). The Prophet Joseph Smith taught-and ancient tradition confirms-that Abraham brought his knowledge of the cosmos with him to Egypt and taught the learned and the wise among them of these things (see Abr. 3:15; Teachings, p. 251).

But AbrahamÂs vision was more than an astronomy lesson and a guide to understanding the cosmos; it was a lesson in priesthood government, a testimony of the central role of Jesus Christ (see Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection, p. 95). For the God of all creation explained to the father of the faithful: ÂI will multiply thee, and thy seed after thee, like unto theseÂ (Abr. 3:14), meaning like unto the planets and stars, a promise God had made before (Gen. 15:5; D&C 132:30). Jehovah stated that one star is greater than another until we come to Kolob, the greatest of them all. Even so, ÂThese two facts do exist, that there are two spirits, one being more intelligent than the other; there shall be another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they allÂ (Abr. 3:19). Consider the following from the third chapter of and facsimile no. 2 in Abraham:

We now compare the characteristics of Kolob with scriptural descriptions of the Savior and others:

A revelation on astronomy pales in importance to a revelation setting forth the order and nature of the kingdom of God. Was Abraham to be merely a visiting professor of astronomy, or was he to stand as a significant witness of Christ the Lord not only to the Egyptians but to all people? Further, the latter-day Seer drew upon the message of the Abrahamic papyri to teach another profound lesson from Abr. 3, saying that Abraham reasoned as follows concerning the God of heaven:

ÂSuppose we have two facts: that supposes another fact may exist-two men on the earth, one wiser than the other, would logically show that another who is wiser than the wisest may exist. Intelligences exist one above another, so that there is no end to them.Â

If Abraham reasoned thus-If Jesus Christ was the Son of God, and John discovered that God the Father of Jesus Christ had a Father [see Rev. 1:5Â6], you may suppose that He had a Father also. Where was there ever a son without a father? And where was there ever a father without first being a son? Whenever did a tree or anything spring into existence without a progenitor? And everything comes in this way. Paul says that which is earthly is in the likeness of that which is heavenly, Hence if Jesus had a Father, can we not believe that He had a Father also? (Teachings, p. 373; emphasis in original.)

The Destiny of the Earth

This earth plays a tremendously significant role in the Eternal FatherÂs plan of redemption. Adam and Eve were placed on the earth in the Garden of Eden, in what we now know as Jackson County, Missouri, in the United States of America (see Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, pp. 481, 545Â46; John Taylor, Mediation and Atonement, pp. 69Â70; George Q. Cannon, Journal of Discourses 11:336Â37); the first man and woman on this planet were placed in an immortal, terrestrial condition. William W. Phelps wrote of this glorious state:

This earth was once a garden place,

With all her glories common,

And men did live a holy race,

And worship Jesus face to face,

In Adam-ondi-Ahman.

(ÂAdam-ondi-Ahman,Â Hymns, no. 49.)

If our first parents had not partaken of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, they would have remained in that state forever and all things would have continued as placed in that pristine day (see 2 Ne. 2:22; Moses 3:9). They would not have progressed, grown in knowledge and experience, or had children (2 Ne. 2:23; Moses 5:11). But Adam and Eve did partake, introducing mortality into the world and opening Âthe way of the worldÂ (Teachings, p. 12). ÂAdam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joyÂ (2 Ne. 2:25). With the Fall came a change in the earth and all things on the face of it. This orb fell to a telestial state, and death and sin became the order of things.

Though generations of righteous people have lived on earth, many men and women have chosen to love Satan more than God (see Moses 5:13, 18, 28), to give themselves up to unholiness and debauchery, and to defile the earth through their sins. Enoch Âbeheld Satan; and he had a great chain in his hand, and it veiled the whole face of the earth with darkness; and he looked up and laughed, and his angels rejoicedÂ (Moses 7:26). Enoch also looked ahead to the days of Noah. Being in tune with the forces of nature through the powers of the Spirit, ÂEnoch looked upon the earth; and he heard a voice from the bowels thereof, saying: Wo, wo is me, the mother of men; I am pained, I am weary, because of the wickedness of my children. When shall I rest, and be cleansed from the filthiness which is gone forth out of me? When will my Creator sanctify me, that I may rest, and righteousness for a season abide upon my face?Â (Moses 7:48.) By the days of Noah, the earth had become filled with violence and corruption. ÂAnd God said unto Noah: The end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with violence, and behold I will destroy all flesh from off the earth.Â (Moses 8:28Â30.) The universal flood represents, ironically, one of GodÂs great acts of love and mercy, particularly for those unembodied spirits who otherwise would have been required to come to an earth whose degrading influences would almost surely suffocate any desires for righteousness (see Journal of Discourses 21:17Â18; 22:301Â2).

Latter-day prophets, schooled by Joseph Smith, have repeatedly taught that the flood also represents, in the eternal scheme of things, the earthÂs baptism by water. Orson Pratt stated:

The first ordinance instituted for the cleansing of the earth, was that of immersion in water; it was buried in the liquid element, and all things sinful upon the face of it were washed away. As it came forth from the ocean flood, like the new-born child, it was innocent, it arose to newness of life; it was its second birth from the womb of mighty waters-a new world issuing from the ruins of the old, clothed with all the innocency of its first creation. As man cannot be born again of water, without an administrator, so the earth required an agency independent of itself, to administer this grand cleansing ordinance, and restore it to its infant purity. That administrator was the Redeemer himself. (In Journal of Discourses 1:331; see also 1:274; 8:83.)

The second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, known as the Âend of the worldÂ and meaning the Âdestruction of the wickedÂ (Joseph SmithÂMatthew 1:4, 31), will entail a cleansing of the earth by fire, a removal of sin and corruption and wickedness from its surface. This confirmation or baptism of the earth by fire will represent a transfiguration of the earth (see D&C 63:20Â21; Teachings, p. 13) and will elevate it to a terrestrial condition that shall prevail during the Millennium. It is in this glorious day that the earth shall rest. Zion will have been established in all the earth, Israel will be gathered home to her Savior and King, and righteousness and truth will have flooded its surface (see Moses 7:62Â64). After the Âlittle seasonÂ at the end of the thousand years, wherein Satan and his hosts shall rebel one final time, then shall come the Âend of the earth,Â the final destruction of the wicked and the celestialization of the planet (D&C 29:22; 43:31; 88:111). The earth Âmust needs be sanctified from all unrighteousness, that it may be prepared for the celestial glory; for after it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father; that bodies who are of the celestial kingdom may possess it forever and ever; for, for this intent was it made and created, and for this intent are they sanctifiedÂ (D&C 88:18Â20).

Conclusion

The religion of the Latter-day Saints is neither time-bound nor earth-bound; it reaches from eternity past to eternity future. Joseph Smith the Prophet and Seer had revealed to him a profound and expansive view of things as they were, as they are, and as they will be. We come to know by modern revelation, for example, that the lowly Nazarene we know as Jesus is Lord and God over all he created and that the Almighty Elohim, who is our Father in Heaven, looks upon and governs in eternity as well as time. We are linked as people to generations past, and our earth, though holding a significant place in the overall plan, is but one of an infinite number of inhabited worlds.

In regard to our own earth, President Brigham Young observed:

I suppose that God never organized an earth and peopled it that was ever reduced to a lower state of darkness, sin and ignorance than this [see 2 Ne. 10:3; Moses 7:36]. I suppose this is one of the lowest kingdoms that ever the Lord Almighty created, and on that account is capable of becoming exalted to be one of the highest kingdoms that has ever had an exaltation in all the eternities. In proportion as it has been reduced so it will be exalted, with that portion of its inhabitants who in their humiliation have cleaved to righteousness and acknowledged God in all things. In proportion to our fall through sin, so shall we be exalted in the presence of our Father and God, through Jesus Christ and by living the righteousness of his Gospel. (In Journal of Discourses 10:175.)

By and through the knowledge we have received as a part of the restored gospel, we begin to sense our relation to the universe, our tie to those organized beings who have been born and lived and died and were resurrected and glorified elsewhere. Indeed, if we could hie to Kolob in the twinkling of an eye, as William W. Phelps proclaimed, Âand then continue onward with that same speed to flyÂ (ÂIf You Could Hie to Kolob,Â Hymns, no. 284), we would never, in all eternity, find a place where gods began to be or where gods do not govern and direct. ÂAll kingdoms have a law given; and there are many kingdoms; for there is no space in the which there is no kingdomÂ (D&C 88:36Â37).
