Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 9

The Three Pillars of Eternity

Behold, he [God] created Adam, and by Adam came the fall of man.

And because of the fall of man came Jesus Christ, even the Father and

the Son; and because of Jesus Christ came the redemption of man.

-Mormon 9:12

All truth is not of equal worth, nor are all gospel principles of equal importance. As pertaining to the principles of salvation, there are some that are basic and fundamental. They are the foundation upon which all others must rest. As we build the house of our understanding brick by brick or principle by principle, each principle must rest securely on its foundational principles and be correctly aligned with its companion principles. Only when this is the case can the house of our faith provide proper shelter and withstand whatever storms may rage. There must be both sequence and order. For instance, the true meaning of the Fatherhood of God is essential to an understanding of the Sonship of Christ. An understanding of the scattering of Israel is necessary to a meaningful understanding of the gathering of Israel. We cannot have a meaningful understanding of the fall of Adam if we have no comprehension of the state from which he fell. Similarly, if the atonement of Christ is to answer the effects of the Fall, we cannot comprehend the ministry of Christ without first understanding the ministry of Adam. An understanding of the Creation is essential to an understanding of the Fall, and an understanding of our fallen state is essential to an understanding of the purpose and magnitude of the redemption we find in Christ. The one principle builds upon the other. Each must be understood in sequence if the house of our faith is to be built securely.

An Understanding of the Creation Restored

Through the revelations of the Restoration we learn of the dual nature of all created things. We learn that all life forms had an existence prior to their sojourn in this mortal state. This mortal state in which we presently find ourselves is, in the revelations of the Restoration, denominated as our Âsecond estate,Â our Âfirst estateÂ having been an incorporeal or spirit existence (Abr. 3:26). The spirit is Âin the likeness of that which is temporal; and that which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual; the spirit of man in the likeness of his person, as also the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God has createdÂ (D&C 77:2). Truly, our God created all things, Âand every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew. For I, the Lord God, created all things, of which I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth.Â (Moses 3:5.) Thus we read of the God of heaven saying to Adam, ÂI made the world, and men before they were in the fleshÂ (Moses 6:51).

In conjunction with this doctrine of a premortal or pre-earth estate, the Prophet also taught, as mentioned earlier in this work, that the elements from which all things, the spirit included, were created are eternal. Not only did the Prophet teach us that the Creation involved the organization of existing elements and that all life forms existed in spirit form prior to being housed in appropriate mortal tabernacles but also that those spirit personages played a role in the Creation itself. In the book of Abraham we learn that the Ânoble and great ones,Â also referred to as the ÂGods,Â sat in council and designed the plan or blueprint of creation (Abr. 3:22; 4:1). That plan called for them to do the labor of creation. Thus we read: ÂAnd then the Lord said: Let us go down. And they went down at the beginning, and they, that is the Gods [or the noble and great ones as they are referred to earlier], organized and formed the heavens and the earth.Â (Abr. 4:1.)

Among the truths of creation restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith, none are of greater importance than the knowledge that God is a personal being, an exalted, resurrected, and glorified man. Out of this singular truth comes the assurance that, when we read that we are in the image and likeness of God, the words mean precisely what they say (see Gen. 1:26Â27). In the book of Moses this text is rendered : ÂI, God, created man in mine own image, in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I themÂ (Moses 2:27). In the book of Abraham it reads: ÂSo the Gods went down to organize man in their own image, in the image of the Gods to form they him, male and female to form they themÂ (Abr. 4:27). This is simply to say, as we have already seen, that when those of the first estate took upon themselves physical bodies, their image and likeness remained unchanged. Latter-day Saints believe that when they address their prayers to their Father in Heaven, they are actually and literally speaking to their Father, not in some metaphorical sense but actually to the Father of their spirits.

An Understanding of the Fall Restored

Having clearly in mind the miracle of creation-pronounced Âvery goodÂ by the Creator himself (Moses 2:31)-we now turn our attention to the nature of things after their fall from that Edenic or paradisiacal state. This is the second pillar of GodÂs eternal plan. First and foremost among the principles taught to us by the Prophet is the reality of the scriptural story itself. It is quite fashionable in much of the sectarian world to argue that the scriptural story-particularly Gen. 1:26Â27 (ÂLet us make man in our imageÂ)-has reference to the human species in a mythical sense. All such notions are dispelled by the Prophet to whom the man Adam appeared to tutor and administer (see D&C 128:20Â21). John Taylor said, ÂIf you were to ask Joseph what sort of a looking man Adam was, he would tell you at once; he would tell you his size and appearance and all about himÂ (in Journal of Discourses 18:326). The Prophet compared his oldest brother, Alvin, with Adam and Seth, saying that Alvin Âwas a very handsome man, surpassed by none but Adam and Seth, and of great strengthÂ (History of the Church 5:247). By revelation we are told that Seth Âwas a perfect man, and his likeness was the express likeness of his father, insomuch that he seemed to be like unto his father in all things, and could be distinguished from him only by his ageÂ (D&C 107:43).

To argue that Adam is a myth is to argue that the story of the Fall is a myth, which of necessity requires that one also argue that the Atonement is myth, which in turn announces that all notions of Christ as Redeemer or Savior are also mythical. In contrast to this, Moroni in the book of Mormon declares: ÂI will show unto you a God of miracles, even the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and it is that same God who created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are. Behold, he created Adam, and by Adam came the fall of man. And because of the fall of man came Jesus Christ, even the Father and the Son; and because of Jesus Christ came the redemption of man.Â (Morm. 9:11Â12.) From the book of Moses we learn that the statement that Adam was created from the dust of the earth applies equally to all-that all humankind are created from existing element, as are both plants and animals (see Moses 6:59; Jacob 2:21; Mosiah 2:25).

In the ProphetÂs inspired translation of the early chapters of Genesis found in the book of Moses, we have the testimony of both Adam and Eve as to necessity of the fall. ÂBecause of my transgression my eyes are opened,Â Adam said. That is to say, Adam now knew good from evil and could thus do works of righteousness, something that in his Edenic state he could not do. Adam continued, ÂAnd in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God.Â That is because Adam now lived in a world in which he could know sorrow and its opposite, joy. In like manner, Eve also testified in a spirit of gladness, saying, ÂWere it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedientÂ (Moses 5:10Â11). EveÂs expression is most perfect. It is one of the most concise and yet perfect discourses ever given. She acknowledges that their transgression had resulted in their expulsion from Eden but also rejoices in the fact that by this means children had come into the world. And because of their fallen state they could now be recipients of the blessings of the Atonement and heirs of eternal life through their obedience.

Such announcements rank chief among the plain and precious principles that had been lost to mankind. As our missionaries go forth to declare the message of the Restoration, they are frequently met with the cynical challenge, ÂHow can there be a God if _________?Â That which follows fills in the blank with some form of suffering or sorrow that is inevitably associated with our fallen world, such as ÂHow can there be a God if he would allow my precious child to die?Â or ÂHow can there be a God if someone I loved so dearly is taken from me?Â The question can take a multitude of forms, but in essence it is always the same-a recognition of the suffering that is universal to humankind because of the fall of Adam. AdamÂs fall brought suffering, disease, aging, and death into the world. It also created the possibility for wickedness in all its forms to exist. Father Lehi explains, ÂIt must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. If not so, . . . righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad.Â What Lehi is doing is illustrating the importance of opposites. All things exist and are defined by contrast. If there is no such thing as evil, then there can be no such thing as righteousness. Thus hot exists in contrast to cold, light in contrast to darkness, courage in contrast to cowardice, salvation in contrast to damnation, joy in contrast to sorrow, and so forth. Without such contrasts or opposites, all things would be the same, or, as Lehi put it, Âa compound in one.Â (2 Ne. 2:11.)

To measure the length and breadth of the Atonement, one must first obtain the same measurements for the Fall. Some have mistakenly asserted that it was just Adam who fell. Were that the case, the atonement of Christ would have been for Adam alone. We would not be in a fallen state, nor would we have any need for a Redeemer. All who have blood coursing in their veins, all who are subject to the aging process, all who are helpless before death have inherited the effects of AdamÂs fall. Indeed, the earth and all created things were a part of the fall and thus come under the atoning grace of Christ. Lehi explained that Âif Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end.Â (2 Ne. 2:22; see also Moses 3:9.) But Adam did fall, and all created things, plant and animal alike, are subject to the laws of this mortal estate and ultimately die. As with man, plants, animals, and even the earth itself are subject to death. Each must die, and each in its order will be called forth in the resurrection (see D&C 88:26).

An Understanding of the Atonement Restored

NephiÂs brother Jacob set forth the effects of the Fall with greater plainness than any other scriptural writer. Had Christ not paid the price for us, had he not worked out an atoning sacrifice, there would be no doctrine of resurrection, Jacob explains. That is to say, the physical or tangible body would never be reunited with the spirit from which it was separated at death. Our spirits must have become like unto the devil, Âand we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himselfÂ forever (2 Ne. 9:9). The spirits of men and women, tainted with sin and having no way to cleanse themselves of its effects, would be subject to the author of sin. We would be citizens of his kingdom. We would have no recourse but to worship Lucifer as our king. Freedom would be unknown, as would be agency and light and truth. But because of the atonement of Christ, both Âdeath and hell must deliver up their . . . captive spirits,Â the grave must yield up the body, and hell, or the world of departed spirits, must yield up its spirits, that body and spirit might be eternally united together; Âand it is by the power of the resurrection of the Holy One of IsraelÂ (2 Ne. 9:12).

Thus the power of the resurrection frees the spirit from the power of the adversary and unites it again with its body that it might stand in the presence of God to be judged according to its works. Herein we find the perfect balance between what Christ has done for us as an act of grace and what we are expected to do in recognizing him as our Lord and Master. Joseph Smith stated this principle: ÂWe believe that through the Atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the GospelÂ (A of F 1:3). So it is that Christ will Âbring salvation to all those who shall believe on his name; this being the intent of this last sacrifice, to bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice, and bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance. And thus mercy can satisfy the demands of justice, and encircles them in the arms of safety, while he that exercises no faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the demands of justice; therefore only unto him that has faith unto repentance is brought about the great and eternal plan of redemption.Â (Alma 34:15Â16.) Jesus the Christ, we are taught, Âhath power given unto him from the Father to redeemÂ us from our sins Âbecause of repentance,Â not in lieu of repentance (Hel. 5:11).

It was not Âcheap graceÂ of which the Prophet Joseph Smith or the prophets of the Book of Mormon spoke. The plan of redemption, they explained, could be brought about only on conditions of repentance, Âfor except it were for these conditions, mercy could not take effect except it should destroy the work of justice. Now the work of justice could not be destroyed; if so, God would cease to be God.Â (Alma 42:13.) To contend that men are saved by grace alone, without any works required on our part, is to ignore the words of Christ relative to the necessity of repentance and baptism. True it is that the Atonement is unconditional as to resurrection: ÂAs in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made aliveÂ (1 Cor. 15:22). All are called forth from the grave, and all except those who are sons of perdition are redeemed from the Âsecond deathÂ (D&C 76:36Â38), but all are not resurrected on equal grounds. At this point our redemption becomes conditional. We cannot concoct a doctrine of redemption that denies the necessity of repentance and obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. Alma explains the principle thus: ÂThe plan of mercy could not be brought about except an atonement should be made; therefore God himself atoneth for the sins of the world, to bring about the plan of mercy, to appease the demands of justice, that God might be a perfect, just God, and a merciful God also. Now, repentance could not come unto men except there were a punishment, which also was eternal as the life of the soul should be, affixed opposite to the plan of happiness, which was as eternal also as the life of the soul.Â (Alma 42:15Â16.) Thus it is that the atonement of Christ cleanses us from the effects of sin, but only through our own suffering and repentance do we obtain the personal strength to overcome sin. The kingdom of heaven cannot be made up of those who have an appetite and propensity for sin, notwithstanding the goodness and perfection of Christ. Each of its citizens must claim their own victory over the powers of the flesh through personal striving and ultimately by virtue of the mercy and goodness of Christ.

The purpose of the plan of salvation is not alone to free us from the dominion and power of the adversary, nor to cleanse us from the effects of our transgressions. Though it does both of these, it also extends to us the opportunity to advance from grace to grace that we might obtain the fulness of the Father (see D&C 93:11Â20). In describing those who obtain the highest degree of glory, modern revelation declares, ÂThese are they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own bloodÂ (D&C 76:69). The Atonement, then, does more than free us from the dominion of Satan; it extends to us the opportunity to become as God is!

The Atonement embraces all of GodÂs creation in both the plant and animal world. It brings victory over everything that is mortal. It overcomes all the vicissitudes of the flesh. Not only through the Atonement do we conquer disease and aging, death and suffering in all its shades and colors, but we also enjoy the restoration of spirit and body and thereby the perpetuation of eternal covenants between husbands and wives, children and parents. Indeed, all things that pertain to our religion are only appendages to that great atoning sacrifice. Gospel principles receive life and breath and substance only to the degree that they are anchored and tied to the Atonement (see Teachings, p. 121).

Conclusion

Through the marvelous outpouring of light and truth that have come into the world through Joseph Smith and the Restoration, we know that the Creation, the Fall, and the Atonement, though three doctrines, are one. They are defined in terms of one another. The Atonement is the child of the Fall; it was called into being because of the Fall. If there had been no Fall, there would have been no need for an Atonement. The Fall came because Adam and Eve transgressed the laws of a terrestrial world, thus plunging the earth and its inhabitants to a lower state. The Fall followed from the Creation. Things had to be created in a higher state in order for a fall to occur. The Fall was downward but forward. These three doctrines, foundational and fundamental to all that we believe as Latter-day Saints, are truly the three pillars of eternity.
