Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 10

The First Estate

We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell; and we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them. —Abraham 3:24-25

We were born first as spirits. Indeed, all things knew an existence in a spirit state before they were naturally upon the earth (see Moses 3:5). In our first estate the spirit lived independent of the body; in mortality spirit and body are temporarily united; in death they are separated; and in the resurrection they are inseparably connected. The tabernacle of flesh is formed in the image and likeness of the spirit that gives it life (see D&C 77:2; Teachings, p. 373). Thus our first estate, or spirit existence, was very much like this one. We knew each other by appearance and as male and female. We would suppose that plants, trees, flowers, and shrubs gave variety and beauty to that world as they do to the one in which we now live and that animals also shared that existence with us. The purpose of our first or heavenly estate was to prepare us for the tests and responsibilities of mortality. Of necessity, therefore, that existence had to be much like this one so that the training and preparation we received would be relevant to the experiences we were destined to have. Out of the tests of mortality come such things as faith, courage, and wisdom, all of which require the fires of mortality to forge.

Councils in Heaven

By observing how the kingdom of God functions on earth, we learn much about the nature of that same kingdom in heavenly realms. The kingdom of God on earth is governed by councils, and so it is in the heavens. In mortality God chooses those of our own number to lead and direct, and all are invited to be involved in some way or another in the labor of the kingdom. Such was also our experience in the heavenly realms. There, among other things, the noble and great ones were invited to sit in council and make plans for the creation of this earth.

"In the beginning, the head of the Gods called a council of the Gods; and they came together and concocted a plan to create the world and people it" (Teachings, pp. 349-50). It was in the translation of the book of Abraham that Joseph Smith learned about the role played by spirits in our pre-earth estate in the planning and creation of this earth. This text contains what we have come to call the plan or blueprint of creation, the program they would follow in the actual labor of creation. The account of the blueprint reads virtually the same as the accounts of the earth's physical creation found in Genesis, Moses, and the temple, except it consistently refers to the labor of creation as being done by "the Gods." It is not until we come to the end of the fourth chapter of Abraham that we discover that the events about which we have been reading are yet future (Abr. 4:30). The fifth chapter begins: "And thus we will finish the heavens and the earth, and all the hosts of them. And the Gods said among themselves: On the seventh time we will end our work, which we have counseled; and we will rest on the seventh time from all our work which we have counseled. And the Gods concluded upon the seventh time, because that on the seventh time they would rest from all their works which they (the Gods) counseled among themselves to form; and sanctified it. And thus were their decisions at the time that they counseled among themselves to form the heavens and the earth." (Abr. 5:1-3.)

In the broad and general sense, God the Eternal Father is the creator of all things. He is God the First, the Creator (see Teachings, p. 190). Under his direction the Savior has created worlds without number (see D&C 76:24; Moses 1:33; 7:30). In the book of Abraham we learn that the Savior was not alone in this labor, but that he was aided by the noble and great spirits who were destined to come to this earth. In the King Follett discourse, the Prophet explained that in the beginning "the head God brought forth the Gods" or "the head of the Gods called together the Gods" (Teachings, p. 348). The reference to "God" in the Genesis text is a translation of the Hebrew word Elohim. El is the Hebrew word for "God," while the addition of im makes it plural. Thus the first sentence in the Old Testament should read, "In the beginning, Gods created the heavens and the earth." The only justification for the rendering of Elohim as "God" instead of "Gods" is theological. The concept of "Gods" simply doesn't fit the theological mindset of either Jewish or Christian translators. This tradition went unchallenged until Joseph Smith dared suggest that the language of the Hebrew text ought to be read as it was rendered.

Speaking of the premortal existence, Joseph Smith said: "God himself, finding he was in the midst of spirits and glory, because he was more intelligent, saw proper to institute laws whereby the rest could have a privilege to advance like himself" (ibid., p. 354). Among the laws that had been instituted and thus constituted the Father's plan for the salvation of his children were the following:

After the creation of the earth and after the announcement had been made that the spirit-children of the Father, each in their turn, would be allowed to come to this earth to receive their body and be tested, the announcement was made that a redeemer would be chosen. The Father asked of his assembled family, in what we now call the Grand Council of Heaven, "Whom shall I send?" (Abr. 3:27.) That is, who would volunteer themselves to be the atoning sacrifice, to make all other gospel blessings possible? Who would go as the Father's Only Begotten in the Flesh, to suffer in both body and spirit in Gethsemane and on a cross, to take upon himself the sins of the world? There were two responses. Jehovah, who would become in the flesh Jesus Christ, said, "Here am I, send me." And then he added, in reference to the entire plan of salvation, "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever." (Abr. 3:27; Moses 4:2.) The other response began the same way—"Here am I, send me"—but from that point on they were entirely different in spirit and purpose. "I will be thy son," he said, "and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor." (Abr. 3:27; Moses 4:1.) After the Lord said, "I will send the first," we read that "the second was angry, and kept not his first estate; and, at that day, many followed after him" (Abr. 3:27-28).

All of the spirit sons and daughters of God were free to choose, and none were to be forced. Thus the second respondent, Lucifer, or Satan, a great and shining star, drew after him "a third part of the hosts of heaven," which he turned away from their Father "because of their agency" (D&C 29:36). Because God had granted them the right to choose, they were free to follow Satan. Surely it is ironic that Lucifer sought to take the gift of agency from all God's children in order, as he proposed, to save them, that none might be lost—yet by such a course all would surely be lost, for without agency or the right of choice no one could choose to follow that path that leads to salvation. His proposal having been rejected, Lucifer sought to obtain the throne of God by rebellion; thus there was war in heaven. Describing these events, John the Revelator wrote: "And there was war in heaven; Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon and his angels fought against Michael; and the dragon prevailed not against Michael.… Neither was there place found in heaven for the great dragon, who was cast out; that old serpent called the devil, and also called Satan, which deceiveth the whole world; he was cast out into the earth; and his angels were cast out with him." (JST Rev. 12:6-8.) Of a vision similar to that of John's, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon wrote: "And this we saw also, and bear record, that an angel of God who was in authority in the presence of God, who rebelled against the Only Begotten Son whom the Father loved and who was in the bosom of the Father, was thrust down from the presence of God and the Son, and was called Perdition, for the heavens wept over him—he was Lucifer, a son of the morning. And we beheld, and lo, he is fallen! is fallen, even a son of the morning!" (D&C 76:25-26.)

"Because that Satan rebelled against me," the Lord explained, "and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down; and he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice" (Moses 4:3-4). "The contention in heaven was—Jesus said there would be certain souls that would not be saved; and the devil said he could save them all, and laid his plans before the grand council, who gave their vote in favor of Jesus Christ. So the devil rose up in rebellion against God, and was cast down, with all who put up their heads for him." (Teachings, p. 357.)

We misunderstand our revealed accounts of what took place in the premortal existence if we suppose that the Father was making a plea for possible plans of salvation in the great council in heaven. This was not the case. God did not stand before the assembled hosts and ask, "What shall we do?" That would hardly be godlike. The plan of salvation, as we have seen, was eternal and had been instituted and taught to the assembled spirits long before the hosts of heaven were assembled. Nor was the Father calling for a popular vote on the plan. There was only one plan—the plan of the Father. The premortal existence was not a democracy any more than the church and kingdom of God on earth is a democracy. It was a theocratic kingdom then, just as it is now. The Lord is the Author of all the laws; he issues all decrees and invites his children to obey. In this instance those in rebellion were cast out. Had a majority of the sons and daughters of the Father aligned themselves with Lucifer, it would have made no difference. Popular vote cannot change eternal principles or negate the importance of agency. All were invited to accept or reject the plan that called for the Firstborn to be our Redeemer; none were invited to revise that plan.

Organization in the First Estate

The first law of heaven is obedience. Indeed, we are told that there is a law "irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:20-21). Alma explained that men called to be high priests were destined to be so called on account of their faith and good works in the "first place." They were, he said, "called and prepared from the foundation of the world," where they had been left "to choose good or evil; therefore they having chosen good, and exercising exceedingly great faith, are called with a holy calling." Others, he said, rejected "the Spirit of God on account of the hardness of their hearts and blindness of their minds, while, if it had not been for this they might have had as great privilege as their brethren." (Alma 13:3-6.) As in all things, Christ is the perfect example of this principle. In that pre-earth council, his pledge to the Father was, "Thy will be done" (Moses 4:2), and as he concluded his incomparable labor of sacrifice, yielding up his life on the cross, he said, "Father, it is finished, thy will is done" (JST Matthew 27:54). Such is the attitude and spirit that all whom the Lord trusts with positions of responsibility must acquire.

Abraham was shown the organization of spirits prior to their coming into mortality. Directing Abraham's attention to the assembly of "noble and great ones," God said, "These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born" (Abr. 3:22-23). In what appears to have been a similar vision, President Joseph F. Smith said: "I observed that they [the Prophet Joseph Smith, his father, Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and other choice spirits] were also among the noble and great ones who were chosen in the beginning to be rulers in the Church of God. Even before they were born, they, with many others, received their first lessons in the world of spirits and were prepared to come forth in the due time of the Lord to labor in his vineyard for the salvation of the souls of men." (D&C 138:53-56.) Joseph Smith explained that "every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was." He then added modestly, "I suppose I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council." (Teachings, p. 365.) So it was that the Father "called all spirits before Him at the creation of man, and organized them. He (Adam) is the head." (Ibid., p. 158.) Chief among the organizational arrangements and foreordinations in the premortal existence was the organization of lineage and family. Offices and positions in the Church or earthly kingdom would be important, but these would be only for a time and a season, while relationships associated with the family are to endure throughout the endless eternities.

Christ was chosen and called in the Grand Council of Heaven to be the Only Begotten in the flesh and thus the Savior or Redeemer of all mankind. Prophets and Apostles and all who were designated to receive the priesthood and significant roles in the Lord's plan and program were also in like manner forechosen and foredesignated. The house of Israel and the Saints of all ages were also designated according to the election of grace to receive the gospel at a certain time and season. They in turn were to be messengers of those truths to the rest of God's children. Thus they were foreordained to be baptized, endowed, and clothed in the authority of the priesthood and to be witnesses of the principles of salvation among all peoples. All of this was in accordance to the heed and diligence they gave to the law of the gospel as it was presented to them in their first estate.

In our pre-earth estate, death and suffering were unknown to us. In that day we were spirits free from the lusts and passions of the flesh. Disease, physical appetites, and weariness were unknown. Nevertheless we had agency, which implies that there were important choices to be made, choices between what we would believe and what we would not believe, choices relative to the causes we would support and those we would not support, choices relative to the preparations we would make for this mortal sojourn and to the talents we would seek to develop, choices between that which was good and that which was not good. This is obvious from the fact that one third of the host of heaven became sons of perdition, meaning they were hopelessly lost.

The laws of our pre-earth society, the laws that we were schooled to live, were gospel laws. Chosen brethren held the holy priesthood and used it not only in the creation of the earth but in positions of authority in which they were called to teach, lead, and direct their brothers and sisters. Certainly there was a church organization wherein we aided and schooled each other in understanding and living the gospel plan. Through the experiences of the first estate, men and women developed talents which they now possess. We bring with us the degree of spirituality and intelligence we acquired while yet in the presence of God. There were musicians, mathematicians, artists, orators, persuasive personalities, wise men, and on and on among the premortal hosts, even as there are among us now. Abraham saw in vision the noble and great spirits while they yet dwelt in the Divine Presence, meaning he saw those who had acquired the talent for spirituality and leadership. We are born with every talent, capacity, and aptitude we gained by obedience to law while in our premortal estate. As to mortal life, we know that "if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come" (see D&C 130:18-19). This principle is surely true in describing the manner in which our first estate dictates our place and position in mortality. We shall speak more of this in our discussion of premortal Israel in chapter 19.

The question is often asked, Will we at death receive a knowledge of the things we once knew in that first estate? It would not seem appropriate for either the wicked or those ignorant of the gospel plan to have such knowledge restored spontaneously as they pass through the veil of death. Were it otherwise, those in the spirit world who had not as yet received the gospel would have no opportunity to accept it in faith, and the opportunity to test their spiritual integrity would be lost. Repentance and conversion must be undertaken in a context of faith. Peter stated the principle well when he said, "For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit" (1 Pet. 4:6). On the other hand, those who have completed their probationary estate in this mortal sphere and have merited the right to go to paradise where they are just men and women made perfect—that is, persons approved of God who will in the resurrection be exalted—will have passed the tests of mortality. For them the day of probation is over, and surely they shall, line upon line, precept upon precept, have that sacred knowledge restored to them.

Conclusion

Life simply does not make sense without a knowledge of the premortal existence. Reason dictates and the Holy Spirit whispers to our spirits that we have always lived. Truly, as Eliza R. Snow affirmed, we feel in this life as though we have "wandered from a more exalted sphere" ("O My Father," Hymns, no. 292). We do not know how long we spent in our first estate. By mortal reckoning it may have been of near infinite duration. During this period, Jehovah, under the direction of the Father, created worlds without number; this presupposes an extended period of time. We would imagine that, during this existence, the same sociality which exists among us here existed among us there. Our circle of friends and associates undoubtedly included many with whom we share association here. The natural kinship that we feel with and for some is obviously rooted there. Thus we have some degree of recollection upon the reunion with such spirits in this estate though the reason therefore may not be apparent to us. (See Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, pp. 12-13, 311.)

What then should we know of the premortal existence? Enough to place this estate in its proper perspective. Enough to know that the justice and mercy of God cannot be measured by what we experience and see here. Enough to know that we are a people of destiny and that we have been schooled and trained for the same. Enough to know that we will not be called upon to do that for which we have not been trained in the councils of heaven long before we were born. Enough to know that the wisdom of God is manifest in the time and circumstances of our birth and the special challenges that will be ours. And yet little enough to assure that this life will be a test worthy of the blessings of eternity and that all who overcome will do so by faith.
