Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 11

The Second Estate

For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God;

yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors.

-Alma 34:32

Who am I? Why am I here? Where did I come from? What becomes of me at death? These are the questions to which all thoughtful persons seek meaningful answers. If man is more than a freak of nature, more than a cosmic accident, if indeed he is the creation of some divine and eternal Being, then it must be to his Creator that we turn for answers to such questions. Revelation must be the source of all such answers. Either the God of creation must speak, or manÂs quest for meaning is reduced to his own mental meandering. By definition, all true religion is revealed religion. God must stand revealed or remain forever unknown. He alone can make known his purposes in the creation of this earth and all things that he has placed on it.

Sons and Daughters of God

It was not intended that man dwell in darkness. Long before the first of our race was placed upon the earth, the Lord had given the command, ÂLet there be lightÂ (Gen. 1:3). Nor was it intended that Adam wander in doubt or uncertainty relative to the nature and purpose of his creation or to whom he was answerable for his conduct. ÂGod conversed with him face to face: in his presence he was permitted to stand, and from his own mouth he was permitted to receive instruction. He heard his voice, walked before him, and gazed upon his glory, while intelligence burst upon his understanding and enabled him to give names to the vast assemblage of his MakerÂs works.Â (Lectures on Faith 2:18.)

Even after his expulsion from the Garden of Eden, Adam was instructed by the voice of the Lord, messengers from his presence, and the whisperings of the Holy Ghost, and on sacred occasions in the presence of the Lord himself (see Moses 5:58; D&C 107:53Â56). How was the family of Adam to obtain a knowledge of God and the saving truths of salvation? First, they were to learn from their father and mother who knew him, and then they were to communicate with their Heavenly Father in the same way as did their parents; the manner of communication with our Heavenly Father is the same for all his children throughout all generations of time. We can no more argue that at some point in time the heavens were to be sealed, bringing to an end immediate communication with God, than we can argue that at a certain point in history children will be born without the need for parents and their wise and loving direction.

It was the Psalmist who raised the question, ÂWhat is man, that thou [having reference to God] art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?Â (Ps. 8:4.) That is to say, what is there about man that commands the attention and interest of a divine being, even to the point of His personally visiting him? Continuing his query, as it is recorded for us in the standard biblical translation, the Psalmist observes that God made man Âa little lower than the angelsÂ and Âcrowned him with glory and honourÂ (v. 5). The true nature of man and the meaning of the words of the Psalmist were lost in the long night of apostate darkness. Standing in the light of the restored gospel and taking our lead from Joseph Smith, we as Latter-day Saints can dare to translate the PsalmistÂs words as they were penned. The word angels in this text comes from the Hebrew elohim, meaning gods. Thus the text actually declares that man was made Âa little lower than the gods.Â Such a translation harmonizes perfectly with a later Psalm that declares, ÂYe are gods; and all of you are children of the most HighÂ (Ps. 82:6).

The revelations of the Restoration plainly teach that we are GodÂs children and thus were created in his image and likeness. We approach such declarations with a sense of sacred reverence, for they are chief among those plain and precious truths that were taken from the scriptures by evil and designing men. The book of Moses, which comes from the Joseph Smith translation of Genesis, evidences these truths: ÂIn the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him; in the image of his own body, male and female, created he themÂ (Moses 6:8Â9; emphasis added). Thus we learn that the countless efforts to explain away the declaration that man is in the image and likeness of God (see Gen. 1:26) as merely a figurative expression are mistaken. God is not a spirit essence lacking body and parts. Exalted beings have bodies, and Adam and Eve were given a physical body in the image and likeness of their divine parents. Indeed, this same revelation declares the name of God to be ÂMan of HolinessÂ and his Only Begotten in the flesh to be Âthe Son of ManÂ (Moses 6:57). In the same text we are also told that Adam is Âthe son of GodÂ (Moses 6:22). Again we are without justification to suppose that this is a figurative declaration. Christ, we are told, is the Only Begotten in the flesh, meaning the only child ever begotten of the immortal Father and a mortal woman, the only child ever begotten of the Father who had blood coursing in his veins. Only in their transgression did Adam and Eve obtain blood, and thus it was a blood fall that necessitated a blood atonement. It was father Abraham who told us that Adam was the ÂfirstbornÂ of all the FatherÂs children upon this earth (Abr. 1:3) and Moses who told us that a genealogy was kept of the family of Adam, who were Âthe children of GodÂ (see Moses 6:6Â8). No longer do the words of the Psalmist, wherein he said, ÂYe are gods; and all of you are children of the most HighÂ (Ps. 82:6), stand alone, and no longer need there be any question as to who we are.

Why We Came to Earth

As to the question why we are here, the revelations of the Restoration again are plain. We come to earth to gain a body, to continue the course that leads to exaltation, and to be tried and tested and proven in all things. The importance of the mortal body is made plain in the Book of Mormon, which defines the resurrection as the inseparable union of body and spirit and the perfection of the same (see Alma 11:45; 40:23). ÂThat which is without body, parts and passions is nothing,Â declared Joseph Smith. ÂThere is no other God in heaven but that God who has flesh and bones.Â As to our purpose in mortality he explained: ÂWe came to this earth that we might have a body and present it pure before God in the celestial kingdom. The great principle of happiness consists in having a body. The devil has no body, and herein is his punishment.Â (Teachings, p. 181; see also pp. 305Â306.) To this the revelations add that only when the body and spirit are inseparably connected can we receive a Âfulness of joyÂ (see D&C 93:33Â34).

Thus it is that the pre-earth spirits come to this, their second estate, to obtain bodies that they might be like their Creator and eventually obtain a fulness of joy. Mortality is a test, a place to see if we will do the things that God requires of us, overcoming all opposition to those efforts by faith (see D&C 76:53). From the book of Abraham we learn that this earth was created to provide a place for the spirit children of the Father to come and prove themselves and see if they would Âdo all things whatsoever the Lord their GodÂ should command them, with the attendant promise that Âthey who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and everÂ (Abr. 3:25Â26).

The great test of mortality is obedience, and as in all things Christ is the perfect example of that. In what may be the greatest discourse in scripture on the matter, Nephi asked why Christ, who was both holy and sinless, needed to be baptized. The response was that by being baptized Christ humbled himself before the Father and witnessed that he would be obedient in keeping all the commandments. Thus he showed the children of men Âthe straitness of the path, and the narrowness of the gate, by which they should enter, he having set the example before them.Â (2 Ne. 31:9.) Nephi effectually suggested four reasons why Christ was baptized: first, to evidence his humility; second, to manifest his obedience to the will of the Father; third, to set an example for all mankind; and fourth, that he too might enter in at the gate, working out his own salvation on the same terms required of his brothers and sisters (vv. 5Â10). Expanding on what Nephi taught and showing that the same principles apply to all the ordinances of salvation, the Prophet Joseph Smith explained: ÂIf a man gets a fullness of the priesthood of God he has to get it in the same way that Jesus Christ obtained it, and that was by keeping all the commandments and obeying all the ordinances of the house of the LordÂ (Teachings, p. 308).

Thus our purpose in mortality is to place ourselves on the path that leads back to the presence of God. Baptism is the gate. It places us on that strait and narrow gospel path. Having been baptized, we must then Âpress forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men.Â We have been promised that if we will Âpress forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life.Â To this Nephi adds, ÂThis is the way; and there is none other way nor name given under heaven whereby man can be saved in the kingdom of God.Â (2 Ne. 31:20Â21.)

In all things, Christ is our exemplar. His sojourn on earth marks the path we are to follow. In a great revelation designed to show us the proper form and reason for worship, the Prophet restored to us some of the writings of John the Baptist. JohnÂs testimony is that Christ did not receive the fulness of his Father at the first but that he Âreceived grace for grace; . . . until he received a fulness; and thus he was called the Son of God, because he received not of the fulness at the first.Â John testified that Âthe heavens were opened, and the Holy Ghost descended upon him [Christ] in the form of a dove, and sat upon him, and there came a voice out of heaven saying: This is my beloved Son. And I, John, bear record that he received a fulness of the glory of the Father; and he received all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him.Â (See D&C 93:12Â18.) How, then, are we to worship? By following ChristÂs example in advancing from grace to grace, by having our will swallowed up in the will of the Father (see Mosiah 15:7), by serving and growing in countless ways in the great labor of building up the kingdom of God on earth according to the opportunities and talents that we are given. And what are we to worship? A God whose Son would mark the path for us by also coming to this earth and taking upon himself all the vicissitudes of mortality, overcoming them as he advanced from one grace to a greater grace. So it was that he received the fulness of the Father, and so it is that we too might obtain that same fulness (see D&C 93:19Â20).

The tests of mortality are portrayed in LehiÂs visionary dream (see 1 Ne. 8). With an angel as his tutor and guide, he was shown a large and spacious field in which he saw a tree, the fruit of which brought great happiness. The tree was white beyond anything he had ever before seen. As he partook of the fruit, his soul was filled with joy and he was immediately desirous that his family also partake of it. As he looked around for his family, he became aware of a river running near the tree, which he followed with his eyes to its head, where he saw his wife, Sariah, and his sons Sam and Nephi. Lehi discerned that they did not know what they should do. Lehi called to them to join him in partaking of the fruit of the tree. After more searching, he sighted Laman and Lemuel and encouraged them to join him, but they refused. Lehi then noticed a rod of iron that extended along the bank of the river leading to the tree. ÂI also beheld a strait and narrow path, which came along by the rod of iron, even to the tree by which I stood; and it also led by the head of the fountain, unto a large and spacious field, as if it had been a worldÂ (1 Ne. 8:20).

Here Lehi saw numberless concourses of people, Âmany of whom were pressing forward, that they might obtain the path which led unto the tree by which [he] stoodÂ (1 Ne. 8:21). Then there arose a mist of darkness that caused many to lose their way and wander off the path and be lost. Others made it safely to the tree and commenced partaking of the fruit. After having done so, they took their eyes off the tree and cast them about as if they were ashamed. Lehi saw a great and spacious building on the opposite side of the river, which stood high above the earth in the air. It was filled with men and women of all ages who were finely dressed and who were mocking those who had come to partake of the fruit. In shame, those who had been feasting on the fruit ceased to do so and fell away into forbidden paths and were lost. Still other multitudes pressed forward and took hold of the end of the iron rod, continuing onward until they partook of the fruit of the tree. We presume they remained true and faithful. Lehi also saw other multitudes feeling their way towards the great and spacious building he had seen. Many were drowned in the depths of the fountain, and many were lost from his view, wandering in strange roads. A great number entered into that strange building, after which they too began to point the finger of scorn at Lehi and those who were partaking of the fruit with him, Âbut we heeded them not.Â (See 1 Ne. 8:23Â33.)

We shall discuss in later chapters what becomes of the body and the soul of man after death. At this point, we will let it suffice to say that our revelations assure us that the labors of this life will follow us into the life to come. Of those who die in the faith, the Lord has said, ÂTheir works shall follow them; and they shall receive a crown in the mansions of my Father, which I have prepared for themÂ (D&C 59:2). Relative to all mankind, the Lord said: ÂWhatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come.Â (D&C 130:18Â19.) Our body and soul constitute the book of life from which we will be judged. All that we have done or left undone will be indelibly recorded there. Thus the scales of eternal justice will balance our labors with the desires of our heart, or our faith with our works.

In the words of Alma, ÂThis life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors.Â We are warned not to procrastinate either the day of our repentance or the labors of our righteousness, Âfor after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed.Â (See Alma 34:32Â34.) Little or nothing is to be gained in deathbed repentance. The reason, Amulek explains, is because that same spirit, meaning those same propensities or dispositions, that held sway over our hearts and minds in this world will hold the same place of kinship with our souls in the world to come. It is for us to change our nature; neither death nor birth will do that for us.

Conclusion

In LehiÂs dream, happiness was found only by those who held fast to the iron rod and rejoiced in the sweetness of the fruit of the tree of life. The purpose of their journey through the mist of darkness known to us as mortality was to obtain that joy and happiness and to share it as families. ÂHappiness,Â Joseph Smith explained, Âis the object and design of our existence; and will be the end thereof, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God.Â He further assured us that God will not institute any ordinance or give any commandment Âthat is not calculated in its nature to promote that happiness which He has designed, and which will not end in the greatest amount of good and glory to those who become the recipients of his law and ordinances.Â (Teachings, pp. 255Â57.) The gospel has no other purpose than to enlighten and bless those who live it. ÂThat which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness. That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day.Â (D&C 50:23Â24.)

If we return to the query of the Psalmist, ÂWhat is man, that thou art mindful of him?Â (Ps. 8:4), our answer is that man is the offspring of God and thus is the focal point of his love and attention. This earth was created for the blessing and advancement of GodÂs sons and daughters. We have been given the gospel as a shield and protection, as a source of confidence and assurance, as a divine system of happiness. In a revelation to Moses, the Lord said, ÂThis is my work and my glory-to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of manÂ (Moses 1:39). GodÂs every purpose is to bless us. The joy parents find in the advancement of their children is but the reflection of the heavenly order of things. God seeks to crown his offspring with glory and honor and to make them his heirs, even Âjoint-heirs with ChristÂ (Rom. 8:14Â17). In manÂs choice to follow the path of happiness, the heavens find cause to rejoice.
