Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 12

Life Beyond the Grave

After this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity,

behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life,

then cometh the night of darkness.

-Alma 34:33

Knowledge concerning life beyond the grave came to Joseph Smith very early in his ministry. God the Eternal Father and his Son Jesus Christ appeared to the boy prophet in a sacred grove in the spring of 1820. In the midst of a light that shone above the brightness of the sun stood two holy personages whose very presence attested to the reality of the life beyond. Subsequent appearances of holy messengers-sent to bestow knowledge, keys, and powers-would further testify to the Latter-day Saints that death is not the end. ÂAll men know that they must die,Â Joseph Smith explained to the Latter-day Saints in Nauvoo. ÂAnd it is important that we should understand the reasons and causes of our exposure to the vicissitudes of life and of death, and the designs and purposes of God in our coming into the world, our sufferings here, and our departure hence. . . . It is but reasonable to suppose that God would reveal something in reference to the matter, and it is a subject we ought to study more than any other. We ought to study it day and night, for the world is ignorant in reference to their true condition and relation. If we have any claim on our Heavenly Father for anything, it is for knowledge on this important subject.Â (Teachings, p. 324.)

As a part of the Restoration, the God of heaven chose to make known, line upon line, precept upon precept, the soul-warming verities associated with that third phase of our eternal journey we know as the postmortal existence.

The Doctrine of Death

Nothing is more common to mortals than death; the common lot of all who come into this life is to leave it. Every man and woman is born, and every man and woman must die. All are born as helpless infants, and, with few exceptions, all depart this sphere equally helpless in the face of death. Death is something most of us fear, something from which we hide, something most of us would choose to avoid if we could. Even among those who read by the lamp of gospel understanding, death is frequently viewed with fear and trembling. Wilford Woodruff Âreferred to a saying of Joseph Smith, which he heard him utter (like this), That if the people knew what was behind the veil, they would try by every means to . . . get there. But the Lord in his wisdom had implanted the fear of death in every person that they might cling to life and thus accomplish the designs of their Creator.Â (Diary of Charles L. Walker, 1:595Â96; spelling and punctuation modernized.)

In the purest sense, there is no death and there are no dead. When things die they do not cease to be; they merely cease to be in this world. Life goes on. Death is a transition, a change in assignment, a transfer to another realm. When we die, the spirit continues to see and act and feel and associate; it is only the physical body that becomes inactive and lifeless for a season. And so it is that we use the term death to describe this transition from our limited perspective. From an eternal vantage point, however, there is only life. We speak often of a personÂs untimely death. Generally we mean that it is untimely for us, for those who remain behind. Though it is true that individuals may hasten their death and thus shorten their day of probation, for the faithful there is nothing untimely about death. President Joseph Fielding Smith stated: ÂMay I say for the consolation of those who mourn, and for the comfort and guidance of all of us, that no righteous man is ever taken before his time. In the case of the faithful Saints, they are simply transferred to other fields of labor. The LordÂs work goes on in this life, in the world of spirits, and in the kingdoms of glory where men go after their resurrection.Â (Address given at the funeral of Elder Richard L. Evans, 4 November 1971, p. 1; see also Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle, pp. 103, 105.)

In a sense, we die as to premortality in order to be born into mortality. Likewise, we must die as pertaining to time in order to be born into eternity. The separation of the physical body and the eternal spirit is a necessary part of the plan of God, for, as Alma explained, to reclaim man from this temporal death Âwould destroy the great plan of happinessÂ (Alma 42:8). Truly, death passes upon all men and women Âto fulfil the merciful plan of the great CreatorÂ (2 Ne. 9:6). Death is merciful in the sense that it delivers us from the toils and agonies of this life. ÂWhen men are prepared,Â the Prophet observed, Âthey are better off to go henceÂ (Teachings, p. 326). In speaking of little children who depart this life before they arrive at the age of accountability, he said, ÂThe Lord takes many away even in infancy, that they may escape the envy of man, and the sorrows and evils of this present world; they were too pure, too lovely, to live on earth; therefore, if rightly considered, instead of mourning we have reason to rejoice as they are delivered from evil, and we shall soon have them againÂ (ibid., pp. 196Â97).

Death is merciful too because it opens us to a new phase of life, a time wherein the restrictions of this mortal coil are gone and the mind or spirit can soar. Brigham Young, in speaking of the glory of what lies ahead, remarked: ÂI can say with regard to parting with our friends, and going ourselves, that I have been near enough to understand eternity so that I have had to exercise a great deal more faith to desire to live than I ever exercised in my whole life to live. The brightness and glory of the next apartment is inexpressible. It is not encumbered . . . so that when we advance in years we have to be stubbing along and to be careful lest we fall down. We see our youth, even, frequently stubbing their toes and falling down. But yonder, how different! They move with ease and like lightning.Â (In Journal of Discourses 14:231.) ÂHow do we know,Â asked Elder Orson Pratt, Âwhen this spirit is freed from this mortal tabernacle, but that all [our] senses will be greatly enlarged? . . . Unclothe the spirit, and instead of exposing a small portion of it about the size of a pea to the action of the rays of light, the whole of it would be exposed. I think we could then see in different directions at once. . . . I believe we shall be freed, in the next world, in a great measure, from these narrow, contracted methods of thinking. Instead of thinking in one channel, and following up one certain course of reasoning to find a certain truth, knowledge will rush in from all quarters; . . . informing the spirit, and giving understanding concerning ten thousand things at the same time; and the mind will be capable of receiving and retaining all.Â (In ibid. 2:243, 246.)

The severance of family ties through death is of all things most painful, bringing with it an avalanche of emotions, including loneliness and sorrow. Those of the household of faith are not spared such feelings. Our Heavenly Father knows all things and has a present view of all time and eternity, and even he is aware of such agonies. The Lord has said: ÂThou shalt live together in love, insomuch that thou shalt weep for the loss of them that dieÂ (D&C 42:45). We weep and we long for a reassociation, but we do not grieve as those who have no hope (see 1 Thes. 4:13), for to do so is to express a lack of faith in the purposes and plan of God and to ignore the promise of reunion and restoration given by our Lord and Savior. Indeed, lifeÂs bitter winters may find us walking alone. During these cold and dark seasons of solitude, we wrap ourselves in the protective clothing of faith and its perspective and are warmed by precious memories. Thus we move on, seeking always to view things as God views them. ÂPrecious in the sight of the Lord,Â the revealed word declares, Âis the death of his saintsÂ (Ps. 116:15). We have the assurance from modern revelation that Âthose that die shall rest from all their labors, and their works shall follow them; and they shall receive a crown in the mansions of my Father, which I have prepared for themÂ (D&C 59:2).

Ten thousand times ten thousand things testify that death is not the end but instead a significant point along the infinite line of life. Truly Âthis life is not all; the voice of reason, the language of inspiration, and the Spirit of the living God, our Creator, teaches us, as we hold the record of truth in our hands, that this is not the case, that this is not so; for, the heavens declare the glory of a God, and the firmament showeth His handiworkÂ (Teachings, p. 56). We are born, we die, and thus the cycle of life continues everlastingly. If there were no death, there would be no life. If there were no death, then the growth and development and expansion and deification which lie ahead would be forever withheld from us. There is purpose in life, and there is purpose in death. He who knows all things orchestrates the events of our existence and knows what is best for us. The Prophet Joseph thus declared: ÂWith respect to the deaths in Zion, we feel to mourn with those that mourn, but remember that the God of all the earth will do rightÂ (History of the Church 1:341).

The World of the Disembodied

Modern revelation attests that the transition from time into eternity is immediate. As the individual breathes his last breath, his spirit leaves the body and passes directly into the world of spirits. Joseph Smith taught: ÂThe spirits of the just are exalted to a greater and more glorious work; hence they are blessed in their departure to the world of spirits. Enveloped in flaming fire, they are not far from us, and know and understand our thoughts, feelings, and motions, and are often pained therewith.Â (Teachings, p. 326; emphasis added.) ÂIs the spirit world here?Â President Brigham Young asked. ÂIt is not beyond the sun, but is on this earth that was organized for the people that have lived and that do and will live upon it.Â (In Journal of Discourses 3:372.) Parley P. Pratt similarly explained that the spirit world Âis here on the very planet where we were bornÂ (Key to the Science of Theology, p. 80).

At the time of oneÂs entrance into the spirit world, the individual experiences what President Joseph F. Smith called a Âpartial judgmentÂ (see Gospel Doctrine, pp. 448Â49). He or she goes either to paradise or to hell (see 1 Ne. 15:29; 2 Ne. 9:12). Paradise is the abode of the faithful, a state of happiness, Âa state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrowÂ (Alma 40:12). Paradise is a place where spirits Âexpand in wisdom, where they have respite from all their troubles, and where care and sorrow do not annoyÂ (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, p. 448). On the other hand, the spirits of the wicked Âshall be cast out into outer darkness; there shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, and this because of their own iniquity, being led captive by the will of the devilÂ (Alma 40:13).

Modern revelation also makes clear that the entire spirit world, not just that portion known as hell or outer darkness, is in a sense a Âspirit prison.Â Though there are divisions of some kind between the righteous and the wicked, all of the spirits of men and women are in one world, just as they are in the flesh. In the postmortal spirit world, the disembodied long for deliverance and seek for relief from their present condition; they look upon the long absence of their spirits from their bodies as a bondage (see D&C 45:17; 138:50; see also 138:15Â18, 23). ÂWhen our spirits leave these bodies, will they be happy?Â Orson Pratt asked. ÂNot perfectly so,Â he responded. ÂWhy? Because the spirit is absent from the body; it cannot be perfectly happy while a part of the man is lying in the earth. . . . You will be happy, you will be at ease in paradise; but still you will be looking for a house where your spirit can enter, and act as you did in former times.Â (In Journal of Discourses 1:289Â90.)

Brigham Young asked: ÂWhere are the spirits of the ungodly? They are in prison. Where are the spirits of the righteous, the Prophets, and the Apostles? They are in prison, brethren; that is where they are.Â President Young continued: ÂI know it is a startling idea to say that the Prophet and the persecutor of the Prophet, all go to prison together . . . , but they have not got their bodies yet, consequently they are in prison.Â (In ibid. 3:94Â95.) The Choice Seer summarized: ÂHades, the Greek, or Sheol, the Hebrew, these two significations mean a world of spirits. Hades, Sheol, paradise, spirits in prison, are all one: it is a world of spirits.Â (Teachings, p. 310.) Thus for the Apostle Peter to declare that Jesus went, after his mortal death, to preach to the Âspirits in prisonÂ (see 1 Pet. 3:18Â20)-and knowing from modern scripture that the Master did not minister in person to the wicked (see D&C 138:20Â22, 29, 37)-we conclude that he preached to the spirits in prison in the sense that he preached the gospel in the spirit world. More specifically, Âfrom among the righteous, he organized his forces and appointed messengers, clothed with power and authority, and commissioned them to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness, even to all the spirits of menÂ (D&C 138:30).

Just as surely as there are variations among the godly in paradise, so also there must be differences among those in hell. There are the very wicked who, as Alma explained, are subject to confrontation, suffering, and sore repentance. There are others-good people, on the whole-who have not enjoyed the blessings of the fulness of the gospel because those blessings were unavailable to them. Such people can continue to work and grow and learn and develop, and many of them open their hearts to the gospel message. Modern prophets have further clarified that once the gospel message is delivered and accepted by individuals in the spirit world, and once the appropriate ordinances have been performed by those in the flesh who act as proxy for the departed, Âthe Lord has administrators there to set them freeÂ (Teachings, p. 367). Once a person has received the gospel and its saving ordinances, he or she is permitted to cross the gulf that separates hell from paradise and thereafter enjoy sweet association with the faithful (see Luke 16:26; see also 1 Ne. 15:28Â30; Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation 2:158, 230).

Peter taught that persons in the spirit world are presented the gospel and are expected to accept it on faith, just as they would be expected to do in the flesh (see 1 Pet. 4:6). And we do not suppose, knowing the goodness and justice of our God, that it would be any easier to accept the gospel as a disembodied spirit than as a mortal. And yet there are factors that bear upon a personÂs capacity to see and feel and hear and receive the truth. Some of those factors bear upon all of us, and some of them are beyond our power to control. As we move closer to the great millennial day, wickedness will widen and malevolence will multiply. The index of moral pollution will rise, making it more and more difficult to remain unscathed and unwounded in the war against evil. ÂIt is my conviction,Â Elder Boyd K. Packer testified, Âthat those wicked influences one day will be overruledÂ (in Conference Report, April 1992, p. 94).

Surely in the postmortal spirit world men and women will have their burdens of abuse, neglect, false teachings, and improper traditions-all of which can deter one from embracing the truth-torn away as a film. Then perhaps they will, free in that sphere from LuciferÂs taunts, see as they are seen and know as they are known. Wilford Woodruff stated: ÂI tell you when the prophets and apostles go to preach to those who are shut up in prison, . . . thousands of them will there embrace the Gospel. They know more in that world than they do here.Â (As quoted in Packer, The Holy Temple, p. 206.) Lorenzo Snow, presumably speaking of the honest-hearted individuals who enter the spirit world, also pointed out:

Within the last few months thousands of persons in the spirit world have been placed in a condition that they may receive the word of God and be saved, through the ordinances that have been administered in these four temples in this Territory. A wonderful work is being accomplished in our temples in favor of the spirits in prison. I believe, strongly too, that when the Gospel is preached to the spirits in prison, the success attending that preaching will be far greater than that attending the preaching of our Elders in this life. I believe there will be very few indeed of those spirits who will not gladly receive the Gospel when it is carried to them. The circumstances there will be a thousand times more favorable. . . . I believe there will be very few who will not receive the truth. They will hear the voice of the Son of God; they will hear the voice of the Priesthood of the Son of God, and they will receive the truth and live. (In Stuy, Collected Discourses 3:363.)

ÂIn this space between death and the resurrection of the body, the two classes of souls remain, in happiness or in misery, until the time which is appointed of God that the dead shall come forth and be reunited both spirit and bodyÂ (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, p. 448). And so the postmortal spirit world is an intermediate stop for all men and women. It is a place of waiting, of repentance and suffering, of peace and rest, and of instruction and preparation. Those celestial people who receive and enjoy the blessings of the gospel and those terrestrial people who at least receive the testimony of Jesus will come forth from the spirit world unto the first resurrection (see D&C 76:50Â79). Those who continue to assert their own will and refuse the SaviorÂs offer of enlightenment and renewal will remain in the spirit world until the thousand years are ended (D&C 76:81Â85). Then in that second or last resurrection they shall come forth, either to a telestial glory or to a kingdom of no glory as sons of perdition (see D&C 76:31Â38).

Resurrection and Judgment

The Apostle Paul taught that Âif in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserableÂ (1 Cor. 15:19). That is to say, if JesusÂ greatest accomplishments consisted of his kindness, his generosity, and his sage advice, then our hope for happiness hereafter is unfounded. Like Paul, the Book of Mormon prophet Jacob declared that if Christ did not rise from the dead as it was predicted that he would do, then we should one and all be consigned at the time of death to spiritual ruin and destruction and be forevermore subject to the father of lies. Why? Because if Jesus did not have the power to rise from the dead and thus redeem the body from the grave, then he surely did not have the power to forgive sins and thereby redeem the spirit from hell (see 2 Ne. 9:7Â9; compare 1 Cor. 15:12Â17). ÂIf the resurrection from the dead be not an important point, or item in our faith,Â Joseph Smith explained, Âwe must confess that we know nothing about it; for if there be no resurrection from the dead, then Christ has not risen; and if Christ has not risen He was not the Son of God.Â On the other hand, Âif He has risen from the dead the bands of the temporal death are broken that the grave has no victory. If then, the grave has no victory, those who keep the sayings of Jesus and obey His teachings have not only a promise of a resurrection from the dead, but an assurance of being admitted into His glorious kingdom.Â (Teachings, p. 62.) Because Jesus Christ has risen from the dead, we also shall rise from the dead. Because he lives, we shall live also beyond the grave.

The resurrected body is a spiritual body, meaning that it is immortal, not subject to death (see 1 Cor. 15:44; Alma 11:45; D&C 88:27). The scriptural promise is that we will come forth from the grave with a resurrected body suited to the respective kingdom we shall inherit:

They who are of a celestial spirit shall receive the same body which was a natural body; even ye shall receive your bodies, and your glory shall be that glory by which your bodies are quickened.

Ye who are quickened by a portion of the celestial glory shall then receive of the same, even a fulness.

And they who are quickened by a portion of the terrestrial glory shall then receive of the same, even a fulness.

And also they who are quickened by a portion of the telestial glory shall then receive of the same, even a fulness.

And they who remain [the sons of perdition] shall also be quickened; nevertheless, they shall return again to their own place, to enjoy that which they are willing to receive, because they were not willing to enjoy that which they might have received. (D&C 88:28Â32.)

Further, the scriptures of the Restoration clarify the nature of the resurrected body. ÂThe soul [meaning, in this instance, the spirit] shall be restored to the body,Â Alma explained, Âand the body to the soul; yea, and every limb and joint shall be restored to its body; yea, even a hair of the head shall not be lost; but all things shall be restored to their proper and perfect frameÂ (Alma 40:23; see also 11:43). In speaking of the righteous who waited anxiously for the SaviorÂs entrance into paradise, Joseph F. Smith wrote: ÂTheir sleeping dust was to be restored unto its perfect frame, bone to his bone, and the sinews and the flesh upon them, the spirit and the body to be united never again to be divided, that they might receive a fulness of joyÂ (D&C 138:17). Latter-day prophets have instructed that the body comes forth from the grave as it is laid down, Âwhether old or young; there will not be Âadded unto their stature one cubit,Â neither taken from it; all will be raised by the power of God, having spirit in their bodies, and not bloodÂ (Teachings, pp. 199Â200). We are not to understand that physical deformities will be a part of the resurrected body, for Âdeformity will be removed; defects will be eliminated, and men and women shall attain to the perfection of their spirits, to the perfection that God designed in the beginningÂ (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, p. 23).

On one occasion Elder Orson Pratt pointed out that a personÂs mortal body is constantly changing-old cells being replaced by new ones, and so forth. The Prophet Joseph responded: ÂThere is no fundamental principle belonging to a human system that ever goes into another in this world or in the world to come; I care not what the theories of men are. We have the testimony that God will raise us up, and he has the power to do it. If any one supposes that any part of our bodies, that is, the fundamental parts thereof, ever goes into another body, he is mistaken.Â (History of the Church 5:339.) Brigham Young, who was tutored by the Choice Seer, said:

The question may be asked, do not the particles that compose manÂs body, when returned to mother earth, go to make or compose other bodies? No, they do not. . . . Neither can the particles which have comprised the body of man become parts of the bodies of other men, or of beasts, fowls, fish, insect, or vegetables. They are governed by divine law and though they may pass from the knowledge of the scientific world, that divine law still holds, governs and controls them. ManÂs body may be buried in the ocean, it may be eaten by wild beasts, or it may be burned to ashes, they may be scattered to the four winds, yet the particles of which it is composed will not be incorporated into any form of vegetable or animal life, to become a component part of their structure. . . . At the sound of the trumpet of God every particle of our physical structures necessary to make our tabernacles perfect will be assembled, to be rejoined with the spirit, every man in his order. Not one particle will be lost. (ÂThe Resurrection,Â p. 153.)

Finally, we have the comforting assurance that even though men and women are refined, renewed, and perfected in body and soul in the resurrection, we shall maintain our identity. We shall know friends and loved ones in and after the resurrection, even as we know them now. Though Christians at the time of Joseph Smith (and many today, as well) spoke of being caught up into the love of Jesus and blending into his nature, the revelations of heaven declare otherwise. In speaking of meeting a departed loved one in the future, President Joseph F. Smith taught: ÂI expect to be able to recognize her, just as I could recognize her tomorrow, if she were living . . . , because her identity is fixed and indestructible, just as fixed and indestructible as the identity of God the Father and Jesus Christ the Son. They cannot be any other than themselves. They cannot be changed; they are from everlasting to everlasting, eternally the same; so it will be with us. We will progress and develop and grow in wisdom and understanding, but our identity can never change.Â (Gospel Doctrine, p. 25.)

In the Book of Mormon, resurrection and eternal judgment are companion doctrines, just as are the Fall and Atonement. One of the great acts of mercy and grace is that all men and women who took a physical body, including the sons of perdition, will be resurrected and thereafter brought to stand before God to be judged of their works. In a sense, therefore, the Atonement overcomes spiritual death for all, at least for a short season wherein men stand once again in the divine presence. Jacob wrote: ÂAnd it shall come to pass that when all men shall have passed from this first death unto life, insomuch as they have become immortal, they must appear before the judgment-seat of the Holy One of Israel; and then cometh the judgment, and then must they be judged according to the holy judgment of GodÂ (2 Ne. 9:15). Samuel the Lamanite also declared that Jesus Âsurely must die that salvation may come; yea, it behooveth him and becometh expedient that he dieth, to bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, that thereby men may be brought into the presence of the LordÂ (Hel. 14:15; compare 3 Ne. 27:13Â16). Finally, Moroni bore witness that Âbecause of Jesus Christ came the redemption of man. And because of the redemption of man, which came by Jesus Christ, they are brought back into the presence of the Lord; yea, this is wherein all men are redeemed.Â (Morm. 9:12Â13; emphasis added.)

Conclusion

ÂMore painful to me are the thoughts of annihilation than death,Â Joseph Smith once declared (Teachings, p. 296). With the restoration of divine truths concerning life after death, light has replaced darkness, sound doctrine and pure religion have replaced ignorance and superstition, and men and women may now traverse lifeÂs paths without that ominous fear of what-if anything-follows death. We know where we came from. We know why we are here. And we know where we are going when death calls to each of us, when we pass through that veil that separates time and eternity. The testimony of holy writ resounds: in Christ there is peace. In Christ there is hope for deliverance from sin and death. There are no wrongs that shall not be righted in time or eternity, no burdens that shall not be lifted. Joseph Smith the Seer, with a perspective informed by a panoramic vision, prophetically promised: ÂAll your losses will be made up to you in the resurrection, provided you continue faithful. By the vision of the Almighty I have seen it.Â (Ibid.)
