Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Part II

Joseph Smith-A Legal Administrator

Inasmuch as the Lord Almighty has preserved me until today,

He will continue to preserve me, by the united faith and prayers

of the Saints, until I have fully accomplished my mission in this life,

and so firmly established the dispensation of the fullness of the

priesthood in the last days, that all the powers of

earth and hell can never prevail against it.

-Joseph Smith (Teachings, p. 258)

To the meridian Twelve, the Lord said: ÂYe have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained youÂ (John 15:16). It is for the Lord to choose those who act in his name. If there be a message of salvation, it must trace itself to the Author of salvation. In like manner, if there be ordinances of salvation, they too must come through a legal administrator, one called and ordained as were the meridian Twelve. So it has ever been, and so it must ever be. The LordÂs house is a house of order.

Joseph Smith professed no authority save that given him by those sent from the throne of God. He received the lesser priesthood at the hands of John the Baptist, and the greater, the Holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God, at the hands of Peter, James, and John. ÂIt shall not be given to any one to go forth to preach my gospel, or to build up my church,Â the Lord told his newly called prophet, Âexcept he be ordained by some one who has authority, and it is known to the church that he has authority and has been regularly ordained by the heads of the churchÂ (D&C 42:11).

The power and authority of the higher, or Melchizedek Priesthood, is to hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church-

To have the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to have the heavens opened unto them, to commune with the general assembly and church of the Firstborn, and to enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of the new covenant.

The power and authority of the lesser, or Aaronic Priesthood, is to hold the keys of the ministering of angels, and to administer in outward ordinances, the letter of the gospel, the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, agreeable to the covenants and commandments. (D&C 107:18Â20.)

Joseph Smith spoke Âas one having authorityÂ (Matt. 7:29), and by that same authority he reinstituted the ordinances of salvation. By that authority he reestablished the church and kingdom of God on the earth. By that authority he organized the quorums of the First Presidency and the Twelve Apostles, to whom the Lord said:

For unto you, the Twelve, and those, the First Presidency, who are appointed with you to be your counselors and your leaders, is the power of this priesthood given, for the last days and for the last time, in the which is the dispensation of the fulness of times.

Which power you hold, in connection with all those who have received a dispensation at any time from the beginning of the creation;

For verily I say unto you, the keys of the dispensation, which ye have received, have come down from the fathers, and last of all, being sent down from heaven unto you. (D&C 112:30Â32.)

Thus the authority by which Jesus preached as well as the prophets before him, the authority by which they healed the sick and raised the dead, the authority by which they baptized the faithful and remitted sins, the authority by which all matters that appertain to the kingdom of God were performed, all of these things were restored in this the final great dispensation of the gospel. The clear recognition of the necessity of that authority and the equally clear manifestation of that authority in our dispensation stand as perfect witnesses of the divine calling of the Prophet Joseph Smith and of the divinity of the Church organized by him.

Chapter 13

The Need for Divine Authority

All the ordinances, systems, and administrations on the earth are of

no use to the children of men, unless they are ordained and authorized

of God; for nothing will save a man but a legal administrator;

for none others will be acknowledged either by God or angels.

-Joseph Smith (Teachings, p. 274)

Anciently the LordÂs people were always a covenant people with covenant spokesmen, those commissioned to speak for the Lord, standing at their head. These men, generally known as prophets and apostles, not only spoke by way of revelation but claimed the authority to perform whatever ritual or ordinance was essential to the edification, blessing, and salvation of their followers. In our own day, we might ask if such authority is still necessary. If so, can it still be found among the children of men? How are the various claims to authority to be discerned? How is such authority obtained, and what constitutes its proper use?

The Necessity of Authority

Men may profess the right to establish their own kingdoms or organize their own churches, but having done so they do not have the right to profess that what they have done represents the Lord. If the kingdom is the LordÂs, then its ministers must be of his choosing and its rituals of his ordaining. Well might we ask: How would you react to strangers invading the sanctity of your home, claiming the right to act in your name, and redistributing your property? Claiming to minister in the name of God without his commission does not differ from such a course. Its seriousness still echoes in the words spoken on Sinai, ÂThou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vainÂ (Ex. 20:7). To those of our dispensation the Lord has said, ÂLet all men beware how they take my name in their lips-for behold, verily I say, that many there be who are under this condemnation, who use the name of the Lord, and use it in vain, having not authorityÂ (D&C 63:61Â62).

No kingdom, government, or organization of any kind could survive without respect for authority. All such entities require officers and laws and all reject as meaningless those things not done by proper authority. In families, children do not speak in the name of their parents unless they have been properly directed to do so. In business and government, only authorized persons can speak with authority, sign contracts, or otherwise represent the institutions involved. So it is and must be in the kingdom of God. It is not for those who have not been chosen as agents of the King to tell others that they have been saved or damned. Nor is it for them to profess to represent the kingdom of God in the declaration of its doctrines. Some have supposed that their reading of the Bible and the directive given to others anciently commissions them to act in the name of the Lord. This could hardly be the case. Having possession of the constitution of the United States does not empower one to represent the government of the United States any more than a childÂs possession of his or her parentsÂ wedding license authorizes that child to speak for them. ÂBehold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion.Â To illustrate, the Lord asks a series of obvious questions: ÂWill I accept of an offering . . . that is not made in my name [meaning by the authority of my priesthood]? Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed? And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was?Â (D&C 132:8Â11.) Who, we ask, has the right to speak for God? And in response we must reply: only those he has authorized to do so.

ÂWhat will become of the world, or the various professors of religion who do not believe in revelation and the oracles of God as continued to His Church in all ages of the world, when He has a people on earth?Â Joseph Smith asked rhetorically. ÂI tell you in the name of Jesus Christ, they will be damned.Â (Teachings, p. 272.) Illustrating this principle the Prophet observed that Âthere is no salvation between the two lids of the Bible without a legal administratorÂ (ibid., p. 319). He also said, ÂAll the ordinances, systems, and administrations on the earth are of no use to the children of men, unless they are ordained and authorized of God; for nothing will save a man but a legal administrator; for none others will be acknowledged either by God or angelsÂ (ibid., p. 274). ÂGod will not acknowledge that which he has not called, ordained, and chosenÂ (ibid., p. 168).

Claims to Priesthood Authority

The Catholic Church makes a twofold claim to the authority to represent the Lord: scripture and apostolic tradition. While other religious denominations claim possession of the same scriptures, Catholicism makes an exclusive claim to the apostolic or oral tradition by which they are to be interpreted. That is, they claim to be the stewards of the unwritten and private instruction given by the Apostles to the succeeding generation. This, they claim, belongs to their church alone. Thus the church claims to have the key which unlocks the true or secret meaning of each scriptural text. It is also argued that, as recorded in Matt. 16, the Savior chose Peter to stand at the head of the church and that whatever he allowed on earth would be what heaven allows, and whatever he chose to forbid on earth would be what heaven forbids. The authority of the popes is then traced to the authority given to Peter, who is claimed as the first of their number.

The Protestant world was formed by the rejection of the Catholic claim to authority during the period called the Reformation. The idea of apostolic tradition was rejected on the grounds that its fruits-which included masses for the dead, Limbo, Purgatory, indulgences, and so forth-were corrupt and unbiblical. The Bible is declared to be the sole norm of faith in the Protestant world. Love of the scriptures and faith in the grace of Christ are declared to be sufficient for salvation. If priesthood, meaning power and authority, is necessary, Protestants claim it from the Bible. The claim of the mother church to apostolic tradition is rejected, as is the claim to continuous institutional revelation. The Bible must stand supreme as the final word of God.

The Latter-day Saint claim to authority can be reduced to a single word: revelation. The argument against revelation is simple and obvious: revelation has ceased, and one cannot have it. Joseph Smith claimed that when he and Oliver Cowdery learned of the importance of baptism while translating the Book of Mormon, they immediately retired to the seclusion of the woods along the banks of the Susquehanna River and inquired of God about the matter. In response to their prayer, a heavenly messenger who introduced himself as John the Baptist appeared to them for the purpose of restoring the authority by which he had baptized the Savior and others in the meridian day. The Baptist explained that he acted under the direction of Peter, James, and John, who held the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood, which priesthood and keys would in due time be conferred upon Joseph and Oliver. This, in fact, took place a few weeks thereafter. (See Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:68Â75; see also D&C 27:12; 128:20.)

How, then, is one to discern where the authority to speak for God is to be found and where it is not? Perhaps the best answer to this question is to simply look to see where the things that priesthood is meant to do are being done. Among those who possessed priesthood anciently we find prophets and apostles, revelation, visions, dreams, the visitation of angels, the authority to pen scripture, spiritual gifts, healings, and so forth. The claim to priesthood or authority must be inseparable with the claim to possess the powers of heaven. One could hardly claim, for instance, to speak for God on the one hand while on the other declaring the heavens sealed or that God had ceased speaking. If God will not speak to a certain person, that person can hardly profess to speak for him.

The power of salvation can never be found in the philosophical wanderings of men. All true gospel principles must trace themselves back to God himself. Revelation must be their source. As that fact is true of the principles of salvation, so it is true of the ordinances of salvation and of all other matters to which men are expected to give reverence and respect. If men profess the authority to act in the name of Deity, they must be able to trace that authority in the same way they do their doctrines to the throne of God. One does not obtain authority from a book, nor does authority come from traditions. The authority must be as pure as the doctrines. Indeed, those having authority must be the source through which the doctrines are revealed.

Without revelation there can be no priesthood. Surely we cannot profess to speak for God while maintaining at the same time that he has ceased to speak. We cannot command the sick to rise and walk on the strength of a promise given to others in an ancient day. Nor can we say, ÂGo your way, your sins are forgiven you,Â on the strength of what a legal administrator said to others at another time in other circumstances. Christ spoke as one having authority, and those commissioned to speak in his name must be able to speak with that same authority. So it is that we read that Âby the hands of the apostles were many signs and wonders wrought among the peopleÂ (Acts 5:12). We cannot rightfully suppose that when the Savior charged his chosen disciples to take the gospel message to those of every nation and tongue that we can claim that same commission by having read his charge to them. All valid claims to priesthood must trace themselves to God and must do so in a manner that can be observed and documented. Anything less than this is an invitation to every malcontent to profess to be the spokesman for God.

With the restoration of the gospel comes the restoration of the priesthood and the system whereby we can know of the legitimacy of any claim men make to having GodÂs authority. The priesthood is conferred by the laying on of hands by those who are legal heirs to it. Its powers and authorities function in accord with the law of common consent, which requires those who are to be governed by it to first covenant to sustain those who are going to preside (see D&C 20:65; 26:2). ÂIt shall not be given to any one,Â the Lord said, Âto go forth to preach my gospel, or to build up my church, except he be ordained by some one who has authority, and it is known to the church that he has authority and has been regularly ordained by the heads of the churchÂ (D&C 42:11).

The doctrine of the priesthood with the attendant doctrines of discipline and order are not principles peculiar to our earthly estate. They were a part of our pre-earth life and will continue to be a part of our experience in the world to come. All who are rightful heirs of the authority of God are governed by these principles. When the Father and the Son appeared to Joseph Smith in the Sacred Grove and Joseph inquired as to which church he should join, it was not the Father who directly answered his question. Rather, the Father addressed the youthful Prophet, saying, ÂThis is My Beloved Son. Hear him!Â (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:17.) Because salvation comes only in and through Christ, all revelations that lead to it must come from him. Thus the Father honored that office and directed Joseph SmithÂs inquiry to the Savior for a response (see JST, John 1:19). In like manner, when the resurrected Christ appeared to Paul on PaulÂs journey to Damascus, the Lord directed him to go to the city were he was to receive instruction from the local priesthood leader, Ananias (see Acts 9:3Â18). Angels will never be found bringing messages that circumvent the office of those already called. As the Father honored the office of his Son, so the Lord honored the office to which Ananias had been called. Still again, when the angel of the Lord appeared to Cornelius, he confined his instruction to directing him to find and give ear to Peter (see Acts 10:1Â8). Thus we see that neither the Father, the Son, nor an angel of the Lord will allow the waters of revealed truth to be diverted from their established channels. Truly, the Âgrand rule of heavenÂ is that Ânothing should ever be done on earth without revealing the secret to his servants the prophets. . . . Paul could not learn so much from the Lord relative to his duty in the common salvation of man, as he could from one of ChristÂs ambassadors called with the same heavenly calling of the Lord.Â (Teachings, p. 265.)

The Right to the Priesthood

In his epistle to the Hebrews, the Apostle Paul, as part of his argument designed to show the superiority of the dispensation of the gospel brought by Christ to replace the Mosaic law, shows that the Melchizedek Priesthood is superior to the Levitical Priesthood. As that argument has been preserved for us, Paul suggests that Melchizedek was Âwithout father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of lifeÂ (Heb. 7:3). Joseph Smith, both in the Joseph Smith Translation and the Doctrine and Covenants, corrects this strange misconception so as to clarify that it is the higher or holy priesthood, not Melchizedek, that is without father, mother, or descent (see JST, Heb. 7:3; D&C 84:17). From the days of Moses to the days of Christ, holding the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood had been a matter involving ÂfatherÂ and Âmother,Â meaning that to hold the priesthood one had to be born of parents who were of the tribe of Levi. Such limitations did not exist relative to the Melchizedek or higher Priesthood. Yet, it too was a matter of birthright. By covenant the Lord promised Abraham that his seed (meaning Âthe literal seed, or the seed of the bodyÂ) would have the right to bear the priesthood among all nations (see Abr. 2:9Â11).

Speaking to the early elders of the Church, the Lord stated that the priesthood had Âcontinued through the lineage of your fathersÂ and thus Âye are lawful heirs, according to the flesh.Â These brethren were told that the hand of the Lord had been over their families, because the priesthood was to come through their Âlineage until the restoration of all things spoken by the mouths of all the holy prophets since the world began.Â (D&C 86:8Â10.) In a revelation consisting of questions and answers from the book of Isaiah, we are told that the ancient prophetÂs promise that Zion would put on her strength (see Isa. 52:1) Âhad reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage; also to return to that power which she had lostÂ (D&C 113:7Â8; emphasis added). It cannot be supposed that family ties alone qualify one to hold the priesthood. By revelation we have been told that to hold the priesthood one must be called, found worthy, sustained by the vote of the Church, and ordained by those in authority (see D&C 20:65; 43:11; 68:15, 19). The promise of the priesthood has never been granted to any other than Âworthy male members of the ChurchÂ (Official DeclarationÂ2; see also D&C 121:21).

ÂHe that receiveth my gospel,Â the Savior said, Âreceiveth me; and he that receiveth not my gospel receiveth not meÂ (D&C 39:5). And again, ÂWhosoever receiveth my word receiveth me, and whosoever receiveth me, receiveth those, the First Presidency, whom I have sent, whom I have made counselors for my nameÂs sake unto you.Â This doctrine is then extended to whomsoever the First Presidency sends in the name of the Savior. As to accountability, the Lord promises a day of vengeance that is to come upon those who misuse his name. It will come first upon his own house, Âfirst among those among you, saith the Lord, who have professed to know my name and have not known me, and have blasphemed against me in the midst of my house, saith the Lord.Â Returning his attention to those called to stand at the head, the Lord said: ÂFor unto you, the Twelve, and those, the First Presidency, who are appointed with you to be your counselors and your leaders, is the power of this priesthood given, for the last days and for the last time, in the which is the dispensation of the fulness of times. Which power you hold, in connection with all those who have received a dispensation at any time from the beginning of the creation; for verily I say unto you, the keys of the dispensation, which ye have received, have come down from the fathers, and last of all, being sent down from heaven unto you.Â (See D&C 112:20Â32.)

Conclusion

Priesthood, which is power, GodÂs power, a divine power delegated to men on earth to accomplish the glorification of the planet, is and must be conferred by legal administrators. It cannot be conjured up or claimed simply by the sincere. It comes Âby the laying on of hands by those who are in authorityÂ (A of F 1:5). Further, because it is GodÂs own power, it can be exercised only in righteousness. ÂThe rights of the priesthood,Â Joseph Smith explained, Âare inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and . . . the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness. That they may be conferred upon us, it is true; but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man.Â (D&C 121:36Â37.)

Further, the Prophet instructed: ÂNo power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile-reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy; that he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of deathÂ (D&C 121:41Â44).

Purity of heart and soul are inseparable with proper use of the priesthood. ÂLet thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven. The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever.Â (D&C 121:45Â46.)
