Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 14

The Preparatory Priesthood

For behold, the Lord God hath sent forth the angel crying through

the midst of heaven, saying: Prepare ye the way of the Lord,

and make his paths straight, for the hour of his coming is nigh.

-D&C 133:17

While Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery labored on the translation of the Book of Mormon, they came to the realization that if the ordinance of baptism was essential to the salvation of the saints in ancient times, it must be equally so today. Desirious to know how they might enjoy the blessings associated with that sacred ordinance and knowing that a reliable answer could be found only in the heavens, they retired to a secluded spot on the banks of the Susquehanna River to inquire of the Lord. Describing what followed, Joseph, whose pattern was always to record such events in simplicity and directness, stated: ÂWhile we were thus employed, praying and calling upon the Lord, a messenger from heaven descended in a cloud of lightÂ (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:68). Oliver, in his more graphic style, gives a more complete account of what took place. ÂOn a sudden,Â he said, Âas from the midst of eternity, the voice of the Redeemer spake peace to us, while the veil was parted and the angel of God came down clothed with glory, and delivered the anxiously looked for message, and the keys of the Gospel of repentance. What joy! what wonder! what amazement! While the world was racked and distracted-while millions were groping as the blind for the wall, and while all men were resting upon uncertainty, as a general mass, our eyes beheld, our ears heard, as in the Âblaze of dayÂ; yes, more-above the glitter of the May sunbeam, which then shed its brilliancy over the face of nature! Then his voice, though mild, pierced to the center, and his words, ÂI am thy fellow-servant,Â dispelled every fear.Â (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:71, footnote.)

Duties, Offices, and Promises

When the higher priesthood was taken from men generally in the days of Moses, Âthe lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel; which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John, whom God raised up, being filled with the Holy Ghost from his motherÂs womb. For he was baptized while he was yet in his childhood, and was ordained by the angel of God at the time he was eight days old unto this power, to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the Lord before the face of his people, to prepare them for the coming of the Lord, in whose hand is given all power.Â (D&C 84:26Â28.)

In a revelation on the priesthood we are told that Âthere are, in the church, two priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek and Aaronic, including the Levitical PriesthoodÂ (D&C 107:1). As to the duties of the Aaronic Priesthood we are told: ÂThe second priesthood is called the Priesthood of Aaron, because it was conferred upon Aaron and his seed, throughout all their generations.Why it is called the lesser priesthood is because it is an appendage to the greater, or the Melchizedek Priesthood, and has power in administering outward ordinances. The bishopric is the presidency of this priesthood, and holds the keys or authority of the same.Â (D&C 107:13Â15.) As to the specific charge given to the Aaronic Priesthood, we are told that Âthe power and authority of the lesser, or Aaronic Priesthood, is to hold the keys of the ministering of angels, and to administer in outward ordinances, the letter of the gospel, the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, agreeable to the covenants and commandmentsÂ (D&C 107:20).

Along with the office of bishop, the Aaronic Priesthood includes three other offices-deacon, teacher, and priest. ÂThe priestÂs duty is to preach, teach, expound, exhort, and baptize, and administer the sacrament, and visit the house of each member, and exhort them to pray vocally and in secret and attend to all family duties. And he may also ordain other priests, teachers, and deacons. And he is to take the lead of meetings when there is no elder present; but when there is an elder present, he is only to preach, teach, expound, exhort, and baptize, and visit the house of each member, exhorting them to pray vocally and in secret and attend to all family duties. In all these duties the priest is to assist the elder if occasion requires.Â (D&C 20:46Â52.)

ÂThe teacherÂs duty is to watch over the church always, and be with and strengthen them; and see that there is no iniquity in the church, neither hardness with each other, neither lying, backbiting, nor evil speaking; and see that the church meet together often, and also see that all the members do their duty. And he is to take the lead of meetings in the absence of the elder or priest-and is to be assisted always, in all his duties in the church, by the deacons, if occasion requires. But neither teachers nor deacons have authority to baptize, administer the sacrament, or lay on hands; they are, however, to warn, expound, exhort, and teach, and invite all to come unto Christ.Â (D&C 20:53Â59.)

The book of Malachi contains a marvelous prophecy relative to the return of the Baptist in the last days and the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood. In his description of the events of the last days, Christ quoted this passage to the Nephites so that it might also be recorded in the Book of Mormon:

Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the Lord of hosts.

But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refinerÂs fire, and like fullerÂs soap:

And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.

Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years. (Mal. 3:1Â4; see also 3 Ne. 24:1Â4.)

It is argued by those not of our faith that this prophetic promise was filled in the mortal ministry of Christ. The argument is not true to the words of the prophecy. Though the Lord frequently taught in the temple during his mortal ministry, he made no ÂsuddenÂ appearance there as spoken of in his prophecy. True it is that John the Baptist came as a messenger to prepare the way before him in his earthly ministry, but it is equally true that John was destined to come again to prepare the way before the millennial reign. It is plain from what Malachi has written that the LordÂs people are to be both a temple-building people and a covenant people. It is also evident that the LordÂs people must believe in and accept divinely sent messengers.

The first clear evidence that this prophecy will find its fulfillment in the last days rather than in the mortal ministry of Christ is its reference to him as the ÂLord of hosts.Â In his mortal ministry Christ came into this world as a helpless child, not at the head of an army of angels. In MalachiÂs prophecy, then follows a question about who will be worthy and prepared to receive him or abide the day of his coming. No one had any difficulty abiding his presence in his mortal ministry. The sons of Levi were not purged of their sins at that time, nor did they make an offering that was acceptable to him. This authority, he said, would not be taken from the earth until the sons of Levi had made an acceptable offering to the Lord. OliverÂs rendering of the BaptistÂs words is even more emphatic: ÂUpon you my fellow-servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer this Priesthood and this authority, which shall remain upon earth, that the Sons of Levi may yet offer an offering unto the Lord in righteousness!Â (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:71, footnote.)

The offering to be made by the sons of Levi is the same ritual of animal sacrifice that was offered anciently. This constitutes something of a surprise to many Latter-day Saints. The Prophet Joseph Smith explains:

It is generally supposed that sacrifice was entirely done away when the Great Sacrifice [i.e.,] the sacrifice of the Lord Jesus was offered up, and that there will be no necessity for the ordinance of sacrifice in future; but those who assert this are certainly not acquainted with the duties, privileges and authority of the Priesthood, or with the Prophets.

The offering of sacrifice has ever been connected and forms a part of the duties of the Priesthood. It began with the Priesthood, and will be continued until after the coming of Christ, from generation to generation. We frequently have mention made of the offering of sacrifice by the servants of the Most High in ancient days, prior to the law of Moses; which ordinances will be continued when the Priesthood is restored with all its authority, power and blessings. . . .

These sacrifices, as well as every ordinance belonging to the Priesthood, will, when the Temple of the Lord shall be built, and the sons of Levi be purified, be fully restored and attended to in all their powers, ramifications, and blessings. This ever did and ever will exist when the powers of the Melchizedek Priesthood are sufficiently manifest; else how can the restitution of all things spoken of by the Holy Prophets be brought to pass. It is not to be understood that the law of Moses will be established again with all its rites and variety of ceremonies; this has never been spoken of by the prophets; but those things which existed prior to MosesÂ day, namely, sacrifice, will be continued.

It may be asked by some, what necessity for sacrifice, since the Great Sacrifice was offered? In answer to which, if repentance, baptism, and faith existed prior to the days of Christ, what necessity for them since that time? (Teachings, pp. 172Â73.)

To what degree the law of sacrifice will be carried out in that future day is uncertain. This much we know: as a Âpart of the restitution of all things-and then on a limited basis only-blood sacrifices will be offered againÂ (McConkie, The Mortal Messiah 1:128; see also Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation 3:94). This is literal. It is emphatically stated by the prophets. It is hard doctrine, but it is true. It is not to be confused with the Prophet Joseph SmithÂs application of the Malachi passage to our responsibility in behalf of the dead: ÂLet us, therefore, as a church and a people, and as Latter-day Saints, offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness; and let us present in his holy temple, when it is finished, a book containing the records of our dead, which shall be worthy of all acceptationÂ (D&C 128:24).

Through the Prophet Joseph Smith we have received much by way of understanding as to how the Aaronic Priesthood functioned anciently. ÂAs touching the Gospel and baptism that John preached,Â he said,

I would say that John came preaching the Gospel for the remission of sins; he had his authority from God, and the oracles of God were with him, and the kingdom of God for a season seemed to rest with John alone. The Lord promised Zacharias that he should have a son who was a descendant of Aaron, the Lord having promised that the priesthood should continue with Aaron and his seed throughout their generations. Let no man take this honor upon himself, except he be called of God, as was Aaron; and Aaron received his call by revelation. An angel of God also appeared unto Zacharias while in the Temple, and told him that he should have a son, whose name should be John, and he should be filled with the Holy Ghost. Zacharias was a priest of God, and officiating in the Temple, and John was a priest after his father, and held the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood, and was called of God to preach the Gospel of the kingdom of God. The Jews, as a nation, having departed from the law of God and the Gospel of the Lord, prepared the way for transferring it to the Gentiles.

But, says one, the kingdom of God could not be set up in the days of John, for John said the kingdom was at hand. But I would ask if it could be any nearer to them than to be in the hands of John. The people need not wait for the days of Pentecost to find the kingdom of God, for John had it with him, and he came forth from the wilderness crying out, ÂRepent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is nigh at hand,Â as much as to say, ÂOut here I have got the kingdom of God, and you can get it, and I am coming after you; and if you donÂt receive it, you will be damned;Â and the scriptures represent that all Jerusalem went out into JohnÂs baptism. There was a legal administrator, and those that were baptized were subjects for a king; and also the laws and oracles of God were there; therefore the kingdom of God was there; for no man could have better authority to administer than John; and our Savior submitted to that authority Himself, by being baptized by John; therefore the kingdom of God was set up on the earth, even in the days of John.

There is a difference between the kingdom of God and the fruits and blessings that flow from the kingdom; because there were more miracles, gifts, visions, healings, tongues, &c., in the days of Jesus Christ and His apostles, and on the day of Pentecost, than under JohnÂs administration, it does not prove by any means that John had not the kingdom of God, any more than it would that a woman had not a milkpan because she had not a pan of milk, for while the pan might be compared to the kingdom, the milk might be compared to the blessings of the kingdom.

John was a priest after the order of Aaron, and had the keys of that priesthood, and came forth preaching repentance and baptism for the remission of sins, but at the same time cries out, ÂThere cometh one mightier than I after me, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose,Â and Christ came according to the words of John, and He was greater than John, because He held the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood and kingdom of God, and had before revealed the priesthood of Moses, yet Christ was baptized by John to fulfill all righteousness; and Jesus in His teachings says, ÂUpon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.Â What rock? Revelation.

Again he says, ÂExcept a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God;Â and, Âheaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.Â If a man is born of water and of the Spirit, he can get into the kingdom of God. It is evident the kingdom of God was on the earth, and John prepared subjects for the kingdom, by preaching the Gospel to them and baptizing them, and he prepared the way before the Savior, or came as a forerunner, and prepared subjects for the preaching of Christ; and Christ preached through Jerusalem on the same ground where John had preached; and when the apostles were raised up, they worked in Jerusalem, and Jesus commanded them to tarry there until they were endowed with power from on high. Had they not work to do in Jerusalem? They did work, and prepared a people for the Pentecost. The kingdom of God was with them before the day of Pentecost, as well as afterwards; and it was also with John, and he preached the same Gospel and baptism that Jesus and the apostles preached after him. The endowment was to prepare the disciples for their missions unto the world.

Whenever men can find out the will of God and find an administrator legally authorized from God, there is the kingdom of God; but where these are not, the kingdom of God is not. All the ordinances, systems, and administrations on the earth are of no use to the children of men, unless they are ordained and authorized of God; for nothing will save a man but a legal administrator; for none others will be acknowledged either by God or angels. (Teachings, pp. 272Â74.)

Conclusion

As with the ProphetÂs account of the First Vision, the story of the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood stands as perfect evidence that Joseph Smith was a prophet. Notwithstanding the First Vision in which he had seen both the Father and the Son, the numerous occasions upon which he was instructed by Moroni, his possession of the gold plates and the Urim and Thummim, and his call to translate the plates, Joseph Smith made no pretense to priesthood authority, to the right to publicly preach the gospel, or to the right to perform any gospel ordinance. There was simply no assumption of authority on his part. Further, Joseph Smith was never alone when priesthood or keys were restored. There was always a companion at his side. Thus he complied with the law of witnesses. Where the authority of heaven is involved and principles of salvation are at stake, we are not required to depend on the testimony of one man.

The discipline and order associated with the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood also constitute an evidence of the truthfulness of the story. When the Baptist appeared, he immediately stated that he acted under the direction of Peter, James, and John, the First Presidency of the meridian Church after the death of Christ, the holders of the keys of the kingdom. He explained what he had the authority to do (commission them to baptize each other) and what the limitations of his authority were (he could not confer the gift of the Holy Ghost). Then, rather than baptize them himself, a matter that would cause no difficulty for a resurrected being, he had Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery baptize each other, thus teaching that the heavens do not do for us what we are capable of doing for ourselves. Nor does the story stop here, for then we read that John the Baptist directed Joseph and Oliver to reordain each other. Thus he establishes in their minds that ordination to the priesthood is to follow baptism and that the discipline associated with the ordinances of salvation is to be kept pure. Then we note that it was only after the organization of the Church that offices within the priesthood are mentioned. Joseph and Oliver did not come out of the woods that morning claiming any office, though they did obtain the future promise of the same. One cannot hold an office in a nonexistent organization. Offices would wait until the Church was organized. Nor does it go unnoticed how perfectly the language and promise of John accords with the prophecy of Malachi, a matter overlooked by Christian organizations claiming their own authority. Thus another wall in the great temple of the Restoration was raised.
