Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 15

The Holy Order of God

There are, in the church, two priesthoods, namely,

the Melchizedek and Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood.

Why the first is called the Melchizedek Priesthood is because

Melchizedek was such a great high priest.

Before his day it was called the Holy Priesthood,

after the Order of the Son of God.

But out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being,

to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name, they,

the church in ancient days, called that priesthood after Melchizedek,

or the Melchizedek Priesthood.

-D&C 107:1Â4; emphasis in original

For those of us who have been born with sight it is difficult, if not impossible, to appreciate what it would be like to have been born without vision. So it is in the realms of spiritual things. As rightful heirs to and recipients of the blessings of the priesthood, Latter-day Saints often do not fully realize how distinctive and unique our position is, especially as viewed by those not of our faith. When we talk to many in the traditional Christian world about priesthood, for instance, we generally assume a certain common ground and are surprised to find it does not exist. Virtually any Latter-day Saint, if asked what the priesthood is, would respond that it is the power and authority to act in the name of God. As simple as that concept seems, it is not shared by others. The most comprehensive of theological dictionaries simply define priesthood as the office or function of a priest. The biblical image is of someone making a ritual sacrifice. Today the thought is simply that of a minister. To function in the priesthood denotes authority that is expressly traceable to God, that requires direct and personal communication with him and embraces the responsibility to speak in the first person for him, something that is not commonly shared. Such an understanding requires that every holder of the priesthood function in his office after the pattern of the prophets and apostles of the Old and New Testament. Thus they are to operate by the Spirit of revelation, speak as one having authority, and function after the pattern of their ancient counterparts.

The Timeless Nature of the Priesthood

ÂIn primitive ages, the fathers of families, princes and kings were priests. Thus Cain and Abel, Noah, Abraham, Melchizedek, Job, Isaac and Jacob offered their own sacrifices.Â (WebsterÂs 1828 Dictionary.) From the time of Moses, the office of priest was restricted to the tribe of Levi. It consisted of three orders-high priest, priests, and Levites. Today traditional Christianity finds itself divided on the matter of authority-Catholics claim it on behalf of Âthe Church,Â while Protestants claim it on behalf of Âthe Bible.Â Both agree that man must bow to a higher authority than self; they differ in attributing this authority to the corporate organization in the one case or to a book or compilation of literature in the other.

The knowledge of what the priesthood is, who is entitled to hold it, how one obtains it, and how it is to function was restored to us by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Since the answer to each of these questions represents the restoration of an ancient and timeless order, an understanding of how the priesthood functioned anciently is essential to understanding how the priesthood is intended to function in our day. Indeed, in a text Joseph Smith restored from AdamÂs day, we read: ÂNow this same Priesthood, which was in the beginning, shall be in the end of the world alsoÂ (Moses 6:7). In like manner, the Apostle Paul referred to this same authority as the Âunchangeable priesthoodÂ (Heb. 7:24). References to the priesthood, as one would expect, were surely chief among the plain and precious things taken from biblical texts (see 1 Ne. 13:20Â34). As we have it today, the word priesthood is found in only two chapters of the New Testament and is mentioned only nine times in the Old Testament.

For an illustration of the understanding lost to the Bible reader, let us take the case of Melchizedek, the man after whom the higher or holy priesthood was named. Melchizedek is mentioned in three places in the Bible. He first comes on the scene in the book of Genesis (chapter 14) in association with Abraham. Then, after the passage of a thousand years, he is mentioned again in one of DavidÂs Psalms (110:4). Again a thousand years of narrative pass with no mention of him until Paul speaks of him in his epistle to the Hebrews (chapters 5, 7). To Bible commentators, Melchizedek is an enigma and is generally referred to as a Canaanite priest and king. From Joseph SmithÂs restoration of the Genesis text, we learn that ÂMelchizedek was a man of faith, who wrought righteousness,Â that he was Âapproved of GodÂ and Âordained an high priest . . . after the order of the Son of God; which order came, not by man, nor the will of man; neither by father nor mother; neither by beginning of days nor end of years; but of God.Â Further, we learn that the priesthood of God Âwas delivered unto men by the calling of his own voice, according to his own will, unto as many as believed on his name.Â (JST, Gen. 14:26Â29.) Restorations to the text of Hebrews include this declaration: ÂFor this Melchizedek was ordained a priest after the order of the Son of GodÂ; and this promise: ÂAnd all those who are ordained unto this priesthood are made like unto the Son of God, abiding a priest continuallyÂ (JST, Heb. 7:3). That is to say, every holder of the Melchizedek Priesthood is or should be a type and shadow of Christ. Those who lived before he came were types of his coming, and those who have lived since the meridian of time are to labor in the image and likeness or shadow of his ministry. All were and are to be as he was.

Joseph SmithÂs translation of Hebrews and the revelations recorded in D&C 84 unlock the otherwise mysterious meaning of the words of the Psalmist. David wrote, ÂThe Lord hath sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of MelchizedekÂ (Ps. 110:4). Paul explains, ÂFor the law [of Moses] was administered without an oath [meaning the oath that pertains to the higher priesthood] and made nothing perfect, but was only the bringing in of a better hope; by the which we draw nigh unto God. Inasmuch as this high priest [Christ] was not without an oath, by so much was Jesus made the surety of a better testamentÂ (JST, Heb. 7:19Â21). The purpose of PaulÂs argument is to show that as there was a higher priesthood than that which administered the law of Moses, so there was in Christ a higher law than the carnal law that existed from Moses to the time of Christ. In the revelation on priesthood now known to us as D&C 84 of the Doctrine and Covenants, we learn that the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood comes by oath and covenant. That is, God-who swore by oath to Melchizedek that if he would magnify his priesthood he would receive the fulness of the blessings of heaven-makes that same oath with all faithful priesthood holders who keep their covenant to magnify their office or calling in the priesthood and to sustain those called to preside over them (see D&C 84:33Â44). In a second revelation on the order of the priesthood, Joseph Smith learned that there were two priesthoods in the Church in Old Testament times: Âthe Melchizedek and Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood.Â The reason the first was called after Melchizedek was because he Âwas such a great high priest. Before his day it was called the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God. But out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name, they, the church, in ancient days, called that priesthood after Melchizedek, or the Melchizedek Priesthood.Â (D&C 107:1Â4; emphasis in original.)

A second illustration of how an understanding of the priesthood was taken from the Bible comes from the writings of Abraham, also restored to us by Joseph Smith. From this text we learn that Abraham, who had previously been ordained to the holy priesthood by Melchizedek (see D&C 84:14), sought for the fulness of priesthood blessings. Abraham said: ÂFinding there was greater happiness and peace and rest for me, I sought for the blessings of the fathers, and the right whereunto I should be ordained to administer the same; having been myself a follower of righteousness, desiring also to be one who possessed great knowledge, and to be a greater follower of righteousness, and to possess a greater knowledge, and to be a father of many nations, a prince of peace, and desiring to receive instructions, and to keep the commandments of God, I became a rightful heir, a High Priest, holding the right belonging to the fathersÂ (Abr. 1:2). Abraham explained that this right was conferred upon him from the fathers and that it traced back Âeven from the beginning, or before the foundation of the earth,Â to Father Adam and down through the fathers to him. Thus he said, ÂI sought for mine appointment unto the Priesthood according to the appointment of God unto the fathers concerning the seed.Â (Abr. 1:3Â4.)

If such texts had been preserved in the Bible, neither Catholic nor Protestant claims to priesthood, or the authority to represent God, would pass the test of scriptural scrutiny. From the restored texts that we have just examined, we learn that righteousness is a requisite for holding the priesthood, as is the approval of God. The necessity of ordination is emphasized along with the necessity of those doing the ordaining being able to trace their authority to the throne of God. Indeed, the priesthood itself is identified by the name the Holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God, thus suggesting the necessity of holiness, order, and faith in the doctrine of the divine Sonship of Christ. Singularly, each of these truths have in their purity been lost to those who have also lost the priesthood held by the ancients.

The Order of the Priesthood Restored

With a restoration of the priesthood comes the knowledge that its primary purpose is to prepare the faithful Saints to come into the presence of God. A primary revelation on the priesthood speaks of the powers of godliness necessary for men in the flesh to see the face of God and live (see D&C 84:19Â22). Another great revelation about the priesthood explains that the power and authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood is to hold the keys to open the heavens and Âto commune with the general assembly and church of the Firstborn, and to enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of the new covenantÂ (see D&C 107:18Â19). As the purposes of the gospel are everlastingly the same, so are its doctrine and its priesthood. Joseph Smith explained that Adam Âblessed his posterityÂ in order that he might bring them into the presence of God (Teachings, p. 159). Three years before his death, Adam gathered the righteous residue of his posterity into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, where the Lord appeared to and blessed them (see D&C 107:53). ÂThe order of this priesthood was confirmed to be handed down from father to son, and rightly belongs to the literal descendants of the chosen seed, to whom the promises were made.Â These promises were intended to be Âpreserved unto the end of the earth.Â (D&C 107:40Â42.) How was it that Adam prepared his descendants to enter into the presence of the Lord? He prepared them to receive the Âfulness of the priesthood,Â or the fulness of the blessings of the house of the Lord (D&C 124:28). In ancient times this order of the priesthood was spoken of as the patriarchal order because it came down from father to son (see D&C 107:40Â52). In our day we refer to this Âorder of the priesthoodÂ as the new and everlasting covenant of marriage (D&C 131:2), an order that can be obtained only in the temple through the ordinance of eternal marriage.

Joseph Smith tells us that all the holy prophets held the Melchizedek Priesthood (see Teachings, p. 180). Thus the right to stand in the divine presence was not lost to them. Elijah, for instance, held the keys of the sealing power and performed many mighty miracles in his day. He had power to seal the heavens, raise the dead, relieve the drought-stricken land, and call down fire from heaven. He was the last Old Testament prophet to hold the keys of the priesthood (see ibid., p. 172). He was taken up into heaven without tasting death so that he, like Moses, would have a tangible body and thus be able to confer keys on Peter, James, and John on the Mount of Transfiguration. At the death of the meridian Twelve, the priesthood and its keys were lost in the Old World. Shortly thereafter this same authority was lost to the remnant of Israel that had been transplanted to the New World. Thus the world was without the blessings that come from this authority until it was restored to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

What, then, is the priesthood? From the perspective of mortal man, it is the power and authority of God, delegated to man on the earth, to act in all things for the blessing of men and women on the earth. It is the divinely given right for someone here on the earth to act on behalf of Deity and eventually to stand in the divine presence. Indeed, if the LordÂs house is a house of order, all that is done in his name must be done by or under the direction of the priesthood. If the gospel is Jesus ChristÂs, then the authorization to teach it must be his also. This, of course, could be no less true of the ordinances of the gospel; the authorization to perform them must come through priesthood channels. The Âgreater priesthood administereth the gospelÂ (D&C 84:19). Indeed, Joseph Smith tells us that the Melchizedek Priesthood Âis the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation and every important matter is revealed from heavenÂ (Teachings, pp. 166Â69). Further, we are told that the priesthood holds the Âkey of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of GodÂ (D&C 84:19). The mysteries of the kingdom are those things that can be known and obtained only by the Spirit of revelation. Often such revelations are associated with ordinances or sacred rituals that can be performed only by the authority of the priesthood. To hold the key of the priesthood is to hold that authority that unlocks or dispenses such sacred knowledge.

In a revelation given to the newly called Quorum of the Twelve in our dispensation, the Lord said: ÂThe power and authority of the higher, or Melchizedek Priesthood, is to hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church-to have the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to have the heavens opened unto them, to commune with the general assembly and church of the Firstborn, and to enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of the new covenantÂ (D&C 107: 18Â19). Once again, the Melchizedek Priesthood is the authority of God dispensed to man to prepare him to stand in the divine presence. It embraces the authority to part the veil, receive revelation, and commune with those who have held the keys and authority of salvation in dispensations past.

True priesthood is always traceable to God; a man who holds the priesthood must be able to show that he was Âcalled of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of handsÂ by those who are known to hold that authority (A of F 1:5). In a revelation that embraces the law of the Church, the Lord said: ÂIt shall not be given to any one to go forth to preach my gospel, or to build up my church, except he be ordained by some one who has authority, and it is known to the church that he has authority and has been regularly ordained by the heads of the churchÂ (D&C 42:11). Who then can hold the priesthood? Those to whom the prophet of God, the man holding the keys or right of presidency over the priesthood, extends the invitation to hold it. Those so called must be found worthy and must receive the sustaining vote of the Church (see D&C 26:2; 68:15; 107:22).

The story of the restoration of the Aaronic or lesser priesthood was related in the previous chapter. The higher or Melchizedek Priesthood was restored to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery within weeks after the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood. The exact date has been lost to us, but the events associated with it have not. According to the promise of John the Baptist to Joseph and Oliver, Peter, James and John, who received the priesthood at the hands of Christ himself, came to them and bestowed that same authority upon them (see D&C 27:12; 128:20). Elder Erastus Snow gives the following description of those events: ÂIn due course of time, as we read in the history which he [Joseph] has left, Peter, James and John appeared to him-it was at a period when they were being pursued by their enemies and they had to travel all night, and in the dawn of the coming day when they were weary and worn who should appear to them but Peter, James and John, for the purpose of conferring upon them the Apostleship, the keys of which they themselves had held while upon the earth, which had been bestowed upon them by the Savior. This Priesthood conferred upon them by those three messengers embraces within it all offices of the Priesthood from the highest to the lowest.Â (In Journal of Discourses 23:183.)

Conclusion

Joseph SmithÂs view of the priesthood was breathtaking. We search the sectarian world in vain for a meaningful understanding of the authority necessary to represent God and to perform the ordinances of salvation. As with all other doctrines that he taught, the Prophet immediately links us with the heavens and GodÂs power and authority. Truly, Âevery one being ordained after this order and calling should have power, by faith, to break mountains, to divide the seas, to dry up waters, to turn them out of their course; to put at defiance the armies of nations, to divide the earth, to break every band, to stand in the presence of God; to do all things according to his will, according to his command, subdue principalities and powers; and this by the will of the Son of God which was from before the foundation of the worldÂ (JST, Gen. 14:30Â31).

And who is it that is to be entrusted with such power and authority? The invitation has now gone forth in this great gospel dispensation for all worthy male members of the Church to be so endowed. All are charged to Âbe full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith.Â They are further charged to let virtue garnish their thoughts unceasingly, with the attendant promise that their confidence shall Âwax strong in the presence of GodÂ and that the doctrine of the priesthood shall distill upon their souls Âas the dews from heaven.Â The Holy Ghost, they are promised, will be their constant companion, and their scepter an Âunchanging scepter of righteousness and truth.Â (D&C 121:45Â46.) The Holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God has been restored to the earth in our day. It is here. Its powers are here. The keys to officiate in the ordinances of salvation are vested in those called as prophets, seers, and revelators to preside over The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and have been delegated by them to others who preside over the ecclesiastical units of the Church throughout the earth. Hence the work of redemption goes forward under divine authority.
