Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 16

The Restoration of Keys and Power

Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into

your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and

dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors.

-D&C 110:16

In the preceding chapters we have spoken of the need for authority and of the subsequent restoration of the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods. Let us now address the issue of the necessity of a system by which those priesthoods are themselves governed. If, as we have seen, all worthy males who are of an age of maturity can hold the priesthood, what is to prevent them from using the priesthood improperly, and by what authority is unity brought to the ranks of the priesthood? Consider, for instance, that many wards in the Church have over a hundred men holding the authority to administer the ordinance of the sacrament. This suggests the possibility of an equal number of sacrament meetings, each being held for the convenience of a particular priesthood holder and his family. What authority is it that prevents such division and confusion? In like manner, all who have the authority to administer the sacrament also have the authority to perform the ordinance of baptism, thus suggesting the possibility of a multiplicity of baptisms. How, then, does the Lord assure that his will be a house of order and that there will be but Âone Lord, one faith, one baptismÂ (Eph. 4:5)?

Keys, Presidency, and Sealing Power

Joseph Smith taught that the directing powers, the authority by which discipline and organization are imposed on the priesthood and thus the Church, are known to us as the keys of the kingdom. Keys, which symbolically represent the authority by which things are opened or shut and bound or loosed are described in revelations on the priesthood as Âthe right of presidency,Â meaning the authority to preside (D&C 68:17; see also 107:8). Thus, for instance, each ward in the Church is presided over by a bishop. The bishop is both the president of the Aaronic Priesthood and the presiding high priest in the ward. As such, he holds the keys, or right of presidency, over the ordinances of baptism and sacrament within the boundaries of his bishopric office. Though many within his ward have the authority to perform these ordinances, they can use that authority only under his direction or by his authorization. Thus the keys prescribe the limits and bounds within which the priesthood must function and thereby assure that the LordÂs house will remain a house of order.

Within the ranks of the priesthood, the presiding officer over each quorum is given the appropriate keys of governing authority by which he announces the limits and bounds within which his quorum members are to function. ÂOf necessity,Â the revelation states, Âthere are presidents, or presiding officers growing out of, or appointed of or from among those who are ordained to the several offices in these two [Aaronic and Melchizedek] priesthoodsÂ (D&C 107:21). The president of the high priesthood, or President of the Church as he is generally called, holds all the keys of the kingdom and thus has the authority to direct all the affairs of both priesthoods. The Lord told Joseph Smith: ÂI have conferred upon you the keys and power of the priesthood, wherein I restore all things, and make known unto you all things in due time. And verily, verily, I say unto you, that whatsoever you seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever you bind on earth, in my name and by my word, saith the Lord, it shall be eternally bound in the heavens; and whosesoever sins you remit on earth shall be remitted eternally in the heavens; and whosesoever sins you retain on earth shall be retained in heaven.Â (D&C 132:45Â46.)

From the above quotation we also learn that the doctrine of keys embraces the power to unlock the heavens and restore a knowledge of all the mysteries that appertain to the salvation of men. In September 1830 Joseph Smith was told that he held Âthe keys of the mysteries, and the revelations which are sealedÂ with the obvious idea that through him and his office they would be revealed (D&C 28:7). In December of that year the Lord said, ÂI have sent forth the fulness of my gospel by the hand of my servant Joseph; and in weakness have I blessed him; and I have given unto him the keys of the mystery of those things which have been sealed, even things which were from the foundation of the world, and the things which shall come from this time until the time of my comingÂ (D&C 35:17Â18). We are also told that Âfor him to whom these keys are given there is no difficulty in obtaining a knowledge of facts in relation to the salvation of the children of men, both as well for the dead as for the livingÂ (D&C 128:11). Thus by revelation the Âkeys of the kingdomÂ are also designated as the Âkey of knowledgeÂ (D&C 128:14) or the Âkeys of access to GodÂ (The Words of Joseph Smith, p. 54).

In Nauvoo, when Joseph Smith received revelation and direction relative to the ordinances of the temple, he began to refer to the keys of the kingdom in still a third sense. In a talk to the Relief Society given 28 April 1842, he spoke of their receiving the Âthe keys of the PriesthoodÂ or the Âkeys of the kingdomÂ with their husbands and of their learning how to ask the Lord questions and receive answers. He also told the sisters that if they were Âpure and innocentÂ they could Âcome into the presence of God.Â (Ibid., pp. 117, 141; see also Teachings, p. 226.) The following Sunday, 1 May 1843, speaking to the assembled Saints in the Grove, the Prophet referred to the keys of the kingdom as Âcertain signs and words by which false spirits and personages may be detected.Â These keys, he said, could not be revealed to the elders until the temple was completed and they had been endowed. (The Words of Joseph Smith, p. 119.) Perhaps his crowning discourse on this subject was given on 10 March 1844, when he referred to the Âpower of Elijah and the keys of the kingdom of JehovahÂ (Teachings, p. 338) and indicated that obtaining the Âfulness of the priesthoodÂ was associated with a man and his wife having their calling and election made sure (The Words of Joseph Smith, p. 304; see also pp. 306, 330).

Thus the symbolism associated with the keys of the kingdom is threefold. As it pertains to the government of the Church, the priesthood embraces the power and authority to lock or unlock, to open or close, to bind or loose-that is, to grant promises and blessings or to preclude the same. It is proper authority that disciplines and marshals the priesthood. As to doctrinal matters, the keys of the mysteries of the kingdom constitute the authority by which the heavens are opened and the channel through which GodÂs revelations flow. Finally, in a combination of the two previous definitions, the keys embrace that authority restored by the prophet Elijah whereby men and women are sealed up into eternal life and receive the fulness of the priesthood.

Angels Come

We have told the story of the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood. We center our attention now on the specific keys restored by John the Baptist to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. The Baptist announced himself as holding Âthe keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sinsÂ (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:69; see also D&C 84:26). As the Melchizedek Priesthood has the authority to bring one into the presence of God, the Aaronic Priesthood embodies the authority to bring one into the presence of angels. Significantly, it is after the restoration of this authority that the heavens were opened and the chain of angelic ministrants commenced their visits to the Prophet. That John the Baptist restored the keys or right to preach the gospel of repentance and baptize affirms once again the necessity of authority. If it is the LordÂs gospel, those declaring it must be of his choosing and its ordinances must be of his ordaining.

In restoring the Aaronic Priesthood, John told Joseph and Oliver that he was acting under the direction of Peter, James, and John, Âwho held the keys of the Priesthood of MelchizedekÂ (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:72). When the three presiding high priests of the meridian dispensation laid their hands on the heads of Joseph and Oliver, they bestowed the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood upon them, thus enabling them to regulate all of the priesthoodÂs affairs, and they also bestowed the keys of the kingdom-that is, the right to preside over the Church-and the keys of the dispensation of the fulness of times, or the authority to stand at the head of the last and greatest of all gospel dispensations (see D&C 27:13; 128:21).

Thus the stage was set and the authority granted whereupon the Church could be organized, the gospel declared, and its ordinances performed. The importance of the restoration of keys cannot be overstated. We would assume that many held the priesthood in the meridian day at the death of the Apostles. When those keys were lost, those holding the priesthood lost the right to utilize their priesthood. Priesthood must always function under the direction of those holding the keys to oversee its labors. With the Melchizedek Priesthood, Joseph Smith was empowered to build the Kirtland Temple, where a partial endowment was administered and where keys which would constitute a fulness of the priesthood could be restored. After the dedication of that temple, on 3 April 1836, messengers from three Old Testament dispensations appeared to confer their powers and authorities upon the two leading officers of the Church. The first to come was Moses, who had stood face-to-face with Jehovah on Mount Sinai and who, after having been taken into heaven without tasting death, had appeared to Christ and his three chief Apostles on the Mount of Transfiguration. From Moses Joseph and Oliver were to receive Âthe keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the northÂ (D&C 110:11). Two separate events are designated here. The first refers to the authority by which the scattered remnants of Israel are gathered to the Âwaters of Judah, or . . . the waters of baptismÂ (1 Ne. 20:1) and to the possession once again of the priesthood, that they might labor to Âbring again Zion, and the redemption of IsraelÂ (D&C 113:8). This embraces the promise that the Lord will once again speak to them or give them revelation. The second is that authority by which in some future day the ten tribes, or at least some representative number from each of the ten tribes, will be directed to return to their ancient lands of inheritance.

After the appearance of Moses came the appearance of Elias to commit Âthe gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessedÂ (D&C 110:12). Thus the covenant God made with Abraham was restored. As Abraham had received the promise of the continuation of his seed and by implication the eternal nature of his union with Sarai, so the doctrine of eternal marriage with the same promise relative to the nature of the family unit is restored to those of the ancient patriarchÂs family. So central is the family unit to the whole system and plan of salvation that the eternal union of the man and the woman in marriage by the authority of the priesthood is known as an Âorder of the priesthoodÂ and is thought of as being synonymous with the Ânew and everlasting covenantÂ (D&C 131:2).

Following Elias came Elijah in fulfillment of one of the best known of Old Testament prophecies, Mal. 4:5Â6. From ElijahÂs rendering of the prophecy it is evident that its fulfillment centers around the revelation of the priesthood and the turning of the hearts of the children, rather than the fathers, to the ancient promises. Joseph Smith said that Âthe word turn here should be translated bind, or sealÂ (Teachings, p. 330; emphasis in original). He also said that when Malachi made this prophecy, he Âhad his eye fixed on the restoration of the priesthood, the glories to be revealed in the last daysÂ and more particularly on Âa welding link of some kind or other between the fathers and the childrenÂ (D&C 128:17Â18).

The crowning ordinances of the gospel take place in the temple. Chief among them are the ordinance of eternal marriage, in which a man and woman are bound together in an eternal union, and the expansion of that ordinance to embrace the ordination of the man to become a king and priest and his wife to become a queen and priestess. Those so ordained are promised that they Âshall inherit thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers, dominions, all heights and depthsÂ and that in the resurrection Âthey shall pass by the angels, and the gods, which are set there, to their exaltation and glory in all things, as hath been sealed upon their heads, which glory shall be a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever. Then shall they be gods, because they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto them. Then shall they be gods, because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them.Â (D&C 132:19Â20.) Because of the central, saving role of Moses, Elias, and Elijah-together with the keys they restored-we shall speak of this matter again in our discussion of the restoration of a covenant people.

In addition to the appearance of Moses, Elias, and Elijah in the Kirtland Temple on 3 April 1836, other prophets from dispensations past also came to restore their powers and authorities: Michael or Adam; Raphael, who may have been Enoch (see McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, p. 618); Gabriel or Noah; and Âdivers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little; giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope!Â (D&C 128:21.)

Conclusion

Joseph Smith explained: ÂThe Priesthood is everlasting-without beginning of days or end of years; without father, mother, etc. If there is no change of ordinances, there is no change of Priesthood. Wherever the ordinances of the Gospel are administered, there is the Priesthood.Â (Teachings, p. 158.) The keys or directing power, the right of presidency, are essential in maintaining that order that must and should characterize the work of him who is eternal, unchanging, and without variance. The keys of the Church, meaning the keys of the kingdom (see D&C 42:69), are sacred rights to open the door to knowledge and understanding (see D&C 128:11, 14) and thereby empower the Saints of the Most High to officiate in the name of him whose Church this is.
