Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 17

The Ordinances of Salvation

Without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood,

the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh.

-D&C 84:21

With the introduction of the concept of a Âpriesthood of all believersÂ by Protestants after the Reformation and a reliance upon scripture as sole authority, it is little wonder that the doctrinal necessity for ordinances should cease or at best become clouded and uncertain. Lost among many during the long night of apostasy were such things as the saving efficacy of ordinances, the place of ordinances as a channel for divine power, and the need to maintain the divinely revealed mode and manner of performance of the ordinances. It was thus early in the work of the Restoration that the Lord began to make known his will concerning the sacraments of the Church, including those we know as the ordinances of salvation.

The Meaning of Ordinances

Righteousness and truth result in order, while evil and wickedness lead to confusion and disorder. In describing the depraved state of things at the close of the Nephite narrative, Mormon spoke of his people as Âwithout civilization,Â Âwithout principle,Â Âpast feeling,Â and, interestingly enough, Âwithout order and without mercyÂ (Moro. 9:11, 18, 20). Whereas faithfulness and adherence to the light of Christ and to moral codes and standards bring forth peace and decency and enhanced organization among the sons and daughters of God, indifference towards or defiance of divine law bring forth chaos and division. Nephi explained that Âthe Spirit of the Lord will not always strive with man. And when the Spirit ceaseth to strive with man then cometh speedy destruction.Â (2 Ne. 26:11.) Those who no longer enjoy the influence of the Spirit Âare without Christ and God in the world; and they are driven about as chaff before the windÂ (Morm. 5:16). When the Spirit ceases to strive with men and women, Satan has Âfull power over the hearts of the peopleÂ and they are Âgiven up unto the hardness of their hearts, and the blindness of their mindsÂ (Ether 15:19). The Holy Spirit is an organizing principle, and the nearer we approach our Heavenly Father the greater will be our grasp of reality, our ability to see things as they really are and to value our true relationship to man and God.

The LordÂs house is Âa house of orderÂ (D&C 132:8), and he expects his earthly servants to maintain that order. ÂOrganize yourselves,Â he instructed the members of the School of the Prophets; Âprepare every needful thing; and establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God; that your incomings may be in the name of the Lord; that your outgoings may be in the name of the Lord; that all your salutations may be in the name of the LordÂ (D&C 88:119Â20). ÂWherefore, as ye are agents, ye are on the LordÂs errand; and whatever ye do according to the will of the Lord is the LordÂs businessÂ (D&C 64:29).

An ordinance is a law, a statute, a commandment. It is a regulation, a guide, a means of ordering things or putting matters in place or in their proper relationship to other matters. In short, an ordinance is that which helps to maintain order. The ordinances of God are the commandments and rules for governing and ordering our lives. This is the broad definition of ordinance. Thus the Lord, in his preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, explained concerning the religious world prior to the First Vision: ÂThey have strayed from mine ordinances, and have broken mine everlasting covenantÂ (D&C 1:15; emphasis added). In addition, the Savior provided a pattern for discerning between pretenders and true servants of God. We will know that a man is who he says he is Âif he obey mine ordinancesÂ (see D&C 52: 15Â16). Obedience to the laws of God is prerequisite to the approbation of heaven. Should one come among us claiming divine authority to speak or demonstrating miraculous power, we need only attend to the manner in which he or she observes the laws and statutes of God.

ÂAnd the keys of the mysteries of the kingdom shall not be taken from my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., through the means I have appointed, while he liveth, inasmuch as he obeyeth mine ordinancesÂ (D&C 64:5). This does not seem to be a reference to JosephÂs willingness to be baptized or confirmed or ordained or sealed but rather an expression of his need to keep the commandments of the Lord. Similarly, in a revelation to Brigham Young concerning the Camp of Israel, the word of the Lord came: ÂAnd this shall be our covenant-that we will walk in all the ordinances of the LordÂ (D&C 136:4).

ÂAmong his laws and commandments,Â Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written, Âthe Lord has provided certain rites and ceremonies which are also called ordinances. These ordinance-rites might be pictured as a small circle within the larger circle of ordinance-commandments. Most of these rites and ceremonies, as illustrated by baptism and celestial marriage, are essential to salvation and exaltation in the kingdom of God; some of them, such as the blessing of children and the dedication of graves, are not ordinances of salvation, but are performed for the comfort, consolation, and encouragement of the saints.Â ( Mormon Doctrine, pp. 548Â49; emphasis in original.) The ordinances serve as a channel between the heavens and the earth, a means by which God can convey his power and deliver divine understanding to his people. Many of the ordinances serve as marvelous teaching devices, conveying sacred truths as well as sacred powers or privileges. For this reason they have been, are, and forever will be performed in a designated manner.

For example, we know that baptism by immersion is symbolic of the death, burial, and rise to newness of life of our Redeemer (see Rom. 6:3Â5; D&C 128:12). It must be done by immersion in order to answer to the type, to carry out its symbolic meaning. Thus the Prophet taught:

God has set many signs on the earth, as well as in the heavens; for instance, the oak of the forest, the fruit of the tree, the herb of the field, all bear a sign that seed hath been planted there; for it is a decree of the Lord that every tree, plant, and herb bearing seed should bring forth of its kind, and cannot come forth after any other law or principle. Upon the same principle do I contend that baptism is a sign ordained of God, for the believer in Christ to take upon himself in order to enter into the kingdom of God. . . . Those who seek to enter in any other way will seek in vain; for God will not receive them, neither will the angels acknowledge their works as accepted, for they have not obeyed the ordinances, nor attended to the signs which God ordained for the salvation of man, to prepare him for, and give him a title to, a celestial glory. . . .

Baptism is a sign to God, to angels, and to heaven that we do the will of God, and there is no other way beneath the heavens whereby God hath ordained for man to come to Him to be saved, and enter into the Kingdom of God, except faith in Jesus Christ, repentance, and baptism for the remission of sins, and any other course is in vain; then you have the promise of the gift of the Holy Ghost. (Teachings, p. 198.)

Obedience to the ordinances of salvation, meaning both commandments and rites, is prerequisite to the receipt of the power of God, for Âthe powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousnessÂ (D&C 121:36). A modern revelation declares that the Âgreater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God. Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest. And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh; for without thisÂ-the power of godliness-Âno man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live.Â (D&C 84:19Â22.) ÂGod is known,Â Elder McConkie wrote,

in and through and because of the priesthood; without it he would remain unknown. Through the priesthood the Holy Ghost is given to men, which Comforter is sent forth to bear record of the Father and the Son; also, through the priesthood men are able to progress in spiritual things until they gain personal communion with Deity. . . . In and through the holy priesthood, including all the laws and rites that go with it, the power of godliness, or in other words the power of righteousness, is brought to pass in the lives of men. Without these priesthood laws and powers, GodÂs power and glory would not be revealed to man on earth. Without them they could not see the face of God, for if they did, his glory would destroy them. (The Promised Messiah, p. 589.)

Those rites or ceremonies that we know as the sacraments or ordinances of salvation must be received in righteousness if they are to be of eternal worth to us. That is to say, worthiness and the companionship of the Holy Ghost are the seedbed for efficacy in regard to the ordinances. The Holy Ghost is a revelator; no man can receive the Holy Ghost without receiving revelation (see Teachings, p. 328). The Holy Ghost is a comforter, the divine means by which peace and comfort and assurance come to the Saints. The Holy Ghost is a sanctifier, the means by which men and women are baptized by fire and born again, the means by which dross and iniquity are burned out of the soul as though by fire. The Holy Ghost is the Holy Spirit of Promise, the Holy Spirit promised the faithful, the means whereby ordinances and covenants are ratified, sealed, and approved by God. Truly, Âall covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations, that are not made and entered into and sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise . . . are of no efficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection from the dead; for all contracts that are not made unto this end have an end when men are deadÂ (D&C 132:7).

Covenants and Ordinances Forever the Same

Because we know that the great plan of happiness is eternal and that salvation in any age is accomplished only in and through the mediation of the Redeemer, we also know that the covenants and ordinances are likewise eternal and unchanging. It is in this light-the eternal nature of things-that the restored gospel is called the new and everlasting covenant. Modern revelations affirm: ÂWherefore, I say unto you that I have sent unto you mine everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginningÂ (D&C 49:9). ÂVerily I say unto you, blessed are you for receiving mine everlasting covenant, even the fulness of my gospel, sent forth unto the children of men, that they might have life and be made partakers of the glories which are to be revealed in the last days, as it was written by the prophets and apostles in days of oldÂ (D&C 66:2; compare 1:22; 39:11; 45:9; 49:9; 133:57). In the words of President Joseph Fielding Smith, ÂThe new and everlasting covenant is the sum total of all gospel covenants and obligationsÂ (Doctrines of Salvation 1:156). The gospel covenant is new in the sense that it is revealed anew following a period of apostasy. It is everlasting in the sense that it was had from the beginning.

ÂNow taking it for granted that the scriptures say what they mean, and mean what they say,Â the Prophet Joseph noted, Âwe have sufficient grounds to go on and prove from the Bible that the gospel has always been the same; the ordinances to fulfill its requirements, the same, and the officers to officiate, the same; and the signs and fruits resulting from the promises, the same.Â He continues with an illustration of this principle: ÂTherefore, as Noah was a preacher of righteousness he must have been baptized and ordained to the priesthood by the laying on of the hands.Â (Teachings, p. 264.) Earlier in his ministry the Prophet had spoken concerning Abel, the son of Adam:

It is said by Paul in his letter to the Hebrew brethren [see Heb. 11:4], that Abel obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts. . . . Then certainly God spoke to him: indeed, it is said that God talked with him; and if He did, would He not, seeing that Abel was righteous deliver to him the whole plan of the Gospel? And is not the Gospel the news of the redemption? How could Abel offer a sacrifice and look forward with faith on the Son of God for a remission of his sins, and not understand the Gospel? . . . And if Abel was taught of the coming of the Son of God, was he not taught also of His ordinances? We all admit that the Gospel has ordinances, and if so, had it not always ordinances, and were not its ordinances always the same? (Ibid., p. 59.)

Truly, the Lord Âset the ordinances to be the same forever and everÂ (ibid., p. 168). That is, ÂOrdinances instituted in the heavens before the foundation of the world, in the priesthood, for the salvation of men, are not to be altered or changed. All must be saved on the same principles.Â (Ibid., p. 308.)

Adam holds Âthe keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy OneÂ (D&C 78:16). Joseph Smith observed that Âthe Priesthood is an everlasting principle, and existed with God from eternity, and will to eternity, without beginning of days or end of years. The keys have to be brought from heaven whenever the Gospel is sent. When they are revealed from heaven, it is by AdamÂs authority.Â (Teachings, p. 157.) More specifically, Adam was the Âfirst to hold the spiritual blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances for the salvation of his posterity unto the endÂ (ibid. p. 167). God Âset the ordinances to be the same forever and ever, and set Adam to watch over them, to reveal them from heaven to man, or to send angels to reveal themÂ (ibid. p. 168).

In that spirit, and knowing what we do about the everlasting nature of the gospel, the Church and kingdom, and the covenants and ordinances pertaining thereto, we know that many of the ancients had the gospel. Many of them knew the Lord, taught his doctrine, and officiated as legal administrators in his earthly kingdom. Isaac, Israel, Joseph, and all the patriarchs enjoyed personal revelation and communion with their Maker. We would suppose that Eve and Sarah and Rebekah were baptized; that Jacob received the temple endowment; that Micah and Malachi stood in the prophetic office by divine call and not because they assumed that role on their own. Nephi, son of Lehi, was baptized by water and received the gift of the Holy Ghost as well as the high priesthood, although an account of these events is not stated directly in the Nephite record. That the blessings of the holy temple were available to the former-day Saints is made clear in the ProphetÂs translation of the Egyptian papyri. We are told that one particular figure represents Âthe grand Key-words of the Holy Priesthood, as revealed to Adam in the Garden of Eden, as also to Seth, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, and all to whom the Priesthood was revealedÂ (Abraham, facsimile no. 2, explanation of Figure 3). Because of what has been made known through Joseph Smith-principles of doctrine and priesthood government-we know what it takes to operate the kingdom of God and what things the people of God must do to comply.

Conclusion

Joseph Smith wrote: ÂWe believe that the first principles and ordinances of the Gospel are: first, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second, Repentance; third, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; fourth, Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy GhostÂ (A of F 1:4). The Prophet was the conduit through which a myriad of truths have come to the earth in this final dispensation. He has taught us concerning the spiritual powers that can and should be enjoyed by men and women within the household of faith. He has taught us concerning the godly powers that are channeled to men and women through sacred covenants and ordinances. Indeed, it is only as we receive the ordinances of salvation worthily that we are able to harness many of those divine forces that a benevolent God has vouchsafed for the Saints of the Most High. Truly, Âall the ordinances and duties that ever have been required by the Priesthood, under the directions and commandments of the Almighty in any of the dispensations, shall all be had in the last dispensationÂ (Teachings, p. 171). We are not free to pick and choose which of those sacraments we will abide by, for Âall men who become heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ will have to receive the fulness of the ordinances of his kingdom; and those who will not receive all the ordinances will come short of the fullness of that glory, if they do not lose the wholeÂ (ibid., p. 309; see also p. 331).
