Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 18

The Restoration of the Covenant

Those saints who have gone before me, who have possessed this land,

shall cry, yea, even from the dust will they cry unto the Lord;

and as the Lord liveth he will remember the covenant

which he hath made with them.

-Mormon 8:23

Without covenants there is and can be no salvation. As spoken of in scripture and as found in the gospel plan, a covenant is a formal agreement between God and his children in which the terms of blessings and salvation are clearly announced and agreed to. Such covenants are solemnized by ritual ordained by God and administered by one having authority to act in his stead. It naturally follows that the LordÂs people have always been a covenant people. It follows too that they will have standing at their head a prophet or covenant spokesman, one ordained to act as the earthly voice of their heavenly Master. Covenants cannot be made independent of the priesthood or of the Spirit of revelation. Those covenants out of which the promise of exaltation comes must be performed on sacral space, holy ground, a place where men can stand, even in the flesh, in the presence of God. Thus a covenant people will always be a temple-building people.

Restoring the Covenant

Covenants require obedience. To suggest that salvation can be found in the grace of Christ alone, without willing compliance with the ordinances of salvation and with the living of their terms with exactness and honor, is to deny both the doctrine and the example of Christ, who came as the Âmessenger of the covenantÂ (Mal. 3:1). In like manner, to suppose that salvation can be obtained through ritual obedience without grace is equally false. The perfection of Christ embraced both teaching and example. Having established baptism as an ordinance of salvation, he himself complied with it. Why? Because he could not be saved without doing so. Scripture tells us that Christ was baptized to Âfulfil all righteousnessÂ (Matt. 3:15). Nephi, in teaching the role of Christ as messenger of the covenant, asks rhetorically how the Savior fulfilled all righteousness in being baptized. His answer: the Son of God Âhumbleth himself before the Father, and witnesseth unto the Father that he would be obedient unto him in keeping his commandments.Â Further, he Âshoweth unto the children of men the straitness of the path, and the narrowness of the gate, by which they should enter, he having set the example before them.Â (2 Ne. 31:7, 9.)

By being baptized, Christ illustrated his humility to the Father, covenanted to keep the FatherÂs commandments, entered in at the gate that he himself might be saved, and set an example for all mankind to follow. By the Spirit of revelation, Joseph Smith was able to further expand our understanding of ChristÂs role as an exemplar when he explained that it was in the making and keeping of covenants that Christ marked the path that we are to follow (see Teachings, p. 308). Who, then, are the children of the covenant? The testimony of prophets both ancient and modern is that the children of the covenant are those who enter into and keep the covenants of salvation. ÂAs many of the Gentiles as will repent are the covenant people of the Lord,Â Nephi explained, Âand as many of the Jews as will not repent shall be cast off; for the Lord covenanteth with none save it be with them that repent and believe in his Son, who is the Holy One of IsraelÂ (2 Ne. 30:2).

In the chapter about the restoration of the keys of the kingdom, we laid a foundation for an understanding of the restoration of the covenant and of the fulfilling of the promises made anciently to the fathers. Indeed, it ought to be observed that there is a perfection in the sequence of events that stands as a towering witness of the divine calling of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Were the story one of JosephÂs making, we would not expect it to have been an Old Testament church that he restored. Further, we would not have expected him to claim keys and tutoring from so many of the noble and great ones known to us in the Bible. Would he not have simply declared that the Savior bestowed upon him all the keys of the kingdom and be done with the matter? Instead, he weaved a tapestry of intricate detail that involved a legion of heavenly ministrants, all restoring their particular keys, powers, and authorities. Why, we are left to ask, are there so many angelic ministrants when one blessing from the Savior would do?

First, it should be observed that it was not the New Testament church alone that was being restored. It was the church of Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Elijah. All authority and keys came from the Old Testament. What of John the Baptist? some will ask. And then it will be immediately remembered that he brought the priesthood of Aaron. And what of Peter, James, and John? others will ask. And again the answer finds us rooted in the Old Testament, for they restored the priesthood of Melchizedek. It should further be remembered that the cord that binds the Old Testament together is the promise of the Father to the covenant people. Much of it is written in the form of books of consolation that foretell a future day when Israel will once again enjoy the glory of DavidÂs day.

Significantly, the Book of Mormon represents the continuation of this same theme. In its preface, Moroni states a twofold purpose for the book: first, to show the remnants of the House of Israel the manner in which God had blessed their fathers and to assure them that they would again Âknow the covenants of the Lord,Â and second, to convince Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ. Significantly, textual corrections in Joseph SmithÂs translation of the Bible consistently sustain this theme, as does the book of Abraham. The manner in which keys were restored to Joseph Smith constitutes a continuation of this theme. If the story was of Joseph SmithÂs making, we would expect him to simply announce that he had received all necessary keys and authority from the Savior himself. Who could argue with such a claim? Such, however, is not the story. Joseph SmithÂs testimony is that those holding authority-each in turn-came and restored their keys.

The effect of this is to bind us in a very personal way with each of those who stood as dispensation heads or held particular keys. Who does not remember with special feelings of fondness those who have conferred authority or office upon them? So it is that we obtain an intimate acquaintanceship with those who went before. No more perfect way could be found to establish the dispensation of the fulness of times. The prophets of earlier dispensations tutor and instruct our modern prophets. They laid their hands on Brother JosephÂs head and personally gave him the keys and powers that were theirs. Further, never did this happen when Joseph Smith was alone. Always another was at his side so that every conferral of authority could be sustained in the mouth of two witnesses.

No other dispensation has enjoyed such a union with those of ages past. This union represents, the Prophet explains, Âa welding linkÂ in which those of the house of faith are bound together throughout all their generations. ÂWe without them cannot be made perfect,Â he said, Âneither can they without us be made perfect. Neither can they nor we be made perfect without those who have died in the gospel also; for it is necessary in the ushering in of the dispensation of the fulness of times, which dispensation is now beginning to usher in, that a whole and complete and perfect union, and welding together of dispensations, and keys, and powers, and glories should take place, and be revealed from the days of Adam even to the present time.Â (D&C 128:18.)

These events and the restoration of the authority associated with them make us special witnesses of the verity of those events spoken of in the Bible. While those of other faiths may conjecture that stories such as those of Adam and Noah are simply myths created by a primitive mind to explain the unknown, we as Latter-day Saints are duty-bound to testify of their reality. These men and the great events of their day are known to us. Our faith is immediate and personal. We have no right, Joseph Smith rightfully declared, to claim their promises to be ours. ÂYou cannot found your hopes of salvation upon the obedience of the children of Israel when journeying in the wilderness, nor can you expect that the blessings which the apostles pronounced upon the churches of Christ eighteen hundred years ago, were intended for you. Again, if othersÂ blessings are not your blessings, othersÂ curses are not your curses.Â (Teachings, p. 12.) We stand as agents unto ourselves.

We make no claim to borrowed blessings. We stand independent. We, like all men, will be judged according to our own works. The uniqueness of our theology, however, is that the ancients have conferred upon us all the authorities they held. By obedience to the same laws and ordinances and by entering into the same covenants, we become heirs of the same blessings and promises to which they are heirs. Chief among those blessings are the promises made to the fathers relative to the continuation of the family unit and the eternal nature of the covenant of marriage. Let us now look more closely at that promise.

The Abrahamic Covenant

Appropriately, the restoration of the gospel centers in and around the restoration of the Abrahamic covenant. Our most perfect explanation of the promises made to Abraham was restored to us in the ProphetÂs translation of the Abrahamic papyrus. ÂI will make of thee a great nation,Â the Lord said to Abraham,

and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations;

And I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father;

And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee; and in thee (that is, in thy Priesthood) and in thy seed (that is, thy Priesthood), for I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal (Abr. 2:9Â11).

The greatest promise that God can give a righteous man-one whose calling and election is sure, as was the case with Abraham-would be promises relative to his family (see D&C 132:37, 49Â50). When all earthly possessions are weighed in the balance and given their proper worth, no wealth, honor, or glory compares in importance to the well-being of those of our own family. So it is that the Lord rewarded the faithful aged patriarch with the promise that his would be a favored and chosen lineage. It would be his descendants who would be honored with the right to hold the priesthood and thus the responsibility to be the messengers of salvation to all nations. It is for this reason that all missionaries are expected to have received a patriarchal blessing. It is their right to know by the Spirit of revelation that their call is in harmony with the promise made to their ancient father. So inclusive was the promise given to Abraham that those not naturally of his seed who entered into the covenant of salvation were to be adopted into his lineage; they too could call him father and enjoy the blessings bequeathed to the righteous among his natural heirs.

This promise had been affirmed to Joseph Smith by revelation as early as 1831. In the revelation on eternal marriage-which, incidentally, was not recorded until 1843-we learn that ÂAbraham received promises concerning his seed, and of the fruit of his loins-from whose loins ye are, namely, my servant Joseph-which were to continue so long as they were in the world; and as touching Abraham and his seed, out of the world they should continue; both in the world and out of the world should they continue as innumerable as the stars; or, if ye were to count the sand upon the seashore ye could not number themÂ (D&C 132:30). As stated in the revelation, the promise given to the seed of Abraham is of such enduring power that death does not dissolve it. Those descendants of Abraham who die without the opportunity to lay claim to the priesthood and its blessings still have claim upon their birthright in the world to come. In the world of the spirits they will be taught the gospel message by others of AbrahamÂs seed, and upon embracing it they will, through the ordinances of the temple performed by those who act as proxy for them, have all the blessings of Abraham given to them.

Conclusion

The gospel is the everlasting covenant. It is so called because it comes from him who is everlasting and because the promise of salvation that it contains grows out of our covenant relationship with God. It is known to those of our dispensation as the new and everlasting covenant because its principles and powers have been revealed anew to us. The conditions of all gospel covenants Âwere instituted from before the foundation of the worldÂ and to be of Âefficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection from the deadÂ must bear the ratifying seal of the Holy Spirit of Promise. That is, any covenant, oath, vow, connection, association, or expectation that is to span this mortal sphere must do so with the sanction and approval of the third member of the Godhead. The Holy Ghost must attest that the proper ordinances have been performed by the proper authority and that those entering into these ordinances have lived up to the terms of their covenant. This principle assures that those who are unclean or unworthy will not be allowed to enter into the kingdom of heaven. It further assures that it is in and through the covenants of salvation that we obtain that kingdom. (See D&C 132:4Â7.)
