Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 19

The Restoration of the Covenant People

Ye are the children of the prophets; and ye are of the house of Israel;

and ye are of the covenant which the Father made with your fathers,

saying unto Abraham:

And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.

-3 1 Ne. 20:25

As we have seen, the restoration of the gospel through the Prophet Joseph Smith entailed the restoration of the new and everlasting covenant that God made with the ancients, which we sometimes call the Abrahamic covenant. ÂThe time has at last arrived,Â the modern seer declared, Âwhen the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, has set his hand again the second time to recover the remnants of his people. . . . This covenant has never been established with the house of Israel, nor with the house of Judah, for it requires two parties to make a covenant, and those two parties must be agreed, or no covenant can be made.Â Joseph continued: ÂChrist, in the days of His flesh, proposed to make a covenant with them, but they rejected Him and His proposals, and in consequence thereof, they were broken off, and no covenant was made with them at that time. But their unbelief has not rendered the promise of God of none effect.Â (Teachings, pp. 14Â15.) The organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and the establishment of the kingdom of God on earth-with its saving truths and ordinances-perpetuates the ancient covenant and helps to identify and restore those who are the chosen people.

Premortal Israel

We know from modern revelation that we lived before we came here. Very little of what we do and feel and accomplish in our second estate may be comprehended in the abstract, independent of what we did and who we were in the premortal existence. Alma teaches us that many of us demonstrated Âexceeding faith and good worksÂ in the premortal existence as a preparation for the callings and assignments we receive here (Alma 13:3). ÂBeing subject to law,Â Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written, Âand having their agency, all the spirits of men, while yet in the Eternal Presence, developed aptitudes, talents, capacities, and abilities of every sort, kind, and degree. During the long expanse of life which then was, an infinite variety of talents and abilities came into being. As the ages rolled, no two spirits remained alike. . . . Abraham and Moses and all of the prophets sought and obtained the talent for spirituality. Mary and Eve were two of the greatest of all the spirit daughters of the Father. The whole house of Israel, known and segregated out from their fellows, was inclined toward spiritual things.Â (The Mortal Messiah 1:23.)

We speak often in the Church of foreordination to office and calling, and it is significant that many of us were foreordained to serve in responsible positions in the kingdom. Other than the conditional election to eternal life, perhaps the greatest foreordination-based on premortal faithfulness-is foreordination to lineage and family: certain individuals come to the earth through a designated channel, through a lineage that entitles them to remarkable blessings but also a lineage that carries with it burdens and responsibilities. In the words of Elder Melvin J. Ballard, Israel is Âa group of souls tested, tried, and proven before they were born into the world. . . . Through this lineage were to come the true and tried souls that had demonstrated their righteousness in the spirit world before they came here.Â (Melvin J. Ballard-Crusader for Righteousness, pp. 218Â19.)

Moses counseled his people: ÂRemember the days of old, consider the years of many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy elders, and they will tell thee. When the most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel. For the LordÂs portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.Â (Deut. 32:7Â9.) In speaking to the Athenians, the Apostle Paul declared: ÂGod that made the world and all things therein . . . hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitationÂ (Acts 17:24, 26).

President Harold B. Lee explained:

Those born to the lineage of Jacob, who was later to be called Israel, and his posterity, who were known as the children of Israel, were born into the most illustrious lineage of any of those who came upon the earth as mortal beings.

All these rewards were seemingly promised, or foreordained, before the world was. Surely these matters must have been determined by the kind of lives we had lived in that premortal spirit world. Some may question these assumptions, but at the same time they will accept without any question the belief that each one of us will be judged when we leave this earth according to his or her deeds during our lives here in mortality. IsnÂt it just as reasonable to believe that what we have received here in this earth [life] was given to each of us according to the merits of our conduct before we came here? (In Conference Report, October 1973, pp. 7Â8.)

The declaration of lineage by patriarchs is therefore as much a statement as to who and what we were, as it is to who we are now and what we may become. If there is no relationship between the first estate and the second, why, as President Lee might ask, should we believe there is any relationship between what we do here and what we will receive hereafter?

Who are we, then? President Lee answered: ÂYou are all the sons and daughters of God. Your spirits were created and lived as organized intelligences before the world was. You have been blessed to have a physical body because of your obedience to certain commandments in that premortal state. You are now born into a family to which you have come, into the nations through which you have come, as a reward for the kind of lives you lived before you came here and at a time in the worldÂs history, as the Apostle Paul taught the men of Athens and as the Lord revealed to Moses, determined by the faithfulness of each of those who lived before this world was created.Â (In Conference Report, October 1973, p. 7.) And yet coming to earth through a peculiar lineage would involve much more than boasting of a blessing; it would entail bearing a burden. ÂOnce we know who we are,Â Elder Russell M. Nelson said, Âand the royal lineage of which we are a part, our actions and our direction in life will be more appropriate to our inheritanceÂ (ÂThanks for the Covenant,Â p. 59).

Coming into the Covenant

The revelations that came through Joseph Smith affirmed what the Savior had taught in the meridian of time and in other dispensations-that being a covenant people entails more than being lineal descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Those who lay claim to their covenant status must be willing to come unto Jesus Christ, who is the Mediator of the covenant. Nephi testified that Âas many of the Gentiles as will repent are the covenant people of the Lord; and as many of the Jews as will not repent shall be cast off; for the Lord covenanteth with none save it be with them that repent and believe in his Son, who is the Holy One of IsraelÂ (2 Ne. 30:2).

When Israel-as individuals or as a nation-has chosen to reject the true Messiah and his gospel, they have been scattered, meaning they have been lost as to the blessings of the covenant and, in some cases, lost as to their covenant identity. In speaking of ancient Israel, Jacob wrote: ÂAnd after they have hardened their hearts and stiffened their necks against the Holy One of Israel, behold, the judgments of the Holy One of Israel shall come upon them. And the day cometh that they shall be smitten and afflicted. Wherefore, after they are driven to and fro, for thus saith the angel, many shall be afflicted in the flesh, and shall not be suffered to perish, because of the prayers of the faithful; they shall be scattered, and smitten, and hated.Â (2 Ne. 6:10Â11; see also 10:3Â6.)

Joseph Smith said, ÂOne of the most important points in the faith of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, through the fullness of the everlasting Gospel, is the gathering of IsraelÂ (Teachings, p. 92). The gathering of Israel is a two-part process: first spiritual and secondly temporal. It is not primarily a matter of moving one group of people from one piece of real estate to another; the gathering is to a Person, to Jesus Christ, to his church and kingdom and then to the lands of their inheritance or to the congregations of the faithful (see 2 Ne. 9:1Â2). Nephi explained that in the last days the people of the covenant will Âknow that they are of the house of Israel, and that they are the covenant people of the Lord; and then shall they know and come to the knowledge of their forefathers, and also to the knowledge of the gospel of their Redeemer . . . and the very points of his doctrine, that they may know how to come unto him and be savedÂ (1 Ne. 15:14). Jacob observed that the Lord would be merciful to his chosen people, such Âthat when they shall come to the knowledge of their Redeemer, they shall be gathered together again to the lands of their inheritanceÂ (2 Ne. 6:11). He also reaffirmed the order of the gathering in a later sermon: ÂBut behold, thus saith the Lord God: When the day cometh that they shall believe in me, that I am Christ, then have I covenanted with their fathers that they shall be restored in the flesh, upon the earth, unto the lands of their inheritanceÂ (2 Ne. 10:7).

In short, people are gathered first and foremost as they receive the message of the gospel, are baptized into the LordÂs church, and congregate with the Saints. ÂWhosoever I will,Â the Lord declared in January 1831, Âshall go forth among all nations, and it shall be told them what they shall do; for I have a great work laid up in store, for Israel shall be saved, and I will lead them whithersoever I will, and no power shall stay my handÂ (D&C 38:33). President Spencer W. Kimball explained: ÂNow, the gathering of Israel consists of joining the true church and their coming to a knowledge of the true God. . . . Any person, therefore, who has accepted the restored gospel, and who now seeks to worship the Lord in his own tongue and with the Saints in the nations where he lives, has complied with the law of the gathering of Israel and is heir to all of the blessings promised the Saints in these last days.Â (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 439.) The gathering in the dispensation of the fulness of times begins with missionary work. Thus a modern revelation contains the following invitation: ÂThe days of thy deliverance are come, if thou wilt hearken to my voice, which saith unto thee: Arise and be baptized, and wash away your sins, calling on my name, and you shall receive my Spirit, and a blessing so great as you never have known. And if thou do this, I have prepared thee for a greater work. Thou shalt preach the fulness of my gospel, which I have sent forth in these last days, the covenant which I have sent forth to recover my people, which are of the house of Israel.Â (D&C 39:10Â11.)

Baptism and the reception of the Holy Ghost are, however, only the initial steps of the gathering. The people of the covenant are not fully gathered until they enjoy the blessings of the holy temple, until they are gathered to Âthe mountain of the LordÂs house. . . . And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths.Â (2 Ne. 12:2Â3.) ÂWhat was the object of gathering the Jews, or the people of God in any age of the world?Â the Prophet asked rhetorically. His answer: ÂThe main object was to build unto the Lord a house whereby He could reveal unto His people the ordinances of His house and the glories of His kingdom, and teach the people the way of salvation; for there are certain ordinances and principles that, when they are taught and practiced, must be done in a place or house built for that purpose.Â (Teachings, pp. 307Â8.)

The Promises Made to the Fathers

ÂI say also unto thee,Â the Savior stated at Caesarea Philippi, ÂThat thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.Â (See Matt. 16:13Â19.) Within a week the LordÂs promise was fulfilled: Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John-the chief Apostles and First Presidency of the meridian church-to a high mountain to pray. While in that setting, these four were transfigured-lifted spiritually to a higher plane-and thus prepared for a transcendent experience. (See Matt. 17:1Â9.)

Moses and Elijah appeared and bestowed their keys upon this meridian Presidency (see Teachings, p. 158). These directing powers would allow the Apostles to govern and direct the Church in the absence of Jesus Christ and make available to the members of the Church all of the blessings of the everlasting gospel. Peter, James, and John had received the Melchizedek Priesthood earlier and had been given apostolic power and commission at the time of their appointment to the Twelve. As a result of this experience on the Mount of Transfiguration, they were granted the right to bind and seal on earth, with the full confidence that their actions would receive sealing validity in the heavens.

That which took place in the first-century Christian church has its parallels in the latter-day church. In chapter 16 we discussed the coming of Moses, Elias, and Elijah as a part of the restoration of the keys of the priesthood. Let us now review their coming from the point of view of the everlasting covenant. The winter and spring of 1836 proved to be an era of both modern Pentecost and modern transfiguration. On Sunday, 3 April 1836, one week following the glorious dedicatory service of the Kirtland Temple, the Saints were again assembled in the house of the Lord. In the morning hours Thomas B. Marsh (then President of the Twelve) and David W. Patten were called upon to speak. In the afternoon the First Presidency and the Apostles participated in a sacramental service, after which Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery knelt in prayer behind drawn curtains adjacent to the large pulpits on the west side of the main floor of the temple. At that moment a wondrous vision burst upon them, one of the most significant theophanies of the ages.

Joseph and Oliver were transformed and made ready to penetrate the veil and receive divine direction and authority. Appropriately, Jesus the Christ appeared first. On this sacred day, Jehovah came again to his temple-the first temple to be authorized and accepted by him since the long night of apostate darkness. Our LordÂs appearance was but the beginning of the realization of his promise given three years earlier: ÂAnd inasmuch as my people build a house unto me in the name of the Lord, and do not suffer any unclean thing to come into it, that it be not defiled, my glory shall rest upon it; yea, and my presence shall be there, for I will come into it, and all the pure in heart that shall come into it shall see GodÂ (D&C 97:15Â16). The Savior accepted the offering of his Saints-this temple built at great sacrifice-and then expanded their vision in regard to the importance of that which they had accomplished: ÂYea the hearts of thousands and tens of thousands shall greatly rejoice in consequence of the blessings which shall be poured out, and the endowment with which my servants have been endowed in this houseÂ (D&C 110:9).

ÂAfter this vision [of the Christ] closed, the heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the northÂ (D&C 110:11). The keys restored by the ancient lawgiver formalized the work of gathering that had begun earlier. They enabled the Saints to accomplish the directive delivered in September 1830: ÂAnd ye are called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect; for mine elect hear my voice and harden not their heartsÂ (D&C 29:7). To the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints-the man appointed Âto preside over the whole church, and to be like unto MosesÂ (D&C 107:91)-were given keys to gather modern Israel. Even as Moses led ancient Israel out of Egyptian bondage, so the President of the Church was given keys to lead modern Israel out of the bondage and throes of modern Egypt into Zion.

ÂAfter this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessedÂ (D&C 110:12). The identity of Elias-whether he be Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham himself, or a prophet named Elias from the days of Abraham-is not clearly known. In any case, this heavenly messenger restored the keys necessary to establish the ancient patriarchal order, making Joseph Smith and the faithful Saints who receive celestial marriage heirs to the blessings and promises made to the fathers-Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Elias thus restored the power by which eternal families are organized through the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. ÂAs the crowning cause for wonderment,Â Elder Bruce R. McConkie has explained, Âthat God who is no respecter of persons has given a like promise [to that of Abraham and Joseph Smith] to every [member] in the kingdom who has gone to the holy temple and entered into the blessed order of matrimony there performed. Every person married in the temple for time and for all eternity has sealed upon him, conditioned upon his faithfulness, all of the blessings of the ancient patriarchs, including the crowning promise and assurance of eternal increase, which means, literally, a posterity as numerous as the dust particles of the earth.Â (The Millennial Messiah, p. 264.)

ÂAfter this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said: Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi-testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come-to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curseÂ (D&C 110:13Â15). Precisely on the day that ElijahÂs appearance took place, Jews throughout the world were engaged in the celebration of the Passover. Since the time of Malachi-from about 400 b.c. until now-Jews worldwide have awaited ElijahÂs coming with anxious anticipation. Elijah did come, but not to Jewish homes; he came rather to a synagogue of the Saints and to his legal administrators on earth. There he bestowed keys of inestimable worth.

In his first appearance to Joseph Smith in 1823, Moroni quoted numerous passages from the Old and New Testaments. The Prophet indicated that Moroni quoted Mal. 4:5Â6 but gave a different rendering from that in the King James Version. Malachi, we learn from the Prophet, Âhad his eye fixed on the restoration of the priesthoodÂ (D&C 128:17). The prophecy began: ÂBehold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the LordÂ (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:38; D&C 2:1). Joseph and Oliver had been ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood and had been given apostolic power and commission as early as 1829. How was it, then, that Elijah would reveal the priesthood? Simply stated, Elijah was sent in 1836 to reveal keys of the priesthood and sealing powers that had not yet been fully understood or were not fully operational in this dispensation. Elijah restored the keys whereby families, organized in the patriarchal order through the powers delivered by Elias, could be bound and sealed for eternity.

Elijah came to Âplant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathersÂ whereby the Âhearts of the children [should] turn to their fathersÂ (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:39; D&C 2:2). The Spirit of the Lord witnesses to faithful Latter-day Saints of the central place of eternal marriage and of the sublime joys associated with the everlasting continuation of the family. Through temples, GodÂs promises to the fathers-the promises pertaining to the gospel, the priesthood, and eternal increase (see Abr. 2:8Â11)-are extended to all the faithful Saints of all ages. The hearts of the children turn to the ancient fathers because the children are now participants in and recipients of the blessings of the fathers. Being profoundly grateful for such privileges, members of the Church motivated by the spirit of Elijah also find their hearts turning to their more immediate fathers, and they do all within their power through family history research and attendant temple work to ensure that the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are enjoyed by their ancestry as well as their posterity. ÂIf it were not so [that is, if Elijah had not come], the whole earth would be utterly wasted at [ChristÂs] comingÂ (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:39; D&C 2:3). Why? Because the earth would not have accomplished its foreordained purpose to establish on its face a family system patterned after the order of heaven. If there were no sealing powers whereby families could be bound together, then the earth would never Âanswer the end of its creationÂ (D&C 49:16). It would be wasted and cursed, for all men and women would be forever without root or branch, without ancestry or posterity. However, because Elijah came, all other ordinances for the living and the dead-such as baptisms, confirmations, ordinations, and sealings-have real meaning and are of efficacy, virtue, and force in eternity (see Teachings, p. 172; Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation 2:115Â28).

In summary, Moses restored the keys to gather Israel, to bring people into the Church and kingdom through missionary work. Elias restored the keys to organize those converts into eternal families through the covenant and ordinance of eternal marriage. And Elijah restored the keys associated with the fulness of the priesthood, the powers necessary to bind and seal those families unto eternal life. The ordinances associated with the ministry and bestowal of keys by Moses, Elias, and Elijah-culminating in temples of the Lord-are the capstone blessings of the gospel and the consummation of the FatherÂs work: they provide purpose and perspective for all other gospel principles and ordinances.

A Modern Abraham

In speaking of the Angel Moroni, the Prophet Joseph Smith stated, ÂThis messenger proclaimed himself to be an angel of God, sent to bring the joyful tidings that the covenant which God made with ancient Israel was at hand to be fulfilled, that the preparatory work for the second coming of the Messiah was speedily to commence; that the time was at hand for the Gospel in all its fullness to be preached in power, unto all nations that a people might be prepared for the Millennial reign. I was informed that I was chosen to be an instrument in the hands of God to bring about some of His purposes in this glorious dispensation.Â (History of the Church 4:536Â37.) Joseph of old prophesied that his latter-day namesake would be raised up by God to bring the people of the last days to the knowledge of the covenants God had made with the ancient fathers (see 2 Ne. 3:7; compare 1 Ne. 13:26). The name Joseph is a blessed and significant name. Whether Joseph SmithÂs name is associated with the Hebrew word Yasaf, which means Âto add,Â or to the word Asaph, meaning Âto gather,Â one senses that the latter-day Seer was destined to perform a monumental labor in regard to the fulfillment of the Abrahamic covenant in the final dispensation.

Joseph Smith was a descendant of Abraham, a Âpure EphraimiteÂ (in Journal of Discourses 2:269). By lineage he had a right to the priesthood, the gospel, and eternal life (see Abr. 2:8Â11). In a revelation given on 6 December 1832, the Savior said: ÂThus saith the Lord unto you, with whom the priesthood hath continued through the lineage of your fathers-for ye are lawful heirs, according to the flesh, and have been hid from the world with Christ in God-therefore your life and the priesthood have remained, and must needs remain through you and your lineage until the restoration of all things spoken by the mouths of all the holy prophets since the world beganÂ (D&C 86:8Â10).

On one occasion President Brigham Young declared:

You have heard Joseph say that the people did not know him; he had his eyes on . . . blood-relations. Some have supposed that he meant spirit, but it was the blood-relation. This is it that he referred to. His descent from Joseph that was sold into Egypt was direct, and the blood was pure in him. That is why the Lord chose him and we are pure when this blood-strain from Ephraim comes down pure. The decrees of the Almighty will be exalted-that blood which was in him was pure and he had the sole right and lawful power, as he was the legal heir to the blood that has been on the earth and has come down through a pure lineage. The union of various ancestors kept that blood pure. There is a great deal the people do not understand, and many of the Latter-day Saints have to learn all about it. (ÂFamily Meeting,Â p. 107.)

What is true in regard to the ProphetÂs lineage-his right to the priesthood and the gospel and his duty in regard to the salvation of the world-is equally true for other Latter-day Saints. The Lord spoke of his Saints as Âa remnant of Jacob, and those who are heirs according to the covenantÂ (D&C 52:2). ÂAwake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion,Â Isaiah recorded; Âput on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy cityÂ (Isa. 52:1). A modern revelation provides our finest commentary on this passage, explaining that Jehovah Âhad reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage; also to return to that power which she had lostÂ (D&C 113:8). The Lord also encouraged Israel through Isaiah to shake herself from the dust and loose herself from the bands about her neck (see Isa. 52:2). That is, Âthe scattered remnants are exhorted to return to the Lord from whence they have fallen; which if they do, the promise of the Lord is that he will speak to them, or give them revelation.Â In so doing, Israel rids herself of Âthe curses of God upon her,Â or in other words her Âscattered condition among the Gentiles.Â (D&C 113:10.)

Joseph Smith became a father of the faithful to those of this dispensation, the means by which the chosen lineage could be identified, gathered, organized as family units, and sealed forevermore into the house of Israel and to their God. The patriarch in the days of the early Church, Joseph Smith Sr., blessed his son as follows: ÂA marvelous work and a wonder has the Lord wrought by thy hand, even that which shall prepare the way for the remnants of his people to come in among the Gentiles, with their fulness, as the tribes of Israel are restored. I bless thee with the blessings of thy Fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and even the blessings of thy father Joseph, the son of Jacob. Behold, he looked after his posterity in the last days, when they should be scattered and driven by the Gentiles.Â (Quoted in Joseph F. McConkie, His Name Shall Be Joseph, p. 103.)

Through the work set in motion by Joseph Smith, the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are available to all who will join the Church and prove worthy of the blessings of the temple. JehovahÂs plea through Isaiah that the people of the covenant become a light to the nations, that they might be his Âsalvation unto the end of the earthÂ (Isa. 49:6), is realized through the restoration of the gospel. As the Prophet declared, Âthe election of the promised seed still continues, and in the last day, they shall have the Priesthood restored unto them, and they shall be the Âsaviors on Mount ZionÂÂ (Teachings, p. 189). Because Joseph Smith was the head of this dispensation and its modern Abraham, Brigham Young could appropriately say of his predecessor: ÂJoseph is a father to Ephraim and to all Israel in these last daysÂ (Journal History, 9 April 1837).

ÂAs I said unto Abraham concerning the kindreds of the earth, even so I say unto my servant Joseph: In thee and in thy seed shall the kindred of the earth be blessedÂ (D&C 124:58). Further: ÂAbraham received promises concerning his seed, and of the fruit of his loins-from whose loins ye are, namely, my servant Joseph-which were to continue so long as they were in the world; and as touching Abraham and his seed, out of the world they should continue; both in the world and out of the world should they continue as innumerable as the stars; or, if ye were to count the sand upon the seashore ye could not number them. This promise is yours also, because ye are of Abraham.Â (D&C 132:30Â31.)

Conclusion

Joseph Smith stated: ÂIt is a principle I esteem to be of the greatest importance to those who are looking for salvation in this generation, or in these, that may be called, Âthe latter times.Â All that the prophets that have written, from the days of righteous Abel, down to the last man that has left any testimony on record for our consideration, in speaking of the salvation of Israel in the last days, goes directly to show that it consists in the work of the gathering.Â (Teachings, p. 83.) Indeed, the gospel has been restored in order to search out, gather, and seal unto eternal life those who were a peculiar treasure in their first estate and who qualify through their faithfulness for the title of chosen people in this life. To Sidney Rigdon the Savior implored: ÂKeep all the commandments and covenants by which ye are bound; and I will cause the heavens to shake for your good, and Satan shall tremble and Zion shall rejoice upon the hills and flourish; and Israel shall be saved in mine own due time; and by the keys which I have given shall they be led, and no more be confounded at allÂ (D&C 35:24Â25). Thus the plea of modern Israel ascends to Jehovah: ÂPut upon thy servants the testimony of the covenantÂ (D&C 109:38).
