Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 20

Salvation and the Eternal Family

In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees;

And in order to obtain the highest,

a man must enter into this order of the priesthood

[meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage];

And if he does not, he cannot obtain it.

He may enter into the other, but that is the end of his kingdom;

he cannot have an increase.

-D&C 131:1Â4

Joseph Smith taught that ultimate salvation is found only in the eternal union of man and woman. Every priesthood, grace, power, and authority restored to the Prophet Joseph Smith centers in the salvation of the family. Peter, James, and John restored the Holy Priesthood, thereby authorizing men to perform the ordinances of salvation; Elias restored the ordinance of eternal marriage and the promise of an endless seed; and Elijah restored the sealing power and the fulness of the priesthood by which husband, wife, and children are bound eternally. These doctrines build on the assurance of the Book of Mormon that the resurrection is corporeal and thus that women will be resurrected as women and men as men, the bond of their love ever intact. Thus, as baptism is the gate to the strait and narrow path leading to eternal life, eternal marriage becomes the door through which all who inherit that glory must enter. None enter alone. The man and the woman must stand side by side. Couples in turn must be bound in eternal covenant with their righteous progenitors and with their posterity. In that eternal and restored system we know as The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, salvation is a family affair.

Eternal Worlds and Eternal Families

Speaking of the eternal world, Joseph Smith observed: ÂThat same sociality which exists among us here will exist among us there, only it will be coupled with eternal glory, which glory we do not now enjoyÂ (D&C 130:2). In so saying, the Prophet was teaching a doctrine quite distinctive from that taught in the traditional Christian world. In contrast to the notion of psalm-singing saints resting in the rapture of the Almighty is the idea of marriage, the giving of life through the creation of spirit children, and the never-ending responsibility and privilege of parenthood. The faithful become fathers and mothers in heaven where they labor to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of their progeny.

Would it not be a strange and senseless thing for the God of heaven to create us male and female and to command that a man leave his father and mother and cleave unto his wife and none else, that their love and devotion one for another might grow ever stronger with the passing of years, only to have them ripped apart in death, never again to be united? Would it not be equally strange for this all-knowing God to place his creations upon an earth whose nature and society would have nothing to do with the worlds to come? What is the purpose of our earthly sojourn if the lessons learned and experience gained have nothing to do with our eternal abode and the nature of life there? Yet many teach that in heaven the righteous will be involved in an everlasting liturgy of praise to God or an endless meditation in solitude on his divine majesty and goodness, having gained no advantage in so doing by their experience on earth and having no interest in or love for those who were so important to them here. The earth, according to such notions, being in all its dimensions contrary to the order of heaven, is to be destroyed along with our memory of all earthly associations.

The view of heaven in the historical Christian faith is that death has been conquered and that pain and sorrow are no more-but then neither are friends, family, or human creativity to be preserved, for such are viewed simply as distractions from God, who is to be the focal point of all attention. In this theocentric view, all things center around Deity. Man was created to reverence and honor him and thus will spend eternity doing so. By contrast, the heaven spoken of by Joseph Smith was the perfection of all that God had created and placed on the earth. As all living things-both plant and animal-were created as spirits before they were clothed with tangible and mortal bodies, so they are to come forth in the resurrection corporeal and immortal. The glory of God, Joseph Smith taught, consists of Âsaving all that His hands had made, whether beasts, fowls, fishes or men; and He will glorify Himself with themÂ (Teachings, p. 291). Those living things in every Âsphere of creation,Â our revelations tell us, are entitled to Âthe enjoyment of their eternal felicityÂ (D&C 77:3). All things have been created to beautify and enhance this world in preparation for what it will become (see D&C 59:18Â19). Further, the experience of mortality is of infinite worth, for we are assured that Âwhatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come.Â (D&C 130:18Â19.)

As every power and authority restored by the Prophet Joseph Smith leads to the salvation of the family, the same is also true of the doctrinal restoration that took place through him. First among the doctrines restored was a knowledge of the nature of our Eternal Father. The God of the Prophet Joseph Smith is a personal being, not in the metaphorical sense as held by the traditional Christian world, but in the most literal of senses. He is a man, exalted and glorified but a man nevertheless. Our Heavenly Father is a Man of Holiness (see Moses 6:57). When Latter-day Saints address their Father in Heaven in prayer, they are doing exactly that, speaking with their Father, the literal Father of their spirits and the actual Father of both the spirit and body of the Lord Jesus Christ. Paul stated it well when he said: ÂFor this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is namedÂ (Eph. 3:14Â15). MosesÂ declaration that we were created in the image and likeness of God is also taken very literally (see Gen. 1:27).

In the King Follett discourse, the ProphetÂs great sermon on the nature of God, Joseph Smith took occasion to explain that God does not create things out of nothing (see Teachings, p. 350). The implication of such a declaration generally goes unnoticed. The moment the notion of creation from nothing is adopted, God and humanity cease to be kin! This doctrine disinherits us all as sons and daughters of God. If we were created from nothing, we can no longer maintain that we are the spirit children of God, that we were schooled and prepared for our experience in mortality, that we came to earth with a foreordination, that there was a grand council in heaven in which we chose to sustain Christ as our Redeemer and placed ourselves under covenant to do the will of the Father. Such a notion suggests that our actual relationship with God is no closer than a pot to the potter or a blanket to the weaver.

We cannot overstate the importance of Joseph SmithÂs statement in understanding the nature of God and our relationship to him. If God created the earth and everything on it from nothing, then the search for our ancestry will eventually trace back to nothing. That is a far different notion than the declaration that we are the children of God. In the idea of creation ex nihilo, God becomes an incomprehensible and abstract being; in the theology of Joseph Smith, God becomes a loving Father and salvation becomes a family affair. Thus we find the Prophet explaining: ÂThere are but a very few beings in the world who understand rightly the character of God.Â He then added: ÂIf men do not comprehend the character of God, they do not comprehend themselves.Â (Teachings, p. 343.)

The New and Everlasting Covenant of Marriage

By revelation Joseph Smith learned that in the celestial or highest degree of glory there are three heavens or degrees. ÂIn order to obtain the highest,Â he explained, Âa man must enter into this order of the priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage]; and if he does not, he cannot obtain it. He may enter into the other, but that is the end of his kingdom; he cannot have an increase.Â (See D&C 131:1Â4.) ÂExcept a man and his wife enter into an everlasting covenant and be married for eternity, while in this probation, by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood, they will cease to increase when they die; that is, they will not have any children after the resurrectionÂ (Teachings, pp. 300Â301).

Exaltation, which is had only by obtaining a fulness of the Father, can be obtained only in the eternal union of man and woman in marriage. As all will be granted the privilege of hearing the gospel, so all will have the opportunity to enter into this order of the priesthood. Love and marriage are as much a requisite for the kingdom of heaven as faith, repentance, and baptism. ÂWhoso forbiddeth to marry,Â the Lord told Joseph Smith, Âis not ordained of God, for marriage is ordained of God unto man. Wherefore, it is lawful that he should have one wife, and they twain shall be one flesh, and all this that the earth might answer the end of its creation [implying that the earth was created for the very purpose that we might court, fall in love, and marry]; and that it might be filled with the measure of man, according to his creation before the world was made.Â (D&C 49:15Â17.)

To be binding, covenants must always embrace the proper ordinance performed by the proper authority acting under the direction of those who hold the keys. The terms of the covenant must be kept with exactness and honor. Thus the Lord explains that

if a man marry him a wife in the world, and he marry her not by me nor by my word, and he covenant with her so long as he is in the world and she with him, their covenant and marriage are not of force when they are dead, and when they are out of the world; therefore, they are not bound by any law when they are out of the world.

Therefore, when they are out of the world they neither marry nor are given in marriage; but are appointed angels in heaven, which angels are ministering servants, to minister for those who are worthy of a far more, and an exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory.

For these angels did not abide my law; therefore, they cannot be enlarged, but remain separately and singly, without exaltation, in their saved condition, to all eternity; and from henceforth are not gods, but are angels of God forever and ever.

And again, verily I say unto you, if a man marry a wife, and make a covenant with her for time and for all eternity, if that covenant is not by me or by my word, which is my law, and is not sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, through him whom I have anointed and appointed unto this power, then it is not valid neither of force when they are out of the world, because they are not joined by me, saith the Lord, neither by my word; when they are out of the world it cannot be received there, because the angels and the gods are appointed there, by whom they cannot pass; they cannot, therefore, inherit my glory; for my house is a house of order, saith the Lord God. (D&C 132:15Â18.)

Doctrines of Consolation

The restored gospel of Jesus Christ is a message of hope, a voice of consolation. More than anything else, the gospel message sets forth the eternal truth that our Father loves us, that he is concerned with our welfare, that he will do all he can to ensure our happiness and well-being, and that no one will be forgotten or overlooked. The primary responsibility to teach the gospel to children rests with their parents, not with the Church or any of its auxiliaries. Nevertheless there are those children who, despite the best efforts of their parents, will choose to stray from their teachings and example. Though their hearts will ache, there is reason for faithful parents, whose children are heirs of the covenant, to have hope even for those who wander. ÂWhen a seal is put upon the father and mother, it secures their posterity, so that they cannot be lost, but will be saved by virtue of the covenant of their father and motherÂ (Teachings, p. 321).

Elder Orson F. Whitney expounded on this great doctrine of hope:

The Prophet Joseph Smith declared-and he never taught more comforting doctrine-that the eternal sealings of faithful parents and the divine promises made to them for valiant service in the Cause of Truth, would save not only themselves, but likewise their posterity. Though some of the sheep may wander, the eye of the Shepherd is upon them, and sooner or later they will feel the tentacles of Divine Providence reaching out after them and drawing them back to the fold. Either in this life or the life to come, they will return. They will have to pay their debt to justice; they will suffer for their sins; and may tread a thorny path; but if it leads them at last, like the penitent Prodigal, to a loving and forgiving fatherÂs heart and home, the painful experience will not have been in vain. Pray for your careless and disobedient children; hold on to them with your faith. Hope on, trust on, till you see the salvation of God. (In Conference Report, April 1929, p. 110.)

Inasmuch as many of the earthÂs inhabitants, including many of the household of faith who are worthy in every other way, will not have the opportunity to marry in the temple, what will become of them? What of those who deeply and dearly desired to enjoy all of the privileges and sweet blessings associated with the eternal family unit but never were afforded that opportunity? Lorenzo Snow, one of the Prophet JosephÂs successors, taught: ÂThere is no Latter-day Saint who dies after having lived a faithful life who will lose anything because of having failed to do certain things when opportunities were not furnished him or her. In other words, if a young man or a young woman has no opportunity of getting married, and they live faithful lives up to the time of their death, they will have all the blessings, exaltation, and glory that any man or woman will have who had this opportunity and improved it. That is sure and positive.Â (The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow, p. 138.)

Another marvelous doctrine of consolation taught by the Prophet deals with those who died before they grew to maturity. Joseph F. Smith, the son of Hyrum and sixth president of the Church, tells us that ÂJoseph Smith declared that the mother who laid down her little child, being deprived of the privilege, the joy, and the satisfaction of bringing it up to manhood or womanhood in this world, would, after the resurrection, have all the joy, satisfaction and pleasure, and even more than it would have been possible to have had in mortality, in seeing her child grow to the full measure of the stature of its spiritÂ (Gospel Doctrine, p. 453).

Conclusion

The family is the most important unit in time and in eternity, and no organization, even divinely revealed ones like the Church and its auxiliaries, should take priority over the family. Because the family is so central to the great plan of our God, our Heavenly Father has made provision for its everlasting perpetuation. That provision is eternal marriage and the sealing of husband and wife, parents and children, through the sacred ordinances of the temple. It is the power to bind and seal on earth and in heaven that makes it all possible.
