Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 21

The Mountain of the LordÂs House

And it shall come to pass in the last days,

that the mountain of the LordÂs house shall be established

in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills;

and all nations shall flow unto it.

And many people shall go and say, Come ye,

and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord,

to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways,

and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law,

and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

-Isaiah 2:2Â3

Latter-day Saints could hardly claim to be in possession of the faith of ancient Israel and not at the same time claim to have received as a part of that restoration the concept of temple worship. Whenever the Lord has had a people that he acknowledged as his own, they have been a temple-building people. Thus from the days of Adam to the time of Christ temples existed in which sacred ceremonies and ordinances were performed, revelations were given, and the Lord manifested himself to the faithful. ÂFor this cause,Â the Lord told Joseph Smith,

I commanded Moses that he should build a tabernacle, that they should bear it with them in the wilderness, and to build a house in the land of promise, that those ordinances might be revealed which had been hid from before the world was.

Therefore, verily I say unto you, that your anointings, and your washings, and your baptisms for the dead, and your solemn assemblies, and your memorials for your sacrifices by the sons of Levi, and for your oracles in your most holy places wherein you receive conversations, and your statutes and judgments, for the beginning of the revelations and foundation of Zion, and for the glory, honor, and endowment of all her municipals, are ordained by the ordinance of my holy house, which my people are always commanded to build unto my holy name. (D&C 124:38Â39.)

Tradition holds that in Jerusalem at the time of Christ there may have been as many as 480 synagogues. Their function was ancillary to the temple, which was the focal point of the Hebrew system of worship. Because the temple occupied the central place in the faith of the Old Testament Saints, its very existence was understood to be a manifestation of GodÂs favor as it rested upon that nation. When Christ told those holding a corrupted priesthood that the temple would be destroyed, he was prophesying the destruction of their nation. The additional statement that not one stone would be left standing upon another was a prophetic foreshadowing of their scattering among the nations of the earth (see Joseph SmithÂMatthew 1:3Â4; D&C 45: 18Â21). Thus the restoration of the temple and the performance of the sacred ordinances therein constitutes an assurance that the Lord remembers the covenants that he made with his ancient covenant people and that Israel is to be gathered.

IsraelÂs Latter-day Return

Both Isaiah and Micah recorded an important prophecy relative to the temple in the last days. ÂAnd it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the LordÂs house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.Â (Isa. 2:2Â3; see also Micah 4:1Â2.)

The prophecy clearly announces that in the last days the temple will once again be the focal point of worship among the LordÂs people. A host of prophecies announce that the gospel will be taken to those of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. Prophecy suggests that notwithstanding the fact that the gospel will be taken to the ends of the earth, it will also be necessary for those who embrace it to come to the Âmountains of the LordÂs houseÂ to obtain certain blessings once known to Jacob and the other ancient patriarchs. It was understood by the Saints that references to Zion and Jerusalem represented two separate cities: the Zion or New Jerusalem mentioned in the writings of Enoch and the Book of Mormon, and the Jerusalem of old, both of which are to be built as holy cities to the Lord (see 3 Ne. 20:22; Ether 13:8Â12; Moses 7:62Â63). Thus we are told that in the final days those who are Âamong the GentilesÂ are to flee to Zion and those who are of Judah are to Âflee unto Jerusalem, unto the mountains of the LordÂs houseÂ (D&C 133:12Â13).

By way of explanation, a revelation was given through Joseph Smith in September 1832. ÂYea, the word of the Lord concerning his church, established in the last days for the restoration of his people, as he has spoken by the mouth of his prophets, and for the gathering of his saints to stand upon Mount Zion, which shall be the city of New Jerusalem. Which city shall be built, beginning at the temple lot, which is appointed by the finger of the Lord, in the western boundaries of the State of Missouri, and dedicated by the hand of Joseph Smith, Jun., and others with whom the Lord was well pleased. Verily this is the word of the Lord, that the city New Jerusalem shall be built by the gathering of the saints, beginning at this place, even the place of the temple, which temple shall be reared in this generation. For verily this generation shall not all pass away until an house shall be built unto the Lord, and a cloud shall rest upon it, which cloud shall be even the glory of the Lord, which shall fill the house.Â (D&C 84:2Â5.)

These events find expression in the tenth Article of Faith, which states that Âwe believe in the literal gathering of Israel and in the restoration of the Ten TribesÂ and that Zion, meaning the New Jerusalem, Âwill be built upon the American continent.Â The place of the New Jerusalem was designated by revelation to be Independence, Missouri (see D&C 57:1Â3). The revelations and attendant understanding of these principles came to the Prophet Âline upon line.Â In the April conference of 1844, he observed that there had been considerable discussion about where Zion was and where the Saints were to gather. In response he said: ÂI am now going to tell you. The prophets have spoken and written upon it; but I will make a proclamation that will cover a broader ground. The whole of America is Zion itself from north to south, and is described by the Prophets, who declare that it is the Zion where the mountain of the Lord should be, and that it should be in the center of the land. When Elders shall take up and examine the old prophecies in the Bible, they will see it.Â (Teachings, p. 362.)

Continuing his instruction on the matter, Joseph Smith explained that

as soon as the Temple and baptismal font are prepared [the reference here is to the Nauvoo Temple], we calculate to give the Elders of Israel their washings and anointings, and attend to those last and more impressive ordinances, without which we cannot obtain celestial thrones. But there must be a holy place prepared for that purpose. There was a proclamation made during the time that the foundation of the Temple was laid to that effect, and there are provisions made until the work is completed, so that men may receive their endowments and be made kings and priests unto the Most High God, having nothing to do with temporal things, but their whole time will be taken up with things pertaining to the house of God. There must, however, be a place built expressly for that purpose, and for men to be baptized for their dead. It must be built in this the central place; for every man who wishes to save his father, mother, brothers, sisters and friends, must go through all the ordinances for each one of them separately, the same as for himself, from baptism to ordination, washings and anointings, and receive all the keys and powers of the Priesthood, the same as for himself.

I have received instructions from the Lord that from henceforth wherever the Elders of Israel shall build up churches and branches unto the Lord throughout the States, there shall be a stake of Zion. In the great cities, as Boston, New York, &c., there shall be stakes. It is a glorious proclamation, and I reserved it to the last, and designed it to be understood that this work shall commence after the washings, anointings and endowments have been performed here. (Ibid., pp. 362Â63.)

Even from the time of her scattering, the prophets of ancient Israel foretold of a future day of restoration. Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel spoke much of these things, but the greatest of the prophecies of consolation for scattered Israel are found in the Book of Mormon. Its message, coupled with the revelations of the Restoration, make it clear that the greatest events of our dispensation will center in the declaration of the gospel to the nations of the earth and in the response of the seed of Abraham to that message. That seed, according to the promises of the covenant, will have their hearts touched by the message and will be moved upon to embrace the faith of their ancient fathers. That faith will lead them to the mountain of the LordÂs house, temples of the Lord that will ultimately be built throughout the world. There the covenant made with their ancient fathers will be renewed with them. There they will learn to walk in paths of faith with the Âpure in heartÂ of all ages (D&C 97:21; see also 100:16; 101:18).

A Temple People

The importance of these events so pressed upon the mind of the Prophet that he sought for opportunities to introduce some to temple ordinances before the building was completed. This was accomplished by arranging rooms in the upper story of his brick store in Nauvoo. There, on 4 May 1842, he began to administer these sacred rites. The ProphetÂs journal for that day reads:

Wednesday, 4.-I spent the day in the upper part of the store, that is in my private office . . . in council with General James Adams, of Springfield, Patriarch Hyrum Smith, Bishops Newel K. Whitney and George Miller, and President Brigham Young and Elders Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards, instructing them in the principles and order of the Priesthood, attending to washings, anointings, endowments and the communication of keys pertaining to the Aaronic Priesthood, and so on to the highest order of the Melchizedek Priesthood, setting forth the order pertaining to the Ancient of Days, and all those plans and principles by which any one is enabled to secure the fullness of those blessings which have been prepared for the Church of the Firstborn, and come up and abide in the presence of the Eloheim in the eternal worlds. In this council was instituted the ancient order of things for the first time in these last days. And the communications I made to this council were of things spiritual, and to be received only by the spiritual minded: and there was nothing made known to these men but what will be made known to all the Saints of the last days, so soon as they are prepared to receive, and a proper place is prepared to communicate them, even to the weakest of the Saints; therefore let the Saints be diligent in building the Temple, and all houses which they have been, or shall hereafter be, commanded of God to build; and wait their time with patience in all meekness, faith, perseverance unto the end, knowing assuredly that all these things referred to in this council are always governed by the principle of revelation. (Teachings, p. 237.)

Through the years it has not been uncommon for individuals, particularly in the context of sharing the gospel with others, to list the similarities between Mormonism and the New Testament church. In such discussions we expect to hear the sixth Article of Faith quoted, which states: ÂWe believe in the same organization that existed in the Primitive Church, namely, apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists, and so forth.Â Certainly such things constitute evidence of the verity of the latter-day church. As impressive as such presentations might be, however, they miss the greatness of Joseph Smith and the message of the Restoration. It is not just the New Testament church that has been restored to us but rather a church known to the faithful of all past ages and dispensations. A listing of those who restored keys illustrates the point. Joseph Smith received priesthood keys from Adam, Enoch, Raphael, Elias, Moses, Elijah, John the Baptist, and Peter, James, and John. All restored authority that is rooted in the Old Testament. Though they lived in New Testament times, John the Baptist brought back the Aaronic Priesthood and Peter, James, and John the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Conclusion

Herein we find the greatness of the restored gospelÂs message. It was not only the office of Apostle or the Sermon on the Mount that Joseph Smith restored; it was the covenant that God made with Abraham. It was the promise made to his seed scattered throughout all the nations of the earth. It was the promise given over and over again by prophets from the time of Moses to the time of Christ and beyond. It was a promise that was centered in the ordinances and rituals of the temple. It was the promise capsulized in the words of Isaiah and Micah when they described the return of Israel to Âthe mountains of the LordÂs house.Â
