Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 22

The Establishment of Zion

Keep my commandments,

and seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion.

-D&C 6:6

Joseph Smith taught that the kingdom of God consists of more than preaching and study and Sabbath services; it entails the entire renovation of the order of things on earth, the transformation of man, and the elevation of society. At the heart of that sublime vision is the doctrine of Zion, a doctrine and a worldview that shaped the early Church and points the Saints of the twentieth century toward a grand ideal. The early Saints were instructed: ÂPut your trust in that Spirit which leadeth to do good-yea, to do justly, to walk humbly, to judge righteously; and this is my SpiritÂ (D&C 11:12). The Prophet knew and taught that heaven is not an individual abode in the great by-and-by; rather, heaven here and hereafter consists of the continuation and perpetuation of social relations. ÂThe greatest temporal and spiritual blessings which always come from faithfulness and concerted effort, never attended individual exertion or enterpriseÂ (Teachings, p. 183).

The Discovery of Zion

The Prophet Joseph Smith seems to have first encountered the concept of Zion in a sense other than the holy mount or holy city in Jerusalem in his translation of the Book of Mormon. Note the following:

And blessed are they who shall seek to bring forth my Zion at that day, for they shall have the gift and the power of the Holy Ghost (1 Ne. 13:37).

He [God] commandeth that there shall be no priestcrafts; for, behold, priestcrafts are that men preach and set themselves up for a light unto the world, . . . but they seek not the welfare of Zion.

. . . Wherefore, if they should have charity they would not suffer the laborer in Zion to perish.

But the laborer in Zion shall labor for Zion; for if they labor for money they shall perish. (2 Ne. 26:29Â31.)

For behold, at that day shall he [Satan] rage in the hearts of the children of men, and stir them up to anger against that which is good.

And others will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, that they will say: All is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth, all is well-and thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell.

. . . Therefore, wo be unto him that is at ease in Zion! (2 Ne. 28:20Â21, 24.)

Verily, verily, I say unto you [Christ is speaking to the Nephites during his postresurrection ministry], thus hath the Father commanded me-that I should give unto this people this land [America] for their inheritance.

And then the words of the prophet Isaiah shall be fulfilled, which say:

Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together shall they sing, for they shall see eye to eye when the Lord shall bring again Zion. (3 Ne. 16:16Â18; see Isa. 52:8.)

The use of the word Zion in the Book of Mormon is thus seen to be much broader than a reference to the Old Testament city of Jerusalem. Zion is to be established or brought forth under GodÂs direction, and those who fight against it will incur the displeasure of the Almighty. In other passages the word Zion is used to describe a community or society of believers who labor for Âthe welfare of ZionÂ and not for personal benefit. Further, spiritual vigilance and a constant desire to improve should be hallmarks of the people of God; the members of the community are to avoid the attitude that Âall is well in Zion.Â The words of Jesus in 3 Ne. 16 are instructive in that a prophecy from Isaiah is given a unique interpretation. The inheritance of the land of America by the descendants of the tribe of Joseph and the establishment of a holy people there is seen to be a fulfillment of the prophecy that the Lord Âshall bring again Zion.Â In the early revelations to the Prophet Joseph, a similar notion of Zion as a holy community or a society of believers is evident. Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were instructed in April 1829: ÂKeep my commandments, and seek to bring forth and establish the cause of ZionÂ (D&C 6:6; 11:6; 12:6; compare 14:6). At the time of the organization of the Church, a revelation stated that Joseph Smith had been Âinspired to move the cause of ZionÂ (D&C 21:7).

A key moment in Church history in regard to the discovery of the concept of Zion came during the ProphetÂs inspired translation of the King James Bible. When Sidney Rigdon joined the Prophet in December 1830 and became the principal scribe in the Bible translation, particulars concerning the Patriarch Enoch and his ancient city of Zion were first made known. A King James text of three verses on Enoch and his people was expanded by revelation to over one hundred verses, restoring knowledge concerning such things as the manner in which an entire society of antedeluvians was spiritually awakened and stimulated to transcendent righteousness; the means by which this ancient people, formerly bent upon selfishness and pride, had their souls changed, saw to the needs of the poor, and became Âof one heart and one mindÂ; and how, through the application of such a divine philosophy, they were translated, taken from the earth into the bosom of God (see Moses 7). EnochÂs Zion became the pattern, the scriptural prototype for the Latter-day Saints. In the months that followed, several revelations which we now have in the Doctrine and Covenants spoke of the ancient Zion of Enoch and also provided the broad framework whereby the Latter-day Saints, through the principles of consecration and stewardship, could lay the foundation for a modern society of Zion. Zion came to be associated with the restored church and the grander work of the Restoration. The faithful took heart in the midst of their troubles, for Zion was the city of God (see D&C 97:19). Indeed, in speaking of the sacred spot where the people of God congregated, the Lord said: ÂBehold, the land of Zion-I, the Lord, hold it in mine own handsÂ (D&C 63:25). Surely the King of Zion (see Moses 7:53) would deal mercifully with his subjects.

Zion: Many Phases and Meanings

Zion was not and is not today a man-made enterprise. It is more, far more that a city that focuses on social problems and solutions in fallen manÂs social programs. ÂOther attempts to promote universal peace and happiness in the human family have proved abortive,Â the Seer stated; Âevery effort has failed; every plan and design has fallen to the ground; it needs the wisdom of God, the intelligence of God, and the power of God to accomplish this. The world has had a fair trial for six thousand years; the Lord will try the seventh thousand Himself.Â The Prophet also added: ÂIn regard to the building up of Zion, it has to be done by the counsel of Jehovah, by the revelations of heaven.Â (Teachings, pp. 252, 254.) Elder John Taylor added that human enterprises Âhave failed, and they will fail, because, however philanthropic, humanitarian, benevolent, or cosmopolitan our ideas, it is impossible to produce a true and correct union without the Spirit of the living God, and that Spirit can only be imparted through the ordinances of the GospelÂ (in Journal of Discourses 18:137).

Zion and the economy. From the perspective of the latter-day Seer, Zion is a holy society in which it is possible to reconcile the irreconcilable. For one thing, Zion blends the otherwise disparate qualities of mature individualism and social union. Under the spiritual influence of Zion-an order of Saints built upon the restored religion of Jesus Christ and motivated by the power of his Holy Spirit-men and women become powerful individuals as well as intelligent contributors to society. Because of their covenantal obligations to others as well as to God (see Mosiah 18:8Â11), individuals in Zion seek the interest of their neighbors and do all things Âwith an eye single to the glory of GodÂ (D&C 82:19). Consecration and stewardship are a means of establishing economic oneness among the Saints and independence from the world (see D&C 78:14). ÂIt was my endeavor,Â the Prophet stated, Âto so organize the Church, that the brethren might eventually be independent of every incumbrance beneath the celestial kingdom, by bonds and covenants of mutual friendship, and mutual loveÂ (History of the Church 1:269).

Early Latter-day Saints were asked to consecrate all of their properties and holdings to God through the bishop of the Church. This they did by covenant. They then had deeded back to themselves a stewardship or inheritance of a portion of property or an assignment that they were to manage, expand upon, and be accountable for. Whenever the amount consecrated exceeded what was deeded back as stewardship, the residue or surplus went into the storehouse, the center of economic interests in the community. When the amount of resources generated by oneÂs stewardship exceeded the original agreed-upon stewardship, the excess or surplus also went into the storehouse. (See D&C 42:30Â35, 53Â55; 51:1) Surplus consecration and surplus production were used by the community to assist the poor, the widows, and dependent children (see D&C 83). Many of the early Latter-day Saints lived under this system in Ohio and Missouri, but by 1834 the specific implementation of this order of things was discontinued. Later versions of consecration and stewardship, sometimes known as the United Order or the Order of Enoch, were implemented in the Great Basin after the Latter-day Saints came west.

Again, in Zion the temporal and the spiritual could not be separated. ÂWherefore, verily I say unto you that all things unto me are spiritual, and not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporalÂ (D&C 29:34). Therefore, it was impossible to qualify for glory hereafter if the people of God could not deny themselves and establish oneness here. ÂIn your temporal things you shall be equal,Â the Master stated, Âand this not grudgingly, otherwise the abundance of the manifestations of the Spirit shall be withheldÂ (D&C 70:14). ÂFor if ye are not equal in earthly things ye cannot be equal in obtaining heavenly things; for if you will that I give unto you a place in the celestial world, you must prepare yourselves by doing the things which I have commanded you and required of youÂ (D&C 78:6Â7).

Zion as a location. The idea that there was a specific location for the city of Zion within North and South America was made known very early. The Lord explained to Oliver Cowdery in his September 1830 call to preach among the Lamanites that Âit is not revealed, and no man knoweth where the city Zion shall be built, but it shall be given hereafter.Â The Lord then added that the location Âshall be on the borders by the Lamanites.Â (D&C 28:9.) It was on 20 July 1831, just as the leaders of the Saints had begun to arrive in Missouri, that the word of the Lord came concerning the specific location of Zion. The Savior declared that the land of Missouri was Âthe land which I have appointed and consecrated for the gathering of the saints. Wherefore, this is the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion. . . . The place which is now called Independence is the center place.Â (D&C 57:1Â3.)

Zion as an ensign or standard. Zion is spoken of in scripture as a banner or ensign around which a weary and beleaguered people may rally. It is also a standard against which the substance and quality of all things are to be evaluated. The Saints are expected to judge all things by a set of guidelines obtained from a source beyond that of unenlightened man. Note the language of the revelation: ÂBehold, I, the Lord, have made my church in these last days like unto a judge sitting on a hill, or in a high place, to judge the nations. For it shall come to pass that the inhabitants of Zion shall judge all things pertaining to Zion.Â (D&C 64:37Â38.) As an illustration of this principle, Elder Joseph Young explained that Joseph Smith the Prophet Ârecommended the Saints to cultivate as high a state of perfection in their musical harmonies as the standard of the faith which he had brought was superior to sectarian religion. To obtain this, he gave them to understand that the refinement of singing would depend upon the attainment of the Holy Spirit. . . . ÂWhen these graces and refinements and all the kindred attractions are obtained that characterized the ancient Zion of Enoch, then the Zion of the last days will become beautiful, she will be hailed by the Saints from the four winds, who Âwill gather to Zion with songs of everlasting joy.ÂÂÂ (History of the Organization of the Seventies, pp. 14Â15.)

In addition, Zion was and is to be the focus, the convergence, and the concentration of all that is good, all that is ennobling, all that is instructive and inspirational. In Zion all things are to be gathered together in one in Christ (see Eph. 1:10). In short, according to President Brigham Young, Âevery accomplishment, every polished grace, every useful attainment in mathematics, music, in all science and art belong to the SaintsÂ (in Journal of Discourses 10:224). The Saints Ârapidly collect the intelligence that is bestowed upon the nations,Â President Young said on another occasion, Âfor all this intelligence belongs to ZionÂ (in ibid. 8:279).

Zion as a state of being. Zion is people, the people of God, those people who have come out of the world of Babylon into the marvelous light of Christ. In this vein the Lord encouraged his little flock: ÂVerily, thus saith the Lord, let Zion rejoice, for this is Zion-The Pure in Heart; therefore, let Zion rejoice, while all the wicked shall mournÂ (D&C 97:21). Thus Zion is a state of being, a state of purity of heart that entitles one to be known as a member of the household of faith. President Brigham Young therefore spoke of the Saints having Zion in their hearts: ÂUnless the people live before the Lord in the obedience of His commandments,Â he said, Âthey cannot have Zion within them.Â Further, ÂAs to the spirit of Zion, it is in the hearts of the Saints, of those who love and serve the Lord with all their might, mind, and strength.Â (In Journal of Discourses 2:253.) On another occasion President Young affirmed: ÂZion will be redeemed and built up, and the Saints will rejoice. This is the land of Zion; and who are Zion? The pure in heart are Zion; they have Zion within them. Purify yourselves, sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and have the Zion of God within you.Â (In ibid. 8:198.) Finally, President Young asked: ÂWhere is Zion? Where the organization of the Church of God is. And may it dwell spiritually in every heart; and may we so live as to always enjoy the Spirit of Zion.Â (In ibid. 8:205.)

Zion as a gathering place. Isaiah the prophet had spoken some seven hundred years before Christ of the Âmountain of the LordÂs houseÂ being established in the tops of the mountains (Isa. 2:2). In July 1840 Joseph Smith declared, in harmony with the SaviorÂs teachings in the Book of Mormon (see 3 Ne. 16:16Â18), that Âthe land of Zion consists of all North and South America, but that any place where the Saints gather is Zion.Â (The Words of Joseph Smith, p. 415; spelling and punctuation modernized). The latter part of this statement-that Zion represents more than a place or single location but rather any locus of gathering-is significant. It broadens the notion of Zion to include areas around the world where the people of the covenant congregate. The Lord surely foresaw this larger vision of Zion when he said in the midst of the Missouri persecutions: ÂZion shall not be moved out of her place, notwithstanding her children are scattered. They that remain, and are pure in heart, shall return, and come to their inheritances, they and their children, with songs of everlasting joy, to build up the waste places of Zion-and all these things that the prophets might be fulfilled. And, behold, there is none other place appointed than that which I have appointed; neither shall there be any other place appointed than that which I have appointed, for the work of the gathering of my saints-until the day cometh when there is found no more room for them; and then I have other places which I will appoint unto them, and they shall be called stakes, for the curtains or the strength of Zion.Â (D&C 101:17Â21.) In the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple, the Prophet pleaded in behalf of the Saints Âthat they may come forth to Zion, or to her stakes, the places of thine appointment, with songs of everlasting joyÂ (D&C 109:39). The revelations are explicit in their pronouncement that safety and refuge are to be found in the stakes of Zion. ÂArise and shine forth,Â the Lord implored, Âthat thy light may be a standard for the nations; and that the gathering together upon the land of Zion, and upon her stakes, may be for a defense, and for a refuge from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earthÂ (D&C 115:5Â6; compare Teachings, pp. 160Â61).

As to the future of Zion, the New Jerusalem, Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written:

The center place! Let Israel gather to the stakes of Zion in all nations. Let every land be a Zion to those appointed to dwell there. Let the fulness of the gospel be for all the saints in all nations. Let no blessing be denied them. Let temples arise wherein the fulness of the ordinances of the LordÂs house may be administered. But still there is a center place, a place where the chief temple shall stand, a place to which the Lord shall come, a place whence the law shall go forth to govern all the earth in that day when the Second David reigns personally upon the earth. And that center place is what men now call Independence in Jackson County, Missouri, but which in a day to come will be the Zion of our God and the City of Holiness of his people. The site is selected; the place is known; the decree has gone forth; and the promised destiny is assured. (A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, p. 595.)

At the same time that the Church will establish a significant presence in Independence, Missouri, and though Jackson County will become a gathering place, indeed the Center Place, yet there will always be, as suggested above, a need for the stakes of Zion throughout the earth far and wide, a need for the Saints to gather in their own lands and congregate with their own people. President Spencer W. Kimball taught: ÂThe First Presidency and the Twelve see great wisdom in the multiple Zions, many gathering places where the Saints within their own culture and nation can act as a leaven in the building of the kingdom-a kingdom which seeks no earthly rewards or treasures. Sometimes, inadvertently, we have given artificial encouragement to individuals to leave their native land and culture and, too often, this has meant the loss of the leaven that is so badly needed, and the individuals involved have sometimes regretted their migrations.Â (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 440.)

In this spirit-the spirit of an expansive concept of Zion-it is wrong to suppose and misleading to suggest that all of the Saints from all over the world will in a future day gather physically to Missouri. Elder McConkie observed:

As we are aware, the building of the New Jerusalem lies in the future, at a time yet to be designated by revelation. There is no present call for the saints to purchase land or to live in Jackson County or in any place connected therewith. The revealed word relative to the gathering to Independence and its environs will come through the prophet of God on earth. When it does come-with the consequent return of the saints to that Zion which shall not be moved out of its place-that call will not be for the saints in general to assemble there. The return to Jackson County will be by delegates, as it were. Those whose services are needed there will assemble as appointed. The rest of Israel will remain in their appointed places. The LordÂs house is a house of order, and faithful saints do as they are told and go at the bidding of their prophet, for his voice is the voice of the Lord. (The Millennial Messiah, p. 294.)

Conclusion

Like the true and living church of which we are a part, the concept of Zion has grown and expanded as we have been humble and teachable enough as a people to perceive the plans and purposes of the Almighty. Elder Erastus Snow pointed out in 1884 that when the early Saints Âfirst heard the fullness of the Gospel preached by the first Elders, and read the revelations given through the Prophet Joseph Smith, our ideas of Zion were very limited. But as our minds began to grow and expand, why we began to look upon Zion as a great people, and the Stakes of Zion as numerous. . . . We ceased to set bounds to Zion and her Stakes.Â (In Journal of Discourses 25:30Â31.) Likewise, Elder Joseph Young explained that many Saints of the nineteenth century-moved upon by the Spirit of prophecy and revelation, such that future events appeared close at hand-misconstrued and miscalculated on a number of matters, including the time when the Saints should return to Missouri and redeem Zion. ÂThe Holy Spirit brought many things close to their minds-they appeared right by, and hence many were deceived. . . . I knew that faith and the Holy Ghost brought the designs of Providence close by, and by that means we were enabled to scan them, . . . but we had not knowledge enough to digest and fully comprehend those things.Â (In ibid. 9:230.)

Zion is a place. Zion is a people. Zion is a holy state of being. In the words of President Spencer W. Kimball, Zion is the Âhighest order of priesthood societyÂ (in Conference Report, October 1977, p. 125). It is the heritage of the Saints. ÂThe building up of Zion,Â Joseph Smith taught, Âis a cause that has interested the people of God in every age; it is a theme upon which prophets, priests and kings have dwelt with peculiar delight; they have looked forward with joyful anticipation to the day in which we live; and fired with heavenly and joyful anticipations they have sung and written and prophesied of this our day; but they died without the sight; we are the favored people that God has made choice of to bring about the Latter-day gloryÂ (Teachings, p. 231). This is the destiny of those who endure faithfully to the end. In that sense, as Joseph Smith stated, ÂWe ought to have the building up of Zion as our greatest objectÂ (ibid., p. 160).
