Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 23

The Kingdom of God in Ages Past

For he [God] is the same yesterday, to-day, and forever;

and the way is prepared for all men from the foundation of the world,

if it so be that they repent and come unto him.

-1 1 Ne. 10:18

Once the church of God is organized on earth with legal administrators, there is the kingdom of God. ÂThe kingdom of God was set up on the earth from the days of Adam to the present time,Â the Prophet Joseph Smith explained, Âwhenever there has been a righteous man on earth unto whom God revealed His word and gave power and authority to administer in His name. And where there is a priest of God-a minister who has power and authority from God to administer in the ordinances of the gospel and officiate in the priesthood of God-there is the kingdom of God.Â (Teachings, p. 271.)

Adam Through Noah

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a restoration of the ancient order of things, the return to earth of that church and kingdom that has existed from the beginning of time. The Lord made known through Joseph Smith principles regarding the everlasting gospel, that same gospel that was enjoyed by the ancient worthies. From the days of Adam to the time of Moses, men and women lived under a patriarchal theocracy, a family order presided over by a patriarch. In addition, they sought after and followed the will of God in regard to all matters. Such persons as Adam, Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech, and Noah were all high priests; they governed the church and kingdom in righteousness and by virtue of their civil (kingly) and ecclesiastical (priestly) positions. Other worthy men held the higher priesthood, but these patriarchs were the presiding officers. (See Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection, p. 73.)

Adam. Adam was the earthÂs first Christian. He was baptized, confirmed, born of the Spirit, quickened in the inner man, ordained, and received into the holy order of God (see Moses 6:64Â68). ÂThe Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generationÂ (Teachings, p. 157). In the book of Moses, which is the Prophet Joseph SmithÂs inspired translation of the early chapters of Genesis, is recorded the revelation of the gospel to Adam. We read there of AdamÂs baptism and spiritual rebirth: ÂAnd he heard a voice out of heaven, saying: Thou art baptized with fire, and with the Holy Ghost. This is the record of the Father, and the Son, from henceforth and forever.Â And now note the language of the scripture: ÂAnd thou art after the order of him who was without beginning of days or end of years, from all eternity to all eternity. Behold, thou art one in me, a son of God; and thus may all become my sons. Amen.Â (Moses 6:66Â68.) Adam was born again and became through adoption a son of Christ. But there was more. He became, through the powers of the holy priesthood and the ordinances associated therewith, a son of God the Father. Of this matter Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written:

As men [and women] pursue the goal of eternal life, they first enter in at the gate of repentance and baptism, thereby taking upon themselves the name of Christ. They then gain power to become his sons and daughters, to be adopted into his family, to be brethren and sisters in his kingdom. Baptism standing alone does not transform them into family members, but it opens the door to such a blessed relationship; and if men so live as to obtain the Spirit and are in fact born again, then they become members of the Holy Family.

Then, if they press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, keeping the commandments and living by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God, they qualify for celestial marriage, and this gives them power to become the sons [and daughters] of God, meaning the Father. They thus become joint-heirs with Christ who is his natural heir. Those who are sons [and daughters] of God in this sense are the ones who become gods in the world to come. (D&C 76:54Â60) They have exaltation and godhood because the family unit continues in eternity. (D&C 132:19Â24). (Doctrinal New Testament Commentary 2:474.)

Again, in referring to the experience of our first parent, President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: ÂTo Adam, after he was driven from the Garden of Eden, the plan of salvation was revealed, and upon him the fulness of the priesthood was conferredÂ (Doctrines of Salvation 3:81). President Ezra Taft Benson, in an address delivered at the Logan Temple Centennial in May 1984, spoke the following about this order of God:

The temple is a sacred place, and the ordinances in the temple are of a sacred character. Because of its sacredness we are sometimes reluctant to say anything about the temple to our children and grandchildren.

As a consequence, many do not develop a real desire to go to the temple, or when they go there, they do so without much background to prepare them for the obligations and covenants they enter into.

I believe a proper understanding or background will immeasurably help prepare our youth for the temple. This understanding, I believe, will foster within them a desire to seek their priesthood blessings just as Abraham sought his.

When our Heavenly Father placed Adam and Eve on this earth, He did so with the purpose in mind of teaching them how to regain His presence. Our Father promised a Savior to redeem them from their fallen condition. He gave to them the plan of salvation and told them to teach their children faith in Jesus Christ and repentance. Further, Adam and his posterity were commanded by God to be baptized, to receive the Holy Ghost, and to enter into the order of the Son of God.

To enter into the order of the Son of God is the equivalent today of entering into the fullness of the Melchizedek Priesthood, which is only received in the house of the Lord.

Because Adam and Eve had complied with these requirements, God said to them, ÂThou art after the order of him who was without beginning of days or end of years, from all eternity to all eternityÂ (Moses 6:67). (Ensign, August 1985, p. 8.)

Truly, ÂAdam was the natural father of his posterity, who were his family and over whom he presided as patriarch, prophet, priest, and kingÂ (see John Taylor, ÂPatriarchal,Â pp. 921Â22).

Enoch. As we discussed in chapter 22, the Prophet Joseph Smith drew heavily upon the underlying principles and success of EnochÂs Zion when the latter-day Seer sought to establish Zion in this final dispensation. EnochÂs society was the pattern, the prototype. The Apostle Paul could therefore write of Abraham as one of many who Âlooked for a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is GodÂ (Heb. 11:10). Through preaching righteousness and incorporating the doctrines of the gospel into all they did, including applying the pure love of Christ in their social relations and thereby consecrating themselves completely, Enoch and his people founded a holy commonwealth. The Lord came and dwelt Âwith his people, and they dwelt in righteousness. . . . And the Lord called his people Zion, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them.Â (Moses 7:16, 18.)

The people in EnochÂs city gained power over evil, power to transform humanity and the very earth on which they lived. Elder Joseph Young, brother of Brigham Young, explained what he had learned from Joseph Smith: ÂIt may be inferred that the disciples of Enoch were gathered together. At his suggestion they built a city, on the site which he had selected. He had seen the heavens opened; had gazed upon cities that were celestial; had been familiar with the gorgeousness of the heavenly mansions, and the splendor of their architecture. Acquiring thereby a superior intelligence and that spirit of refinement and taste, which enabled him to instruct his brethren to build after the pattern of the heavenly.Â Further, Âthe people, and the city, and the foundations of the earth on which it stood, had partaken of so much of the immortal elements, bestowed upon them by God through the teachings of Enoch, that it became philosophically impossible for them to remain any longer upon the earth.Â (ÂEnoch and His City,Â pp. 10, 11.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith also explained that translation is a power that belongs to the Melchizedek Priesthood, a dimension of the holy order of God. The oath pertaining to the Melchizedek Priesthood was sworn by God to Enoch, Âthat every one being ordained after this order and calling should have power, by faith, to break mountains, to divide the seas, to dry up waters, to turn them out of their course; to put at defiance the armies of nations, to divide the earth, to break every band, to stand in the presence of God; to do all things according to his will, according to his command, subdue principalities and powers; and this by the will of the Son of God which was from before the foundation of the world. And men having this faith, coming up unto this order of God, were translated and taken up into heaven.Â (JST, Gen. 14:30Â33.) John Taylor added, ÂIt would appear that the translated residents of EnochÂs city are under the direction of Jesus, who is the Creator of worlds; and that he, holding the keys of the government of other worlds, could, in his administrations to them, select the translated people of EnochÂs Zion, if he thought proper, to perform a mission to these various planets, and as death had not passed upon them, they could be prepared by him and made use of through the medium of the holy priesthood to act as ambassadors, teachers, or messengers to those worlds over which Jesus holds the authorityÂ (The Gospel Kingdom, p. 103; see also Teachings, pp. 170Â71).

Noah. Noah was the tenth from Adam, one ordained a patriarch at the age of ten years (see D&C 107:52). He was more, far more than a weather prophet; he was a legal administrator, one called and empowered by God to call a wicked generation to repentance. ÂAnd the Lord ordained Noah after his own order, and commanded him that he should go forth and declare his Gospel unto the children of men, even as it was given unto Enoch. And it came to pass that Noah called upon the children of men that they should repent; but they hearkened not unto his words.Â Further, NoahÂs call to repentance was not just a warning of impending disaster; it was a call to come unto Christ and be saved. ÂBelieve and repent of your sins,Â Noah said, Âand be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, even as our fathers, and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost, that ye may have all things made manifest.Â (Moses 8:19Â20, 24.) The Prophet Joseph explained the position of Noah, who was the Angel Gabriel before his mortal birth, in the priesthood hierarchy. Noah Âstands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood; he was called of God to this office, and was the father of all living in this day, and to him was given the dominionÂ (Teachings, p. 157).

Abraham Through Christ

Abraham. Abraham, known to us as the Âfather of the faithful,Â sought for the Âblessings of the fathersÂ and the right to administer the same (see Abr. 1:1Â3). His father Terah was an idolater, and so AbrahamÂs blessings could not come to him in father-to-son fashion. And so it was that he looked to Melchizedek, the great high priest of that day, for counsel, direction, and authority. In his discussion of the ancients who entered the rest of the Lord, Alma chose Melchizedek to illustrate this doctrine. ÂAnd now, my brethren,Â he said, ÂI would that ye should humble yourselves before God, and bring forth fruit meet for repentance, that ye may also enter into that rest. Yea, humble yourselves even as the people in the days of Melchizedek, who was also a high priest after this same order [the holy order of God] which I have spoken, who also took upon him the high priesthood forever.Â (Alma 13:13Â14.)

The Saints of God who lived at the time of Âthe church, in ancient daysÂ called the Holy Priesthood after Melchizedek (see D&C 107:2Â4). Melchizedek is one of the most enigmatic figures in Judeo-Christian history. Legends about Melchizedek abound in Jewish traditions, in Christian literature and art, and among the writings of the Qumran sectaries. Josephus explained that the city of Salem, over which Melchizedek reigned, later became known as Jerusalem. In writing of Jerusalem, Josephus observed: ÂHe who first built it was a potent man among the Canaanites and is in our tongue called [Melchizedek] the Righteous King, for such he really was; on which account he was [there] the first priest of God, and first built a temple [there], and called the city Jerusalem, which was formerly called SalemÂ (ÂThe Wars,Â 6.10.1). As Latter-day Saints, we know a great deal about Melchizedek as a result of the foregoing verses in Alma, Joseph SmithÂs translation of the fourteenth chapter of Genesis and the fifth and seventh chapters of Hebrews, and his own sermons on the priesthood.

And what of the relationship of Melchizedek to Abraham? Alma mentions simply that Abraham paid tithing to him (see Alma 13:15). More specifically, a modern revelation informs us that ÂEsaias . . . lived in the days of Abraham, and was blessed of him-which Abraham received the priesthood from Melchizedek, who received it through the lineage of his fathers, even till NoahÂ (D&C 84:13Â14). It appears that Abraham sought for the same power and authority as Melchizedek, the power to administer endless lives, the fulness of the powers of the priesthood. According to Elder Franklin D. Richards, the Prophet Joseph explained that the power of Melchizedek was Ânot the power of a prophet, nor apostle, nor patriarch only, but of a king and priest to God, to open the windows of heaven and pour out the peace and law of endless life to man. And no man can attain to the joint heirship with Jesus Christ without being administered to by one having the same power and authority of Melchizedek.Â (The Words of Joseph Smith, p. 245; spelling, grammar, and punctuation modernized.) In summary, Joseph the Prophet explained: ÂAbraham says to Melchizedek, I believe all that thou hast taught me concerning the priesthood and the coming of the Son of Man; so Melchizedek ordained Abraham and sent him away. Abraham rejoiced, saying, Now I have a priesthood.Â (Teachings, pp. 322Â23.)

Moses. We learn from modern revelation that Moses was ordained to the high priesthood by Jethro the Midianite, his father-in-law (see D&C 84:6). In speaking of the children of Israel, the Prophet stated: ÂTheir government was a theocracy; they had God to make their laws, and men chosen by Him to administer them; He was their God, and they were His people. Moses received the word of the Lord from God Himself; he was the mouth of God to Aaron, and Aaron taught the people, in both civil and ecclesiastical affairs; they were both one, there was no distinction.Â (Teachings, p. 252.)

Moses sought diligently to bring the children of Israel to a point of spiritual maturity wherein they could enjoy the highest blessings of the priesthood-the privilege of entering into the rest of the Lord, into the divine presence (see D&C 84:19; 107:18). ÂBut they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory. Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also; and the lesser priesthood continued.Â (D&C 84:24Â26.) That is, IsraelÂs unwillingness to enter the LordÂs presence (see Ex. 20:19) signaled their unworthiness to bear the holy priesthood.

ÂAnd the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two other tables of stone, like unto the first, and I will write upon them also, the words of the law, according as they were written at the first on the tables which thou brakest; but it shall not be according to the first, for I will take away the priesthood out of their midst; therefore my holy order, and the ordinances thereof, shall not go before them; for my presence shall not go up in their midst, lest I destroy them. But I will give unto them the law as at the first, but it shall be after the law of a carnal commandment; for I have sworn in my wrath, that they shall not enter into my presence, into my rest, in the days of their pilgrimage.Â (JST, Ex. 34:1Â2; see also JST, Deut. 10:1Â2.) When Moses was translated, the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood were taken from among the Israelites as a body and the patriarchal order of priesthood ceased. No longer did the Melchizedek Priesthood pass from father to son. Thereafter, the priesthood of administration was the Aaronic Priesthood, except in those cases wherein it became necessary for the Lord to call a man to bear the high priesthood and hold the keys therein; such came by special dispensation (see Teachings, pp. 180Â81; McConkie, The Mortal Messiah 1:60; Smith, Doctrines of Salvation 3:84Â85).

Jesus Christ. Jesus of Nazareth came to the earth to save us from sin and death and hell and endless torment (see 2 Ne. 9:10Â13). He came to the earth as the Son of the Eternal Father and the son of Mary. From his Father he inherited the powers of a god, the powers of immortality. From his mother he inherited mortality, the capacity to die. As a dual being he possessed the nature and power to do what no other man in this worldÂs history could do-live a perfect life, take upon himself the sins of all mankind through an infinite and eternal atoning sacrifice, and then lay down his life in death and take it up again in resurrected immortality. He was and is the Lamb of God, the Messiah, the Christ, the Anointed One, the Savior and Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.

But our Lord came among men also as a restorer, one sent by the Father to bring again to the earth knowledge and keys and authorities that had been lost during a season of apostasy. That is, Jesus was an Elias of restoration (see JST, John 1:20Â28; compare JST, Matt. 11:13Â14; JST Matt. 17:10Â13). Because the Melchizedek Priesthood had not been available to the generality of the people for a millennium and a half, Jesus restored this holy order. ÂChrist came according to the words of John, and He was greater than John, because He held the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood and kingdom of GodÂ (Teachings, p. 274). He organized a church among men, ordained chosen disciples to the holy apostleship, and oversaw the conferral of sacred keys (see Matt. 16:16Â19; 17:1; 18:17; Teachings, p. 158). The Prophet Joseph Smith explained simply that ÂJesus was then the legal administrator, and ordained His ApostlesÂ (Teachings, p. 319). The Master organized the church of Jesus Christ, but he was crucified and his Apostles killed before the full kingdom of God-with power to govern in both political and spiritual spheres-could be set up in the meridian of time (see JST, Rev. 12:1Â7).

As a part of what we know as the LordÂs Prayer, the Savior said: ÂThy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.Â (Matt. 6:10.) ÂWhat kingdom?Â Elder John Taylor asked. ÂWhat is the meaning of Âthy kingdom comeÂ? It means the rule of God; it means the law of God; it means the government of God; it means the people who have listened to and who are willing to listen to and observe the commands of Jehovah; and it means that there is a God who is willing to guide and direct and sustain his people. . . . Thy kingdom come; that the confusion . . . the evil and wickedness, the murder and bloodshed that now exist among mankind may be done away, and the principles of truth and right, the principles of kindness, charity and love as they dwell in the bosom of the Gods, may dwell with us.Â (In Journal of Discourses 23:177Â78.)

Conclusion

Whenever the God of heaven has chosen to bestow priesthood authority and set up his gospel, with its eternal covenants and ordinances, there is the kingdom of God. Joseph Smith revealed the singular truth that the kingdom of God did not begin in what the world calls the Christian era; rather, that kingdom has been on the earth from the dawn of time. Uninspired if well-intentioned men and women have over the generations sought to establish peace and order and goodness in the earth, but these things will come to pass only as the powers of God are infused in and among all creation. Elder Orson Pratt observed: ÂThe kingdom of God is a theocracy. And as it is the only form of government which will redeem and save mankind, it is necessary that every soul should be rightly and thoroughly instructed in regard to its nature and general characteristics. . . . God is the King. In Him exists all legal authority. He alone has the right of originating a system of government on the earth.Â (Orson PrattÂs Works, pp. 32, 33.) All things bow in humble reverence before our God and Father, the Almighty Elohim. God has, however, committed all judgment to the Son (see John 5:22), and so ÂJesus Christ is the heir of this Kingdom-the Only Begotten of the Father according to the flesh, and holds the keys over all this worldÂ (Teachings, p. 323).
