Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 24

The Kingdom of God Restored

Lift up your hearts and rejoice, for unto you the kingdom,

or in other words, the keys of the church have been given.

-D&C 42:69

Through the Restoration, JehovahÂs invitation to ancient Israel has been renewed: ÂNow therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine: and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nationÂ (Ex. 19:5Â6). The true Saints of God are to become a purchased possession, a redeemed property, a sealed commodity to the Most High. They are Âa chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that [they] should shew forth the praises of him who hath called [them] out of darkness into his marvellous lightÂ (1 Pet. 2:9).

A Kingdom Never to Be Destroyed

Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon some five to six centuries before the birth of the Savior, dreamed a dream (see Dan. 2). It was an unusual dream, a most unusual dream-and the dream was from God. The dream troubled him, so he called upon his priests and advisers and asked them to rehearse to him the dream and interpret it. ÂIf ye will not make known unto me the dream,Â the king said, Âwith the interpretation thereof, ye shall be cut in pieces, and your houses shall be made a dunghill. But if ye shew the dream, and the interpretation thereof, ye shall receive of me gifts and rewards and great honour: therefore shew me the dream, and the interpretation thereof.Â (See vv. 3Â6.) Nebuchadnezzar was certain that if he were to tell the wise men what the dream was, in time they would conjure up a meaning. They could not, of course, reveal the dream. ÂFor this cause the king was angry and very furious, and commanded to destroy all the wise men of Babylon. And the decree went forth that the wise men should be slain; and they sought Daniel and his fellows to be slain.Â (Vv. 12Â13.) Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego had impressed the king at the time they were brought into captivity, and so Nebuchadnezzar had appointed them as advisers.

The four Hebrews inquired of the Lord, and the dream and its interpretation were given to Daniel by revelation. In the spirit of rejoicing not only in gratitude for the LordÂs mercy in revealing the dream but also in the grand message of the revelation itself, Daniel exulted: ÂBlessed be the name of God for ever and ever: for wisdom and might are his: and he changeth the times and the seasons: he removeth kings, and setteth up kings: he giveth wisdom unto the wise, and knowledge to them that know understanding: He revealeth the deep and secret things: he knoweth what is in the darkness, and the light dwelleth with him. I thank thee, and praise thee, O thou God of my fathers, who hast given me wisdom and might, and hast made known unto me now what we desired of thee: for thou hast now made known unto us the kingÂs matter.Â (See Dan. 2:19Â23.) Daniel then persuaded the kingÂs executioner not to destroy the wise men but instead to provide for an audience with Nebuchadnezzar. ÂThe king answered and said to Daniel, . . . Art thou able to make known unto me the dream which I have seen, and the interpretation thereof? Daniel answered in the presence of the king, and said, The secret which the king hath demanded cannot the wise men, the astrologers, the magicians, the soothsayers, shew unto the king.Â And then came these remarkable words: ÂBut there is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets, and maketh known to the king Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the latter days.Â (Vv. 26Â28.)

ÂThou, O king, sawest, and behold a great image. This great image, whose brightness was excellent, stood before thee; and the form thereof was terrible. This imageÂs head was of fine gold, his breast and his arms of silver, his belly and his thighs of brass, his legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay.Â (Dan. 2:31Â33.) According to Daniel, Nebuchadnezzar then saw a little stone that was cut out of the mountain Âwithout hands,Â meaning, presumably, by divine power, without human involvement. The stone rolled down from the mountain, grew in size and momentum, and then struck the large image, breaking it to pieces. ÂThe stone that smote the image became [itself] a great mountain, and filled the whole earth.Â (See vv. 34Â35.)

Then came the interpretation. Nebuchadnezzar, as the king of the most powerful empire at the time, was represented by the head of gold. Having the historical perspective before us, we recognize that other kingdoms, which would follow in succession after the Babylonians, were symbolized by metals and elements less valuable and less powerful than gold: the breast and arms of silver represented the Medo-Persians, the belly and thighs of brass represented the Graeco-Macedonians, the legs of iron represented the Romans, and the feet of iron and clay represented several lesser kingdoms (see Rudger Clawson, in Conference Report, April 1930, pp. 31Â32; Spencer W. Kimball, in Conference Report, April 1976, p. 10). Of the latter kingdoms, Daniel explained:

And as the toes of the feet were part of iron, and part of clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken.

And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men: but they shall not cleave one to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay.

And in the days of these [latter] kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand forever.

Forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great God hath made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter: and the dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure. (Dan. 2:42Â45.)

Joseph Smith knew and taught that the organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on 6 April 1830 was the prelude to the ultimate fulfillment of NebuchadnezzarÂs dream-vision. In a prayer written by revelation at Hiram, Ohio, in October 1831, the voice of the Lord spoke through the Prophet: ÂThe keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth, and from thence shall the gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole earthÂ (D&C 65:2). Less than two months before his death, Joseph the Seer declared: ÂI calculate to be one of the instruments of setting up the kingdom of [God forseen by] Daniel by the word of the Lord, and I intend to lay a foundation that will revolutionize the whole world. . . . It will not be by sword or gun that this kingdom will roll on: the power of truth is such that all nations will be under the necessity of obeying the Gospel.Â (Teachings, p. 366.)

President Spencer W. Kimball, in discussing the dream of King Nebuchadnezzar, said:

This is a revelation concerning the history of the world, when one world power would supersede another until there would be numerous smaller kingdoms to share the control of the earth.

And it was in the days of these kings that power would not be given to men, but the God of heaven would set up a kingdom-the kingdom of God upon the earth, which should never be destroyed nor left to other people.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was restored in 1830 after numerous revelations from the divine source; and this is the kingdom, set up by the God of heaven, that would never be destroyed nor superseded, and the stone cut out of the mountain without hands that would become a great mountain and would fill the whole earth. . . .

We give these truths to you, not in arrogance or worldly pride, but with a deep sincerity and a kindly offer-the gospel without price, the gospel of truth, the gospel of salvation and exaltation.

I know it is true. I know it is divine. I know it is the little stone that was cut out of a mountain without hands. I know it will fill the earth as prophesied and commanded. (In Conference Report, April 1976, pp. 10, 12.)

Indeed, the work of the Restoration, so tiny in its inception in 1830, is spreading to all lands. Mount Zion is being prepared. The mountains of the LordÂs houses-sacred edifices wherein saving work for the living and the dead is performed-are beginning to dot the earth. Walls and barriers to the work of the Lord are coming down one by one, and the time is not far distant when the message of the Restoration will have been delivered to every country and clime. ÂOur missionaries are going forth to different nations,Â the Prophet Joseph declared. ÂThe Standard of Truth has been erected; no unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing; persecutions may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent, till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done.Â (History of the Church 4:540.) Indeed, the Saints of the Most High yearn for the day when Âthe kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and everÂ (Rev. 11:15).

The Fulness of the Priesthood

Joseph Smith taught that in the ultimate sense, the kingdom of God is made up of men who have qualified by obedience to become kings and priests and of women who have similarly qualified to become queens and priestesses. These blessings are to be had only through receiving all of the rites and privileges of the holy temple. That is to say, only through the covenants and ordinances of the house of the Lord may men and women qualify to be like God and to dwell with him. Goodness of the heart, Christian character-these things are important, but the ordinances, all of the ordinances, are essential (see Teachings, p. 331). In speaking of the importance of the Nauvoo Temple, the Lord commanded his Saints to Âbuild a house to my name, for the Most High to dwell therein. For there is not a place found on earth that he may come to and restore again that which was lost unto you, or which he hath taken away, even the fulness of the priesthood.Â (D&C 124:27Â28.)

As we have shown in this work, the Lord saw fit to reveal his mind and will in regard to the holy priesthood-as with all other matters of the Restoration-line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little. First came the Baptist to the banks of the Susquehanna, bringing the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood, the governing powers concerning the preparatory gospel. Within weeks, Peter, James, and John came, delivering the holy apostleship, the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood, the governing powers concerning the everlasting gospel. Moses, Elias, and Elijah came to the Kirtland Temple, restoring keys of inestimable worth to the Church and kingdom of God. And it is by virtue of the authority brought by Elijah that the full blessings of the holy temple are made available to the Saints.

Three months before his death, Joseph Smith instructed the Latter-day Saints concerning the mission of Elijah: ÂThe spirit, power, and calling of Elijah is, that ye have power to hold the key of the revelations, ordinances, oracles, powers and endowments of the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood and of the kingdom of God on the earthÂ (Teachings, p. 337). Elijah restored the keys whereby individuals and families may, through the blessings of the holy temple, develop to the point where they receive the fulness of the priesthood and thus become kings and queens, priests and priestesses unto God in that order of the Melchizedek Priesthood we know as the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. ÂThose holding the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood,Â the Prophet Joseph had taught earlier, Âare kings and priests of the Most High God, holding the keys of power and blessingsÂ (ibid., p. 322). Through the powers delivered by Elias-the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, the order entered into by Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob-eternal families are created here and hereafter. Through the powers delivered by Elijah, man and wife may be sealed unto eternal life, inasmuch as Âthe power of Elijah is sufficient to make our calling and election sureÂ (ibid., p. 338).

That the Lord Jesus is our pattern, guide, and exemplar in all things, including the receipt of priesthood power, was made plain by the Prophet Joseph Smith. ÂAll men who become heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ will have to receive the fulness of the ordinances of his kingdom; and those who will not receive all the ordinances will come short of the fullness of that glory, if they do not lose the whole.Â Earlier the Prophet said, ÂIf a man gets a fullness of the priesthood of God he has to get it in the same way that Jesus Christ obtained it, and that was by keeping all the commandments and obeying all the ordinances of the house of the Lord.Â (Ibid., pp. 308, 309.) President Joseph Fielding Smith, in commenting on these statements by the Prophet, observed: ÂI hope we understand that. If we want to receive the fulness of the priesthood of God, then we must receive the fulness of the ordinances of the house of the Lord and keep his commandments. . . . Let me put this in a little different way. I do not care what office you hold in this Church-you may be an apostle, you may be a patriarch, a high priest, or anything else-you cannot receive the fulness of the priesthood unless you go into the temple of the Lord and receive these ordinances of which the Prophet speaks.Â (Doctrines of Salvation 3:131.)

Jesus Christ is the King of kings. He not only presides over the leaders of nations and earthly monarchs but, more particularly, over those who have matured spiritually in the powers and ordinances of the gospel. We come unto Christ, first of all, through an authorized baptism, and then we receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. If we live worthy of the Comforter, we are born again as to the things of righteousness; we die as to the ways of the world and are quickened as to the matters of the Spirit. We become the sons and daughters of Jesus Christ by adoption. As we qualify for entrance into the holy temple, we take upon ourselves greater obligations and open ourselves to new vistas of understanding, perspective, and priesthood power. Through obedience to the ordinances of the temple, we become sons and daughters of God, meaning the Father. Brigham Young explained: ÂWhen the Holy Priesthood, which is after the order of the Son of God, is upon the earth, and its organizations, ordinances, gospel, powers, authorities and blessings, are enjoyed by the children of men; then by means of sealing powers and keys, and an everlasting covenant, the sons of men become the sons of God by regeneration, and are entitled, every man in his order, to the privileges, exaltations, principalities and powers, kingdoms and thrones, which are held and enjoyed, by the Great Father of our race.Â (In Journal of Discourses 10:355.)

Speaking of the time just prior to the Prophet JosephÂs death, George Q. Cannon explained that Joseph Âmanifested great anxiety to see the [Nauvoo] temple completed, as most of you who were with the Church during his day, well know. ÂHurry up the work, brethren,Â he used to say, Âlet us finish the temple; the Lord has a great endowment in store for you, and I am anxious that the brethren should have their endowments and receive the fullness of the Priesthood.Â He urged the Saints forward continually, preaching unto them the importance of completing that building, so that therein the ordinances of life and salvation might be administered to the whole people, but especially to the quorums of the holy Priesthood; Âthen,Â said he, Âthe Kingdom will be established, and I do not care what shall become of me.ÂÂ (In ibid. 13:49.)

Conclusion

The kingdom of God is now constituted on earth as The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is the kingdom the ancients foresaw would be set up in the last days, a kingdom that, unlike the ephemeral kingdoms of this world, would stand forever. In a day yet to come, the King of kings shall rend the kingdoms of man and bring about a Âfull end of all nationsÂ (D&C 87:6; see also 84:118). Indeed, the kingdoms of the world will be subdued (see D&C 103:7). In the meantime, ÂLet my army become very great,Â the Lord said, Âand let it be sanctified before me, that it may become fair as the sun, and clear as the moon, and that her banners may be terrible unto all nations; that the kingdoms of this world may be constrained to acknowledge that the kingdom of Zion is in very deed the kingdom of our God and his Christ; therefore, let us become subject unto her lawsÂ (D&C 105:31Â32).

Our Father and God desires to give to his children all that he has and to enable them to inherit, possess, and receive the fulness of his power and blessings. Through the redemption that is in Christ and by virtue of his holy priesthood, men become kings and priests unto God (see Rev. 1:6; 5:10). In eternity, through the blessings of the temple, Âthe saints shall be filled with his glory, and receive their inheritance and be made equal with himÂ (D&C 88:107). ÂThey are they into whose hands the Father has given all things-they are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory; and are priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek, which was after the order of Enoch, which was after the order of the Only Begotten Son. Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God.Â (D&C 76:55Â58.)
