Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Part III

Joseph Smith-Prophet and Seer

It is my meditation all the day, and more than my meat and drink,

to know how I shall make the Saints of God comprehend

the visions that roll like an overflowing surge before my mind.

-Joseph Smith (Teachings, p. 296)

All prophets speak scripture. Some of their number have their words recorded in holy writ for the instruction of many. Fewer still of their number are granted the office of seership wherein they are invited to clothe themselves in the power of God and ascend the high mountain from whence can be seen the visions of eternities past and future. Of that select group, surely no one has been permitted to pen more of what his ancient counterparts saw and add to what they were shown than the Prophet Joseph Smith. We know of no man in the earthÂs history who has done more to extend the faith and expand the mind of mortal men than Joseph the Prophet-whose very name means Âhe who gathersÂ and Âlet him add.Â

Through his eyes and the words that he has penned, we too are invited to stand on that high and holy mountain and see both past and future. Turning to look to the past, we find ourselves once again in the Grand Council of Heaven watching the drama unfold. The Father, having completed his review of the great plan whereby we, his spirit children, are to become as he is, speaks again of the necessity of a Redeemer and asks, ÂWhom shall I send?Â We see also the assembly of the noble and great ones as they labor in council to plan the creation of the earth. We learn of other worlds, like unto ours, that also have been created. In number, the grains of the sands of the sea do not represent even a beginning. We begin to see that Âthere is no space in the which there is no kingdom; and there is no kingdom in which there is no space, either a greater or a lesser kingdom. And unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions.Â (D&C 88:37Â38.)

Turning our attention to the celestial realms, we stand with Joseph the Seer and Sidney Rigdon and behold the glory of the Son on the right hand of the Father. We see the holy angels and those who are sanctified standing before his throne, and we hear the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father, Âthat by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto GodÂ (D&C 76:24).

We listen as Joseph describes the scene in poetic form:

And I heard a great voice, bearing record from heavÂn,

HeÂs the Saviour, and only begotten of God-

By him, of him, and through him, the worlds were all made,

Even all that career in the heavens so broad,

Whose inhabitants, too, from the first to the last,

Are savÂd by the very same Saviour of ours;

And, of course, are begotten GodÂs daughters and sons,

By the very same truths and the very same powÂrs.

(ÂThe Answer,Â Times and Seasons 4:82Â83.)

The accumulation of all scholarly knowledge in the earthÂs history of events past or the projection of things future will yet pale into embarrassed silence when compared with the knowledge granted us through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Such things stand as a third great evidence of his prophetic calling.

Chapter 25

Parting the Veil

How long can rolling waters remain impure?

What power shall stay the heavens?

As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river

in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream,

as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven

upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints.

-D&C 121:33

No doctrine is more fundamental to the message of the Restoration than the simple injunction to ask God. Each member of the Church is expected to have a personal testimony, one born of the Spirit of revelation, that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith is a prophet, and that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the only true and living church on the face of the whole earth. Without that witness born of the Spirit, no one should be invited to the waters of baptism, be allowed to hold office or position, participate in sacred ordinances, or be called upon to preach or teach the gospel. Personal testimony that comes by the power of the Holy Ghost is fundamental to our faith.

No Salvation Without Revelation

Personal revelation cannot simply be viewed as a right enjoyed by the faithful among our ranks; it is an obligation incumbent upon all. ÂYe are commanded,Â the Lord said, Âin all things to ask of God, who giveth liberally; and that which the Spirit testifies unto you even so I would that ye should do in all holiness of heart, walking uprightly before me, considering the end of your salvation, doing all things with prayer and thanksgiving, that ye may not be seduced by evil spirits, or doctrines of devils, or the commandments of men; for some are of men, and others of devilsÂ (D&C 46:7). As baptism is a commandment essential to salvation, so is the charge to receive the Holy Ghost. ÂYou might as well baptize a bag of sand as a man,Â the Prophet said, Âif not done in view of the remission of sins and getting of the Holy Ghost. Baptism by water is but half a baptism, and is good for nothing without the other half-that is, the baptism of the Holy Ghost.Â (Teachings, p. 314.) To enjoy the companionship of the Holy Ghost is to enjoy the Spirit of revelation. Joseph Smith put it this way: ÂNo man can receive the Holy Ghost without receiving revelations. The Holy Ghost is a revelator.Â (Ibid., p. 328.)

ÂSalvation cannot come without revelation; it is in vain for anyone to minister without it. No man is a minister of Jesus Christ without being a Prophet. No man can be a minister of Jesus Christ except he has the testimony of Jesus; and this is the spirit of prophecy.Â (Ibid., p. 160.) Without revelation there is neither the Church nor the possibility of salvation. ÂThe plea of many in this day is, that we have no right to receive revelations; but if we do not get revelations, we do not have the oracles of God; and if they have not the oracles of God, they are not the people of God. But say you, What will become of the world, or the various professors of religion who do not believe in revelation and the oracles of God as continued to His Church in all ages of the world, when He has a people on earth? I tell you, in the name of Jesus Christ, they will be damned; and when you get into the eternal world, you will find it will be so, they cannot escape the damnation of hell.Â (Ibid., p. 272.)

The death of Christ and his Apostles brought an end to revelation and thus to the New Testament church that was founded on revelation. Thereafter the heavens were declared to be sealed and the canon of scripture to be complete. In restoring the principle of revelation, Joseph Smith also restored a wealth of knowledge about how revelation comes. Indeed, no writer of holy writ has done more to teach the honest truth seeker how to part the veil and receive divine direction than the Prophet Joseph Smith. Inquiring of the Lord in behalf of Oliver Cowdery, who sought permission to translate the plates from which the Book of Mormon came, the Prophet penned these words: ÂI say unto you, that assuredly as the Lord liveth, who is your God and your Redeemer, even so surely shall you receive a knowledge of whatsoever things you shall ask in faith, with an honest heart, believing that you shall receive. . . . Yea, behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart.Â (D&C 8:1Â2.)

These verses are marvelously instructive. They contain what could be called a prophetic formula. First, God swears an oath when he says, Âassuredly as the Lord liveth.Â If God lives, he responds to the prayers of those who ask in faith with an honest heart; he cannot be God and do otherwise. The idea that the heavens are sealed is not only at odds with all that is in holy writ; it is contrary to the very nature of God and suggests that in our day there is no God (see 2 Ne. 28:5). Next the revelation describes the way in which the Lord will speak to us: ÂI will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost.Â This statement takes on greater meaning when compared to the notions of revelation common in the sectarian world. Many espouse a notion they call divine dictation: in order for revelation to come to us untainted by human frailties, all bodily functions must be suspended as the revelation is received. The prophet is simply a dummy in the lap of the divine ventriloquist. Who and what he or she is have no effect on the expression of the revelation. The revealed expression is to be entirely GodÂs. The revelation to Oliver Cowdery refutes such a notion with the announcement that God will speak to Oliver in his mind and in his heart. Having given us both a mind and a heart, the Lord expects us to use them in communicating with him.

In translating the Book of Mormon, the Prophet learned that the Lord speaks to us according to our language and our understanding (see 2 Ne. 31:3). When a man or a woman receives a revelation, the wisdom of the heavens-in whatever form it comes or whoever the messenger is-must be reduced to our level of communication and understanding. In many instances, the Lord simply places the appropriate thought in our mind and our heart and leaves us with the responsibility to clothe it in words. Thus as we expand our understanding we expand our ability to communicate with the heavens. Oliver Cowdery obtained a promise from the Lord that he could sit in the ProphetÂs stead and translate a portion of the Book of Mormon. However, he failed in his attempt to do so. Greatly distraught, he asked the Prophet to inquire of the Lord why he had been promised he could translate and then was unable to do so. The fact that he had to seek that answer through Joseph Smith rather than ask for himself may suggest the reason for his failure in his attempt to translate.

Speaking through the Prophet but to Oliver Cowdery-and in effect to all of us who are growing up into the Spirit of revelation-the Lord said: ÂDo not murmur, my son, for it is wisdom in me that I have dealt with you after this manner. Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me. But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right.Â (D&C 9:6Â8.) Truth, Joseph Smith observed, Âtastes goodÂ (Teachings, p. 355). Alma described it as being delicious to the taste (see Alma 32:28, 35). Joseph Smith further described the Spirit of revelation as something that entered every feeling of his heart with great force (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:12).

Having studied the matter out in his own mind, Oliver Cowdery was to make his own best judgment on what was correct and present it to the Lord for confirmation. If he was wrong, Oliver was told he would experience Âa stupor of thoughtÂ that would cause him Âto forget the thing which is wrongÂ (D&C 9:9). We have here a revealed formula for receiving answers to prayer. We must sift, study, and search for the best possible answer. Having done so, we are to present it to the Lord in prayer. If it be right, he will confirm our decision by causing our bosom to burn within us. If it is wrong or inappropriate we will experience uncertainty, darkness, or stupor of thought. Thus revelation comes not by the suspension of our native endowment of mind and soul but by the disciplined use of both.

A Profile of the Spirit

As part of the ordinance of confirmation following baptism, each member of the Church is promised the companionship of the Holy Ghost and directed to live worthy of it. To enjoy that companionship is to enjoy the Spirit of revelation. It is natural, then, that we find in the early revelations of the Restoration instruction by which we can come to know that Spirit. In a revelation given to Hyrum Smith even before the organization of the Church, the Lord said: ÂPut your trust in that Spirit which leadeth to do good-yea, to do justly, to walk humbly, to judge righteously; and this is my Spirit. Verily, verily, I say unto you, I will impart unto you of my Spirit, which shall enlighten your mind, which shall fill your soul with joy; and then shall ye know, or by this shall you know, all things whatsoever you desire of me, which are pertaining unto things of righteousness, in faith believing in me that you shall receive.Â (D&C 11:12Â14.)

In harmony with the revelations given to Oliver Cowdery, the two keys given in this revelation by which we are to know all things center in the mind and the soul: the mind is to be enlightened, and the soul is to be filled with joy. Light and joy, then, are to be the longitude and latitude by which we chart our course. Moroni concluded the Book of Mormon with a similar promise. The honest truth seeker, he promised, could know the truth of all things by the power of the Holy Ghost (see Moro. 10:5). This is not a promise that the seeker can know all things or all truth but that he or she can discern all matters pertaining unto things of righteousness.

As it became necessary for the Saints to discern between true and false spirits, the Lord extended their understanding: ÂAnd again, I will give unto you a pattern in all things, that ye may not be deceived; for Satan is abroad in the land, and he goeth forth deceiving the nations-wherefore he that prayeth, whose spirit is contrite, the same is accepted of me if he obey mine ordinances. He that speaketh, whose spirit is contrite, whose language is meek and edifieth, the same is of God if he obey mine ordinances. And again, he that trembleth under my power shall be made strong, and shall bring forth fruits of praise and wisdom, according to the revelations and truths which I have given you. And again, he that is overcome and bringeth not forth fruits, even according to this pattern, is not of me. Wherefore, by this pattern ye shall know the spirits in all cases under the whole heavens.Â (D&C 52:14Â19.)

The key of discernment as given in the above revelation is obedience to the ordinances of the Lord. This means compliance with the laws, statutes, or commandments of the Lord, including saving rites and ceremonies. All saving truths must flow through the channels the Lord has ordained, and those who deliver them must be properly commissioned to do so. The Prophet said, ÂIt is . . . the privilege of any officer in this Church to obtain revelations, so far as relates to his particular calling and duty in the ChurchÂ (Teachings, p. 111). No one, however, is to receive revelations for those who preside over them (see D&C 28:1Â2; Teachings, p. 21).

The ÂHoly Ghost has no other effect than pure intelligence. It is more powerful in expanding the mind, enlightening the understanding, and storing the intellect with present knowledge, of a man who is of the literal seed of Abraham, than one that is a Gentile, though it may not have half as much visible effect upon the body; for as the Holy Ghost falls upon one of the literal seed of Abraham, it is calm and serene; and his whole soul and body are only exercised by the pure spirit of intelligence; while the effect of the Holy Ghost upon a Gentile, is to purge out the old blood, and make him actually of the seed of Abraham. That man that has none of the blood of Abraham (naturally) must have a new creation by the Holy Ghost. In such a case, there may be more of a powerful effect upon the body, and visible to the eye, than upon an Israelite, while the Israelite at first might be far before the Gentile in pure intelligence.Â (Teachings, pp. 149Â50.)

ÂA person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation,Â the Prophet said; Âfor instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, so that by noticing it, you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon; (i.e.) those things that were presented unto your minds by the Spirit of God, will come to pass; and thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus.Â (Ibid., p. 151.)

Revelation, the Prophet taught, was to be immediate and personal. We have no right, he explained, to lay claim to promises made to another people in another time. As their curses are not our curses, so their promises are not our promises (see Ibid., p. 12). ÂReading the experience of others, or the revelations given to them, can never give us a comprehensive view of our condition and true relation to God. Knowledge of these things can only be obtained by experience through the ordinances of God set forth for that purpose. Could you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject.Â (Ibid., p. 324; emphasis in original.)

All of GodÂs children in all ages of the earthÂs history have equal claim upon his attention and have need for his instruction. When Christ said to Peter, ÂUpon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against itÂ (Matt. 16:18), he had reference to the rock of revelation (see Teachings, p. 274). As to the matter of who is entitled to receive revelations, the Prophet said: ÂGod hath not revealed anything to Joseph, but what He will make known unto the Twelve, and even the least Saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear themÂ (ibid., p. 149). In a letter to the Saints, Joseph asked, ÂHow long can rolling waters remain impure? What power shall stay the heavens?Â Then by way of response he said: ÂAs well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri River in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints.Â (D&C 121:33.)

Emphasizing the importance of revelation, Joseph Smith said: ÂWe never can comprehend the things of God and of heaven, but by revelation. We may spiritualize and express opinions to all eternity; but that is no authority.Â (Teachings, p. 292.) ÂOne truth revealed from heaven is worth all the sectarian notions in existenceÂ (ibid., p. 338). ÂThe nearer man approaches perfection, the clearer are his views, and the greater his enjoyments, till he has overcome the evils of his life and lost every desire for sin; and like the ancients, arrives at that point of faith where he is wrapped in the power and glory of his Maker and is caught up to dwell with HimÂ (ibid., p. 51).

Conclusion

As Latter-day Saints, Âwe believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of GodÂ (A of F 1:9). ÂMy works are without end,Â the Lord told Moses, Âand also my words, for they never ceaseÂ (Moses 1:4). The church and kingdom of God can never be without the Spirit of revelation. One must have the Spirit of revelation to teach the gospel, just as listeners and learners must have that same Spirit to understand it (see D&C 50:11Â22). As long as God has children, they will have claim upon their divine Father to know his mind and will. Such has been his promise to all who seek him in all ages of the earthÂs history. Nephi stated it thus: ÂFor he that diligently seeketh shall find; and the mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto them, by the power of the Holy Ghost, as well in these times as in times of old, and as well in times of old as in times to come; wherefore, the course of the Lord is one eternal roundÂ (see 1 Ne. 10:17Â19).
