Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 26

A Panoramic Vision

For there is a time appointed for every man, according as his works shall be.

God shall give unto you knowledge by his Holy Spirit, yea,

by the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost,

that has not been revealed since the world was until now;

Which our forefathers have awaited with anxious expectation to be revealed

in the last times, which their minds were pointed to by the angels,

as held in reserve for the fulness of their glory;

A time to come in the which nothing shall be withheld,

whether there be one God or many gods, they shall be manifest.

All thrones and dominions, principalities and powers,

shall be revealed and set forth upon all who have endured valiantly

for the gospel of Jesus Christ.

And also, if there be bounds set to the heavens or to the seas,

or to the dry land, or to the sun, moon, or stars-

All the times of their revolutions, all the appointed days, months, and years,

and all the days of their days, months, and years, and all their glories,

laws, and set times, shall be revealed in the days of the dispensation

of the fulness of times-

According to that which was ordained in the midst of the Council of the

Eternal God of all other gods before this world was,

that should be reserved unto the finishing and the end thereof,

when every man shall enter into his eternal presence and into his immortal rest.

-D&C 121:25Â32

If we came to the earth with a divinely ordained purpose, surely it is for God to announce the same. Even the journey of faith cannot be made without direction. We find that direction in the gospel of Jesus Christ. Since it is the purpose of the heavens to save all of GodÂs creations that are willing, there must of necessity be a divine design that spans all ages and generations. It must bind past, present, and future together as one. It must give purpose to all of heavenÂs workmanship and provide both mercy and justice to all of the FatherÂs children. Such is the plan of salvation and such is the magnitude of the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The length and breadth of these revelations stand as a perfect evidence of his divine calling.

The Vision of the Celestial Kingdom

It was in what is called the vision of the celestial kingdom (see D&C 137) that Joseph Smith learned the principles associated with salvation for the dead. Special significance is associated with each person in the vision and the order in which they are mentioned. Let us consider the implications. First, the Prophet saw the Father and the Son. They were seated together upon a throne of glory, bespeaking the perfect unity that exists between them. Then he saw Father Adam, the great patriarch of the human race. With him stood Abraham, the father of the faithful. Representing the faithful of AbrahamÂs seed, Joseph saw his own father, Joseph Smith Sr., with his beloved companion, Lucy Mack Smith, at his side. Their union was made the more perfect by the presence of JosephÂs oldest brother, Alvin, who had died some seven years before the organization of the Church. The reunion of Alvin with his parents in the presence of Adam and Abraham, two of the most prominent of our ancient fathers, was both gratifying and puzzling to the Prophet. His first thought was to wonder how Alvin could have Âobtained an inheritance in that [celestial] kingdom,Â given that he had died Âbefore the Lord had set his hand to gather Israel the second time, and had not been baptized for the remission of sinsÂ (D&C 137:6).

Joseph knew that what he was seeing in this vision was a representation of things as they would yet be, not as they then were. This was made plain by the representation of his father and mother in those heavenly realms despite the fact that they were both still alive and well. In fact, the ProphetÂs father, who would live for another four years, was in the room with the Prophet while he received his vision. His mother would live for another nineteen years. Then the Lord spoke these words to Joseph Smith: ÂAll who have died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom; for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their heartsÂ (D&C 137:7Â9).

Herein are established the principles by which those who died without the opportunity to embrace the gospel will be granted that privilege in the spirit world. Joseph Smith may have had some notion of the gospel being preached in the spirit world by this time, since he had previously received a revelation that stated that those who rejected the gospel in this life and then accepted it when it was brought to them a second time in the spirit world would inherit the terrestrial kingdom (see D&C 76:73Â74). Nevertheless, the appearance of Alvin in the celestial kingdom was a surprise to him. The basic principle being announced through this vision was that those who receive the gospel in the spirit world must do so Âaccording to men in the fleshÂ (1 Pet. 4:6). That is to say, the same doctrines and principles apply on both sides of the veil. Thus God, who knows the hearts of all his children, must judge whether those receiving the gospel on the other side of the veil would have done so in the flesh had that opportunity been theirs. Further, the Father also must judge whether they would have accepted it with all their hearts, meaning they would have endured in faith to the end and thus been valiant in their witness (see D&C 76:79).

What these principles do is extend the opportunity to every soul that ever lived to accept or reject the gospel according to the same standard, whether it be in this life or the next. Alvin, who was shown in this vision, constitutes the perfect example of someone who died without the opportunity to embrace the gospel in the flesh but who would have done so had that privilege been his, and furthermore he was evidently one who would have endured faithfully to the end. Thus his reunion with his parents took place in the presence of Abraham, who held the keys by which the marriage union becomes eternal and to whom the promise of an endless posterity had been given, as well as in the presence of Father Adam, who holds the keys of salvation (see D&C 78:16; 110:12).

This principle illustrates the perfect balance between justice and mercy. On the one hand, to be exalted one must embrace the gospel when the opportunity comes and then hold on to the end. On the other hand, no one will ever be denied a gospel blessing because of circumstances beyond their control. If the desires of the personÂs heart were right, those righteous desires will stand in the stead of the works he or she was unable to perform. Thus each of GodÂs children will have equal claim upon the blessings of the Father. What a marvelous and comforting doctrine!

The Vision of the Degrees of Glory

Our understanding of the justice and mercy of God is further enhanced in a revelation of unparalleled magnitude. The revelation begins with the promise that the Lord will reveal all the mysteries of his kingdom Âfrom days of old, and for ages to comeÂ to all who reverence him and serve him Âin righteousness and in truth unto the end.Â ÂYea, even the wonders of eternity shall they know, and things to come will I show them, even the things of many generations. And their wisdom shall be great, and their understanding reach to heaven; and before them the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall come to naught.Â (See D&C 76:5Â11.) As the standards of the gospel are to be the same for all, so are its blessings and privileges.

We learn in this vision that in the FatherÂs house there are indeed many mansions or degrees of glory (John 14:1Â2). In this revelation we learn of four great divisions that will take place among the children of men in the day of resurrection. The highest of all the degrees is called the celestial kingdom. Here the faithful can receive the fulness of all that the Father has. The second or middle kingdom is known to us as the terrestrial kingdom. Here are to be found the upright and honorable of the earth who chose not to devote themselves to the things of the Spirit and contented themselves with less than a fulness of the gospel.

The third of these heavenly degrees is called the telestial kingdom. Its citizenry consists of the wicked, those who chose during mortality to pursue evil rather than good. They are recipients of hell, that portion of the postmortal spirit world where they pay for their sins in the prison of torment before their resurrection to a degree of glory. Having thus paid the Âuttermost farthingÂ (Matt. 5:26) and cleansed their souls, they become inheritors of a glory Âwhich surpasses all [mortal] understandingÂ (D&C 76:89). These are they who received neither the testimony of Jesus nor the gospel covenant (see D&C 76:82, 101). ÂThese are they who are liars, and sorcerers, and adulterers, and whoremongers, and whosoever loves and makes a lieÂ (D&C 76:103). Finally, the last of those to come forth are known to us as sons of perdition, those who are hopelessly lost. These are they who deny and defy, they who have enjoyed great light and knowledge pertaining to God and his work but who then lose the spirit of light and fight the faith as bitter apostates. So grievous has been their sin that no forgiveness awaits them in this world or that to come. Theirs is not a kingdom of glory but rather an endless and everlasting punishment (see D&C 76:44).

Relative to those who become sons of perdition, Joseph Smith explained: ÂAll sins shall be forgiven, except the sin against the Holy Ghost; for Jesus will save all except the sons of perdition. What must a man do to commit the unpardonable sin? He must receive the Holy Ghost, have the heavens opened unto him, and know God, and then sin against Him. After a man has sinned against the Holy Ghost, there is no repentance for him. He has got to say that the sun does not shine while he sees it; he has got to deny Jesus Christ when the heavens have been opened unto him, and to deny the plan of salvation with his eyes open to the truth of it; and from that time he begins to be an enemy. This is the case with many apostates of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.Â The Prophet continued: ÂWhen a man begins to be an enemy to this work, he hunts me, he seeks to kill me, and never ceases to thirst for my blood. He gets the spirit of the devil-the same spirit that they had who crucified the Lord of Life-the same spirit that sins against the Holy Ghost. You cannot save such persons; you cannot bring them to repentance; they make open war, like the devil, and awful is the consequence.Â (Teachings, p. 358.)

Like the Prophet, we must build the house of our understanding brick by brick or principle by principle. The Book of Mormon constitutes the theological foundation upon which all other revelations given in our dispensation must rest. From it we learn of the corporeal nature of resurrection and of the spirit world where disembodied spirits await the day of their resurrection (see Alma 40:11Â23). It is in this world of spirits, prior to the resurrection and the day of judgment, that the gospel is to be taught; those who did not have the opportunity to stand in its light in mortality will be granted the privilege to do so. The revelation on the degrees of glory, given in February 1832, picks up at this point, announcing that those who come forth in the first or celestial resurrection will be priests and kings and heirs of God, being Âequal [with the Father and the Son] in power, and in might, and in dominionÂ (see D&C 76:56, 95). After the restoration in April 1836 of the keys associated with the perpetuation of the Abrahamic covenant and those sacred authorities that deal with the eternal nature of the family unit, it was revealed to the Prophet that the celestial kingdom is itself divided into three heavens or degrees, the highest of which is reserved for those who have entered into the new and everlasting covenant of marriage (see D&C 131). Thus both the gender and the divine roles assigned to man and woman, particularly those of father and mother, are preserved throughout the eternities.

The Panoramic View

The revelations vouchsafed to Joseph Smith reach from eternity past to eternity future. He restored to the world the knowledge of the pre-earth life, where we were born the spirit sons and daughters of God. He restored to us the knowledge of the spirit world where disembodied spirits rest from or complete their labors prior to the resurrection. And he recorded for us the most expansive revelation ever given relative to the many mansions of God in the worlds to come. Drawing upon the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith, it appears that such revelatory experiences were the common lot of each of the dispensation heads and that many of the ancient prophets were invited to stand on the high mountain and see the panorama of history past and history future.

Of father Adam, we read that he called the residue of his posterity, all that were righteous, to the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman to bestow upon them his last blessing. Standing in the midst of that great congregation, he being Âfull of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation,Â which things were recorded in the book of Enoch. (See D&C 107:53Â57.) Of Enoch, we learn that not only did he record the prophesies of Adam but that at the command of the Lord he ascended Mount Simeon, where he was clothed upon with glory and saw the Lord face-to-face and was shown Âthe world for the space of many generationsÂ (see Moses 7:2Â4). He was shown Âall the inhabitants of the earthÂ and saw how his own city was to be taken up into heaven. He saw the days of Noah and the flood. In vision he witnessed the major events of the meridian of time, including the crucifixion and resurrection of the Savior, the great Âveil of darknessÂ that would cover the earth prior to the Restoration, the going forth of the Book of Mormon and the gospel in the last days, and the eventual return of his city to join the city of the New Jerusalem during ChristÂs millennial reign. (See Moses 7:42Â64.)

Of Noah, we read that he Âprophesied, and taught the things of God, even as it was in the beginning,Â that his message centered in faith in Christ, baptism, and the receipt of the Holy Ghost by which all the faithful could Âhave all things made manifestÂ to them, and that he Âwalked with GodÂ (Moses 8:16, 24, 27). Of Abraham, we read that he too stood face-to-face with God, who said to him: ÂBehold I will show you all these. And he put his hand upon mine eyes, and I saw those things which his hands had made, which were many; and they multiplied before mine eyes, and I could not see the end thereof.Â (See Abr. 3:11Â12.) In still another restored text we read of Moses being Âcaught up into an exceedingly high mountain,Â where he talked with God Âface to face.Â He too was invited to see the workmanship of the Lord. ÂMoses looked, and beheld the world upon which he was created; and Moses beheld the world and the ends thereof, and all the children of men which are, and which were created.Â (Moses 1:1, 2, 8.) That our story might be complete, it was revealed to Joseph Smith that Peter, James, and John were endowed with the same knowledge while on the Mount of Transfiguration (see D&C 63:20Â21). Of his own experience, the Prophet Joseph simply stated: ÂPaul saw the third heavens, and I moreÂ (Teachings, p. 301).

Conclusion

As the great prophets of dispensations past ascended the holy mount to see of things yet future, so the time will come when all the faithful Saints will have the privilege of seeing what the ancient seers saw and knowing what the ancient seers knew. That which Joseph Smith saw and recorded for us evidences that he stood on ground made sacred by the faith of his ancient counterparts. As they stood face-to-face with God and conversed with him as one man converses with another, so did he. As they were granted the privilege of seeing the great panorama of GodÂs creations, so was he. As they received the promise that revelation would never cease, so did he. We are the children of the prophets, as were the faithful of ages past. The invitation is ours to stand where they have stood and to see what they have seen. As their eyes were anointed that they might see (see Moses 6:35Â36), so our eyes can be enlightened by that same Spirit that we too might see and understand the things of God.

If The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is to be judged by its fruits and Joseph Smith by the doctrines he restored, then both stand without peer. The sweeping panorama that unites eternity past with eternity future and the perfection of GodÂs mercy and justice are as far beyond the theologies of men as the creation of the earth is above and beyond an artistÂs depiction of the same. Only with such vision can divine purpose be given to all of GodÂs creations and the faith be found by which the children of God might in fact grow to become as he is.
