Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 27

Restoring Plain and Precious Truths

These last records . . . shall establish the truth of the first [the Bible],

which are of the twelve apostles of the Lamb,

and shall make known the plain and precious things which have been

taken away from them; and shall make known to all kindreds,

tongues, and people, that the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father,

and the Savior of the world; and that all men must come unto him,

or they cannot be saved.

-1 1 Ne. 13:40

Peter, who stood at the head of the meridian church following the ascension of Christ, foresaw a future day in which there would be a Ârestitution of all things.Â This, he said, had been prophesied by the Âmouth of all his holy prophets since the world began.Â (Acts 3:21.) That is, all the holy prophets knew that there would be a universal apostasy followed by a universal restoration. Keys, powers, authorities, ordinances, rites, and doctrines known to the ancients were destined to be lost in the long night of apostate darkness. All that was lost would be restored in the glorious dispensation of the fulness of times.

Opening the Heavens

Of this we can be certain: the greater the doctrine, the more it will be opposed and the sooner it will disappear when darkness reigns. Apostasy will always involve the closing of the heavens and silencing of living oracles. This is accomplished in the guise of loyalty to dead prophets, whose words will be declared complete and final on all matters of faith. The pattern is always the same. First comes the silencing of the prophetic voice and next the taking from and adding to what past prophets have said. The final stage of apostasy comes when the words of the prophets are reinterpreted so as to rob them of all vestige of meaning. This is accomplished by declaring the greatness and goodness of God to be a divine mystery that transcends the ability of the mortal mind to comprehend. Thus the plain meaning of scripture is declared to be a metaphor, requiring the aid of those trained in the wisdom of men to interpret it.

The great promise of the dispensation of the fulness of times is that every doctrine, ordinance, and authority necessary to the salvation of humankind will be restored anew. We do not seek to imitate the churches of the world, nor have we borrowed doctrines or authority from them. We stand entirely independent. All doctrine and authority that we profess is rooted in revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith or his successors. It could be argued that we share the Bible in common with the historical Christian world, but in fact we do not. Joseph Smith stated the matter well when asked if Mormons believe the Bible: ÂIf we do, we are the only people under heaven that doesÂ (Teachings, p. 119). We read the same words and tell our children the same stories about the faith of the ancients, yet we stand worlds apart in our understanding of the meaning behind what is being read. Where we accept scripture to be literal, the traditional Christian world often holds it to be figurative; where we accept scripture to be ever expanding, they declare it to be final and complete; where we hold gospel principles to be everlastingly the same, they hold them to be continuously evolving. When the Spirit of revelation was rejected, the true understanding of all revelation theretofore given was lost also.

During his mortal ministry, but few believed the words of Jesus and chose to follow him. Would we suppose it to be any different with the record of what he taught? Only those who have the same Spirit possessed by his meridian followers could be expected to understand and believe the true meaning of our LordÂs words. The faith required to accept the words of living apostles and prophets in one age is no different from the faith required in another. The faithful of whom we read in the Bible followed living prophets, not dead ones. Such is the Spirit that unlocks the true meaning of the Bible. One cannot have the Spirit of Christ and at the same time deny the spirit of revelation or the spirit of prophecy (see D&C 11:25; Rev. 19:10).

Among the first of the plain and precious things that Joseph Smith restored was the spirit of revelation, the reality that the heavens are not sealed, the verity that God does speak. Revelation is the rock upon which all else must rest. This, of course, is the heart of the Book of Mormon message. Inspired by the visionary experience of his father, Nephi sought to experience the same things. ÂI, Nephi, was desirous,Â he said, to Âsee, and hear, and know of these things, by the power of the Holy Ghost, which is the gift of God unto all those who diligently seek him, as well in times of old as in the time that he should manifest himself unto the children of men. For he is the same yesterday, to-day, and forever; and the way is prepared for all men from the foundation of the world, if it so be that they repent and come unto him. For he that diligently seeketh shall find; and the mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto them, by the power of the Holy Ghost, as well in these times as in times of old, and as well in times of old as in times to come; wherefore, the course of the Lord is one eternal round.Â (1 Ne. 10:17Â19.)

This right of all mankind to communicate with the heavens on equal terms is one of the principles that binds the Saints of all generations together. Alma teaches the doctrine quite succinctly as he reasons with his son Corianton. ÂIs it not as easy at this time for the Lord to send his angel to declare these glad tidings unto us as unto our children, or as after the time of his coming?Â (Alma 39:19.) Similarly, Moroni directs his words to those who deny the necessity of continuous revelation or any of the gifts and powers of God.

I speak unto you who deny the revelations of God, and say that they are done away, that there are no revelations, nor prophecies, nor gifts, nor healing, nor speaking with tongues, and the interpretation of tongues;

Behold I say unto you, he that denieth these things knoweth not the gospel of Christ; yea, he has not read the scriptures; if so, he does not understand them.

For do we not read that God is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and in him there is no variableness neither shadow of changing?

And now, if ye have imagined up unto yourselves a god who doth vary, and in whom there is shadow of changing, then have ye imagined up unto yourselves a god who is not a God of miracles.

But behold, I will show unto you a God of miracles, even the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and it is that same God who created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are. (Morm. 9:7Â11.)

Restoring the Plain and the Precious

In a prophetic description of the Bible, Nephi tells us that the writings of its original authors contained Âthe covenants of the LordÂ that God had made with the house of Israel, along with many other prophecies. He likened its contents to the brass plates but indicated that the plates were more extensive. (See 1 Ne. 13:23.) This makes the Book of Mormon promise of the restoration of the brass plates and the announcement that their content will yet go to all the nations of the earth all the more significant (see 1 Ne. 5:16Â18; Alma 37:3Â4). It certainly sustains the idea that many plain and precious things were taken from the Old Testament record and that those missing truths are essential to the understanding of those who would seek to be numbered among the household of faith. Nephi further indicated that the Bible, meaning both the Old and New Testaments, as originally written contained the fulness of the gospel of the Lord, but after they had gone forth from the hand of the twelve Apostles the great and abominable church had taken from them Âmany parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord.Â This was done to blind the eyes and harden the hearts of the children of men. Nephi further tells us that it was only after Âthese plain and precious thingsÂ had been taken that the book went Âforth unto all the nations of the Gentiles.Â Because of those things that were taken, Âan exceedingly great many do stumble, yea, insomuch that Satan hath great power over them.Â Nevertheless the promise was also given that Âafter the Gentiles do stumble exceedingly, because of the most plain and precious parts of the gospel of the Lamb which have been kept back by that abominable church, which is the mother of harlots, saith the Lamb-I will be merciful unto the Gentiles in that day, insomuch that I will bring forth unto them, in mine own power, much of my gospel, which shall be plain and precious, saith the Lamb.Â (See 1 Ne. 13:26Â34.)

As an illustration of both the apostasy and the extent to which the plain and precious things have been taken from the Bible, consider the following concepts and the doctrines associated with them: church, baptism, Holy Ghost, gift of the Holy Ghost, Son of God, Jesus Christ, and Father in Heaven. Each constitutes an important part of the Christian faith, though none of these terms are found in the Old Testament. For a Latter-day Saint, for whom the gospel is everlastingly the same, the aforementioned are all fundamental to the gospel, and there is no surprise in the fact that Joseph Smith consistently restored these terms and concepts to the Old Testament text. For traditional Christianity, their absence from the Old Testament is evidence that the faith of the Old Testament people was too primitive to embrace such doctrines. However, just as such plain and precious truths were taken from the Old Testament, so doctrines of equal importance were taken from the New Testament. The kinds of things we learn in the Book of Mormon make this apparent. The New Testament, for instance, tells us the story of ChristÂs crucifixion but does not explain to us why it was necessary for the Son of God to die in such a manner, whereas the Book of Mormon does explain (see 2 Ne. 9; Alma 34, 42). Again, it is to the Book of Mormon that we turn to find a definition of resurrection, to be told of the necessity of continuous revelation and the ministering of angels, to gain an understanding of the tree of life, to be instructed relative to the fallen nature of man, to learn what it means to be saved, to learn about foreordination to the priesthood, and to obtain a knowledge of the postmortal spirit world.

After the publication of the Book of Mormon, the Lord directed the Prophet Joseph to commence an inspired translation of the Bible. In this labor he would restore much that had been taken from the original text. The ProphetÂs study of Old and New Testament texts raised many questions, causing him to inquire of the Lord for understanding on a variety of matters. Many of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants came in answer to those questions. Questions from John 5 resulted in the revelation on the degrees of glory found in Doctrine and Covenants section 76, questions and answers on the book of Revelation are found in D&C 77, and key prophecies of Isaiah are explained in D&C 113. D&C 132 contains the LordÂs explanation as to why the plurality of wives was practiced by many of the faithful in Old Testament times, restores an understanding of the new and everlasting covenant, and reveals the doctrine of eternal marriage even as it was known from the time God sealed Adam and Eve as husband and wife in the garden of Eden.

The greatest truths are those that deal with the nature of God, his Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost. It is natural to assume that these would also be the first truths to be restored when we are invited once again to stand in the light of heaven. The book of Moses, which is an extract from Joseph SmithÂs translation of Genesis, is a classic illustration. Christian creeds declare God to be incorporeal, and sectarian commentators tell us that when scripture says we are in the image and likeness of God, it is only to be understood figuratively. Yet the book of Moses declares: ÂIn the image of his own body, male and female, created he them, and blessed themÂ (Moses 6:9). Thus the knowledge that God is a corporeal being, which Joseph Smith would have assumed from the First Vision, is affirmed for him as early as June l830. He was further told that in the language of Adam, God was known as ÂMan of HolinessÂ and Christ as Âthe Son of ManÂ (Moses 6:57). As genealogies are traced, Adam is identified as the ÂfirstbornÂ (Abr. 1:3) of the inhabitants of this earth and as Âthe son of GodÂ (Moses 6:22). We are further told that Âa book of remembrance was kept, . . . a genealogy was kept of the children of GodÂ (see Moses 6:5Â8). This, of course, would include all descendants of Adam. Thus we find Enoch saying to God, ÂThou hast made me, and given unto me a right to thy throneÂ (Moses 7:59). It does not take any stretch of the imagination to see why such statements would have been taken from the scriptures; they are all very plain and very precious.

The Spirit of revelation brought the same kind of transformation to the New Testament. For instance, the text of John 1:18 that reads, ÂNo man hath seen God at any timeÂ was corrected by the Prophet to read, ÂNo man hath seen God at any time, except he hath borne record of the Son; for except it is through him no man can be savedÂ (JST, John 1:19). The confusing text in John 10:8, where Christ is recorded as saying, ÂAll that ever came before me are thieves and robbers,Â a statement that would have to include the Old Testament prophets, now reads, ÂAll that ever came before me who testified not of me are thieves and robbers.Â The implications are profound, because it means that all Old Testament prophets knew of Christ and testified of him. One would be hard-pressed to prove this with the Old Testament as it presently stands. Yet, the book of Moses and the Book of Mormon spell it out as plainly as language permits. Starting with father Adam, we learn that an angel of the Lord explained the nature of the sacrifices Adam had been commanded to offer after he left Eden as Âa similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father.Â Further, he was to do all that he did in the name of the Son of God and to Ârepent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore.Â (Moses 5:7Â8.) We are told that God himself spoke to Adam, saying: ÂI am God; I made the world, and men before they were in the flesh. And he also said unto him: If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you.Â (Moses 6:51Â52.)

The Book of Mormon is a powerful confirmation that the ancients knew of Christ and his gospel from the very beginning. More than five hundred years before the birth of Christ, Jacob recorded this testimony: ÂFor, for this intent have we written these things, that they may know that we knew of Christ, and we had a hope of his glory many hundred years before his coming; and not only we ourselves had a hope of his glory, but also all the holy prophets which were before us. Behold, they believed in Christ and worshiped the Father in his name, and also we worship the Father in his name. And for this intent we keep the law of Moses, it pointing our souls to him; and for this cause it is sanctified unto us for righteousness, even as it was accounted unto Abraham in the wilderness to be obedient unto the commands of God in offering up his son Isaac, which is a similitude of God and his Only Begotten Son.Â (Jacob 4:4Â5.) Moroni stated it perfectly: ÂWhen ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost. And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things.Â (Moro. 10:4Â5.) This doctrine, which places all men on equal grounds with their Creator and assures that God is no respecter of persons, stands at odds with the theologies of the traditional Christian world.

Chief among the truths restored are those dealing with the nature of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. These are matters over which there have been centuries of debate and conflict, which resulted in traditional ChristianityÂs adoption of an incomprehensible Deity. As GodÂs nature was reinterpreted by the wisdom of men, he became increasingly abstract and transcendent. Thus we find God today languishing in the outer reaches of space without body, parts, passions, speech, and of course without gender. Yet Latter-day Saints know otherwise. ÂNow, what do we hear in the gospel which we have received? A voice of gladness!Â We have received the testimony that God reigns and the promise that Âas the dews of Carmel, so shall the knowledge of God descend uponÂ us. (D&C 128:19.) Whereas the Bible can be searched in vain for a definition of resurrection, the Book of Mormon speaks with marvelous plainness. Amulek describes it thus: ÂThis mortal body is [to be] raised to an immortal body, that is from death, even from the first death unto life, that they can die no more; their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruptionÂ (Alma 11:45). Alma explains it this way: ÂThe soul shall be restored to the body, and the body to the soul; yea, and every limb and joint shall be restored to its body; yea, even a hair of the head shall not be lost; but all things shall be restored to their proper and perfect frameÂ (Alma 40:23). By announcing that we may reclaim our physical bodies in the eternal worlds, the Book of Mormon makes heaven a tangible and corporeal existence. And if GodÂs children have bodies, then what of him in whose image and likeness they are created?

From the Book of Mormon, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery learned of the importance of the ordinance of baptism. As they inquired of the Lord to know how they were to conform with this sacred ritual, they set in order a sequence of events that resulted in the restoration of priesthood, keys, powers, and authority. The knowledge of other sacred covenants followed in rapid succession. Chief among the keys restored was that authority known to us as the sealing power, the authority by which man and woman are bound as husband and wife both on the earth and in heaven. In turn their children are eternally sealed to them such that salvation becomes a family affair. All the ordinances of the temple are predicated on the nature of the resurrection. If we do not receive our bodies back, if there is no distinction as to gender in the resurrection, if men are no longer men and women no longer women, then there would be no purpose for marriage or families. Everything in the temple centers around the eternal nature of the family, not just families for this world but families for the endless duration of the eternities. As already noted, it was in the restoration of a Genesis text that we learn that in the language of Adam, God was known by the name ÂMan of HolinessÂ and the promised Messiah as Âthe Son of ManÂ (Moses 6:57; JST Gen. 6:60). ÂIf the veil were rent today,Â Joseph Smith would later explain, Âand the great God who holds this world in its orbit, and who upholds all worlds and all things by his power, was to make himself visible,-I say, if you were to see him today, you would see him like a man in form-like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form as a manÂ (Teachings, p. 345).

Again the contrast with historical Christianity is remarkable. When Plato made it unfashionable for God to have a body, reasoning that such would confine him to time and place, both Judaism and Christianity followed suit. This notion was followed by the idea that the body is simply a prison in which the soul has been confined as a punishment for the fall of Adam. In the early centuries of Christianity, asceticism became the rage with its attendant idea that sins were to be atoned for by mortification of the flesh. One extreme gave birth to another, and some took flight to the desert, where they lived in circumstances more austere than those of animals and with fewer pleasures. Martyrdom, at least for a period, became an acceptable way to free oneself from the bodily prison. Celibacy became the way to avoid any pleasure that might be derived by association with women. For the fairer gender, this philosophy led to lifelong virginity and nunneries. Children, it was determined, were born in sin, which in turn created the necessity of infant baptism. Mary, who in addition to her firstborn also gave birth to at least four other sons and more than one daughter (see Matt. 13:55Â56), was declared to be the perpetual virgin. The commandment that a man was to leave his father and mother and cleave unto his wife and multiply and replenish the earth now became a practice relegated to those without the spiritual strength to avoid such soul-demeaning alliances. What a remarkable contrast there is when words are permitted to mean what they say, when father means father, mother means mother, son means son, and begotten means begotten.

In response to the question, How were the plain and precious parts taken from the Bible? we know enough to say that they were taken away quite deliberately. It is not scribal error that we are talking about, nor is it faulty translation. Both are matters of some concern, but they are not the major offense that purposely taking away verses, chapters, and whole books are. Two quotations from the Prophet Joseph Smith illustrate this matter. The first is found in the preface to Doctrine and Covenants 76: ÂFrom sundry revelations which had been received, it was apparent that many important points touching the salvation of man had been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled.Â The second is the revelation given in response to the ProphetÂs question as to whether or not the Apocrypha should be part of his translation of the Bible. ÂThere are,Â the Lord said, Âmany things contained therein that are true, and it is mostly translated correctly; there are many things contained therein that are not true, which are interpolations by the hands of menÂ (D&C 91:1Â2). An interpolation is an insertion. What we have, then, is evidence of both the taking from and adding to texts that in their origin were inspired. Again, this is not scribal error. It is deliberate, premeditated mischief. It is the kind of thing that has gone on virtually from the beginning of time and over which there was no control until the invention of the printing press in 1450. Prior to the printing press, no two books would ever have been entirely the same. As for scripture, no autographs (meaning original copies) exist for any book of the Bible. There is no absolute or sure checkpoint. The great changes that were made in the biblical text were made early, and those making them were careful to cover their tracks. The era in which this took place as far as the New Testament is concerned is in effect a historical black hole: records of what was happening simply did not survive.

Conclusion

The host of truths restored to us through the Prophet Joseph Smith, truths that are singularly ours as Latter-day Saints, constitute an illustration of what was taken away from the Bible. Ours is a restored gospel. We profess no doctrines new to the faithful of ages past but rather a host of doctrines unknown to those of the religious world today. Perhaps the most important lesson to grow out of this brief review of doctrinal history is that those truths that are to us most plain and precious are always in danger of perversion and that perversion can come only from within our own ranks. The warning is obvious: beware of those who would have us mingle our doctrine with the philosophies of men.

In his instruction to Nephi, the angel of the Lord said: ÂThese last recordsÂ-meaning, no doubt, the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith Translation, and other prophetic oracles of this final dispensation-Âwhich thou hast seen among the Gentiles, shall establish the truth of the first, which are of the twelve apostles of the Lamb, and shall make known the plain and precious things which have been taken away from them; and shall make known to all kindreds, tongues, and people, that the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father, and the Savior of the world; and that all men must come unto him, or they cannot be savedÂ (1 Ne. 13:40).
