Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 28

The Expanding Canon

And whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost

shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord,

shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord,

and the power of God unto salvation.

-D&C 68:4

The family of Joseph Smith Sr. loved the Bible, and it was from this background that the latter-day Seer acquired his own love for holy writ. Most of his sermons, writings, and letters are laced with quotations, paraphrases, or summaries of biblical passages and precepts from both the Old and New Testaments. Joseph once remarked that one can Âsee GodÂs own handwriting in the sacred volume: and he who reads it oftenest will like it bestÂ (Teachings, p. 56). He believed the Bible represented GodÂs word to humanity, and he gloried in the truths and timeless lessons it contained. Even in his tender years Joseph learned that the Bible was the object of considerable contention-a war of words and a tumult of opinions, with people conscripting its teachings for their own purposes. Joseph did not believe the Bible was complete, nor did he feel that religious difficulties could necessarily be handled quickly by turning to the Old or New Testament for help.

Beyond the Bible

Nephi learned of many evil attitudes and actions that would afflict the people of the last days. Some of these included the tendency to teach with oneÂs own learning and thus deny the power of the Holy Ghost; to deny the power of God in general; to assume that the work of redemption was complete and thus inapplicable in modern times; to declare that the day of miracles has passed; and to encourage complacency through saying such things as Âeat, drink, and be merryÂ and Âall is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth, all is wellÂ (see 2 Ne. 28:3Â8, 21). And then Nephi added: ÂTherefore, wo be unto him that is at ease in Zion! Wo be unto him that crieth: All is well! Yea, wo be unto him that hearkeneth unto the precepts of men, and denieth the power of God, and the gift of the Holy Ghost! Yea, wo be unto him that saith: We have received, and we need no more! And in fine, wo be unto all those who tremble, and are angry because of the truth of God! For behold, he that is built upon the rock receiveth it with gladness.Â (2 Ne. 28:24Â28.)

Nephi devotes an entire chapter to a scathing denunciation of those who reject additional revelation from God and, more particularly, the Book of Mormon. ÂWherefore murmur ye,Â the Savior scolded, Âbecause that ye shall receive more of my word? . . . Wherefore, because that ye have a Bible ye need not suppose that it contains all my words; neither need ye suppose that I have not caused more to be written.Â (2 Ne. 29:8, 10.) Those who claim membership in the Âliving churchÂ (D&C 1:30) must open themselves to living light and living authority; they must acknowledge and glory in the ongoing revelation of the mind and will of God to his people.

After speaking of how James 1:5 had made such a deep impression upon his soul, the Prophet said: ÂI reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did . . . for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the BibleÂ (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:12). On another occasion he spoke concerning his belief in ongoing revelation from God:

From what we can draw from the Scriptures relative to the teaching of heaven, we are induced to think that much instruction has been given to man since the beginning which we do not possess now. This may not agree with the opinions of some of our friends who are bold to say that we have everything written in the Bible which God ever spoke to man since the world began, and that if He had ever said anything more we should certainly have received it. . . . We have what we have, and the Bible contains what it does contain: but to say that God never said anything more to man than is there recorded, would be saying at once that we have at last received a revelation: for it must require one to advance thus far, because it is nowhere said in that volume by the mouth of God that He would not, after giving what is there contained, speak again; and if any man has found out for a fact that the Bible contains all that God ever revealed to man he has ascertained it by an immediate revelation. (Teachings, p. 61.)

In an 1833 letter to his uncle, Silas Smith, Joseph Smith wrote of the need for continual direction through prophets:

Seeing that the Lord has never given the world to understand by anything heretofore revealed that he had ceased forever to speak to his creatures when sought unto in a proper manner, why should it be thought a thing incredible that he should be pleased to speak again in these last days for their salvation? Perhaps you may be surprised at this assertion that I should say Âfor the salvation of his creatures in these last daysÂ since we have already in our possession a vast volume of his word [the Bible] which he has previously given. But you will admit that the word spoken to Noah was not sufficient for Abraham. . . . Isaac, the promised seed, was not required to rest his hope upon the promises made to his father Abraham but was privileged with the assurance of his [GodÂs] approbation in the sight of heaven by the direct voice of the Lord to him. . . .

I have no doubt but that the holy prophets and apostles and saints in the ancient days were saved in the kingdom of God. . . . I may believe that Enoch walked with God. I may believe that Abraham communed with God and conversed with angels. . . . I may believe that Elijah was taken to heaven in a chariot of fire with fiery horses. I may believe that the Saints saw the Lord and conversed with him face-to-face after his resurrection. I may believe that the Hebrew church came to Mount Zion and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels. I may believe that they looked into eternity and saw the Judge of all, and Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant; but will all this purchase an assurance for me, or waft me to the regions of eternal day with my garments spotless, pure, and white? Or must I not rather obtain for myself, by my own faith and diligence in keeping the commandments of the Lord, an assurance of salvation for myself? And have I not an equal privilege with the ancient Saints? And will not the Lord hear my prayers, and listen to my cries as soon [as] he ever did to theirs, if I come to him in the manner they did? Or is he a respecter of persons? (The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, pp. 298Â301; spelling and punctuation modernized.)

The Prophet wrote: ÂWe believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctlyÂ (A of F 1:8). It appears that Joseph Smith meant to convey what is generally associated with the term transmitted; certainly there was more involved in how we got the Bible than translation matters, including copying, adding to, taking from, interpretation, as well as problems of translation from the ancient tongues. In 1843 Joseph Smith said: ÂI believe the Bible as it read when it came from the pen of the original writers. Ignorant translators, careless transcribers, or designing and corrupt priests have committed many errors.Â (Teachings, p. 327.) He taught that many plain and precious truths had been taken from the Bible before the documents were compiled into what we now know as the Old and New Testaments (1 Ne. 13:20Â40). This was one of the reasons Joseph Smith felt called to initiate a restoration of truth and power, not simply a reformation of existing religious matters. Latter-day Saints thus speak of the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ being restored through Joseph Smith, including doctrinal and theological matters once clearly taught or practiced but since lost to the world through the centuries.

Thus the Prophet did not hold a traditional belief in the infallibility or inerrancy of the Bible. He believed, to be sure, that the essential message of the Bible was true and from God. We could say that he believed it was GodÂs word in general. However, we are not so certain that he or modern Church leaders would be convinced that every sentence recorded in the testaments necessarily contains GodÂs words, meaning a direct quotation or a transcription of divine direction. Joseph taught, and his successors have emphasized, that it is the Spirit of revelation within the one called of God that is the energizing force and that in most instances God places the thought into the mind or heart of the revelator, who then assumes the responsibility to clothe the oracle in language. Certainly there are times when a prophet records the words of God directly, but very often the Âstill small voiceÂ (D&C 85:6) whispers to the prophet, who then speaks for God.

When Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith in 1823, he quoted many passages of scripture. In particular, he quoted Mal. 4:5Â6 quite differently from the King James Version. What Moroni said is like a bright beacon of light when compared with the biblical passage; what we have in Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:38Â39 and D&C 2 expands dramatically our vision of the promises made to the ancient fathers. But we hasten to add that the King James Version of this scripture is good and true and correct; years later Joseph Smith referred to the matter of work for the dead and quoted directly from the Malachi passage in the King James Bible. ÂI might have rendered a plainer translation to thisÂ-namely, what he had received from Moroni some nineteen years earlier-he wrote in an epistle, Âbut it is sufficiently plain to suit my purpose as it standsÂ (D&C 128:18). We learn from this that a biblical passage may often be rendered in more ways than one and that the amount of light and truth delivered through a passage may depend a great deal upon the spiritual readiness and receptivity of those to whom it is given.

The modern ProphetÂs view of scripture might be stated as follows: When God chooses to speak through a person, that person does not become a mindless instrument, an earthly sound system through which Deity can voice himself. Rather, the person becomes enlightened and filled with intelligence or truth. Nothing could be clearer in the Old Testament, for example, than that many factors impacted the prophetic message: personality, experience, vocabulary, literary talent. The word of the Lord as spoken through Isaiah is quite different from the word of the Lord as spoken through Luke, and both are different from that spoken by Jeremiah or Mark. Some suggest that if the Bible cannot be trusted in all things, it cannot be trusted. Because of the endless textual variants, some of those who believe in biblical inerrancy concede errors in our modern Bible while maintaining the infallibility of the original manuscripts. The difficulty, of course, is that none of the original manuscripts are now available.

Further, it is worth noting that stone, leaves, bark, skins, wood, metals, baked clay, and papyrus were all used anciently to record inspired messages. Our most vital concern with the ancients is not the perfection with which such messages were recorded but the inspiration of the message. More specifically, we are interested in the fact that the heavens have been opened to us, that we have had messages to record. In other words, knowing that God is the same yesterday, today, and forever (see 1 Ne. 10:18; D&C 20:12) and the fact that he has spoken to mortals at all, however well or poorly it may have been recorded, witnesses that he can speak to men and women now. We glory in scripture-not just in the printed and bound volumes we call the standard works, but also in those current and modern words that are spoken and written by the LordÂs anointed as they are moved upon by the power of the Spirit, words that represent the mind, will, voice, and word of God to his people (see D&C 68:3Â4). After all, the Bible is only black ink on white paper until the Spirit of God manifests its true meaning to us; if we have obtained that, there is little need to quibble over the BibleÂs suitability as a history or science text. Perhaps a statement from Brigham Young serves as an effective summary: ÂWhen God speaks to the people, he does it in a manner to suit their circumstances and capacities. . . . Should the Lord Almighty send an angel to re-write the Bible, it would in many places be very different from what it now is.Â (In Journal of Discourses 9:311.) For Joseph Smith and his followers, the traditions of the past regarding scripture, revelation, and canon were altered dramatically by the First Vision. God had spoken again, the heavens were no longer sealed, and a new dispensation of truth was under way. Truly, ÂWe believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of GodÂ (A of F 1:9).

Additional Scripture to Come Forth

The LatterÂday Saints are heirs to an infinite amount of light and truth. So much of that truth has already come, but much-a great deal, in fact-shall yet be delivered to the earth. ÂGod shall give unto you knowledge by his Holy Spirit,Â the Prophet wrote under inspiration in Liberty Jail, Âyea, by the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost, [knowledge] that has not been revealed since the world was until now; which our forefathers have awaited with anxious expectation to be revealed in the last times, which their minds were pointed to by the angels, as held in reserve for the fulness of their glory; a time to come in the which nothing shall be withheld. . . . How long can rolling waters remain impure? What power shall stay the heavens? As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri River in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints.Â (D&C 121:26Â28, 33.) The Saints have been blessed beyond measure with sacred insights; the scriptures of the Restoration now shed forth their resplendent rays upon a darkened and benighted world. But there is more to come, more light, more knowledge, more doctrine, more precepts. And more scripture.

We shall yet read and rejoice in the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon, that panoramic vision vouchsafed to the brother of Jared in which is to be found Âa revelation from God, from the beginning of the world to the ending thereof,Â even Âall things from the foundation of the world unto the end thereofÂ (2 Ne. 27:7, 10). Even Joseph the translator was forbidden to touch the sealed portion in his work with the Nephite-Jaredite record: ÂTouch not the things which are sealed, for I will bring them forth in mine own due time; for I will show unto the children of men that I am able to do mine own work. Wherefore, when thou [Joseph Smith] hast read the words which I have commanded thee, and obtained the witnesses which I have promised unto thee, then shalt thou seal up the book again, and hide it up unto me, that I may preserve the words which thou hast not read, until I shall see fit in mine own wisdom to reveal all things unto the children of men.Â (2 Ne. 27:21Â22; compare Ether 5:1.) Moroni was commanded to write and seal up the vision of the brother of Jared. ÂThey shall not go forth unto the Gentiles until the day that they shall repent of their iniquity, and become clean before the Lord.Â Indeed, in the day that the people of the earth exercise faith like the brother of Jared and thus rend the damning veil of unbelief-presumably in the Millennium-Âthen will I manifest unto them the things which the brother of Jared saw, even to the unfolding unto them all my revelations.Â (See Ether 4:6Â7, 15.)

The brass plates were a sacred and significant record to the Nephites. Nephi killed a man to obtain them, in order that his people might avoid the spiritual and intellectual illiteracy that would surely follow without access to scriptural records (see 1 Ne. 3:19; 4:13, 18). The plates of brass were essentially a more extensive scriptural source than our present Old Testament (see 1 Ne. 13:23), containing the five books of Moses, genealogies of the Lehites, and the other historical and prophetic books down to and including Jeremiah (see 1 Ne. 3:19Â20; 5:11). In addition, the brass plates contained the oracles of prophets not found in our Old Testament: Zenos, Zenock, Neum, and Ezias. Their prophecies and teachings are Christ-centered and gospel-centered, and they bespeak the knowledge of the fulness of the gospel; those prophets understood clearly God, the Godhead, and the redemption that was to come in and through Jesus Christ (see 1 Ne. 19:10; Alma 33:3Â16; Hel. 8:19Â20). The prophecies of both Lehi and Alma set forth the thrilling verity that one day we shall all have access to the brass plates. These records were to be kept and handed down Âfrom one generation to another, and be kept and preserved by the hand of the Lord until they should go forth unto every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, that they shall know of the mysteries contained thereonÂ (Alma 37:4; compare 1 Ne. 5:19). To some degree this prophecy has been fulfilled and will yet be fulfilled through the flooding of the earth with the Book of Mormon (see Moses 7:62), which contains significant portions of the brass plates. In addition, we would anticipate that Âsomeday the Lord will raise up a prophet, who will also be a seer and a translator, to whom he will give the brass plates that they may be translated for the benefit and blessing of those in all nationsÂ (Bruce R. McConkie, ÂThe Doctrinal Restoration,Â p. 16).

In addition to that portion of the record of the ten tribes that we know now as the Doctrine and Covenants, the record of GodÂs dealings with modern Ephraim, we delight in the assurance that other sacred volumes chronicling our RedeemerÂs ministry to the lost tribes shall come forth. How and in what manner they will come forth has not been revealed. What we do know is that the Lord of the earth speaks to all nations of the earth-in the north, in the south, in the east, and in the west. ÂFor behold,Â Jehovah declared, ÂI shall speak unto the Jews and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the Nephites and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the other tribes of the house of Israel, which I have led away, and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto all nations of the earth and they shall write it. And it shall come to pass that the Jews shall have the words of the Nephites, and the Nephites shall have the words of the Jews; and the Nephites and the Jews shall have the words of the lost tribes of Israel; and the lost tribes of Israel shall have the words of the Nephites and the Jews.Â (See 2 Ne. 29:11Â13.)

In short, in the future we shall exult in truths without number found in the myriad of records kept by the Nephites and Lamanites (see Hel. 3:13Â16), including such things as the transcendent matters made known by the Savior among the Nephites when he Âdid expound all things unto them, both great and small. . . . And he did expound all things, even from the beginning until the time that he should come in his glory.Â (3 Ne. 26:1, 3.) Further, we shall come to know many of the particulars of life among the Nephites during their Millennium-like time of peace and righteousness (see 4 Ne. 1:1Â19). We shall yet search and study the book of Enoch (see D&C 107:57), as well as the fulness of the record of John the Baptist (see D&C 93:6, 18). Elder Neal A. Maxwell observed: ÂToday we carry convenient quadruple combinations of the scriptures, but one day, since more scriptures are coming, we may need to pull little red wagons brimful with booksÂ (A Wonderful Flood of Light, p. 18).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote:

The last word has not been spoken on any subject. Streams of living water shall yet flow from the Eternal Spring who is the source of all truth. There are more things we do not know about the doctrines of salvation than there are things we do know.

When we as a people believe and conform to all of the truths we have received, we shall receive more of the mind and will and voice of the Lord. What we receive and when it comes are in large measure up to us. The Lord has many things he wants to tell us, but so far we have not attained that unity and spiritual stature which will enable us to pull down knowledge from heaven upon us.

We praise God because he has seen fit to give to us what we have received, . . . and pray that we may believe and obey with that faith and devotion which will cause the Lord to give us more of his eternal word. The more we know, the more scripture we receive, the more we have in our standard works, the greater is our chance of gaining eternal life in our FatherÂs kingdom. We can never live a law until it is revealed to us. Can any of us know too much? Can we receive too much revelation? Can we add too much to our holy writ?

What a wondrous thing it is to worship a God who still speaks, whose voice is still heard, whose words are without end! (ÂA New Commandment: Save Thyself and Thy Kindred,Â p. 11.)

Conclusion

In March 1844 the Prophet Joseph Smith gave an unusual assignment to a group of Church leaders: they were asked to amend the constitution of the United States so as to make it Âthe voice of JehovahÂ (as cited in Ehat, ÂÂIt Seems Like Heaven Began on Earth,ÂÂ p. 259). Several weeks later, Elder John Taylor, as a representative of a special committee of three, responded that no progress had been made toward the preparation of a constitution for the kingdom of God. The Prophet acknowledged their failure, indicating that he knew Âthey could not draft a constitution worthy of guiding the Kingdom of God.Â (Ibid.) The Prophet himself had gone before the Lord, seeking that such a constitution be made known by revelation. The answer came: ÂYe are my Constitution and I am your God and ye are my spokesmen, therefore from henceforth keep my commandments.Â (As quoted in ibid.)

In a revelation given to President John Taylor on 27 June 1882, the Savior said: ÂVerily, thus saith the Lord, I have instituted my Kingdom and my laws, with the keys and power thereof, and have appointed you as my spokesman and my Constitution, with President John Taylor at your head, whom I have appointed to my Church and my Kingdom as Prophet, Seer and Revelator.Â Later in the same revelation the Lord affirmed: ÂYe are my constitution, and I am your God.Â (In Collier, Unpublished Revelations, pp. 132, 134.) In short, Joseph Smith taught and illustrated the principle of a living church, that the LordÂs earthly kingdom is to be governed by revelation-current, daily, modern revelation-and not by written documents alone. All of GodÂs purposes for his children cannot be codified. Nothing is more fixed, set, and established than the fact that among the people of God the canon of scripture is open, flexible, and expanding.
