Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 29

Joseph Smith as Translator

Behold, here is wisdom; yea, to be a seer, a revelator,

a translator, and a prophet, having all the gifts of God

which he bestows upon the head of the church.

-D&C 107:92

Joseph Smith was called to speak for God; he was a prophet. He was called to make known to the people of these last days the mind and will of God; he was a revelator. He was called to receive and operate under the direction of GodÂs divine power; he was a legal administrator. And he was called to uncover, make known, and dispense things not visible to the natural eye; he was a seer. His would have been a remarkable ministry had he done no more than declare the saving truths concerning God, Christ, and the plan of redemption, as those truths were delivered to him by God, Christ, and angelic ministrants. But he did more, far more. Few if any men in the history of the world have brought forth more scripture, especially sacred records from antiquity originally written in ancient languages. Joseph Smith was called to bring those records to light; he was a translator.

The Work of Translation

King Limhi asked Ammon: ÂKnowest thou of any one that can translate? For I am desirous that these records [the 24 gold plates containing the Jaredite record] should be translated into our language; for, perhaps, they will give us a knowledge of a remnant of the people who have been destroyed, from whence these records came; or, perhaps, they will give us a knowledge of this very people who have been destroyed; and I am desirous to know the cause of their destruction. Now Ammon said unto him: I can assuredly tell thee, O king, of a man that can translate the records [that is, King Mosiah-see Mosiah 21:28] for he has wherewith that he can look, and translate all records that are of ancient date; and it is a gift from God. And the things are called interpreters, and no man can look in them except he be commanded, lest he should look for that he ought not and he should perish. And whosoever is commanded to look in them, the same is called seer.Â (Mosiah 8:12Â13.)

ÂBehold, there shall be a record kept among you,Â the Lord commanded at the time of the organization of the restored church; Âand in it thou [Joseph Smith] shalt be called a seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, an elder of the church through the will of God the Father, and the grace of your Lord Jesus ChristÂ (D&C 21:1). In a great revelation on priesthood, that same Lord declared: ÂAnd again, the duty of the President of the office of the High Priesthood is to preside over the whole church, and to be like unto Moses-behold, here is wisdom; yea, to be a seer, a revelator, a translator, and a prophet, having all the gifts of God which he bestows upon the head of the churchÂ (D&C 107:91Â92; compare 124:125). Like Mosiah, Joseph Smith was given access to the interpreters, the Urim and Thummim, which he used to translate the Book of Mormon as well as the Egyptian papyri that became the book of Abraham. In addition, several of the early revelations in our present Doctrine and Covenants were received through the Urim and Thummim (see D&C 3, 6, 7, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17). Just as ancient prophet leaders like Noah (see Journal of Discourses 16:50), the brother of Jared (see Ether 3:24), Abraham (see Abr. 3:1), Moses (see Ex. 28:30; Num. 27:21; Deut. 33:8), and David (see Journal of Discourses 18:156) utilized the Urim and Thummim to receive revelation, so that God who is the same yesterday, today, and forever chose to speak to his latter-day Seer through the same means.

The idea that Joseph Smith translated ancient records is difficult for some. Even though the Prophet and some of the brethren in the School of the Prophets studied Biblical Hebrew for a season, Joseph Smith was not a linguist. He was not a scholar, at least by this worldÂs standards. But he possessed the mind of God, enjoyed all of the gifts of the Spirit, and was in tune with the Infinite. On one occasion he said: ÂI . . . have witnessed the visions of eternity, and beheld the glorious mansions of bliss, and the regions and the misery of the damned. . . . I . . . have heard the voice of God, and communed with angels, and spake as moved by the Holy Ghost for the renewal of the everlasting covenant, and for the gathering of Israel in the last days.Â (See History of the Church 6:77Â78.) In speaking of his affection for an old German translation of the Bible, he stated: ÂI thank God that I have got this old book; but I thank him more for the gift of the Holy Ghost. I have got the oldest book in the world; but I [also] have the oldest book in my heart, even the gift of the Holy Ghost.Â (Teachings, p. 349.) Thus the ProphetÂs schooling was of the Spirit. His instructors were heavenly beings. And the light and intelligence he received was pure and undiluted by the learning of the worldly wise.

The Lord frequently calls upon Âthe weak things of the world, those who are unlearned and despisedÂ (D&C 35:13) to do his work. ÂWhere is the wise?Â the Apostle Paul asked. ÂWhere is the scribe? where is the disputer of this world? hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?Â Paul continued by observing that Âthe foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than men. For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called: but God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty.Â (See 1 Cor. 1:20Â21, 25Â27.) Indeed, the Restoration has taken place in order that Âthe weak things of the world shall come forth and break down the mighty and strong ones, that man should not counsel his fellow man, neither trust in the arm of flesh-but that every man might speak in the name of God the Lord, even the Savior of the world; that faith also might increase in the earth; that mine everlasting covenant might be established; that the fulness of my gospel might be proclaimed by the weak and the simple unto the ends of the world, and before kings and rulersÂ (D&C 1:19Â23).

In speaking of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, Elder Bruce R. McConkie observed:

The Book of Mormon came forth and was translated by the gift and power of God. The scholarship and learning of wise men were not involved. It was not brought forth by intellectual giants who had been trained in all the linguistic wisdom of the world. It came forth by the power of the Holy Ghost. The translator said, ÂI am not learnedÂ (2 Ne. 27:19). The Lord replied, ÂThe learned shall not readÂ the account on the plates (2 Ne. 27:20).

There is a great key in this. The Book of Mormon is translated correctly because an unlearned man did it by the gift and power of God. It took him less than sixty translating days. The Bible abounds in errors and mistranslations, in spite of the fact that the most learned scholars and translators of the ages labored years on end over the manuscripts of antiquity to bring it forth.

The key to an understanding of Holy Writ lies not in the wisdom of men, not in cloistered halls, not in academic degrees, not in a knowledge of Greek and Hebrew-though special intellectual insights may result from all of these-but the things of God are known and understood only by the power of the Spirit of God (see 1 Cor. 2). (ÂThe Bible: A Sealed Book,Â p. 1.)

Bringing Forth Holy Scripture

And so it was with Joseph Smith. Formal learning can be of great value, but it can also stand in the way of spiritual progress and enlightenment if one is unwilling to be taught. The Prophet was an open vessel, a pure conduit, a receptive student who became a master teacher. No one knew his limitations more keenly than Joseph himself. God can, however, take a sensitive and submissive soul who is willing to be instructed and bring to pass mighty works.

To Oliver Cowdery the Lord said: ÂAssuredly as the Lord liveth, who is your God and your Redeemer, even so surely shall you receive a knowledge of whatsoever things you shall ask in faith, with an honest heart, believing that you shall receive a knowledge concerning the engravings of old records, which are ancient, which contain those parts of my scripture of which has been spoken by the manifestation of my SpiritÂ (D&C 8:1). Within a short time, the Savior instructed Oliver that when the translation of the golden plates was completed, Âother records have I, that I will give unto you power that you may assist to translateÂ (D&C 9:2). These two revelations point up the ProphetÂs translation activity with the Book of Mormon, the inspired translation of the Bible, and the book of Abraham.

Book of Mormon. The Book of Mormon is itself a marvel. It is a priceless gem, a work of holy writ whose worth cannot be measured. We really do not know how the Prophet translated the Book of Mormon. We have various accounts of that process, all differing somewhat in detail. The revelations declare that God Âgave him power from on high, by the means which were before prepared, to translate the Book of MormonÂ (D&C 20:8). In fact, he was given Âsight and power to translateÂ (D&C 3:12). Joseph the Prophet simply said in the Wentworth Letter: ÂThrough the medium of the Urim and Thummim I translated the record by the gift and power of GodÂ (Papers 1:431). Though we glory in the miraculous manner in which the Lord saw fit to equip and endow an ignorant farm boy, we focus our minds on the reality that it is the text, the content of the Book of Mormon that matters; other things, though fascinating, pale into insignificance when compared to the message of the Book of Mormon itself.

The glad tidings we deliver to the world are, of course, of Jesus Christ, who was crucified. But we declare it through the testimony of a modern revelator, a contemporary seer, one who has seen and knows for sure (see D&C 31:3Â4). Truly the greatest physical and spiritual evidence of Joseph SmithÂs calling is the Book of Mormon. It may be picked up. It may be handled. It may be read, studied, pondered, and prayed over. Or it may be ignored, slighted, spurned, or attacked. But it may not be dismissed with a wave of the hand or by hurling unsavory epithets at it or its translator. It is not on trial; the world is on trial. The Book of Mormon demands a decision, for salvation itself is at stake.

Joseph SmithÂs translation of the Bible. Sometime prior to June 1830, the Lord commanded Joseph Smith to begin a serious study of the King James Version of the Bible, a study that came to be known as the Ânew translation.Â On 8 October 1829 the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery purchased a large pulpit-style edition of the Bible from E.B. Grandin in Palmyra, New York. This was the Bible used in the translation. The Prophet would read from the Bible and, under inspiration, dictate to a scribe-whether Oliver Cowdery, Emma Smith, John Whitmer, or Sidney Rigdon-who would then write what was said on manuscript pages. The work with the Bible was done without the aid of the Urim and Thummim. The first thing revealed, dated June 1830, became what we know as Moses 1, an account of an extra-biblical experience had by the prophet Moses on an unnamed mountain. Following this account, the Prophet and his scribe began to move through Genesis, making alterations in the text as they were inspired to do so. What we now have as the book of Moses in our Pearl of Great Price is the Joseph Smith translation of the opening chapters of Genesis. The translators worked with the text of Genesis until 7 March 1831, when a revelation instructed them to begin the inspired translation of the New Testament (see D&C 45:60Â62). At that point they had come as far as Gen. 19:35. For about a month, progress went forward with both Genesis and Matthew, until in early April full time and attention were devoted to the New Testament.

Translation activity continued until February 1833, until the New Testament was completed. Then the translators returned to the Old Testament. On 2 July 1833 the Prophet wrote to the leaders of the Church in Missouri and indicated that he and his scribe had just completed their translation of the Bible. In fact, Joseph worked with the text for the next eleven years of his life, editing, correcting, refining that which had come to him by revelation. Joseph SmithÂs translation of the Bible is one of the greatest evidences of his prophetic calling. In total, over 3,410 verses from the King James Version were altered with corrections, additions, and an occasional deletion. There is no question but that in many cases these changes represent a restoration of ancient texts that had been corrupted or lost before the compilation of the Bible (see preface to D&C 76). This is certainly the case in regard to insight that came to Joseph Smith pertaining to the Creation, Fall, and Atonement and the work of Adam and Eve (see Moses 2Â6), the life and ministry and translation of Enoch (see Moses 6Â7), the Christian ministry of Noah (see Moses 8), the person and powers of Melchizedek (see JST, Gen. 14:25Â40), and the prophecies of Joseph of old (see JST, Gen. 50:24Â38). In the New Testament, significant doctrinal details concerning John the Baptist (see JST, Luke 3:4Â11), the place of Jesus as the Word and the baptism of Christ (see JST, John 1:1Â34), the Sermon on the Mount as a kind of missionary training center for the Twelve (see JST, Matt. 5Â7), and scores of other changes point toward a divinely directed restoration.

In other cases, it may be that Joseph the Prophet restored conversations and teachings, as well as episodes in the lives of the ancients in both Old and New Testaments that actually happened but were never recorded. In addition, we cannot overlook the possibility that in some cases the ProphetÂs alterations to the King James Version represent a type of inspired prophetic commentary on the text, a prophetic prerogative with which we find no fault and which surely must be received with enthusiasm. And certainly one reason we must take the entire Joseph Smith Translation seriously is that the Prophet never took the time to delineate which changes were restorations, which were harmonizations, and which were prophetic commentary. We are not authorized to pick and choose which of the prophetic oracles we will accept and apply and which we will not; we are commanded to Âlive by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of GodÂ (D&C 84:44).

Some of the most important truths of our dispensation came as a direct result of Joseph SmithÂs translation of the Bible. Many of these came from the translation itself, while many others came in the form of revelations (now recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants) that arose from questions resulting from the translation. In the former category, consider the following matters, from the Old Testament alone, that came directly from Joseph SmithÂs translation:

Â The spirit creation and the spiritual creation (see Moses 2Â3)

Â The premortal existence of mankind (see Moses 4)

Â The revelation of the gospel to Adam by heavenly messengers; the baptism, confirmation, and ordination of Adam (see Moses 6)

Â The call and prophetic ministry of Enoch; the establishment of the ancient city of Zion and its translation (see Moses 6Â7)

Â The gospel teachings of Noah (see Moses 8)

Â The ministry of Melchizedek and the translation of Salem (see JST, Gen. 14)

Â The age of accountability of children (see JST, Gen. 17)

Â The difference between the two sets of tablets Moses brought down from Sinai (see JST, Ex. 34; JST Deut. 10). And on and on.

In addition, consider that the following sections of the Doctrine and Covenants came as a direct result of Joseph SmithÂs Bible translation: D&C 74 (dealing with 1 Cor. 7:14), D&C 77 (dealing with Revelation), D&C 91 (dealing with the Old Testament Apocrypha), and D&C 132 (dealing with eternal marriage). Perhaps most important was D&C 76, the vision of the glories, one of the greatest and most sublime revelations ever given or received, which came as Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon pondered over a change they had made in John 5:29.

The Joseph Smith Translation proved to be a vital element in the spiritual education of Joseph Smith himself. The Prophet didnÂt simply attempt to ÂMormonize the Bible,Â as some critics of the Joseph Smith Translation have suggested; in fact, there would have been very little Mormonism with which to Mormonize the Bible in 1830. Rather, as he studied the text of the King James Version, he came to know by revelation what had been taken, altered, added, what things needed to be changed to open the scriptures more fully to the Latter-day Saints and the world. The Prophet considered this work to be a Âbranch of [his] callingÂ (History of the Church 1:238). He warned the Saints: ÂGod [has] often sealed up the heavens because of covetousness in the Church. The Lord [will] cut short his work in righteousness and except the Church receive the fulness of the Scriptures . . . they would yet fail.Â (Teachings, p. 9.) The Lord himself took this labor very seriously. To Sidney Rigdon, the preeminent scribe of the Joseph Smith Translation, he said: ÂAnd a commandment I give unto thee-that thou shalt write for him [the Prophet]; and the scriptures shall be given, even as they are in mine own bosom, to the salvation of mine own electÂ (D&C 35:20).

The Book of Abraham. In the summer of 1835 the leaders of the Church in Kirtland purchased some Egyptian papyri and four mummies from a man named Michael Chandler. The Prophet Joseph was fascinated with the papyri and soon began to translate them. According to the historical records: ÂSome of the Saints at Kirtland purchased the mummies and papyrus, . . . and with W.W. Phelps and Oliver Cowdery as scribes, I [Joseph Smith] commenced the translation of some of the characters or hieroglyphics, and much to our joy found that one of the rolls contained the writings of Abraham, another the writings of Joseph of Egypt, etc.,-a more full account of which will appear in its place, as I proceed to examine or unfold them. Truly we can say, the Lord is beginning to reveal the abundance of peace and truth.Â (History of the Church 2:236.) Orson Pratt explained: ÂThe Prophet translated the part of these writings which . . . is contained in the Pearl of Great Price, and known as the Book of Abraham. Thus you see one of the first gifts bestowed by the Lord for the benefit of His people, was that of revelation-the gift to translate, by the aid of the Urim and Thummim, the gift of bringing to light old and ancient records.Â (In Journal of Discourses 20:65.)

The Prophet Joseph worked on the translation of the papyri for the next few years until they were published, with the facsimiles, in 1842 in the Times and Seasons. That our present book of Abraham is not the entirety of the translation is suggested by the comment above regarding the writings of Joseph. What were they? There is certainly nothing in our book of Abraham that deals with Joseph. Parley P. Pratt wrote that the papyri were Ânow in course of translation by the means of the Urim and Thummim, and proves to be a record written partly by the father of the faithful, Abraham, and finished by Joseph when in EgyptÂ (Millennial Star 3:47). John Whitmer likewise remarked: ÂJoseph the Seer saw these records and by the revelation of Jesus Christ could translate these words, which gave an account of our forefathers. Much of which was written by Joseph of Egypt who was sold by his brethren which when all translated will be a pleasing history and of great value to the saints.Â (In McKiernan and Launius, An Early Latter Day Saint History, pp. 147Â48.)

On 1 February 1843 John Taylor, editor of the Times and Seasons, encouraged members of the Church to renew their subscriptions. He wrote, ÂWe would further state that we had the promise of Br. Joseph, to furnish us with further extracts from the Book of Abraham.Â (Times and Seasons 4:95.) The Saints were fully expecting to receive more information from the papyri, presumably information that had already been translated, beyond what is in the present book of Abraham. In addition, Joseph Smith made reference more than once to doctrinal insights he had gained from the translation of the papyri, insights that are not apparent in the book of Abraham. ÂEverlasting covenant was made between three personages before the organization of this earth, and relates to their dispensation of things to men on the earth; these personages, according to AbrahamÂs record, are called God the first, the Creator; God the second, the Redeemer; and God the third, the witness or TestatorÂ (Teachings, p. 190). Just eleven days before his death, the Translator remarked that he had learned of the doctrine of the plurality of Gods Âby translating the papyrus which is now in my houseÂ (ibid., p. 373).

Much has been said in recent years about the book of Abraham, particularly by its critics. With the discovery in 1967 of some papyrus fragments believed to have been associated with the original Egyptian package, a number of historical researchers and trained Egyptologists have suggested that the extant fragments have little or nothing to do with Abraham, that they are essentially funerary texts, documents used by the ancients to prepare men and women for burial and for entrance into the world to come. Some Latter-day Saints, in an effort to satisfy the critics and spare us the conflict between intellect and faith, have proposed a sort of middle-of-the-road explanation that the fragments do not have much to do with the book of Abraham and that Joseph Smith really utilized the papyrus as a jumping-off point; that is, the papyrus served as a type of catalyst to spark an independent revelation, which revelation was from God. This group accepts the content of the book of Abraham but suggests that the Prophet wasnÂt really translating the papyri.

Though this approach may satisfy some, it makes us as writers extremely uncomfortable. For one thing, this approach does not explain such things as Abr. 1:12 and 1:14 and facsimile number 2, figures 8Â21, in which reference is made to things on the papyri. Joseph Smith believed that he was translating. He said that he was translating. He spoke often in the History of the Church of doing so (see History of the Church 2:238, 286, 334, 388; 3:27; 5:1). Others spoke of him doing so by means of the Urim and Thummim. We testify that Joseph Smith knew exactly what he was doing and that Abr. 1Â5 are from papyri that the Prophet had but that are unavailable today, much as the golden plates are.

As with the Book of Mormon, we do well to spend the bulk of our time and effort in a study of the fruits of the translation-the doctrinal content of the book of Abraham. In that volume, we gain deeper understanding concerning the premortal existence; the council of the Gods and the general conference of all spirits; the creation of the earth and all forms of life; AbrahamÂs desires to enjoy the priesthood blessings of the ancients; the origins of Egypt, Egyptians, and the rights to the priesthood; and AbrahamÂs vision of the cosmos and the central place of Jesus Christ in the plan of the Father.

Conclusion

In the future we shall surely come to understand how the Prophet translated the golden plates, the Egyptian papyri, and the King James Bible. We shall see, one and all, that he was a man of integrity, knew whereof he spoke, and accomplished superhuman tasks by means of divine assistance. In the meantime, an acceptance of Joseph SmithÂs work as translator transcends what is currently known or available in the world of scholarship and thus enters the world of faith. If we cannot for the present time understand how he translated Reformed Egyptian from golden plates, we can taste the sweetness of that which he restored to us. If we cannot reconcile the text of the book of Abraham with what scholars translate from the facsimiles of the few papyrus fragments in our possession, we can still recognize the spirit of truth in that which he recorded. If we find that the ProphetÂs Bible translation does not fit with Hebrew or Greek manuscripts, we yet recognize the spirit and genius of a prophet in it. ÂSearch diligently,Â the Lord implored in a modern revelation, Âpray always, and be believing, and all things shall work together for your good, if ye walk uprightly and remember the covenant wherewith ye have covenanted one with anotherÂ (D&C 90:24; emphasis added).

The Lord does not ask that we suspend all mental activity, that we compromise our integrity, or that we rely upon cunningly devised fables. What he does ask is that we be willing to exercise faith, to believe in the reality of the unseen and trust in things beyond the works of our own hands or the wisdom of our own discoveries. If we are true and faithful to what we believe and know in our hearts, the Lord will yet open our minds and bring forth great discoveries in the land. If, on the other hand, we let what we have discovered by study alone drive our faith and commitment, we close ourselves to a vital realm of reality and block the hand of God. Our study must always be tempered by faith if we desire to be loyal to the work of Joseph Smith, who walked and talked in the light of divine truth. ÂHis mind was opened by the visions of the Almighty,Â Elder Wilford Woodruff testified, Âand the Lord taught him many things by vision and revelation that were never taught publicly in his days; for the people could not bear the flood of intelligence which God poured into his mindÂ (in Journal of Discourses 5:83Â84). Joseph was a prophet, a seer, a revelator. And he was a translator. God be praised for his translations!
