Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 30

The Miracle of the Book of Mormon

Now, what do we hear in the gospel which we have received?

A voice of gladness! A voice of mercy from heaven;

and a voice of truth out of the earth; glad tidings for the dead;

a voice of gladness for the living and the dead; glad tidings of great joy.

How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those that bring

glad tidings of good things, and that say unto Zion:

Behold, thy God reigneth! As the dews of Carmel,

so shall the knowledge of God descend upon them!

And again, what do we hear? Glad tidings from Cumorah!

Moroni, an angel from heaven, declaring the fulfilment of the prophets-

the book to be revealed.

-D&C 128:19Â20

To restore the gospel is to restore faith in a God of miracles. As the gospel is to go to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, so are miracles. One of the marvelous miracles of the Restoration-one destined to go to all the peoples of the earth-is the Book of Mormon. Moroni explained to the youthful Joseph Smith that the book contains Âthe fulness of the everlasting GospelÂ (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:34). We also have the revealed assurance that the book has been translated by the Âgift and power of GodÂ ( D&C 135:3). The going forth of this book was proclaimed by prophets of old as one of the great signs of the times (see 3 Ne. 21:1Â7; Ether 4:17). It is the book destined to gather Israel, to restore them Âto the true church and fold of GodÂ that they might also Âbe gathered home to the lands of their inheritanceÂ and Âbe established in all their lands of promiseÂ (2 Ne. 9:2). It is the destiny of the Nephite record to prove the Bible true, to stand as a tangible evidence that Joseph Smith was a prophet, and to witness that God is the same yesterday, today, and forever (see D&C 20:11Â12). The Book of Mormon represents the restoration of the gospel of Christ in its purity and as such constitutes the perfect measure of the spiritual integrity of all who profess to seek after God and to follow the path that he has marked (see D&C 20:14Â15).

The Gift and Power of God

By divine appointment Joseph Smith translated the Book of Mormon from words of an ancient tongue that had been recorded on gold plates. He obtained the plates from the Angel Moroni. At the time of the translation, Joseph Smith neither spoke nor read any language but his own. He had received the rudiments of an education in the common country schools in the area in which he lived, but he could do little more than read and write. He was entirely dependent on the help of scribes to record the translation as he dictated it. Of a certainty, he did not have sufficient academic training to imitate scripture or forge ancient history. The book can only be what he professed it to be-a spiritual history of the ancient inhabitants of the American continent. It is a sacred and sobering assignment to work with holy scripture. Indeed, as the Prophet Joseph once observed, ÂIt [is] an awful responsibility to write in the name of the LordÂ (History of the Church 1:226).

As to the manner of translation, we know little. At a Church conference in 1831, JosephÂs brother Hyrum asked him to explain to the conference how he had translated the plates. He responded by saying that Âit was not intended to tell the world all the particulars of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon; and also said that it was not expedient for him to relate these thingsÂ (ibid. 1:220). Suffice it to say that he did it Âthrough the mercy of God, by the power of GodÂ (D&C 1:29). We know that he had Âtwo stones in silver bows-and these stones, fastened to a breastplate, constituted what is called the Urim and Thummim . . . in ancient or former timesÂ to aid him in the translation (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:35). As to his own testimony of the Book of Mormon, after a meeting with the Quorum of the Twelve the Prophet made this observation: ÂI told the brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other bookÂ (Teachings, p. 194).

In saying that the Book of Mormon was the Âmost correct of any book on earth,Â the Prophet had reference to the doctrines and principles which it taught. The greatest miracle associated with the Book of Mormon is the purity of its doctrines. The true test of its authenticity is found in living those doctrines. The ProphetÂs promise was that those doing so will get nearer to God than they could by following the precepts of any other book. So it is that the Book of Mormon invites investigation-it extends to all who are honest in heart the invitation to ask God if it is true, with the promise that an answer will be forthcoming. ÂI would exhort you that when ye shall read these things,Â Moroni wrote, Âif it be wisdom in God that ye should read them, that ye would remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down until the time that ye shall receive these things, and ponder it in your hearts. And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost. And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things.Â (Moro. 10:3Â5.)

As to the Book of Mormon being the Âkeystone of our religion,Â it could be observed that the keystone of an arch locks all the other stones in place. If the keystone stands, the arch stands; if the keystone falls, the arch falls. So it is with the Book of Mormon. Its doctrines lock all other truths of the Restoration in place. Of its theological importance, the Prophet asked rhetorically, ÂTake away the Book of Mormon and the revelations, and where is our religion?Â His response: ÂWe have none.Â (Teachings, p. 71.)

The Book of Mormon and the Signs of the Times

In the context of a discourse to the Nephites on the events that will attend the great winding-up scene of the earthÂs history, the Lord said, ÂI give unto you a sign, that ye may know the time when these things shall be about to take place-that I shall gather in, from their long dispersion, my people, O house of Israel, and shall establish again among them my Zion; and behold, this is the thing which I will give unto you for a sign-for verily I say unto you that when these things which I declare unto you, and which I shall declare unto you hereafter of myself, and by the power of the Holy Ghost which shall be given unto you of the Father, shall be made known unto the Gentiles that they may know concerning this people who are a remnant of the house of Jacob, and concerning this my people who shall be scattered by them; verily, verily, I say unto you, when these things shall be made known unto them of the Father, and shall come forth of the Father, from them unto you. . . it shall be a sign unto them, that they may know that the work of the Father hath already commenced unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he hath made unto the people who are of the house of IsraelÂ (3 Ne. 21:1Â3, 7). Repeating the same promise, Moroni said: ÂWhen ye shall receive this record ye may know that the work of the Father has commenced upon all the face of the landÂ (Ether 4:17).

How is it, we might ask, that the coming forth of the Book of Mormon evidences that the work of the Father has commenced among the various nations of the earth? In response, it ought to be observed that God speaks to all people through a living prophet, that angels are again visiting the earth, that revelation and scripture continue, and that God remembers the covenants that he made with the ancient fathers relative to their posterity. Israel is being gathered to the covenant of salvation and will yet be gathered to the lands promised them through obedience to those covenants.

As the ancient prophets prophesied the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, Joseph Smith prophesied its destiny. He did so in his application of the parable of the mustard seed given by the Savior in Matt. 13:31Â32:

And again, another parable put He forth unto them, having an allusion to the Kingdom that should be set up, just previous to or at the time of the harvest, which reads as follows-ÂThe Kingdom of Heaven is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and sowed in his field: which indeed is the least of all seeds: but, when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof.Â Now we can discover plainly that this figure is given to represent the Church as it shall come forth in the last days. Behold, the Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto it. Now, what is like unto it?

Let us take the Book of Mormon, which a man took and hid in his field, securing it by his faith, to spring up in the last days, or in due time; let us behold it coming forth out of the ground, which is indeed accounted the least of all seeds, but behold it branching forth, yea, even towering, with lofty branches, and God-like majesty, until it, like the mustard seed, becomes the greatest of all herbs. And it is truth, and it has sprouted and come forth out of the earth, and righteousness begins to look down from heaven, and God is sending down His powers, gifts and angels, to lodge in the branches thereof. (Teachings, p. 98.)

In Rev. 14:6Â7 we read the prophecy of John the Revelator about the coming of Moroni to restore the book containing the everlasting gospel. ÂAnd I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters.Â A revelation given to Joseph Smith dealing with the subject of the last days contains the confirmation that the events spoken of by John have come to pass. ÂAnd now, verily saith the Lord, that these things might be known among you, O inhabitants of the earth, I have sent forth mine angel flying through the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel, who hath appeared unto some and hath committed it unto man, who shall appear unto many that dwell on the earth. And this gospel shall be preached unto every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people.Â (D&C 133:36Â37.) The everlasting gospel as contained in the Book of Mormon will go to the ends of the earth. Those who accept its message will be gathered into the fold of God and become rightful heirs of all the blessings of salvation. Thus the Book of Mormon, likened by the Prophet to the mustard seed, will become the mightiest of books, for no book will have such power and influence on the destiny of the earth as the Book of Mormon.

Proving the Bible Is True

As declared by revelation, one of the key reasons the Lord gave us the Book of Mormon is to prove that the Bible is true. Lehi repeats this prophecy, recorded by Joseph of Egypt, to his own son Joseph: ÂBut a seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and unto him will I give power to bring forth my word unto the seed of thy loins-and not to the bringing forth my word only, saith the Lord, but to the convincing them of my word, which shall have already gone forth among themÂ (2 Ne. 3:11). Nephi was instructed by an angel relative to the destiny of various scriptural records. He was shown how plain and precious things would be taken from the Bible before it would go forth to the nations of the earth. He was shown how the Book of Mormon and other scriptural texts would sustain it. ÂThese last records, which thou hast seen among the Gentiles,Â he was told, Âshall establish the truth of the first, which are of the twelve apostles of the Lamb, and shall make known the plain and precious things which have been taken away from them; and shall make known to all kindreds, tongues, and people, that the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father, and the Savior of the world; and that all men must come unto him, or they cannot be savedÂ (1 Ne. 13:40).

Commentary on such passages is generally confined to the illustrations as to how the Book of Mormon is a second witness to the Bible. As true as this is, prophecy about the Book of Mormon goes far beyond this. If the Book of Mormon simply repeated Bible doctrines, it could very persuasively be argued that it was not needed or that it was simply an uninspired reproduction of genuine scripture. However, it does more than that. In the brass plates, the Book of Mormon prophets had much of the scripture of the Old World. Further, Christ in his visit to the Nephites quoted many other Old Testament texts to the Nephites and shared with them those truths which constitute the heart of the New Testament. The role of the Book of Mormon reaches beyond simply repeating these things. The Bible, for instance, teaches the principle of revelation. The Book of Mormon evidences the principle of revelation simply because it is one. The Bible testifies of a God of miracles; the Book of Mormon evidences the principle because of the miraculous manner in which it came forth. Joseph Smith simply could not have produced the book on his own. Nor does the suggestion that someone else was the author of the book answer to the impossibility of the task. The Bible teaches of the importance of angels as messengers for God. The Book of Mormon is evidence that Moroni and other angels have indeed come to the earth and have done so in our day.

Not only is the Book of Mormon a perfect witness of such Bible doctrines as revelation, miracles, and the visitation of angels, but it is the source through which many of the plain and precious things taken from Bible texts have been restored. The reasons for this are twofold: first, as already noted, the Old and New World prophets had many texts in common. The records in the possession of the Book of Mormon prophets were preserved from the corruption and tampering that became the common lot of their companion texts in the Old World. Secondly, through the Spirit of revelation much was added to the understanding of those in the New World. Classic illustrations of the purity of doctrine found in the Book of Mormon and lost to its Old World counterpart would be the testimony that Âthe Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal FatherÂ (1 Ne. 13:40), that the Father and the Son are separate and distinct, that the Father is a personal being, and that he literally begot a son. These are all truths basic to the plan of salvation and also truths entirely lost to the so-called Bible-believing world. Similarly, the doctrine of grace, or the role of Christ as Savior, has also been restored in a simple and pure manner in the Book of Mormon. How plain the doctrine: ÂNo unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the endÂ (3 Ne. 27:19).

In the meridian dispensation missionaries went into all the world testifying of the reality of the resurrection of Christ. Paul speaks of over five hundred brethren who saw him in his resurrected state (see 1 Corthinians 15:6). In the Book of Mormon we read that more than 2,500 Nephites were permitted to behold and touch the resurrected Christ (see 3 Ne. 11:15; 17:25). We are left to ask how many others could be added to their ranks if we had accounts of the other flocks that he visited after his labors in the New World. Suffice it to say that the corporeal resurrection of Christ was one of the best attested-to events in earthÂs history. It is upon the reality of the resurrection of Christ that the whole Christian message must rest. If Christ overcame death, he is the Promised Messiah. If he did not, then we yet await the coming of the Son of Man and surrender any notion that salvation could come in and through Jesus of Nazareth.

Not unlike the meridian dispensation, the great weight of the testimony born by the missionaries of our day also rests on tangible evidence. We were not present when the Father and the Son appeared to Joseph Smith in the Sacred Grove, nor were we present when Moroni gave him charge over the gold plates. But we have our own copy of the Book of Mormon. In no other dispensation have people been so favored by circumstances as to possess personal copies of the scriptures. We can take them into our homes to read, study, and ponder. The honest investigator can stop at every great doctrine taught, at every great truth restored, and ask the question: Could Joseph Smith have written that? Having completed the book and asked and answered the question scores of times, having pondered and prayed and listened to the prompting of the Spirit, the seeker will know with perfect surety that the book is true. And if the book is true, then Joseph Smith must of necessity be a prophet, one called of God for this age and generation. And if Joseph Smith is a prophet, then The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints must indeed be the only true and living church on the face of the whole earth.

Faith in the Book of Mormon constitutes a perfect measure of a manÂs or womanÂs spiritual integrity. In all gospel dispensations, to accept Christ has required acceptance of the principle of revelation. This is inherent in the very idea of a dispensation-a period in which the witness of Christ and the saving principles of his gospel are revealed anew. It is that new and pure witness that must be accepted if one is to obtain salvation. In all but the first dispensation, the living voice was ultimately rejected in the name of reverence for the words of prophets long dead. In reality those words had been so gilded with tradition that they no longer conveyed their original spirit and meaning. So it was, for instance, in the meridian dispensation. Those who chose to follow Christ did so against the orthodoxy of the day, the governing doctrine of which was tradition. Christ, as is the case in all dispensations, forced a choice between the living voice and a profession of reverence for the words of prophets long dead.

For our day the Book of Mormon represents the voice of revelation as it defies the fundamental tenant of Christian orthodoxy: that the heavens are sealed and that God no longer speaks directly to man. To accept the Book of Mormon requires the same kind of faith and courage that was required to accept Christ in the meridian dispensation. Thus that ancient record becomes the measure of spiritual integrity. The Book of Mormon, which is foremost a witness for Christ, is too often rejected in the name of reverence for the Savior. Yet so it was during the days of his mortal probation, when he and his followers were rejected by the orthodoxy of the day in the name of loyalty to Moses and other prophets who were dead. It is as difficult for modern Jew or Gentile to part with their traditions and entertain the possibility that God speaks as it was for those of ancient times to suppose that Christ was the fulfillment of the law of Moses. In all of this the genius of the Lord becomes evident, for the cost of discipleship remains unchanged. It demands the same price in faith and courage today that it commanded anciently.

Conclusion

ÂThere is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated-and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicatedÂ (D&C 130:20Â21). The law of the gospel remains the same throughout the expanse of time. It makes no difference in what dispensation we live; the terms of the covenant are the same. Nor could it be any different for those who do not hear the gospel in this life but hear it for the first time in the world of the spirits. ÂNow, what do we hear in the gospel which we have received? A voice of gladness! A voice of mercy from heaven; and a voice of truth out of the earth; glad tidings for the dead; a voice of gladness for the living and the dead; glad tidings of great joy. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those that bring glad tidings of good things, and that say unto Zion: Behold, thy God reigneth! As the dews of Carmel, so shall the knowledge of God descend upon them! And again, what do we hear? Glad tidings from Cumorah! Moroni, an angel from heaven, declaring the fulfilment of the prophets-the book to be revealed.Â (D&C 128:19Â20.) It would appear from these words that the message of salvation is declared through the Book of Mormon even to those who are dead. As it is the means of gathering Israel here, so it is in the world of the spirits.

The doctrine, spirit, and power of the Book of Mormon is such that the Savior said that those who would not believe in him as declared by the Nephite scripture would Âbe cut offÂ from among the people of the covenant (3 Ne. 21:11). Affirming this doctrine, the revelation directing Joseph Smith to proceed with the organization of the Church declared that Âthose who receive it in faith, and work righteousness, shall receive a crown of eternal life; but those who harden their hearts in unbelief, and reject it, it shall turn to their own condemnationÂ (D&C 20:14Â15). The Lord declared the Book of Mormon to be the foundation of his church, meaning that it must also be the foundation of our faith. If that is indeed the case, ours will be a faith that matches that of the ancients. We too will receive revelation, enjoy the ministry of angels, work miracles, and enjoy all the signs that follow those that believe. We will have built upon the rock, and Âthe gates of hell shall not prevailÂ against us (D&C 18:5). Such is the miracle of the Book of Mormon.
