Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 31 Prophets and Prophecy

We believe in the same organization that existed in the Primitive Church,

namely, apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists, and so forth.

-Articles of Faith 1:6

Prophets and prophecy ever have been and ever will be the mark of true religion. No church can profess to represent the God of heaven and be without living prophets and the Spirit of prophecy. Without prophets there can be no authoritative declaration of the gospel, nor can there be any legal administrators who rightfully have the authority to perform ordinances in the name of the Lord. We find no instance in scripture in which the Lord had a people he acknowledged as his own to whom he would not speak and who therefore did not have the authority to pen scripture. ÂSurely the Lord God will do nothing,Â Amos declared, Âbut he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophetsÂ (Amos 3:7).

Ancient prophets stood as the link between God and men. Their voice became his voice, their words his words, their pen his pen. The Almighty manifested his mind and will through them. He evidenced his power through them, and he led and guided his people through them. They were inspired teachers of the gospel and preachers of righteousness, and they were entrusted with the authority to perform the ordinances of salvation. They were the source of inspired teachings; they marked the path the Saints were to follow. To be without prophets is to be without the gospel, without priesthood, without the light of heaven, and without the plan of salvation. If we have need for a living God, we have need for living prophets.

The Office and Calling of a Prophet

It would be self-contradictory for someone to profess to represent God and at the same time profess that revelation had ceased. If God has not spoken to you then you cannot speak for him. ÂNo man is a minister of Jesus Christ,Â Joseph Smith explained, Âwithout being a ProphetÂ (Teachings, p. 160). ÂIf any person should ask me if I were a prophet, I should not deny it, as that would give me the lie; for, according to John, the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy; therefore, if I profess to be a witness or teacher, and have not the spirit of prophecy, which is the testimony of Jesus, I must be a false witness; but if I be a true teacher and witness, I must possess the spirit of prophecy, and that constitutes a prophet; and any man who says he is a teacher or a preacher of righteousness, and denies the spirit of prophecy, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; and by this key false teachers and impostors may be detectedÂ (ibid., p. 269).

Of the call to the prophetic office, we know the following: First, all that hold this office were prepared to do so before the foundations of the earth were laid. ÂBefore I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations,Â the Lord told Jeremiah (Jeremiah 1:5). Explaining his own call, the Apostle Paul said that God had Âset me apart from birthÂ (New English Bible, Gal. 1:15). In a more sweeping statement, Joseph Smith said: ÂEvery man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world wasÂ (Teachings, p. 365). From Joseph SmithÂs translation of the Abraham papyrus, we learn that the ancient patriarch was shown Âthe intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones; and God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast bornÂ (Abr. 3:22Â23). In like manner, Joseph Smith said: ÂI was ordained from before the foundation of the world for some good end, or bad, as you may choose to call it. Judge ye for yourselves.Â (D&C 127:2.)

Second, the Prophet Joseph taught that covenant spokesmen Âmust be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereofÂ (A of F 1:5). Addressing himself to the Apostles he had chosen, the Savior stated the principle thus: ÂYe have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may give it youÂ (John 15:16). To those of our dispensation the Lord said, ÂIt shall not be given to any one to go forth to preach my gospel, or to build up my church, except he be ordained by some one who has authority, and it is known to the church that he has authority and has been regularly ordained by the heads of the churchÂ (D&C 42:11).

Third, those who have been commissioned of God will be endowed with power from on high. As the Apostles of the meridian day went forth clothed in the powers of heaven with the promise of divine protection to preach the gospel, and as they had power to heal the sick, raise the dead, remit sins, and perform all manner of miracles, so those of our day must go forth. ÂYe are to be taught from on high,Â the Lord said to his servants of this, the last dispensation. Therefore, ÂSanctify yourselves and ye shall be endowed with power.Â (D&C 43:16.) They were to go forth Âarmed with powerÂ that his name might be upon them, his glory be round about them, and his angels have charge over them (see D&C 109:22).

Fourth, if a messenger truly represents God, his message must be rooted in revelation. No one who denies the principle of continuous revelation could possibly represent God. The idea that any knowledge of God could be attributed to philosophical speculation is at odds with every truth ever revealed.

Fifth, the true prophet, and for that matter anyone that God commissions to represent him, will always be a preacher of righteousness. President Anthony W. Ivans said:

A careful study of the etymology of the word and of the lives, works and character of the prophets of old makes clear that fact that a prophet was, and is, one called to act as GodÂs messenger. He is to teach men the character of God, and define and make known to the people, his will. He is to denounce sin, and declare the punishment of transgression. He is to be above all else a preacher of righteousness, and when the people depart from the path which he has marked out for them to follow, is to call them back to the true faith. He is an interpreter of the scripture, and declares its meaning and application. When future events are to be declared he predicts them, but his direct, and most important calling is to be a forth-teller, or director of present policy, rather than a foreteller of that which is to come. (In Conference Report, October 1925, p. 20.)

A Pure Channel

Salvation is not born of confusion. Of matters that pertain to the eternal welfare of mankind, there can be no uncertainty. There must be a sure and pure channel to which we can turn to obtain the mind and will of God. Salvation cannot be found in the host of conflicting and contradictory doctrines common to the sectarian world. If there is to be a true church, the Lord must establish it. He must appoint its officers and establish its doctrines. Having done so, he then can be trusted to respect the organization and officers he has chosen. As long as that organization stands, all others are without the right or authority to represent the will of heaven, teach its doctrines, or perform its ordinances. Again, there can be no confusion about such matters. ÂThere is never but one on the earth at a time on whom this power and the keys of this priesthood are conferredÂ (D&C 132:7).

Nothing could be more inconsistent than the supposition that, after God has called a man and appointed him to do a work and the man remains faithful, God would then bypass that man and go to someone else to have him accomplish the same purpose. When the Lord chose Joseph Smith to be his spokesman for this dispensation, there were those within the ranks of the Church who professed the same power and authority to direct the affairs of the Church. The matter demanded and received immediate correction. ÂNo one shall be appointed to receive commandments and revelations in this church excepting my servant Joseph Smith, Jun.,Â the Lord said. ÂThou shalt not command him who is at thy head, and at the head of the church; for I have given him the keys of the mysteries, and the revelations which are sealed, until I shall appoint unto them another in his stead.Â (D&C 28:2, 6Â7.)

The principle is a simple one. All are entitled to revelation for their own stewardship. None are entitled to revelations for stewardships other than their own. Thus no one will be granted revelation for those who preside over them. (See Teachings, pp. 21, 111.) A provisional government existed until the Church was fully restored, the essential provision of which was that if the Prophet were to fall the Lord would call another in his stead (see D&C 35:17Â18). No one would need to step forth to valiantly save the Church. The Lord would attend to the matter himself through the channels he has already established. If the presiding office was to be taken from Joseph Smith, Âhe shall not have power,Â the Lord said, Âexcept to appoint another in his steadÂ (D&C 43:4). Because the Lord established the channel to which we would look if it became necessary to change the ChurchÂs organization, the change would of necessity come through that channel originally established by the Lord. This provision recognizes that men may fall short of the office and calling that is theirs but that the Lord will never apostatize from the order he has established. He is not and cannot be the author of confusion.

Before the Lord allowed the Church to be organized, he announced the law of common consent: ÂNo person is to be ordained to any office in this church, where there is a regularly organized branch of the same, without the vote of that churchÂ (D&C 20:65). Notwithstanding the fact that Joseph Smith had been ministered to by angels, held the priesthood and its keys, and was called of God, he could govern the Church only with the consent of those to be governed. In the kingdom of God Âall things shall be done by common consentÂ (see D&C 26:2). Thus those called to hold offices or positions and administrative matters requiring our support must receive it by the consent or vote of those affected. However, the validity of revelations is not established by the operation of this law. Though God has granted us agency, which he will not violate, the conditions upon which we obtain salvation are not open for negotiation.

What, then, would have happened had those at the meeting at which the Church was to be organized chosen not to sustain Joseph Smith as prophet, seer, and revelator and as the presiding officer in the Church? According to the revelation of the Lord, Joseph Smith could not preside. He could have no authority over those or any other people save it be by their own consent. Would he still be a prophet, seer, and revelator? Certainly. The failure to sustain him could not take from him the authority messengers from heaven had given him. By refusing to sustain him in the office to which the Lord had called him, those present would simply shut the door of salvation on themselves, and the Prophet would go and find a people willing to sustain him. No one can impose the blessings of heaven upon us. We become recipients of the blessings that flow through the living prophet only as we sustain him in the office and position to which the Lord has called him. Our failure to sustain him will not deprive him of any authority save it be that by which he would bless us.

Conclusion

There were never any delusions in the mind of Joseph Smith relative to the idea of a condition of mortal infallibility attending any earthly office or calling. ÂAlthough a man may have many revelations, and have power to do many mighty works,Â the Lord told Joseph, Âyet if he boasts in his own strength, and sets at naught the counsels of God, and follows after the dictates of his own will and carnal desires, he must fall and incur the vengeance of a just God upon himÂ (D&C 3:4). We note the following from the ProphetÂs journal: ÂI was this morning introduced to a man from the east. After hearing my name, he remarked that I was nothing but a man, indicating by this expression, that he had supposed that a person to whom the Lord should see fit to reveal His will, must be something more than a man. He seemed to have forgotten the saying that fell from the lips of St. James, that Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, yet he had such power with God, that He, in answer to his prayers, shut the heavens that they gave no rain for the space of three years and six months; and again, in answer to his prayer, the heavens gave forth rain, and the earth gave forth fruit. Indeed, such is the darkness and ignorance of this generation, that they look upon it as incredible that a man should have any intercourse with his Maker.Â (Teachings, p. 89.) A prophet, Joseph Smith taught, was only a prophet Âwhen he was acting as suchÂ (ibid., p. 278).

Though prophets are but Âearthen vessels,Â we recognize their word as the word of God (2 Cor. 4:7). The Lord states this principle thus: ÂWhat I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken, and I excuse not myself; and though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled, whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the sameÂ (D&C 1:38). On the day the Church was organized, the Lord gave a revelation defining the relationship between its members and its presiding officer, whom members sustained as Âa seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, [and] an elder of the church.Â Speaking to the membership of the Church, this revelation states: ÂThou shall give heed unto all his words and commandments which he shall give unto you as he receiveth them, walking in all holiness before me; for his word ye shall receive, as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith. For by doing these things the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good, and his nameÂs glory.Â (D&C 21:1, 4Â6.) 1996
