Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 32

The Past: Key to the Future

And [Enoch] beheld the spirits that God had created;

and he beheld also things which were not visible to the natural eye;

and from thenceforth came the saying abroad in the land:

A seer hath the Lord raised up unto his people.

-Moses 6:36

Ammon explained to King Limhi that Âa seer is a revelator and a prophet also; and a gift which is greater can no man have, except he should possess the power of God, which no man can; yet a man may have great power given him from God. But a seer can know of things which are past, and also of things which are to come, and by them shall all things be revealed, or, rather, shall secret things be made manifest, and hidden things shall come to light, and things which are not known shall be made known by them, and also things shall be made known by them which otherwise could not be known. Thus God has provided a means that man, through faith, might work mighty miracles; therefore he becometh a great benefit to his fellow beings.Â (Mosiah 8:16Â18.) Seers gain the mind of God and therefore come to see things as God sees them, things that may not be visible to the natural eye (see Moses 6:36). They are able to see the enemy from afar off and are in a position to warn those of the household of faith (see D&C 101:54). Because of their knowledge of the past, their vision of the future, and their awareness of the fact that Âthe course of the Lord is one eternal roundÂ (1 Ne. 10:19), seers are in a position to assist the Saints of the Most High to identify patterns and themes and recurring episodes and to learn the sobering lessons of the past as the prophecies of yesterday find relevance and continuing fulfillment today and tomorrow.

One Eternal Round

Because Âthere has been no change in the constitution of man since he fellÂ (Teachings, p. 60) and because the grand solution to the earthÂs dilemmas is and has always been the gospel of Jesus Christ, it is not surprising that the prophetic word, as delivered through GodÂs living oracles, should find relevance and multiple fulfillment in different ages of the earthÂs history. For example, it is not necessarily true that six thousand years of life on earth have resulted in complete progress. In many ways life is more pleasant and more convenient, and travel and communication are accomplished in ways that would have been considered miraculous by the people in the dawn of time or even as recently as two hundred years ago. On the other hand, since the Fall we have moved steadily toward dissolution as immorality, depravity, sickness, disease, and death have followed naturally on the heels of our own debauchery. Adam and Eve were placed on an earth that was paradisiacal and terrestrial, a condition in which things were spiritual, not mortal or subject to death. Despite the beauties and marvels of creation, we are certainly not living in a paradisiacal world today. But one day things will change. The Lord of Sabaoth, literally the Lord of Hosts or Armies, will return and bring sin and evil to an end, and the earth will be changed; it will be terrestrialized, transfigured, elevated in the scheme of things. This earth will be renewed, made new again, and receive, once again, its paradisiacal glory (see A of F 1:10).

As we have discussed earlier in this work, Adam was given the priesthood by God and he conferred that divine authority upon his sons and their sons after them. The patriarchal order of the Melchizedek Priesthood was in effect. Men governed through the holy priesthood and under the direction of the Almighty. Thus theirs was a patriarchal theocracy. Elder Bruce R. McConkie said, ÂThis theocratic system, patterned after the order and system that prevailed in heaven, was the government of God. He himself, though dwelling in heaven, was the Lawgiver, Judge, and King. He gave direction in all things both civil and ecclesiastical; there was no separation of church and state as we now know it. All governmental affairs were directed, controlled, and regulated from on high. The LordÂs legal administrators on earth served by virtue of their callings and ordinations in the Holy Priesthood and as they were guided by the power of the Holy Ghost.Â (A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, p. 35.)

Today the Saints of God work and serve in the Church, and we do so under what might be called an ecclesiastical system. The Church does not officiate in civil affairs but leaves those matters to the state. The government of the Church is theocratic in the sense that we operate through common consent; God speaks through his anointed servants and the Saints have the choice as to whether or not to sustain those actions. But Church and state are separate. ÂWe believe that all religious societies have a right to deal with their members for disorderly conduct, according to the rules and regulations of such societies; provided that such dealings be for fellowship and good standing; but we do not believe that any religious society has authority to try men on the right of property or life, to take from them this worldÂs goods, or to put them in jeopardy of either life or limb, or to inflict any physical punishment upon them. They can only excommunicate them from their society, and withdraw from them their fellowship.Â (D&C 134:10.) But one day things will change. Christ will stand as the Presiding High Priest over his church and as King over the earth. He shall preside over and direct all affairs, both civil and ecclesiastical. Our Savior will govern his people from two world capitals: the law will go forth from Zion in Independence, Missouri, and the word of the Lord will go forth from Jerusalem (see 2 Ne. 12:3). Likewise, righteous men and women shall oversee their own families in all matters, and they shall preside as kings and queens, priests and priestesses. A theocracy will be reinstituted, and Jesus will reign as King of kings and Lord of lords. In short, Âthis same Priesthood, which was in the beginning, shall be in the end of the world alsoÂ (Moses 6:7).

The scriptures of the Restoration teach that Âthree years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all high priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing.Â On that occasion, ÂAdam stood up in the midst of the congregation; and, notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation.Â (D&C 107:53, 56.) In speaking of this event, the Prophet Joseph Smith said: ÂI saw Adam in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman. He called together his children and blessed them with a patriarchal blessing. The Lord appeared in their midst, and he (Adam) blessed them all, and foretold what should befall them to the latest generation. This is why Adam blessed his posterity; he wanted to bring them into the presence of God.Â (Teachings, pp. 158Â59.)

What took place anciently shall take place in the future. Before the second advent of the Master in glory, Adam will come once again to the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman (see D&C 116). He will meet with many of his posterity, will hold a large sacrament meeting with his people, and once again Christ will partake of the emblems of his death with his disciples (see D&C 27:5Â14). He will Âcall his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man. He (Adam) is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men, and all that have had the keys must stand before him in this grand council. . . . The Son of Man stands before him [Adam], and there is given him [Christ] glory and dominion. Adam delivers up his stewardship to Christ, that which was delivered to him as holding the keys of the universe, but retains his standing as head of the human family.Â (Teachings, p. 157; see also pp. 38Â39, 122.)

To Moses, the Lord Jehovah declared: ÂI will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him.Â (Deut. 18:18Â19.) The Apostle Peter quoted this passage slightly differently: ÂMoses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people.Â (Acts 3:22Â23.) When Moroni first appeared to Joseph Smith in 1823, he quoted PeterÂs words relative to this great prophet. Moroni Âsaid that that prophet was Christ; but the day had not yet come when Âthey who would not hear his voice should be cut off from among the people,Â but soon would comeÂ (Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:40).

Those who reject the LordÂs servants reject him. Thus our Master applies the condemnation for rejecting his words to those who spurn his anointed servants. To the Nephites, the risen Lord explained that Âwhosoever will not believe in my words, who am Jesus Christ, which the Father shall cause him [Joseph Smith] to bring forth unto the Gentiles, and shall give unto him power that he shall bring them forth unto the Gentiles, (it shall be done even as Moses said) they shall be cut off from among my people who are of the covenantÂ (3 Ne. 21:11). And in the LordÂs preface to the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants, the condemnation is broadened somewhat as the following warning is sounded: ÂThe day cometh that they who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from among the peopleÂ (D&C 1:14).

Truly, the course of the Lord is one eternal round. What Isaiah said is not only relevant for the Saints living seven centuries before the birth of Jesus but also for those living in the final era of the earthÂs temporal continuance. What is said of Isaiah might well be said of others of the LordÂs mouthpieces: ÂAll things that he spake have been and shall be, even according to the words which he spakeÂ (3 Ne. 23:3). JoelÂs prophecy regarding the Spirit of the Lord being poured out upon all flesh was fulfilled in the meridian of time (see Acts 2:1Â21), and it shall be fulfilled again in our day and in the future (see Joseph SmithÂHistory 1:41). As it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the days incident to the SaviorÂs return in glory (see Joseph SmithÂMatthew 1:41). As it was among the Nephites just prior to the birth of the Savior as set forth in 3 Nephi, so shall it be in the days and months and years prior to that great and terrible day we know as the Second Coming. And as it was among the Nephites in their Millennium-like society after Christ visited them as set forth in 4 Nephi, so shall it be at the end of the world, when wickedness is removed from the earth and the Lord reigns among his people for a thousand years.

Leaven of the Modern Pharisees

Our day is not unlike a time almost two thousand years ago. Jesus Christ came to the earth at a time of unrest, an era when menÂs hearts were closed to new revelation. Our Lord would, as Isaiah had prophesied, grow up Âas a root out of a dry groundÂ (Isa. 53:2). The parched soil of first-century Judaism was deeply in need of living water, but few there were who would dip even the tip of their fingers in the cooling draught to soothe their agonizing thirst; indeed, some were not even aware of the drought.

Jesus was in constant confrontation with the Pharisees. He attacked the hypocrisy associated with purity of ritual action but paucity of moral and spiritual values. He spoke vehemently against those who zealously attended to rabbinic tradition-matters with little eternal significance-and at the same time ignored or violated the Âweightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faithÂ (Matt. 23:23). He condemned the Pharisees further for the irony of their position towards the scriptures: they accepted the oral interpretations and commentaries of the doctors of the law but refused the healing services of the Great Physician, the one toward whom all the scriptures pointed. ÂYe know not Moses, neither the prophets,Â the Master declared; Âfor if ye had known them, ye would have believed on me; for to this intent they were written. For I am sent that ye might have life.Â (JST, Luke 14:36.) Ironically, then, the canon of scripture was open for rabbinic interpretation but closed to him who came as the fulfillment and extension of the Old Testament.

On one occasion the Pharisees came to Jesus demanding a sign-a physical evidence of his claim to the Messiahship (see Matt. 16:1Â4). The Lord took this opportunity to contrast their ability to read the face of the sky (and thus discern signs associated with weather patterns) against their marked inability to read the Âsigns of the timesÂ and thus discern the true meanings of Messianic prophecies and testimonies. Soon thereafter Christ warned his disciples: ÂTake heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the SadduceesÂ (Matt. 16:6). The disciples finally came to appreciate that the Lord was bidding them to beware of the doctrine, as well as the hypocrisy, of the Jewish leaders (see Matt. 16:5Â12; Luke 12:1). The SaviorÂs rejection of hallowed rabbinic traditions, his growing popularity as a result of opening eyes and minds, and his attack upon the heart and hearth of the Pharisaic craft-all these things eventually led to his arrest and death. But the well had been dug, living water had begun to spring up, thirsty souls had been satisfied, and a spiritual foothold had been established for the meridian day.

Growth, expansion, innovation, and technology have led to remarkable changes in the world over the past two thousand years. On the other hand, some things never change. Religionists without revelation continue to reject living oracles and hold tenaciously to the spiritual status quo. Preachers of a way of life barren of that animation that is breathed into religious practice by the Holy Ghost still seal the canon, applying mortar that blocks the light of new truth and ultimately blocks their progress and that of their followers. Congregations still cry out: ÂWe have enough! There is no need for more revelation!Â The challenge of the true believer in all ages is the same: whether former-day Saint or Latter-day Saint, we encounter a world opposed to that change and way of life associated with embracing the new yet everlasting covenant.

Is it not an odd thing to observe charismatic Christians-people who claim to prophesy and speak in tongues-who at the same time reject the notion of modern Apostles and prophets? Is it not strange that religious leaders across the world-persons who preach of a God interested and involved in human concerns-warn their patrons against kneeling in prayer to ascertain the truthfulness of the message and claims of Latter-day Saint missionaries and members? As Nephi taught his people anciently: ÂIf ye would hearken unto the Spirit which teacheth a man to pray ye would know that ye must pray; for the evil spirit teacheth not a man to pray, but teacheth him that he must not prayÂ (2 Ne. 32:8). Is it not perplexing and tragic that so many outside the Church-those who believe God to be their Father and Jesus Christ to be their pattern for living-should, in the words of Elder Boyd K. Packer, Âwith the help of clergymen, belittle in the most unchristian ways our teaching that we are the literal sons and daughters of GodÂ? (In Conference Report, October 1984, p. 82.) These practices and myriad other attitudes reveal clearly that the spirit of Pharisaic hypocrisy is flourishing in the dispensation of the fulness of times. Individuals and congregations will go to any length-including inconsistency, contradiction, or conduct unbecoming a follower of the Prince of Peace-to oppose or halt the progress of a modern revelation of truth.

Doctrine not delivered through the pipeline of living oracles will neither be understood nor properly applied. Without such illuminating lenses as the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, the Joseph Smith Translation, the Pearl of Great Price, and words of modern Church leaders, the Bible has been and will be forever a sealed book. Its doctrines and principles will always be wrestled over. The message of Christ given anciently to the doctors of the law has remarkable modern application: ÂWoe unto you, lawyers! for ye have taken away the key of knowledge, the fulness of the scriptures; ye enter not in yourselves into the kingdom; and those who were entering in, ye hindered.Â (JST, Luke 11:53.) To deny the Restoration is to deny access to that Spirit by which the will, mind, word, and voice of the Lord-in other words, scripture-is given and comprehended (see D&C 68:3Â4). To accept the Restoration and the servants of the Lord is to become open to the mysteries of the kingdom of God-those things which the world will not and cannot receive. These marvelous truths shall, to the sincere seeker, serve as Âa well of living water, springing up unto everlasting lifeÂ (D&C 63:23).

Reading the Signs of the Times

As noted earlier, the greatest evidence that the Jews in JesusÂ day could not read the vital signs of eternity is the simple fact that they missed the Messiah when he came among them. The Hope of Ages had arrived and was ignored or rejected, and those who thus spurned the Lord of Life were left hopeless. In our day the greatest evidence of peopleÂs inability to read and discern the signs of the times is their failure to accept The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as the predicted kingdom of God on earth. Elder Bruce R. McConkie asked the following questions of the religious world:

If you had lived in Jerusalem in the days of Jesus, would you have accepted him as the Son of God as did Peter and the Apostles? Or would you have said he had a devil and wrought miracles by the power of Beelzebub, as Annas and Caiaphas claimed?

If you had lived in Nazareth or Cana or Capernaum, would you have believed the new religion preached by a few simple fishermen? Or would you have followed the traditions of your fathers in which there was no salvation?

If you had lived in Corinth or Ephesus or Rome, would you have believed the strange new gospel preached by Paul? Or would you have put your trust in the vagaries and traditions and forms of worship that then prevailed?

If you now live in New York or London or Paris, if you live in Chicago, Los Angeles, or Salt Lake-will you accept the new yet old religion, the new yet old gospel, the new yet old way of life that God has revealed anew for our day? Or will you sustain and support churches that no longer have any real resemblance to the one set up among the primitive Saints?

If you hear a prophetic voice, if an apostolic witness is borne in your presence, if the servants of the Lord give you a message from their Master-what is your reaction? Do you believe or disbelieve?

If you are told in words of soberness that Joseph Smith was called of God, that through him the fulness of the everlasting gospel has been restored, and that the Lord has established his church once again among men-do you believe the heaven-sent word? Or, like Annas and Caiaphas, do you stay with the status quo and trust your eternal salvation to the varying forms of man-made worship that abound on every hand?

After bearing witness of the Restoration, Elder McConkie continued:

Now, as Isaiah expressed it, ÂWho hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?Â (Isa. 53:1.)

Who will believe our words, and who will hear our message? Who will honor the name of Joseph Smith and accept the gospel restored through his instrumentality?

We answer: the same people who would have believed the words of the Lord Jesus and the ancient Apostles and prophets had they lived in their day.

If you believe the words of Joseph Smith, you would have believed what Jesus and the ancients said.

If you reject Joseph Smith and his message, you would have rejected Peter and Paul and their message.

If you accept the prophets whom the Lord sends in your day, you also accept that Lord who sent them.

If you reject the restored gospel and find fault with the plan of salvation taught by those whom God hath sent in these last days, you would have rejected those same teachings as they fell from the lips of the prophets and Apostles of old. (In Conference Report, October 1981, pp. 65Â66, 68Â69.)

Reading the signs of the times is difficult and requires significant judgment and discernment. Those who have searched the scriptures and pondered the words of the prophets from days gone by, those who give diligent heed to the words of eternal life as those words come forth from current Apostles and prophets, and those whose faith in the Savior entails a genuine loyalty to seers and revelators who now lead and will yet lead the restored Church-these are they who will be enabled to read the signs of the times and prepared for that which is to be. It is to the presiding elders of the Church that the sure word of prophecy shall come relative to the future (see D&C 68:11). Those outside the Church who reject its teachings and doctrines are not in a position to perceive and properly adapt to the present and future social, economic, and spiritual challenges. Even those within the Church who have not been wise and taken the Holy Spirit for their guide (see D&C 45:57) lack the needed perspective and fail to sense the urgency of the messages of the LordÂs servants concerning both current and future happenings.

To read the signs of the times is to perceive the unfolding of GodÂs divine drama in these last days. It is to have the total perspective of the plan of life and salvation and a special appreciation for the scenes incident to the planÂs consummation. It is to understand that this is the day long awaited by the prophets of old and by the messengers of heaven when God will pour out knowledge and power from on high Âby the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost,Â knowledge Âthat has not been revealed since the world was until nowÂ (D&C 121:26). On the other hand, to read the signs of the times in our day is to read the signs of wear and tear in the faces of those who have chosen to love and give devoted service to either questionable or diabolical causes. Error and wickedness take terrible tolls upon the hearts and countenances of those who choose divergent paths; the wheels of waywardness grind away slowly but inexorably to produce a type of demented character that will never know peace of mind. To read the signs of the times is, in part, to recognize that Alma spoke a profound truth when he counseled a wayward son that Âwickedness never was happinessÂ (Alma 41:10).

To read the signs of the times in our day does not mean seeking signs in our day. The Savior taught that a wicked and adulterous generation may be recognized by its tendency to demand signs as evidence of the verity of the LordÂs work (see Matt. 12:39; 16:4). Interestingly, those who are not spiritually mature enough to read the signs of the times are often those who demand signs of the LordÂs servants. ÂShow us the golden plates,Â they cry out. ÂCall down the angel Moroni. Produce the Egyptian text for the book of Abraham.Â The Saints of God who truly seek to be in tune with the mind and will of God will, on the other hand, be witnesses and recipients of those wonders and miracles that a gracious Lord always showers upon his faithful flock. ÂFaith cometh not by signs,Â Christ explained, Âbut signs follow those that believe.Â Further, ÂWithout faith no man pleaseth God; and with whom God is angry he is not well pleased; wherefore, unto such he showeth no signs, only in wrath unto their condemnation.Â (D&C 63: 9, 11.)

Finally, to read the signs of the times in our day is to make a decision in favor of the society of Zion and the church of the Lamb of God (see 1 Ne. 14:10), this in contradistinction to a decision to enter or perpetuate Babylon. Each city-Zion and Babylon-makes definite requirements of its citizens, and as the millennial day approaches each of these communities will insist upon the total devotion and consecration of its citizenry. To read the signs of the times is to recognize that in the future fewer and fewer individuals will be lukewarm Latter-day Saints; that the myopic and misguided of the religious world will grow in cynicism and confusion; that the ungodly will, as time goes by, sink ever deeper into a despair known only to those who revel in iniquity; that wickedness will widen and malevolence multiply until the citizens of Babylon seal themselves to him who is the father of all lies. To read the signs of the times is also to know that ÂZion must arise and put on her beautiful garmentsÂ (D&C 82:14) that the church of the Lamb shall continue to require the tithes, offerings, and donations of its members until that day when theirs is a full and consecrated life; and that through yielding their hearts unto God and thereby giving all to the Lord through his church, the Saints of the Most High shall establish a heaven on earth and receive the glorious assurance of exaltation in the highest heaven.

Conclusion

Joseph Smith the Prophet and Seer revealed marvelous things concerning the past. These sacred matters are extremely valuable to us historically, for they expand our understanding of life on the earth in earlier dispensations. Joseph Smith teaches us that those who lived in the days of Enoch or Melchizedek or Abinadi or Samuel the Lamanite were real people, men and women who wrestled with the challenges of life and who in many cases found joy in their redemption through Jesus Christ. They made it, and so can we. They overcame the world, and so can we. These glimpses into a bygone day do more, however, than unfold an otherwise mysterious past; they provide a pattern, a guide, a template if you will for what is yet to be. The past becomes the key that unlocks the future. As history has its cycles, so ancient events often have their latter-day counterparts, and prophecies have multiple fulfillments and repeated applications. Prophecies of events now past foretell events yet future. The past is the stage upon which the future is portrayed. The scriptures thereby have a timeless value and an eternal relevance. The children of light read by the lamp of the Restoration and will not be surprised at the coming of the Bridegroom (see D&C 106:4Â5). Through treasuring up his word, they avoid deception (see Joseph SmithÂMatthew 1:37) and walk and live in the light of revealed truth.
